The USA men's national under-19 basketball team, is controlled by USA Basketball, and represents the United States in international under-19 and under-18 (under age 19 and under age 18) basketball competitions.

==
Competitive record ==
A red box around the year indicates tournaments played within the United States


==
See also ==
United States men's national basketball team
United States
men's national under-17 basketball team
United States women's national basketball team
United States
women's national under-19 basketball team
United States women's national under-17 basketball team
United States
men's national 3x3 team
United States women's national 3x3 team


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official Site
FIBA Profile
USA Olympic Basketball Team Rosters and Stats @ basketball-reference.com
The NBA playoffs are an annual best-of-seven elimination tournament annually held after the National Basketball Association (NBA)
’s
regular season to determine the league's champion.

== Format ==
In September 2015, the NBA announced changes to the format of the NBA playoffs that would begin with the 2016 NBA playoffs.
The top eight teams in each conference (East and West), ranked in order by win-loss records, qualify for the playoffs.
The tie-break criteria for playoff seeding and home-court advantage have also changed; head-to-head results between the tied teams is the first tie-breaker, and whether a team won its division championship is the second tie-breaker.
Both conferences conduct the playoffs in the traditional bracket format.
All rounds are best-of-seven series.
Series are played in the 2–2–1–1–1 format, meaning the team with home-court advantage hosts games 1, 2, 5, and 7, while their opponent hosts games 3, 4, and 6, with games 5–7 being played if needed.
Once the playoffs start, the bracket is fixed; teams are never "reseeded", unlike in the National Football League (NFL) where the strongest remaining teams face the weakest teams in subsequent rounds.
This format has been used since 2014, after NBA team owners unanimously voted to change the format of the NBA finals from the 2–3–2 format on October 23, 2013.The most common criticism of the current structure is related to parity of conferences.
On numerous occasions, Eastern Conference teams with losing records qualified for the playoffs, while Western Conference teams with winning records ended up missing them, including the 2011, 2013 and the 2015 NBA playoffs.
Weaker Eastern Conference teams also often make it farther in the playoffs due to the conference imbalance.

==
History ==
The National Basketball Association was established in 1949 by merger of the Basketball Association of America (BAA) and National Basketball League
but it recognizes the three BAA seasons as part of its own history.
In all of its three years the BAA champion was finally determined in a best-of-seven series but its first two tournaments, the 1947 and 1948 BAA Playoffs, were otherwise quite different from the third, which 21st-century NBA playoffs nearly match.
In 1947 and 1948, the Eastern and Western Division champions were matched in a best-of-seven series following the regular season, whose winner advanced to the championship round.
Meanwhile, four runners-up played best-of-three series to determine the other finalist: the two second-place teams were matched in one short series and the two third-place teams in another; the winners of those two series played another one.
In 1947 the Philadelphia Warriors won the runners-up bracket and beat the Western champion Chicago Stags four games to one, which the NBA recognizes as its first championship; in 1948 Baltimore won the runners-up and beat Eastern champion Philadelphia in the final.
Both tournaments generated one finalist from the Eastern and one from the Western Division, but only by chance.
In 1949, the third and last BAA tournament matched Eastern teams exclusively and Western teams exclusively, necessarily generating Eastern and Western playoff champions to meet in the final.
At the same time, the number of playoff teams was increased from three to four from each Division; two rounds of best-of-three series were played, followed by a best-of-seven championship.
The main idea was retained by the NBA.
Even the 1950 tournament, following a transitional season with three divisions rather than two, initially determined one playoff champion from each division.
The Central champion Minneapolis Lakers became the first league champion under the NBA name by defeating Anderson from the West in a best-of-three, with Syracuse from the East idle, and then knocking off the Syracuse Nationals in six games.
The 1951 through 1953 playoffs changed the division finals into a best-of-five playoff.
With only nine league members in 1953–54, the NBA cut its postseason tournament field from eight teams to six (from 1954 through 1966, the period of eight to nine league members).
Round robins were played in 1954, uniquely in NBA history—a three-team round robin among the three playoff teams in each division.
From 1955 to 1966, the first-place team in each division was idle while its two runners-up faced played a best-of-three.
Division finals were expanded to best-of-seven in 1958 and division semifinals to best-of-five in 1961.

With ten league members again for the 1966–67 season, eight teams were again admitted to the tournament, providing a simple three-round knockout (8-team bracket).
A year later, the division semifinals were changed to best-of-seven playoff.

Then, in 1975 and 1977, respectively, a fifth and sixth team were added to each Division, necessitating an additional first round of best-of-three series.

Finally in 1984, the tournament expanded to its present 16-team, four-round knockout, and the now-complete set of first-round series was expanded to a best-of-five.
In 2003 the first round was changed to also be best-of-seven.

Beginning with the 2004 season, with the addition of the thirtieth NBA franchise, the Charlotte Bobcats, the NBA realigned its divisions.
The result was that each conference would have three divisions of five teams each, and the winner of each division was guaranteed a top-three playoff seed.
This would change slightly after the 2005–06 season; while division winners still receive automatic playoff berths, they are guaranteed a top-four seed, as described below.
===
2006
NBA playoffs controversy ===
The previous playoff format, in place for the 2004–05 and 2005–06 NBA playoffs, after the NBA was re-aligned into six divisions, created controversy during the 2005–06 season and playoffs and would be changed prior to the 2006–07 NBA season.
Prior to 2005, NBA division champions were seeded higher than the other teams in their conference, regardless of their record.
Prior to 2004, when the NBA was aligned into two conferences with two divisions each, the division champions were guaranteed the top two seeds.
This meant that top two teams in a conference (by record) would be seeded either first and second
(if they were in opposite divisions) or first and third (if they were in the same division).
Because of the NBA playoffs' preset matchups in the second round, this meant that the top two teams in a conference could never meet until the conference finals, assuming they both made it to that round.

After the NBA realigned its two conferences into three divisions each, the seeding rules remained largely unchanged.
The top three seeds would now be reserved for division champions.
However, this meant that if the top two teams (by record) in a conference were in the same division, they would be seeded first and fourth.
Assuming no first-round upsets, this raised the prospect that the top two teams in the conference would face each other in the conference semifinals, instead of the conference finals.

In the second year of this format, the 2005–06 NBA season, the two teams with the best records in the Western Conference, the San Antonio Spurs and Dallas Mavericks of the Southwest Division, did just that.
The Mavericks had the second-best record in the Western Conference and the third-best record in the entire league, behind the Detroit Pistons and San Antonio.
However, they were seeded fourth because they finished second in the Southwest behind the Spurs.
This turn of events led to the playoff format being criticized by many.
Besides the prospect of a team losing earlier in the playoffs than its regular-season record or seeding would suggest, critics claimed that it also created an unfair advantage for teams in the 2-7/3-6 half of the Western Conference playoff bracket, who could advance to the conference finals without playing either of the two best teams in the conference in an earlier round.

The Phoenix Suns, winners of the Pacific Division and possessors of the third best record, were seeded second, while the Denver Nuggets, winners of the Northwest Division and tied for only the seventh-best record in the conference, were seeded third.

The Memphis Grizzlies and Los Angeles Clippers met in the second-to-last game of the regular season, after the top four seeds had been clinched.
The two teams were already determined to be the fifth and sixth seeds, respectively, and had only to determine which rank higher.
The fifth seed would likely need to defeat the best two teams in the conference without home-court advantage to advance to the conference finals, as it would face fourth-seeded Dallas in the first round and likely face first-seeded San Antonio if it managed to defeat Dallas.
The sixth seed would play third-seeded Denver in the first round, but would have home-court advantage (since the Grizzlies had the fourth-best record in the conference and the Clippers had the fifth-best), and would not have to face either San Antonio or Dallas until the conference finals at the earliest.

This led to speculation about whether the Grizzlies or the Clippers would have much commitment to winning their match-up in the second-to-last game of the season, since it was clearly most advantageous to lose the game in order to obtain the 6th seed.
The Clippers eventually lost to Memphis without much evidence to support the speculation that the Clippers had lost intentionally.
In the first round of the playoffs, the Clippers defeated the Nuggets in five games, while Memphis was swept by Dallas.
Ultimately, Dallas and San Antonio did meet in the second round, with Dallas winning in seven games and advancing all the way to the NBA finals.

===
Timeline ===
1947: The playoffs were instituted with a three-stage tournament, similar to the Stanley Cup playoffs of the 1930s; the two first-place teams qualified directly to one semifinal where they played each other in a best-of-7 series.

Teams finishing second & third qualified for the best-of-3 quarterfinals, where the two second-placed teams were paired in one quarterfinal, as were the two third-placed teams, and the two quarterfinal winners played each other in a best-of-three semifinal.

The two semifinal winners played each other in the Basketball Association of America (BAA)
best-of-7 final series.
There were no byes, or idle time, for the division champions – as there would be for higher-seeded playoff teams
1955–66 and 1975–83.
All six 1947 participants played their first tournament games on Wednesday, April 2; in 1948 the two Eastern runners-up (E2, E3 in the figure) were idle for a few days only because there was a three-way Western tie to break.
Both winners of the runners-up bracket, Philadelphia in 1947 and Baltimore in 1948, reached the final series having played fewer tournament games than their final opponents, Chicago in 1947 and Philadelphia in 1948, had played in the best-of-7 pairings of division champions.
And both winners of the runners-up bracket won the final series.
The "postseason" actually comprised 11 games played in a span of 21 days for the 1947 Chicago Stags and 13 games in 30 days for 1948 Philadelphia Warriors, the finalists who emerged from the pairing of division champions.

1949: The playoffs were reorganized to match Eastern Division teams exclusively, and Western Division teams exclusively – in two halves of the bracket, so to speak.
Thus the BAA tournament generated a playoff champion in each Division.
(
So did the NBA in each of three 1950 divisions, and so it has done in each half of the league since then.)
The top four teams from each of the two divisions qualified.

The quarterfinals and semifinals were renamed division semifinals and division finals, respectively, and both rounds were best-of-3.
Thus any playoff team might be eliminated in two games, one home game.
The best-of-7 final was unchanged.1950:
The BAA was renamed as the National Basketball Association (NBA).

With a three-division setup, 12 teams now qualified for the playoffs, with the top four teams from each division meeting in the best-of-3 division semifinals.

The winners met in the best-of-3 division finals.

With three teams remaining, the surviving team with the best regular season record qualified directly for the finals while the other two teams met in a best-of-3 NBA semifinals.

1951: With the NBA reverting to a two-division setup; the division semifinals reverted to its original 1949 format with only eight teams qualifying.

The division finals was extended to a best-of-5 format.1954:
With only nine league members (soon to be eight), the number of playoff teams was cut down to six.

The division semifinals was changed to a double round-robin format within the division, with the top three teams from each division qualifying (each team played four games).

Following the round-robin games, the top two teams qualified for the best-of-three division finals, followed by the best-of-seven finals.

1955
: The number of playoff teams remained at six, but the initial round-robin was dropped after one year in favor of giving the first-place team in each division a bye to the best-of-five division finals.
Teams which placed second and third played a best-of-three division semifinal.
In 1955 the byes provided five and six extra days idle for the first-place teams.

1958:
The division finals was extended to a best-of-seven format.

1961: The division semifinals were extended to a best-of-five format.
The 1961 to 1966 tournaments alone
combined initial byes for seeded teams with best-of-five initial series for unseeded teams.
The 1961 byes provided five and seven extra days idle for the first-place teams.
By 1966 the schedule provided more rest for the first-round participants with byes of 11 and eight extra days idle.

1967: The number of playoff teams was expanded to eight once more.

The division semifinals now included the fourth-best team in each conference.

The first-placed teams no longer received a bye.

They were matched against the third-placed teams in the best-of-5 division semifinals, while the second-placed teams were now matched against the fourth-placed teams.

1968:
The division semifinals was extended to a best-of-seven format.

1971
: With an increased number of teams, the divisions were upgraded into conferences, which were then split into two divisions.

Eight teams still qualified, four from each conference.
Hence, the division semifinals and division finals came to be known as conference semifinals and conference finals, respectively.
The top two teams in each division qualified as the Eastern Conference, comprising the Atlantic and Central divisions, while the Western Conference consisted of the Midwest and Pacific divisions.
The first place team from one division would face the second place team of the other division within their conference.
In the conference playoffs, a division winner always held home-court advantage over a second place team regardless of record.

1973: The playoff format was modified, as only the divisional champions qualified automatically; two wild-cards were also added from each conference.
Once qualification was determined, the four qualifiers were seeded 1–4 based on record; divisional position no longer mattered.
The #1 seed then played #4, and #2 played #3.
1975: The number of playoff teams was expanded from eight to ten.

A first round was introduced which matched the fourth and fifth seeds in each conference in a best-of-3 first round series, while the top three seeds received a bye.
This is similar to the system currently used in the MLB.
Division winners did not automatically receive a bye to the Conference Semifinals.1977: The number of playoff teams was expanded from 10 to 12.

The first round now included the sixth best team in each conference, which was matched against the third seed.

Only the division winners received byes to the next round.
The 1983 tournament is the latest to incorporate first-round byes for seeded teams.
The first-round best-of-three series tapped off on Tuesday and Wednesday, April 19 and 20; the second-round best-of-sevens on Sunday to the following Wednesday, April 27.
Counting from Tuesday the byes provided five to eight extra days idle.

1984:
The playoffs were expanded from 12 teams to 16 teams.

All teams now participated in the first round, which was extended to a best-of-five series.2003: The first round was extended to a best-of-seven series.
This change arguably benefitted the higher seeds as it reduced the likelihood of an upset by a lower seed.
It also meant that a team that swept their series 4–0 might have to wait up to two weeks to play their next series against a team that had won 4–3.2005: Each conference was realigned into three divisions with each division winner qualifying for a top-three seed regardless of record.

The next best five teams from each conference also qualify for the playoffs.2007:
To address the criticisms of having each division champion guaranteed a top-three seed, regardless of record, the rules were changed such that the division winners are now only guaranteed a top-four seed.

The team with the second-best record in the conference is now guaranteed the second seed, even if it finishes second in its own division.

This ensures that the two best teams in the conference will not meet until the conference finals at the earliest.

The previous system raised the prospect of the two best teams in the conference being seeded 1 and 4 if they play in the same division, thus forcing them to play each other in the second round (given no upsets).

Note:
In the example below, both the East's #2 seed and the West's #3 seed are not division champions.

2016: While the playoff bracketing did not change, qualification criteria were changed.
The teams with the eight best records in each conference receive playoff berths, with no automatic berths nor guaranteed top-four seed placement for division champions.

== Play-in tournament ==
In the 2020 and 2021 playoffs, a play-in tournament was necessitated to determine the final qualified team(s) in the playoffs.

In the 2020 play-in format, if the ninth seed within a conference would have finished the regular season within four games of the eighth seed, they would have then competed in a play-in series.
This format was used only in the Western Conference playoffs, as the ninth-place Memphis Grizzlies finished within a half-game of the eighth-place Portland Trail Blazers and qualified for the play-in tournament.
The Trail Blazers, holding an automatic one-game lead as the higher seed, eliminated the Grizzlies in game one to advance to the playoffs.
The 2021 play-in format was expanded to include the seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth-placed teams in each conference.
The 7th place and 8th place teams will play each other with the winner becoming the 7th seed.
The loser will then play the winner of the 9th and 10th place game with the winner becoming the 8th seed.

==
Team roster ==
Playoff teams must identify their postseason roster before the playoffs begin.
They are allowed up to 15 players and can designate two as inactive for each game.
Players are eligible to be on a team's playoff roster as long as they were on the team for at least one regular season game, and were not on another NBA team's roster after March 1.
Prior to the 2005-06 season, playoff rosters were limited to 12 players who were named before the playoffs began.

== Records and statistics ==
Only five 8th seeded teams have managed to win a series versus the number 1 seeded team:
The Denver Nuggets eliminated the Seattle SuperSonics 3–2 in 1994.
The New York Knicks eliminated the Miami Heat 3–2 in 1999.
The Golden State Warriors defeated the Dallas Mavericks 4–2 in the 2007 Western Conference First Round (becoming the first 8 seed to beat a 1 seed in the best of 7 formats).
In 2011, the Memphis Grizzlies beat the San Antonio Spurs, 4–2 and in 2012, the Philadelphia 76ers beat the Chicago Bulls 4–2.

The 1999 Knicks are the only 8th seeded team to reach the NBA finals; no 8th seeded team has won the NBA championship as of 2020.

The 1956–57 St. Louis Hawks, 1958–59
Minneapolis Lakers and the 1980–81 Houston Rockets are the only teams with losing records (34–38, 33–39 and 40–42, respectively) to make it to the NBA finals.
In 1981, the Houston Rockets' opponent in the Western Conference Finals, the Kansas City Kings, also had a losing record (40–42).
Boston Celtics beat all of these teams in the finals.

The 1994–95 Houston Rockets, a sixth seed with a record of 47–35, are the lowest seeded team to win the NBA finals.
In the NBA finals, the Rockets swept the Orlando Magic (57–25) in four games; in doing so, the Rockets defeated four teams that had won 50 or more games during the regular season (the Utah Jazz at 60–22, the Phoenix Suns at 59–23, the San Antonio Spurs at 62–20 and Orlando at 57–25), the first time a team had done so.
As of now, the 1994–95 Rockets are the only team to have won an NBA title without having the home-court advantage during any round of the playoffs.

The Golden State Warriors own the longest NBA playoff winning streak for a single postseason with 15 straight wins in the 2017 playoffs.

Of all the teams with multiple NBA finals appearances, the Chicago Bulls are the only team to have never lost in the finals, winning six.

The Boston Celtics and Los Angeles/
Minneapolis Lakers possess the most overall NBA finals series wins with 17 each.
The Celtics have played in 21 NBA Finals series, with an overall record of 17–4, while the Lakers have played in the most NBA Finals series (32), with an overall record of 17–15.

The longest active playoff appearance streak currently belongs to the Houston Rockets with 8 consecutive appearances in the playoffs, beginning in the 2012–13 NBA season.
The longest streak of playoffs appearances in a row is currently tied at 22 seasons between the San Antonio Spurs, who made it from 1997–98 season until the 2018–19 season, and the Syracuse Nationals/Philadelphia 76ers, who made it from the 1949–50 season to the 1970–71 season.

In 1983, under the bye–7–7–7 system, the Philadelphia 76ers attained the best record of 12–1, having only lost in Game 4 of the Eastern Conference Finals against the Milwaukee Bucks.

In 2001, under the best of 5–7–7–7 system, the Los Angeles Lakers attained the best record of 15–1, having only lost in Game 1 of the Finals against the Philadelphia 76ers.

In 2017, under the best of 7–7–7–7 system, the Golden State Warriors attained the best record of 16–1, having only lost in Game 4 of the Finals against the Cleveland Cavaliers.
The Warriors and Cavaliers came into the Finals with a combined record of 24–1, with the Cavaliers having only lost in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference Finals against the Boston Celtics.

Of the 74 NBA champions, 72 of them were either a No.
1 seed (50), a No.
2 seed (16) or a No.
3 seed (6).

Of the 74 NBA champions, 38 of them were from the Eastern Conference while the other 34 were from the Western Conference.

==
Playoff appearances ==
Current as of the 2020 NBA playoffs


===
Appearances by active teams ===


==
See also ==
NBA Conference Finals
NBA Finals
NBA G League
List of NBA G League champions
List of NBA playoff series


==
References ==


==
External links ==
NBA official website
Playoff Seeding Criteria
NBA.com
NBA Playoffs
InsideHoops.com coverage
Basketball-Reference.com Index of NBA playoffs seasons
Jada Koren Pinkett Smith () (née Pinkett;
born September 18, 1971) is an American actress, screenwriter, producer, talk show host, businesswoman, and an occasional singer-songwriter.

She began her acting career in 1990, with a guest appearance on the short-lived sitcom True Colors, and subsequently starred in the television series A Different World (1991–1993).
She made her feature film debut in Menace II Society (1993).
Her breakthrough came opposite Eddie Murphy in The Nutty Professor (1996), and she has since starred in more than 20 feature films, including Set It Off (1996)
, Scream 2 (1997), Ali (2001), The Matrix Reloaded (2003), The Matrix Revolutions (2003), Collateral (2004), the Madagascar films (2005–2012), Magic Mike XXL (2015), Bad Moms (2016), Girls Trip (2017), and Angel
Has Fallen (2019).
On television, she has starred in Hawthorne (2009–2011) and Gotham (2014–2016).

Pinkett Smith launched her music career in 2002, when she helped create the heavy metal band Wicked Wisdom, for which she was a singer and songwriter.
Along with her husband Will Smith, she has a production company, and has had producing credits in films, documentaries, and television series.
She also wrote a children's book, Girls Hold Up This World, which was published in 2004.

Jada has been married to Will Smith since 1997, with whom she has two children: son Jaden and daughter Willow.
Through their marriage, she is also stepmother to Smith's son from his first marriage, Trey Smith.

==
Family and early life ==
Born in Baltimore, Maryland, Jada Pinkett Smith was named after her mother's favorite soap opera actress, Jada Rowland.
Pinkett Smith is of Jamaican and Bajan descent on her mother's side and African-American descent on her father's side.
Her parents are Adrienne Banfield-Jones, the head nurse of an inner-city clinic in Baltimore, and Robsol Pinkett Jr., who ran a construction company.
Banfield-Jones, who during the 2010s became Adrienne Banfield-Norris, became pregnant in high school; the couple married but divorced after several months.
Banfield-Jones raised Pinkett with the help of her own mother, Marion Martin Banfield, a Jamaican-born social worker.
Banfield noticed her granddaughter's passion for the performing arts and enrolled her in piano, tap dance, and ballet lessons.
Pinkett Smith has remained close to her mother and said, "A mother and daughter's relationship is usually the most honest, and we are so close."
She also added: "[My mother] understood what I wanted and never stood in my way."
She participated as the maid of honor in Banfield-Norris' 1998 wedding to Paul Jones, a telecommunications executive.
Pinkett Smith has shown great admiration for her grandmother, saying, "My grandmother was a doer who wanted to create a better community and add beauty to the world.
"Pinkett
Smith attended the Baltimore School for the Arts, where she met and became close friends with her classmate, rapper Tupac Shakur.
When she met Shakur, she was a drug dealer.
She majored in dance and theatre and graduated in 1989.
After graduation, she spent a year at the North Carolina School of the Arts.

==
Acting career ==
===
Beginnings (1990–1995) ===
Pinkett began her acting career in 1990, when she starred in an episode of True Colors.
She received guest roles in television shows such as Doogie Howser, M.D. (1991) and 21 Jump Street (1991), and earned a role on comedian Bill Cosby's NBC television sitcom A Different World in 1991, as college freshman Lena James.
In 1994, Pinkett Smith acted with Keenen Ivory Wayans in the action and comedy film A Low Down Dirty Shame.
She described her character, Peaches, as "raw" with "major attitude", and her acting garnered positive reviews.
The New York Times noted, "Ms. Pinkett, whose performance is as sassy and sizzling as a Salt-N-Pepa recording, walks away with the movie."
In 1994, she also starred as a title character in Doug McHenry's romantic drama Jason's Lyric (1994), opposite Allen Payne, and in 1995, played a convict on work release in the horror film Demon Knight (1995).
Roger Ebert, in his review for the former film, praised the chemistry between Payne and Pinkett Smith, writing: "[He] has powerful chemistry with the enigmatic, teasing, tender character played by Pinkett; they really seem to like one another, which is not a feeling you always pick up in screen romances".

===
Rise to prominence (1996–2003) ===
Pinkett Smith starred with actor and comedian Eddie Murphy in the 1996 remake of The Nutty Professor, portraying the love interest of a kind-hearted university professor who is morbidly obese.
The film was a commercial success, earning $25 million in its first weekend in North America; it eventually made $274 million worldwide.
She also had a role in Set It Off (1996), a crime drama about four women who rob banks to escape from poverty, opposite Queen Latifah, Vivica A. Fox, and Kimberly Elise.
Her acting in the film was noted in the San Francisco Chronicle, where they said she was "the one to watch".
Budgeted at $9 million, Set It Off made $41 million globally.
In 1997, Pinkett Smith had a cameo role in Scream 2 as a college student who is brutally murdered in front of hundreds of cinemagoers.
The film made more than $100 million at the North American box office.
In 1998, she played a news reporter in the thriller Return to Paradise, with Joaquin Phoenix and Vince Vaughn, and took on the title role of an extroverted woman, alongside Tommy Davidson, in the comedy Woo.
While giving positive reviews to her performance in Woo, Derek Armstrong of AllMovie stated that the script was "formulaic" and "not much of a vehicle for its impish starlet".
She next starred in Spike Lee's film Bamboozled (2000), as a personal assistant to the main character portrayed by Damon Wayans.
Although the film met with mediocre reviews, it won the Freedom of Expression Award by the National Board of Review.

In 2001, Pinkett Smith portrayed a loud-mouthed wife in the moderately successful comedy Kingdom Come, with LL Cool J, Vivica A. Fox, Anthony Anderson, Toni Braxton, and Whoopi Goldberg.
In the biographical sports drama Ali (also 2001), she played Sonji Roi, the first wife of boxer Muhammad Ali, opposite Will Smith.
While she loved the final product, she initially did not think she was the right person for the role
: "I felt like because we were a couple off screen, for people to see us together on the screen in a movie like this, would take people out of the movie, that people would see Will
and Jada there — they wouldn't see Ali and Sonji".
Perhaps her best-known role to date is the part of human rebel Niobe in the films The Matrix Reloaded (2003) and The Matrix Revolutions (2003),
sequels to 1999's The Matrix, and
the related video game Enter The Matrix (2003).
The character was written specifically with Pinkett Smith in mind.
Directly after she filmed her scenes for Ali, Pinkett Smith flew to Australia to work on the Matrix sequels.
The sequels earned over $91 million and $48 million during their North American opening weekends, respectively.
===
Acting, producing, and directing (2004–2013) ===
In the neo-noir thriller Collateral (2004), alongside Jamie Foxx and Tom Cruise, Pinkett Smith obtained the role of a U.S. Justice Department prosecutor and the target of a contract killer.
The film was a critical and commercial success, grossing US$217.8 million worldwide.
She voiced Gloria, a strong, confident, but sweet hippopotamus, in the computer animated film Madagascar (2005).
Tom McGrath, one of the film's directors, stated they found all these traits in her voice when they listened to her.
Despite a mixed response from critics, the film was a commercial success, earning US$532 million worldwide, making it one of the biggest hits of 2005.
In 2007, she played the wife of an affluent dentist in the drama Reign Over Me, with Adam Sandler, Don Cheadle, Liv Tyler, and Donald Sutherland.
Entertainment Weekly described the film as a "strange, black-and-blue therapeutic drama equally mottled with likable good intentions and agitating clumsiness", and found Pinkett Smith to be "graceful" in it.
In 2008, Pinkett Smith took on the role of a lesbian author in the all-female comedy The Women, opposite Meg Ryan, Annette Bening, Debra Messing, and Eva Mendes.
Though a commercial success, The Women was panned by critics, with Pinkett Smith earning a nomination for the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress for her performance.
Her directorial debut was the drama
The Human Contract (also 2008); she also wrote, and starred as the sister of a successful but unhappy businessman, with Paz Vega and Idris Elba.
It debuted at the Cannes Film Festival in May 2008.
The success of Madagascar led Pinkett Smith to return to the role of Gloria in the 2008 sequel Madagascar:
Escape 2 Africa, which earned US$603 million at the international box office.
Pinkett Smith was an executive producer and starred as a Chief Nursing Officer in the TNT medical drama Hawthorne, which premiered on June 16, 2009.
USA Today remarked:  "Pinkett Smith's Hawthorne is tired in every sense of the word, and she's not the only one.
Every character and event falls under the category of painfully predictable".
Hawthorne ended on August 16, 2011, after three seasons.
While she reprised the voice role of Gloria in Madagascar 3:
Europe's Most Wanted (2012), which made over US$746 million, she also voiced the character in the NBC Christmas special Merry Madagascar (2009) and the direct-to-DVD film Madly Madagascar (2013).

===
Commercial success (2014–present) ===
Beginning in 2014, Pinkett Smith starred in the first season of the FOX crime drama Gotham, as Gotham City gangster Fish Mooney.
She returned, recurrently, in the second and third seasons of the series.
In 2015, she starred in the comedy Magic Mike XXL, as the manager of a star stripper club, opposite Channing Tatum and Joe Manganiello.
The film made US$122.5 million worldwide.
She starred with Mila Kunis, Kristen Bell and Christina Applegate in the comedy Bad Moms (2016), as the sidekick of a domineering parent-teacher association head.
It received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the cast and humor, though did not feel it could "take full advantage of its assets".
The film, nevertheless, earned more than US$183.9 million.
Pinkett Smith next took on the role of a nurse and uptight mom in the comedy Girls Trip (2017), alongside Regina Hall, Queen Latifah and Tiffany Haddish.
The film was chosen by Time magazine as one of its top ten films of 2017, and grossed US$140 million worldwide, including over US$100 million domestically, the first comedy of 2017 to do so.
In July 2017, Pinkett Smith appeared at the Essence Festival where, on the Empowerment Stage, she appeared to talk alongside Queen Latifah.
Pinkett Smith spoke highly of the cast reflecting their characters in real life, stating that they are all women who love other women and work to empower each other, a feature that she notes as rare in Hollywood.
Beginning in May 2018, Pinkett Smith has hosted the Facebook Watch talk show
Red Table Talk, which features her mom and her daughter and focuses on a wide range of topics, with these being watched from three different perspectives.
In a positive review, USA Today's Maeve McDermott praised the series for its "insightful guests, no-holds-barred topics and Smith's magnetic hosting presence".

==
Musical career ==
Under the name Jada Koren, Pinkett Smith formed the metal band Wicked Wisdom in 2002.
The band consists of Pinkett Smith performing lead vocals, Pocket Honore (guitar, vocals), Cameron "Wirm" Graves (guitar, keyboard, vocals), and Rio (bass, vocals).
The band is managed by James Lassiter and Miguel Melendez of Overbrook Entertainment, a company co-founded by Pinkett Smith's husband Will Smith.
The band's self-titled debut album was released on February 21, 2006, by Pinkett Smith's production company 100% Womon and Suburban Noize Records.
Will Smith served as the project's executive producer.
The album made it to Billboard's Top Heatseekers chart, and peaked at number 44 during the week of March 11, 2006.
AllMusic reviewer Alex Henderson said of the album, "[Pinkett Smith] shows herself to be an expressive, commanding singer" and that "[Wicked Wisdom] shows considerable promise".
The band promoted the album in 2006, touring with heavy metal band Sevendust.

===
Onyx Hotel Tour ===
Wicked Wisdom landed a slot on Britney Spears' Onyx Hotel Tour in 2004, one of the year's highest-profile tours.
The band opened for Spears for eight dates in April and May 2004, during the European leg of the tour.

===
Ozzfest 2005 ===
In 2005, Sharon Osbourne went to see Wicked Wisdom perform at a small nightclub in Los Angeles.
She said, "I was blown away.
When you see and hear Jada with her band
it's apparent that she has nothing but love and respect for this genre of music".
In May 2005 organizers announced Wicked Wisdom would perform on the second stage of 2005's Ozzfest.
Fans of the festival were outraged, claiming the band did not have the credibility to perform at the music festival.
Aware of the questions about the band's addition to Ozzfest, Pinkett Smith said, "I'm not here asking for any favors.
You've got to show and prove.
And not every audience is going to go for it.
"
Wicked Wisdom's guitarist Pocket Honore said while early dates of the tour were rocky, "once word got out that we weren't a joke, people started coming out and by the sixth or seventh gig we were on fire".
Pinkett Smith agreed, saying, "After seven dates within the Ozzfest tour, the whole attitude of it started to turn around once the word of mouth started getting out."
==
Other ventures ==


===
Business ===
After opening her music company 100% Women Productions, Pinkett Smith created her own fashion label, Maja, in 1994.
The clothing line features women's T-shirts and dresses embellished with the slogan "Sister Power", sold primarily through small catalogs.
In 2003, Pinkett Smith and Smith helped to create the television series All of Us, which aired on UPN/The CW.
Pinkett Smith published her first children's book, Girls Hold Up This World, in 2004.
"
I wrote the book for Willow and for her friends and for all the little girls in the world who need affirmation about being female in this pretty much masculine world.
I really tried to capture different sides of femininity.
I want girls in the world to feel powerful, to know they have the power to change the world in any way they wish.
"In 2005
, Pinkett Smith became one of many celebrities to invest a combined total of US$10 million in Carol's Daughter, a line of beauty products created by Lisa Price.
She became a spokesman for the beauty line, and said, "To be a part of another African American woman's dream was just priceless to me."

===
Philanthropy ===
In 1997, Pinkett Smith was the emcee of the Million Woman March in Philadelphia.
Together with Will, Pinkett Smith has created the Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation in Baltimore, Maryland, a charity which focuses on youth in urban inner cities and family support.
Her aunt, Karen Banfield Evans, is the foundation's executive director.
The charity was awarded the David Angell Humanitarian Award by The American Screenwriters Association (ASA) in 2006.
The Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation has provided grants to non-profit organizations such as YouthBuild, and Pinkett Smith has made personal donations to organizations such as Capital K-9s.
In 2006, Pinkett Smith donated $1 million to her high school alma mater, the Baltimore School for the Arts, and dedicated the new theater to her classmate and close friend Tupac Shakur.
When Pinkett Smith's aunt, Karen Banfield Evans, was diagnosed with lupus, the Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation, in association with the Lupus Foundation of America and Maybelline, held the first annual "Butterflies Over Hollywood" event on September 29, 2007, at the El Rey Theatre in Los Angeles.
The event raised funds for LFA public and professional educational programs.
The Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation was presented with an award in 2007 at the 4th Annual Lupus Foundation of America Awards.
In 2012, on behalf of PETA, Pinkett Smith wrote a letter to Baltimore's mayor, asking that the visiting Ringling Brothers Circus "comply with Baltimore's absolute prohibition of the use of devices such as bullhooks" and not harm the elephants.
In 2013, she appeared in a video clip for Gucci's "Chime for Change" campaign that aims to raise funds and awareness of women's issues globally.

==
Personal life ==
Pinkett Smith dated former basketball player Grant Hill while he attended the Duke University.
===
Family ===
Jada met Will Smith in 1994 on the set of Smith's television show
The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, when she auditioned for the role of his character's girlfriend, Lisa Wilkes.
She was considered too short and the role went to actress Nia Long.
Will and Jada began dating after he separated from Sheree Fletcher.
Prior to this, Will had grown an attraction to Jada, but did not act on it.
Jada eventually moved from her hometown of Baltimore to California to be with him.
On December 31, 1997, while Jada was three months pregnant, about 100 guests attended their wedding at The Cloisters, near her hometown of Baltimore, Maryland.
Regarding her marriage, Jada said that they are "private people" and told one interviewer, "I will throw my career away before I let it break up our marriage.
I made it clear to Will.
I'd throw it away completely".
The pair produce films through their joint production company, Overbrook Entertainment and Westbrook Inc.
In April 2013, Pinkett Smith caused many to believe she and Will were in an open marriage after stating in an interview: "I've always told Will, 'You can do whatever you want as long as you can look at yourself in the mirror and be okay'.
Because at the end of the day, Will is his own man.
I'm here as his partner, but he is his own man".
However, she denied such, clarifying her statements on Facebook, writing: "
Open marriage?
The statement I made in regard to, 'Will can do whatever he wants', has illuminated the need to discuss the relationship between trust and love and
how they co-exist".
Jada and Will have two children, Jaden (born 1998), and Willow (born 2000).
She is also the stepmother of Trey Smith, Will's son from a previous marriage.
Will commented in 2008 on their parenting styles: "We're not strict but we definitely believe it's a very important component for rearing children.
It creates safety for them.
They understand that they need guidance.
"
The family resides in a 27,000 square foot (2,500 m2) home, on 100 acres (40 ha), in Malibu.

===
Scientology ===
After meeting Tom Cruise during the filming of Collateral in 2004, Pinkett Smith and Smith donated US$20,000 to the Hollywood Education and Literacy Program (HELP), Scientology's basis for homeschooling.

=== Affair with August Alsina ===
In late June 2020, singer August Alsina claimed that he and Jada  were involved in an affair in 2016, with Will Smith's permission.
A spokesman for Pinkett Smith denied the claims, saying they were "absolutely not true".
On July 10, during an episode of Red Table Talk featuring Will Smith, Pinkett Smith confirmed an "entanglement" with Alsina during her separation from Will, although not with Will's permission.
Jada said Alsina misconstrued it as permission because she and Will were "separated amicably".
Pinkett Smith further claimed she wanted to "heal" Alsina, but needed to find healing for herself first.
She eventually got back with Will after breaking things off with Alsina and stated she has not spoken to him since.
After Pinkett Smith's use of the word "entanglement" went viral on the Internet, Alsina released a collaboration titled "Entanglements" with rapper Rick Ross on July 19, 2020, singing "The definition of entanglement is when you get tangled in the sheets".

==
Filmography ==


==
Awards and nominations ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Jada Pinkett Smith at IMDb
Jada Pinkett Smith at AllMovie
Wicked Wisdom
New Village Leadership Academy
The men's national basketball team of the United States won the gold medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London.
Defending the gold medal won by the 2008 team in the previous Olympic Games, the Americans qualified for the 2012 Games after winning the 2010 FIBA World Championship.
The Olympic team lost some players to injuries who might have made the team, and appeared to be short on big men.
Their roster featured five players returning from the 2008 Olympic team and five others from the 2010 World Championship.
Coming off a victory in the 2011-2012 National Basketball Association (NBA) finals, Kobe Bryant was the leader of the Olympic team.

The US went undefeated but appeared vulnerable in five exhibition games.
They finished the tournament with a perfect 8–0 record, defeating opponents by an average of 32 points while trailing in the fourth quarter only once.
The Americans often played with a small lineup that emphasized speed, quickness, and outside shooting.
The team set an Olympic single-game record with 156 points scored against Nigeria in the preliminary round.
In a rematch of the 2008 finals, Team USA again defeated Spain to capture the gold.

==
Roster ==
The 2012 team consisted of returning 2008 Olympic gold medal winners small forwards LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony
, point guards Chris Paul and Deron Williams, and shooting guard Kobe Bryant.
It also featured 2010 World Championship winners small forwards Kevin Durant and Andre Iguodala, power forward Kevin Love, center Tyson Chandler, and point guard Russell Westbrook.
The final two roster spots were claimed by shooting guard James Harden, and power forward Blake Griffin; they were chosen over shooting guard Eric Gordon, small forward Rudy Gay, and power forward Anthony Davis.
Griffin then sustained a torn meniscus during practice and was replaced by Davis, the number one overall pick of the 2012 NBA Draft, who earlier was unable to practice during the final tryouts due to an ankle injury.
Forward Lamar Odom removed himself from consideration in July before the start of training camp.
The initial 20 finalists were announced in January 2012.
In addition to Griffin, others withdrew due to injury including power forwards Chris Bosh (abdomen) and LaMarcus Aldridge (torn meniscus), point guards
Derrick Rose (ACL) and Chauncey Billups, shooting guard Dwyane Wade (knee), and center Dwight Howard (back surgery).

Harden and Davis were added as replacements.
Center Andrew Bynum declined an invitation to be added as a finalist.
The final team was built on quickness and speed.
While the roster appeared to be weakened by the injuries to its inside players, Team USA executive director Jerry Colangelo believed the team was deeper, more athletic and more experienced than the 2008 gold-medal team.
The following is the United States roster in the men's basketball tournament of the 2012 Summer Olympics.

==
Exhibition games ==
The United States went undefeated at 5–0 in their exhibition games, but were behind early against Brazil and Spain and played a close game against Argentina.

The Americans went an undefeated 8–0 and averaged 116 points per game, winning by an average margin of 32.1 points—the fifth highest in US Olympic history.

Team USA trailed in the fourth quarter only once, against Lithuania in the opening round.

Durant scored a United States Olympics record of 156 points in the tournament.

Bryant was not in peak condition early, but he played himself into shape and was a key contributor in the final three games.
While Chandler was the team's only true center—Davis was thin and had no professional experience—Krzyzewski also played Love, James or Anthony as Team USA's de facto center.
Love led the team with 61 rebounds (27 offensive).Compensating for its lack of big men, the US played small ball and spread its playmakers around the three-point line and with a player penetrating and passing the ball back outside.
They won with "basically five players on the perimeter," Spain coach Sergio Scariolo said.
Bryant and Krzyzewski declared at the completion of the tournament that 2012 was their final Olympic appearance.
They both joined Team USA after the disappointing bronze finish in the 2004 Games.
Krzyzewski left with a 62–1 record and a 50-game winning streak in international play for the Americans.
He joined Henry Iba as the only US coaches to lead the team to consecutive Olympic gold medals.
In 2013, Team USA announced Krzyzewski would return as head coach from 2013 through 2016.

===
Preliminary round ===
The US competed in Group A in the opening round.
Teams played in a round robin format with the top four teams advancing to the next round.
The Americans ended group play 5–0, the only undefeated team and the group's top seed.

====
France ====
Durant scored 22 points, and James had eight assists while taking only six shots as the US won their opening game 98–71 over France.
The US was never in any real trouble, but played sloppy in the beginning, missing their first six three-point attempts and being called for 18 personal fouls in the first half.
Anthony and Westbrook spent the final six minutes of the half on the bench after their third personal fouls.
The team led 52–36
at halftime, which expanded to 78–51 after three quarters.
Krzyzewski was able to rest Bryant, James, and Durant for most of the final period, and even the 19-year-old Davis played.
Durant, Anthony, and Chandler contributed nine rebounds each, and Love finished with 14 points.

Bryant, James and Durant finished the game a combined 6 for 12 on three-pointers, while the rest of the team shot 2 for 13.
France's team featured six NBA players, including Tony Parker.

====
Tunisia ====
The US won in a 110–63 blowout over Tunisia, but only after Krzyzewski benched his starters—Bryant, James, Durant, Paul, and Chandler—to begin the second half.
The reserves—Love, Anthony, Iguodala, Williams and Westbrook—responded with a 21–3 run to open the half, turning a 46–33 halftime lead to a 67–36 advantage.
Tunisia, the consensus weakest team in the Olympics and listed by one website as 54-point underdogs, led the game 15–12
after nine minutes, and trailed only 35–30 with about 3+1⁄2 minutes remaining in the first half.

The Americans then scored 11 consecutive points.
Like the opening game when they missed their first six three-pointers, the US started this game an
even worse 0-for-8.
Colangelo said opponents' strategy was to force the Americans to shoot from outside and hope for an off night.
The US made 17 of 22 on conventional field goals in the first half, while missing 10 of 12 from three-point range.
This was the team's second consecutive slow start in the Olympics, following the pattern in their five earlier exhibition games.
The Americans scored on a variety of dunks once the game was in hand.
Anthony and Love led the team with 16 points.
Six Americans scored in double figures, including Durant who had 13 points and added 10 rebounds and 5 assists.

====
Nigeria ====
The US answered critics of their slow starts and outside shooting with a 156–73 blowout of Nigeria.
The Americans scored an Olympic-record 78 points in the first half en route to breaking the record for points in a game of 138, set by Brazil against Egypt in 1988.
The record was broken with 4:37 left to play, and the team set US records for 3-pointers (29), field goals (59), field goal percentage (71%), and margin of victory (
83).Anthony scored 37 points in only 14 minutes of play, shooting 10 of 12 on three-pointers and breaking the US single-game scoring record in less than three quarters.
He broke Stephon Marbury's record of 31 against Spain in 2004.
Bryant scored 16 points, 14 in the first quarter, as the US scored 49 points in the opening period.

They led 78–45 at halftime before doubling their scoring total in the second half.
The Americans shot 29 of 46 on three-point attempts (63 percent).
They more than doubled their previous record of 13 made, which was broken by halftime after 11 three-pointers in the first quarter alone.
Krzyzewski defended the blowout, noting that he removed his stars in the second half, ordered a zone defense, and stopped allowing fast breaks in the opening period.

====
Lithuania ====
Mainly a facilitator in the first three games, James scored 9 of his 20 points in the final four minutes as the US came back to defeat Lithuania
99–94.

Linas Kleiza scored 25 to lead Lithuania, which led by 84–82 with 5:50 remaining.
The US took a three-point lead, but Lithuania pulled within 87–86 with 4:12 in the game.
James followed with a three-pointer and a dunk.
Entering the contest, James was averaging just 6.7 points but with 5.7 assists.
Anthony added 20 points, and Paul contributed seven rebounds, six assists and four of the Americans' 17 steals.
The US made only 10 of 33 attempts on three-point attempts and too often settled for outside shots.
Lithuania outrebounded the US 42–37 and shot an impressive 58 percent from the field.
The Americans struggled to defend Lithuania's high pick-and-roll.
However, the US team's deep bench wore Lithuania down in the final period, forcing several turnovers to determine the outcome in the final minutes.
Winning their first three games by an average of 52.2 points and playing so well, the team had canceled their previous two practices and rested while watching other sports instead.

====
Argentina ====
Durant scored 17 of his 28 points in the third quarter as the US turned a one-point game into a 126–97 blowout over Argentina.
The US led just
60–59
at halftime, when Durant matched Argentina's point total during a 42-point third quarter explosion by the Americans.
James scored the first seven in the quarter before Durant took over and shot 5 of 6 from three-point range.

He finished 8 of 10 from three-point range, and the team was 20 of 39.
James had 18 points in the game, and Paul added 17.The US allowed Argentina to make 11 of its first 15 shots, and the Americans lead was never bigger than six in the second quarter.
Argentina's Luis Scola did not play in the second period, and starting point guard Pablo Prigioni sat the entire game.
They rested their starters in the fourth quarter in preparation for their quarterfinal meeting against Brazil, and a possible rematch against the Americans in the semifinals.
Manu Ginóbili led the Argentines with 16 points, all in the first half.
The US finished the first round as the top seed in their group and the only team undefeated in group play.
An American loss by at least 13 points would have placed Argentina instead into the top spot from Group A.


===
Knockout round ===
The single-elimination round features the top four teams from each of the two groups from the opening round.

====
Quarterfinal – Australia ====
Bryant made six straight three-pointers in the second half and James finished with the first triple-double in US Olympic history.
The Americans surrendered 11 consecutive points to start the second half.
The US was leading by six when Bryant, who shot 0 for 3 in the first half, made consecutive threes to give his team a 70–58 lead.
He scored all of his 20 points in the second half, including four consecutive three-pointers in a 66-second span.
He entered the game averaging only 9.4 points.
James finished with 11 points, 14 rebounds and 11 assists, and he almost had a triple-double by halftime (seven points, 10 rebounds, and six assists).
Love added 10 points and 11 rebounds (eight offensive), Anthony scored 17, and Durant had 14.
====
Semifinal – Argentina ====
The US met Argentina for the third time in a span of 17 days in the third straight Olympic semifinal meeting between the two countries.
Argentina in 2004 was the last team to beat the Americans in Olympic play.
Durant scored 19 points, while James and Anthony added 18 each as the US pulled away from Argentina in the second half for a 109–83 win.
Ginóbili hit a three-pointer at the buzzer at the end of the first half to bring Argentina within 47–40, and he scored another three to open the second half to cut the lead to four points.
Durant and James took over the game as the Americans led by 17 points to start the fourth.
Bryant scored 13 points in the first half—including 11 in the first quarter—and Durant made four three-pointers in the third, while Anthony made four of his own in the fourth.
The US made 18 three-pointers in the game.
James finished the game  with seven rebounds and seven assists.

====
Final – Spain ====
The US met Spain in the gold medal game, a rematch of the finals in the 2008 Olympics.
The Americans had won 118–107 in Beijing that year after leading by just four with about 2+1⁄2 minutes left.
Spain in 2012 was ranked second in the world behind the US, and had a size advantage with brothers Pau and Marc Gasol.
The Spaniards lost games to Russia and Brazil in group play and trailed the Russians by 13 points early in their semifinal win.
The US had also beaten Spain for Olympic gold in 1984.
The Americans were 8–1 against Spain since the introduction of the NBA players into FIBA events in 1992.The Olympics' own daily preview of the 2012 rematch said it would "likely take a great game from Spain and an off-day from the US to cause an upset".
The Americans had been tested only once against Lithuania, and they had dominated opponents in points off turnovers (198–77) and fast-break points (175–55).
In a game that was close until the final minutes, the US defeated Spain 107–100.
The Americans led the Spanish by only one point after three quarters, but James scored on a dunk and then a three-point basket for a 102–93 lead with 1:59 to play.
James had 19 points in the game, joining Michael Jordan as the only players to win the NBA regular-season Most Valuable Player (MVP) award, NBA championship, NBA Finals MVP, and Olympic gold in the same year.
Durant added 30 points, the first 30-point game in an Olympic final in US history.
Spain was led by Pau Gasol with 24 points, including his team's first 13 points in the second half to give them a 71–70 lead halfway into the third quarter.
Gasol added eight rebounds and seven assists in the game.
Spain also trailed by one after the first half, which included their guard Juan Carlos Navarro scoring 19 of his 21 points.
The Spanish kept the game close despite Marc Gasol being called for four fouls in the first quarter and a half.
James, who frequently guarded one of the Gasols due to the Americans' lack of big men, went to the bench with 7:23 in the game after his fourth foul before returning for the final five minutes.
Bryant had 17 in the game for Team USA, and Love contributed nine points and nine rebounds.
The final margin of seven points was the second-closest Olympic final ever after the Soviet Union's controversial one-point defeat of the United States in 1972.

===
Statistics ===
== Dream Team comparisons ==
Bryant and James  believed the 2012 team would win against the Dream Team, the 1992 Olympic team considered by some the greatest sports team ever assembled.
Bryant said, "[T]hey were a lot older, at kind of the end of their careers.
We have just a bunch of young racehorses, guys that are eager to compete".
Dream Team member Charles Barkley said that he "just started laughing" upon hearing Bryant's comment and thought the 1992 team would win by double digits.
Michael Jordan added: "For [Bryant] to compare those two teams is not one of the smarter things he ever could have done...
Remember now, they learned from us.
We didn't learn from them".
Bird joked, "They probably could.
I haven't played in 20 years and we're all old now."
Bryant later clarified that he thought the 1992 team was better, but it was "ludicrous" to think his team could not beat the Dream Team in one game.
"
You didn't ask me if we could beat them in a 7-game series", he said.
Most experts believed the 1992 team would prevail with a distinct advantage with their centers, David Robinson and Patrick Ewing, over the smaller 2012 team.
Chandler was the only 7-foot (2.1 m) player on the 2012 team, but his offensive game was limited.
Some felt the discussion might have been more compelling if Dwight Howard and other injured big men were on the 2012 squad.
NBA coach Doc Rivers felt the London team had an advantage with their outside shooting over the Dream Team.
Like Barkley, CBSSports.com opined that only three members of the 2012 team—Bryant, James, and Durant—would have made the Dream Team.
The Dream Team averaged 117.3 points and won its games by an average of 43.8 points.
The 2012 team averaged a similar point total (115.5) but won by a lesser margin (32.1).
The Dream Team beat Croatia by 32 in the gold-medal game, while the 2012 team won by just seven.
However, the level of international competition improved since 1992.
The 2012 team faced a tougher opponent in Spain, which had seven NBA players; Croatia in 1992 had only two NBA players at that point.
Overall, the 2012 Olympic field had 39 NBA players and 18 former NBA players were on team rosters, while rosters in 1992 had 17 NBA players and three other former players—more than half of those NBA players were on the Dream Team.

== Notes ==


==
References ==
General"USA
Combined Team Statistics (as of Aug 12, 2012)" (PDF).
usabasketball.com.
Archived from the original (PDF) on August 14, 2012.
Retrieved August 14, 2012.Specific


==
External links ==
2012
Men's Olympic Basketball Competition Results at usabasketball.com
Net2phone provides VoIP and cloud computing-based telephony products and services.
The company is a subsidiary of IDT Corporation.

==
History ==
Net2Phone was founded in 1990.
On July 30, 1999, during the dot-com bubble, the company became a public company via an initial public offering, raising $81 million.
Shares rose 77% on the first day of trading to $26 per share.
After completion of the IPO, IDT owned 57% of the company.
Within a few weeks, the shares increased another 100% in value, to $53 per share.
In March 2000, in a transaction facilitated by IDT CEO Howard Jonas, a consortium of telecommunications companies led by AT&T announced a $1.4 billion investment for a 32% stake in the company, buying shares for $75 each.
The transaction was completed in August 2000.
AOL had expressed an interest in buying all or part of the company but was not agreeable to the price.
In 2000, the company acquired Aplio, an internet appliance maker located in San Bruno, California.

In August 2000, Jonathan Fram, president of the company, left the company to join eVoice.
In September 2000, the company formed Adir Technologies, a joint venture with Cisco Systems.
In March 2002, the company sued Cisco for breach of contract.
In 2001, the company acquired iPing.
In February 2002, the company announced 110 layoffs, or 28% of its workforce.
In October 2004, Liore Alroy became chief executive officer of the company.
On March 13, 2006, IDT Corporation acquired the shares of the company that it did not already own for $2.05 per share.
In January 2017, the company acquired LiveNinja.

==
References ==
The Australian women's national basketball team is nicknamed the Opals, after the brightly coloured gemstone common to the country.
From 1994 onwards, the Opals have been consistently competitive and successful having won nine medals at official FIBA international tournaments (Olympics and World Cups), highlighted by a gold medal winning performance at the 2006 World Championship in Brazil.
At the now-defunct regional Oceania Championship for Women, the Opals won 15 titles.
Effective in 2017, FIBA combined its Oceanian and Asian zones for official senior competitions; following this change, the Opals compete in the FIBA Women's Asia Cup.

==
History ==


===
1950-60s:
Beginnings ===
Basketball arrived in Melbourne in 1905, but the first major international women's tournament was the 1953 FIBA World Championships held in Chile.

Although the Opals did not qualify for the first tournament, they did, however, qualify for the 1957 Championships held in Brazil.
Captained by Lorraine Eiler, the Opals defeated Cuba and Peru.
Sixteen year-old Bronte Cockburn led the scoring for Australia with an average of 9.5 points per game, but the inexperienced team ultimately finished in 10th place.
Since then, the Opals have helped increase the popularity of the sport in Australia.
Australia would not get the opportunity to participate at the 1959 World Championship held in Moscow because at the time, the Australian Government would not allow the team to travel to the USSR.
The Opals would not qualify for a World Championship again until the 1967 contest in Czechoslovakia.

With an entirely new team and a single victory over Italy, Australia finished in 10th position for the second time.
Team captain, Jean Forster, led the scoring for Australia with an average of 21.2 points per game, with a tournament high of 34 against Brazil.
Her 21.2 points per game would remain unchallenged for 35 years.

=== 1970s:
Early development ===
In 1971, the Opals travelled once again to Brazil.

Led by new head coach Merv Harris, and featuring Jill Hammond, the team made several improvements with only three players from the 1967 squad selected.

Although the Opals finished in ninth place, they had victories over Madagascar (twice), Argentina, Ecuador and Canada.
In 1975, the team headed to Colombia with another new head coach, Jim Madigan.

Despite a 74–25 confidence building win over Senegal, as well as victories over Japan, Brazil and Hungary, the team finished in 10th place.
The 1976 Olympics held in Montreal marked the first Olympic medals awarded for women's basketball, but Opals did not qualify for the tournament.

Their next major competition would be the 1979 World Championships in South Korea, which would prove to be their first taste of success.

The coach again was Jim Madigan, and the squad featured some of the faces of the Opals for the next decade such as Jenny Cheesman, Robyn Maher, Julie Nykiel, Karin Maar and Patricia Mickan.

The team would have early success defeating Italy and France, as well as thrashing Malaysia 119–14.

Australia would lose their next three games, but bounced back winning their final game over Japan to finish in fourth place, their best international result to that time.

=== 1980s:
Into the Olympics ===
In the early days of women's Olympic basketball, only six countries competed in the tournament, and the host country received an automatic entry.
Therefore, there were 22 countries competing for the remaining five spots in 1980 Olympics held in Moscow.
In the preliminary tournament, the Opals fell to the USA and Hungary, and did not qualify for the Olympics.

Three years later, the team traveled to Brazil for the 1983 World Championships, looking to demonstrate that their 1979 success was no accident.

Despite an early victory over Japan, Australia failed to advance and finished in 11th place.
The Opals were not expected to participate at the 1984 Olympic Games held in Los Angeles.
However, following the decision by Cuba to boycott the games, the door was opened for the Opals to compete in their first ever Olympics.
Led by head coach Brendan Flynn, and team captain Jenny Cheesman, the Opals played competitively in every game, but finished fifth out of the six teams.
The next tournament for the Opals was the 1986 World Championships in Moscow.

The first game against Hungary was a two overtime thriller that the Opals lost 79–77.
The game set the tone for the tournament, and despite some close finishes against the top rated teams, Australia finished in ninth place.
The Opals then headed into the 1988 Seoul Olympics with a medal hope, but they lost the first game to host nation Korea.
The Opals bounced back and defeated Bulgaria, meaning that only the powerful Soviet Union stood between them and a semi-finals berth.

In a major upset, the Opals defeated the USSR 60–48, setting up a meeting against Yugoslavia.

In a memorable game, the Opals lost a closely contested game at the buzzer
57–56, sending them to a rematch with the USSR for the bronze medal.

Motivated by the previous loss, the USSR came out determined and outplayed the Opals
68–53.

Despite the loss, the fourth-place finish equalled the Opals’ previous best international placing.

=== 1990s:
Rise as an International force ===
Building from their success at Seoul, the Opals headed to Malaysia for the 1990 World Championships with high hopes.

The team won their first two games against Malaysia and Italy, before suffering a string of losses to Bulgaria, the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia.
In their final game, the Opals came back from seven point halftime deficit to beat Bulgaria 73–71 and finish in sixth place.
Fifteen teams competed for the five open spots at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, and despite a respectable 4–2 record at the preliminary tournament, the Opals did not qualify.
Two years later, Australia played host to the 1994 FIBA World Championships.
Led by guard Shelley Sandie's 11.9 points per game, the team scored victories over Japan, Italy, Slovakia and Canada to set up a semi-finals match against China.

The Opals held an early lead, but China mounted a second half comeback led by Haixia Zheng's 36 points, and Australia just lost by a single point
66–65.
In the bronze medal game, Australia played the United States, and despite a small halftime lead, the Opals lost a close game 100–95.
The loss however, resulted in a respectable fourth-place finish.
The young 1994 team featured the backbone of Australian teams over the next decade; Rachael Sporn, Trisha Fallon, Michelle Brogan, Allison Tranquilli, Sandy Brondello, Annie La Fleur and Jenny Whittle.
At the 1994 tournament, the team also adopted the Opals as its nickname.

At the 1996 Summer Olympics held in Atlanta, the Olympic tournament was expanded to twelve teams, making an easier path for Australia to qualify.
Captained by Robyn Maher, the Opals started off with strong wins over South Korea, Zaire, and Cuba before losing to eventual gold medalist USA and Ukraine.

Australia then persevered through an overtime game against Russia to set up a semi-finals match against the United States.

The US won the game 93–71, sending the Opals to a rematch against the Ukraine for the bronze medal.

Australia held back a second half comeback by the Ukraine to win the game 66–56, earning Australia its first ever international basketball medal for either men or women.
In 1998, the Opals looked to build off the bronze medal at the World Championships in Germany.

The team featured 17-year-old future star Lauren Jackson, and was led by Michelle Brogan's average of 13.1 points per game.
Australia put together a dominant performance, winning their first seven games before losing to Russia 82–76 in a close semi-final match.
In the bronze medal game, Carla Boyd's 26 points proved too much for Brazil, and the Opals won 72–67 to earn their second bronze medal in international play.

=== 2000s:
A decade of medals & World Champions ===
With Sydney hosting the 2000 Olympic Games, the Opals gained automatic entry into the tournament.
Captained by Michele Timms, the team started out with dominating performances winning all of their first seven games, sending them to their first ever gold medal match, against the USA.
The American team proved too strong for the Opals however, as they won
76–54.
Australia won the Silver Medal, their best result in international competition at the time.
In 2002, the Opals looked to continue their success in China at the World Championships.

Coached by Jan Stirling, captained by Kristi Harrower, and powered by Lauren Jackson's 23.1 points per game (which led the tournament), Australia won its first five games all by double figures.

In the second round the Opals lost to Brazil, but bounced back with a 78–52 victory over France in the quarterfinal.

In the semi-finals, the Opals lost to eventual gold medalist USA, but recovered the next day to capture the bronze medal with a convincing 91–63 win over South Korea.

At the 2004 Olympics held in Athens, Greece, the Opals were led by Lauren Jackson's tournament best 22.9 points and 10 rebounds per game.
With Penny Taylor contributing with 14.8 points per game, Australia dominated early winning their first seven games, all by double digits.
The Opals set up a rematch of the 2000 Olympic gold medal match against the USA.

The United States outlasted the Opals in the fourth quarter to win 74–63, giving the Opals their second straight Olympic silver medal.
The Opals headed to Brazil for the 2006 World Championships looking to win their sixth straight medal in international competitions.

Led by Lauren Jackson's 21.3 points per game and Penny Taylor's 18 points per game, first and third best in the tournament respectively, the Opals played their best tournament to date.

Australia began the tournament with a forfeit victory over Lithuania.
They continued the trend by winning their next seven games decisively, with only one contest being decided by less than 10 points.
In the gold medal game against Russia, the Opals led throughout, paced by Penny Taylor's 28 points and Lauren Jackson's 11 rebounds.

At the final buzzer, the scoreboard read Australia 91, Russia 74; a convincing victory that delivered Australia's first ever basketball gold medal.
Penny Taylor was named the Most Valuable Player of the tournament.
At the 2008 Beijing Olympics, the Opals looked to reaffirm their title as World Champions.

In the lead up, Australia went undefeated against Belarus, Brazil, South Korea, Latvia, Russia, Czech Republic and host China to set up a third straight gold medal match against the United States.

The Opals had trouble hitting the basket and shot just 24% en route to a 92–65 defeat.

The team earned their third straight Olympic silver medal, and their seventh straight international medal finish.
The 2000s was a golden era for the Opals, winning at least a bronze medal at every official FIBA tournament.

=== 2010s:
Ushering a new era ===
In 2010, the 16th edition of the World Championship was held in the Czech Republic.
Pre-tournament favourites Australia, USA, and Russia, dominated play in the first two rounds.

In the quarterfinals, however, Australia suffered a shock 79–68 loss to the Czech Republic.
The loss meant that the Opals could not finish any higher than 5th place, its worst international result since the early 1990s.

Looking to rebound from their disappointing 2010 result, the Opals qualified for the 2012 Olympic Games in London by beating New Zealand three games to nil in the 2011 FIBA Oceania Championship.
They finished the Olympic preliminary series with a 4 – 1 record, losing to France in game 2, but after Belinda Snell sank a well behind the half-court line 3 point shot with less than one second on the clock to send the game into overtime.
Against Russia, Liz Cambage became the first woman in Olympic history to successfully slam dunk a basketball.
In the quarterfinal against China, Lauren Jackson became the Olympic Games record holder for points scored, overtaking Brazilian legend Janeth Arcain's tally of 535 points.
The Opals accounted for China 75–60 to set up a semifinal game with their long-time rivals USA.
Despite holding a half-time lead, the Opals again fell short
losing 86–73.
The Opals would however, win their 5th consecutive Olympic medal with an 83–74 win over Russia to claim the bronze.
Leading up to the 2014 World Championship in Turkey, a number of long-serving players announced their retirements or declared themselves unavailable.
Those players included Kristi Harrower, Jenni Screen, Kristen Veal, Abby Bishop, Kathleen MacLeod, Samantha Richards, Suzy Batkovic and Jenna O'Hea.
Three weeks before the start of the tournament, Lauren Jackson withdrew from the team because of a knee injury.
Two weeks later Liz Cambage ruptured her achilles tendon during a pre-tournament game and was ruled-out because of the injury.
This resulted in the selection of seven debutants into the squad of 12, a move seen as ushering in a new era of Opals basketball.
Despite the loss of veteran players, the Opals went through the preliminary rounds and quarter-final undefeated, setting up a semi-final clash with USA.
In a hard-fought game, the Opals cut the lead from 16 points to just six early in the final quarter, before losing 82–70.
The Opals would however claim their third bronze medal at world championships with a comfortable 74–44 win against host nation Turkey.
Penny Taylor was named to the tournament All-Star Five.
The Opals qualified for the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro following a series win against New Zealand in August 2015.
On 31 March 2016, Lauren Jackson announced her retirement from basketball, citing a chronic knee injury as the reason for her decision.
The Olympic squad was announced on 12 July 2016 and included seven Olympic debutants and only three players from the 2012 squad.
Notable exclusions included three-time Olympic medallist Suzy Batkovic, reigning WNBL MVP Abby Bishop and Rebecca Allen.
Despite slow starts which had plagued Australia throughout the tournament, the Opals finished on top of their group with a 5–0 record, outscoring Japan 33–15 in the final quarter to win by six points.
In the Quarter-final, the Opals suffered a shock 73–71 loss to Serbia, conceding 26 turnovers and eliminating them from medal contention.
This ended a run of five successive Olympic medals dating back 20 years.
One highlight was Liz Cambage breaking Lauren Jackson's Australian Olympic record of points scored in a single game with 37 against Japan.
It was the third-highest haul by a woman in Olympic history and the highest in 28 years.
Following the early exit from the Rio Olympics, Brendan Joyce was replaced in April 2017 by former Opals player and Phoenix Mercury head coach, Sandy Brondello.
Unlike previous years, the Opals qualified for the 2018 World Cup through the FIBA Women's Asia Cup held in India where they won a silver medal.
Kelsey Griffin was named tournament most valuable player.
With basketball returning to the Commonwealth Games for the first time since 2006, the Opals easily accounted for England in the final winning the gold-medal game 99–55.
At the 2018 World Cup held in Spain, the Opals led their group with a 3–0 record.
They then defeated China 83–42
in the quarter-final and Spain 72–66 in the semi-final to set up a gold-medal final with their long-time rivals USA.
The Opals lost the game 73–56 with head coach Sandy Brondello stating a lack of offence proved their downfall.
Liz Cambage led the tournament scoring with an average of 23.8 points per game and was named to the All-Star Five.
==
Competitive record ==


===
Olympic Games ===
Women's basketball was introduced as an Olympic sport at Montreal in 1976.
From 1976 to 1992, only six countries (teams) participated in the Olympic tournament.
However, in 1996 at Atlanta the tournament was expanded to twelve teams.
Through the 2016 Olympics, Australia qualified for the Olympic Games through competing in the FIBA Oceania Basketball Championship held each four years in the year preceding the games.
Typically, this tournament featured either a two or three-game series between Australia and New Zealand.
With the Oceania Championship having been discontinued after its 2015 edition, and FIBA having removed all women's continental championships except for EuroBasket Women from the Olympic qualification process in 2017, Australia will qualify for future Olympics through a two-stage process, starting with an Olympic pre-qualifying tournament involving Asian and Oceanian national teams in the year before the Olympics and followed by a worldwide Olympic qualifying tournament held in the year of the Games.
===
World Cup ===
The first official Women's World Cup, known as the Women's World Championship through its 2014 edition, was held in Chile in 1953.
The tournament was expanded to 16 countries (teams) in 1990.
Since 2017, Australia qualifies for the World Cup through competing in the FIBA Women's Asia Cup, held each four years in the year preceding the Women's World Cup.
Before then, Australia qualified through the FIBA Oceania Championship.
Typically, this tournament featured either a two or three-game series between Australia and New Zealand.
FIBA discontinued the Oceania championships for both women and men after their respective 2015 editions, combining FIBA Asia and FIBA Oceania into a single zone for purposes of World Cup and Olympic qualification.
===
Asia Cup ===
Commencing in 2017, teams from Oceania and Asia zones competed together for the first time ever with the top four finishing teams qualifying for the 2018 World Cup.

===
Statistics ===


==
Team ==


===
Current roster ===
Roster for the 2018 FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup.
===
Past World Cup squads ===


===
Past Olympics squads ===


===
International caps ===
The following is a chronological list of Australian players who have played at official senior FIBA international tournaments (Olympic Games and World Cups).
The list includes both past and present players.
Active players are shown in bold.
Where two or more players debuted in the same series, their cap number is determined by their official uniform number (and not alphabetically).
As of the 2018 World Cup, 111 players have represented Australia at Olympic Games and World Cups.
There were no debutants at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney.

† Deceased


===
Individual achievements ===


===
=
Opals
all-time games played ====
Legend
Games played is current as at the completion of the London Olympic Games in August 2012.

(*) denotes the player is a member of the Australian Basketball Hall of Fame.

Italic denotes the player is still active.
===
Opals Team Captains ===
Legend
Tournaments are those officially sanctioned by FIBA.

== See also ==
Australia men's national basketball team
Australia women's national 3x3 team
Australia women's national under-17 basketball team
Australia women's national under-19 basketball team
Australia women's national wheelchair basketball team
Australian Basketball Hall of Fame
List of Australian WNBA players
List of Olympic medalists in basketball


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Basketball Official website
FIBA profile
AustraliaBasket.com –
Australia Women Current Squad
Australia Basketball Records at FIBA Archive
The following is a timeline of the expansion and evolution of franchises in the National Basketball Association (NBA).
The league was formed as the Basketball Association of America in 1946 and took its current name in 1949.
The histories of franchises that were members of the American Basketball League (ABL), National Basketball League (NBL), National Pro Basketball League (NPBL), and American Basketball Association (ABA) before they joined the NBA are also included.

==
References ==
"Franchise History".
NBA.com.
2016.
Retrieved May 25, 2016.
The United States men's national soccer team (USMNT) represents the United States in men's international soccer competitions.
The team is controlled by the United States Soccer Federation and is a member of FIFA and CONCACAF.

The team has appeared in ten FIFA World Cups, including the first in 1930, where they reached the semi-finals.
The U.S. participated in the 1934 and 1950 World Cups, winning 1–0 against England in the latter.
After 1950, the U.S. did not qualify for the World Cup until 1990.

The U.S. hosted the 1994 World Cup, where they lost to Brazil in the round of sixteen.
They qualified for five more consecutive World Cups after 1994 (for a total of seven straight appearances, a feat shared with only seven other nations), becoming one of the tournament's regular competitors and often advancing to the knockout stage.
The U.S. reached the quarter-finals of the 2002 World Cup, where they lost to Germany.
In the 2009 Confederations Cup, they eliminated top-ranked Spain in the semi-finals before losing to Brazil in the final, their only appearance in the final of a major intercontinental tournament.
United States will co-host the 2026 FIFA World Cup along with Canada and Mexico.

The U.S. also competes in continental tournaments, including the CONCACAF Gold Cup and Copa América.
The U.S. won six Gold Cups, and has achieved a fourth-place finish in two Copa Américas, including the 2016 edition.
The team's head coach is Gregg Berhalter, since November 29, 2018.
Earnie Stewart is the team's General Manager since August 1, 2018.

==
History ==


===
Early years ===
The first U.S. national soccer team was constituted in 1885, when it played Canada in the first international match held outside the United Kingdom.
Canada defeated the U.S. 1–0 in Newark, New Jersey.
The U.S. had its revenge the following year when it beat Canada 1–0, also in Newark, although neither match was officially recognized.
The U.S. earned both silver and bronze medals in men's soccer at the 1904 St. Louis Summer Olympics through Christian Brothers College and St. Rose Parish, though the tournament is declared official only by the IOC (FIFA doesn't endorse tournaments held before 1908).
The U.S. played its first official international match under the auspices of U.S. Soccer on August 20, 1916, against Sweden in Stockholm, where the U.S. won 3–2.

The U.S. fielded a team in the 1930 World Cup in Uruguay, the first ever World Cup to be played.
The U.S. began group play by beating Belgium 3–0.
The U.S. then earned a 3–0 victory over Paraguay, with FIFA crediting Bert Patenaude with two of the goals.
In November 2006, FIFA announced that it had accepted evidence that Patenaude scored all three goals against Paraguay, and was thus the first person to score a hat trick in a World Cup.
In the semifinals, the U.S. lost to Argentina 6–1.
There was no third place game.
However, using the overall tournament records in 1986, FIFA credited the U.S. with a third-place finish ahead of fellow semi-finalist Yugoslavia.
This remains the U.S. team's best World Cup result, and is the highest finish of any team from outside of South America and Europe.

The U.S. qualified for the 1934 World Cup by defeating Mexico 4–2 in Italy a few days before the finals started.
In a straight knock-out format, the team first played host Italy and lost 7–1, eliminating the U.S. from the tournament.
At the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin, the U.S. again lost to Italy in the first round and were eliminated, although this time with a score of 1–0.

The 1950 World Cup in Brazil was the next World Cup appearance for the U.S. as it withdrew in 1938 and the tournament wasn't held again until 1950.
The U.S. lost its first match 3–1 against Spain, but then won 1–0 against England at Independência Stadium in Belo Horizonte.
Striker Joe Gaetjens was the goal scorer.
Called "The Miracle on Grass", the result is considered one of the greatest upsets in the history of the World Cup.
Months before the World Cup, England had beaten an all-star "rest of
Europe" side 6–1 in an exhibition match.
In their third game of the tournament, a 5–2 defeat by Chile saw the U.S. eliminated from the tournament.
It would be four decades before the U.S. would make another appearance in the World Cup finals.

===
Drought (1960s–1980s) ===
The national team spent the mid-to-late 20th century in near complete irrelevance in both the international game and the domestic sporting scene.
There was only one World Cup berth for CONCACAF during this period until 1982.
The emergence of the North American Soccer League in the 1960s and 1970s raised hopes that the U.S. national team would soon improve and become a global force.
However such hopes were not realized and by the 1980s the U.S. Soccer Federation found itself in serious financial struggles, with the national team playing only two matches from 1981 to 1983.
U.S. Soccer targeted the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles and the 1986 World Cup as means of rebuilding the national team and its fan base.
The International Olympic Committee declared that teams from outside Europe and South America could field full senior teams, including professionals (until then, the amateur-only rule had heavily favored socialist countries from Eastern Europe whose players were professionals in all but name).
The U.S. had a very strong showing at the tournament, beating Costa Rica, tying Egypt, losing only to favorite Italy and finishing 1–1–1
but didn't make the second round, losing to Egypt on a tiebreaker
(both had three points).

To provide a more stable national team program and renew interest in the NASL, U.S. Soccer entered the national team into the NASL league schedule for the 1983 season as Team America.
This team lacked the continuity and regularity of training that conventional clubs enjoy, and many players were unwilling to play for the national team instead of their own clubs when conflicts arose.
Team America finished the season at the bottom of the league, with U.S. Soccer canceling the experiment and withdrawing the national team from the NASL after one season.
By the end of 1984, the NASL had folded, leaving the U.S. without a single professional-level outdoor soccer league.
The U.S. bid to host the 1986 FIFA World Cup after Colombia withdrew from contention due to economic concerns, but FIFA selected Mexico to host the tournament.
In the last game of CONCACAF qualifying for the 1986 World Cup, the U.S. needed only a tie against Costa Rica to reach the final qualification group against Honduras and Canada.
U.S. Soccer scheduled the game to be played in Torrance, California, an area with many Costa Rican expatriates, and marketed the game almost exclusively to the Costa Rican community.
Costa Rica won the match 1–0, and kept the U.S. from reaching its fourth World Cup finals.
In 1988, U.S. Soccer attempted to re-implement its national-team-as-club concept, offering contracts to players to train with the national program full-time while occasionally loaning them to club teams as a revenue source for the federation.
This brought many key veterans back into the program and allowed the team to begin playing more matches which, combined with an influx of talent from new youth clubs and leagues established across the nation in the wake of the NASL's popularity, allowed the national team to end the 1980s with optimism and higher hopes of qualifying for the 1990 World Cup than had existed for previous tournaments.

===
Rise in the U.S. (1990s) ===
In 1988, FIFA named the U.S. as the host of the 1994 World Cup (success of the 1984 Summer Olympics played the major role), but it did so under significant international criticism because of the perceived weakness of the national team and the lack of a professional outdoor league.
This criticism diminished somewhat when a 1–0 win against Trinidad and Tobago, the first road win for the U.S. in nearly two years, in the last match of the 1989 CONCACAF Championship, earned the U.S. its first World Cup appearance in 40 years.

The team was managed by Bob Gansler in preparation for the 1990 World Cup in Italy, with two of the team's more experienced players, Rick Davis and Hugo Perez, recovering from serious injuries and unavailable for selection.
Rather than fill out his team with veteran professionals from U.S. indoor soccer leagues as suggested by some, Gansler and his assistant Stejem Mark chose to select many younger players with better conditioning for the outdoor game, including some amateurs playing for college teams.
The U.S. entered the tournament as massive underdogs and suffered defeats in all three of its group games to Czechoslovakia, Italy, and Austria.

In a noteworthy match, in 1993 U.S. Cup, the U.S. beat England by 2–0.After qualifying automatically as the host of the 1994 World Cup under Bora Milutinović, the U.S. opened its tournament schedule with a 1–1 tie against Switzerland in the Pontiac Silverdome in the suburbs of Detroit, the first World Cup game played indoors.
In its second game, the U.S. faced Colombia, then ranked fourth in the world, at the Rose Bowl.
Aided by an own goal from Andrés Escobar, the U.S. won 2–1.
Escobar was later murdered in his home country, possibly in retaliation for this mistake.
Despite a 1–0 loss to Romania in its final group game, the U.S. made it past the initial round for the first time since 1930.
In the round of 16, the U.S. lost 1–0 to the eventual champion Brazil.
Despite this success, the team fired Bora in 1995, reportedly because he was not interested in administrative duties.
In a 1995 friendly, the U.S. came back from 3–0 to win 4–3 against Saudi Arabia, the biggest comeback in the team's history.

In the 1998 World Cup in France, the team lost all three group matches, 2–0 to Germany, 2–1 to Iran, and 1–0 to Yugoslavia, finishing dead last in the field of 32.
Head coach Steve Sampson received much of the blame for the performance as a result of abruptly cutting team captain John Harkes, whom Sampson had named "Captain for Life" shortly before, as well as several other players who were instrumental to the qualifying effort, from the squad.
Thomas Dooley became the Captain at that point.
It emerged in February 2010 that Sampson removed Harkes from the team due to Harkes allegedly having an affair with teammate Eric Wynalda's wife.

===
Success in the 2000s ===
In the 2002 World Cup under Bruce Arena, the U.S. reached the quarterfinals, its best finish in a World Cup since 1930.
The team advanced in the group stage with a 1–1–1 record, beginning with a 3–2 upset win over Portugal, followed by a 1–1 tie with co-host and eventual semi-finalist, South Korea.
The third and final match was a 3–1 loss to Poland, but the team still got to the round of 16 when South Korea defeated Portugal.
This set the stage for a face-off with continental rivals Mexico, the first time they met in a World Cup.
The U.S. won the game 2–0.
Brian McBride opened the scoring, and Landon Donovan scored the second goal.
That victory advanced the team to the quarterfinals, where it met Germany.
The team lost 1–0 after being denied a penalty when Torsten Frings handled the ball to prevent a Gregg Berhalter goal.
All of the U.S. games in the 2002 World Cup were played in South Korea and all their victories came wearing the white kit while their only defeats came while wearing the blue kit.

In the 2006 World Cup, after finishing top of the CONCACAF qualification tournament, the U.S. was drawn into Group E along with the Czech Republic, Italy, and Ghana.
The United States opened its tournament with a 3–0 loss to the Czech Republic.
The team then tied 1–1 against Italy, who went on to win the World Cup.
The U.S. was then knocked out of the tournament when beaten 2–1 by Ghana in its final group match, with Clint Dempsey scoring the U.S.'s only goal in the tournament – the goal against Italy had been an own goal by Italian defender Cristian Zaccardo.
Following the tournament, Arena's contract was not renewed.
After the national team remained dormant for the rest of 2006 while negotiating with various coaches, the federation hired former Chicago Fire, MetroStars and Chivas USA manager Bob Bradley in early 2007.

Bradley began his competitive career with the national team with the 2007 Gold Cup.
In the final, the United States beat Mexico 2–1, which qualified it for the 2009 Confederations Cup.
The U.S. had a notable performance at the 2009 Confederations Cup.
In the semifinals, the U.S. defeated Spain 2–0.
At the time, Spain was atop the FIFA World Rankings and was on a run of 35 games undefeated.
With the win, the United States advanced to its first-ever final in a men's FIFA tournament.
The team lost 3–2 to Brazil after leading 2–0 at half time.
The United States then hosted the 2009 Gold Cup.
In the final, the United States was beaten by Mexico 5–0.
This defeat broke the U.S. team's 58-match home unbeaten streak against CONCACAF opponents, and was the first home loss to Mexico since 1999.

In the Fourth round of the 2010 World Cup qualification, the U.S. began by beating Mexico 2–0.
The February 2009 loss extended Mexico's losing streak against America on U.S. soil to 11 matches.
Jozy Altidore became the youngest U.S. player to score a hat-trick, in a 3–0 victory over Trinidad and Tobago.
Near the end of the summer of 2009, the United States lost 2–1 to Mexico at Estadio Azteca.
On October 10, the U.S. secured qualification to the 2010 World Cup with a 3–2 win over Honduras.
Four days later, the U.S. finished in first place in the group with a 2–2 tie against Costa Rica.

=== 2010–present ===
In the 2010 FIFA World Cup, the U.S. team was drawn in Group C against England, Slovenia and Algeria.
After drawing against England (1–1) and Slovenia (2–2), the U.S. defeated Algeria 1–0 with a stoppage time goal from Landon Donovan, taking first place in a World Cup Finals group for the first time since 1930.
In the round of 16, the U.S. was eliminated by Ghana, 2–1.
On FIFA's ranking of World Cup teams the U.S. finished in 12th place out of the 32-team field.

The U.S. again hosted the Gold Cup in 2011.
The U.S. advanced past the group stage, then defeated Jamaica 2–0 in the quarterfinals and Panama 1–0 in the semifinals before losing to Mexico 4–2 in the final.
Later in the summer, Bob Bradley was relieved of his duties and former German national team manager Jürgen Klinsmann was hired as head coach.

The U.S. had some success in friendlies in 2012 and 2013.
The U.S. team won 1–0 in Italy on February 29, 2012, the team's first ever win over Italy.
On June 2, 2013, the U.S. played a friendly against Germany at a sold out RFK Stadium in Washington D.C., with the U.S. winning 4–3.
In July 2013, the U.S. hosted the 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup where it went undefeated in the group stage and won with a 1–0 victory over Panama in the final, with Landon Donovan winning the tournament's golden ball award.

A 4–3 victory over Bosnia and Herzegovina in an international friendly match in Sarajevo represented the 12th straight win for the USMNT, the longest winning streak for any team in the world at that time.
The 12 game winning streak ended September 6, 2013, when the U.S. lost to Costa Rica 3–1 in San José.
In 2013 the national team played the final round of qualification, and by defeating Mexico in September, the U.S. clinched a spot in the 2014 World Cup.
The U.S. absorbed many German elements leading up to the 2014 World Cup.
U.S.'s German head coach Jürgen Klinsmann surprised the U.S. soccer world by calling up five "Jürgen Americans"—half-blooded Germans born and professionally trained in Germany—to the 23-men squad in the 2014 FIFA World Cup.
The U.S. was drawn into Group G, along with Ghana, Germany, and Portugal.
The U.S. took revenge on the Ghanaians, winning 2–1.
They tied their second group game against Portugal 2–2.
In the final game of the group stage, the U.S. fell to Germany 1–0, but moved on to the knockout stage on goal difference.
This was the first time that the team made two consecutive trips to the knockout stage of the FIFA World Cup.
In the round of 16, the U.S. lost 2–1 to Belgium in extra time, despite goalkeeper Tim Howard making a World Cup record 15 saves during the match.

The national team's next tournament under Klinsmann was the 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup.
The U.S. were eliminated by Jamaica 2–1 in the semifinals, before losing to Panama on penalties in the third place match.
The fourth-place finish was the worst Gold Cup performance by the national team since 2000, and the first time the team failed to make the tournament final since 2003.
In the 2015 CONCACAF Cup playoff to determine the region's entry to the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup, the U.S. were defeated 3–2 by Mexico at the Rose Bowl.
In June 2016, the U.S. played as hosts of Copa América Centenario.
The U.S. topped Group A on goal difference against Colombia.
The U.S. beat Ecuador 2–1 in the quarter-finals, but then fell to Argentina 4–0 and lost to Colombia again
1–0 in the third place match.
They finished fourth at the Copa América, tying their best finish ever in 1995.

Following consecutive losses to Mexico and Costa Rica in the opening games of the final round of qualification for the 2018 FIFA World Cup, Klinsmann was removed as national team coach and technical director and replaced by previous U.S. manager Bruce Arena.
World Cup qualification resumed on March 24, 2017, where Arena and his team had a record 6–0 win over Honduras.
Four days later, the team traveled to Panama City, drawing Panama 1–1.
After beating Trinidad and Tobago 2–0, the U.S. got their third ever result in World Cup Qualification at the Estadio Azteca when they drew 1–1 against Mexico.
In July 2017, the U.S. won their sixth CONCACAF Gold Cup with a 2–1 win over Jamaica in the final.
Following an agonizing 2–1 defeat to Trinidad and Tobago on October 10, 2017, the U.S. failed to qualify for the 2018 World Cup, missing the tournament for the first time since 1986.
Many pundits and analysts called this the worst result and worst performance in the history of the national team.
Following Arena's resignation on October 13, 2017, assistant coach Dave Sarachan was named interim manager during the search for a permanent replacement.

The search for a permanent head coach was delayed by the USSF presidential election in February 2018 and the hiring of Earnie Stewart as general manager in June 2018.
Gregg Berhalter, coach of the Columbus Crew and a former USMNT defender, was announced as the team's new head coach on December 2, 2018.

==
Team image ==


===
Uniforms and crest ===
Since their first unofficial game against Canada, the most common U.S. uniform has been white tops with blue shorts.
In 1950, the U.S. adopted a Peru-styled diagonal stripe or "sash" across the shirt.
The stripe has been on third uniforms for 2003, 2004, and 2006, as well as the 2010 home, road and third uniforms.
An additional color scheme based on the U.S. flag has been occasionally used (most prominently in the 1994 World Cup and 2012–13 qualifiers as well the 1983 Team America franchise of the North American Soccer League) comprising a shirt with red and white stripes with blue shorts.

German brand Adidas provided the uniforms for the United States from 1984 until 1994.
Since 1995, American company Nike has been the uniform supplier.

====
Kit suppliers ====
=== Rivalries ===
The teams of Mexico and the United States are widely considered as the two major powers of CONCACAF.
Matches between the two nations often attract much media attention, public interest and comment in both countries.
Although the first match was played in 1934, their rivalry was not considered major until the 1980s, when the teams began to frequently compete in CONCACAF cups.
On August 15, 2012, the United States defeated Mexico at Estadio Azteca in the first victory for the U.S. against Mexico on Mexican soil in 75 years.

Ever since their first meeting in 1934, the two teams have met 70 times, with Mexico leading the overall series 36–19–15
(W–L–T), outscoring the U.S. 142–80.
However, since the 1990s, the tide began to change due to a rapid growth of soccer in the United States.
During the 21st century, the series has favored the U.S.
14–9–6 (W–L–T).
Either the United States or Mexico has won every edition of the CONCACAF Gold Cup except one (the 2000 CONCACAF Gold Cup was won by Canada).

In recent years the United States has also begun to develop a rivalry with Costa Rica.

===
Supporters ===
There have been two main supporter groups backing the United States men's national soccer team, Sam's Army and The American Outlaws.
Sam's Army started shortly after the 1994 World Cup in the United States and were active through 2014.
Sam's Army members wore red to matches and sung or chanted throughout the match.
They often brought huge U.S. flags and other banners to the game.

The American Outlaws was started in Lincoln, Nebraska in 2007 as a local supporters' group.
The group's membership attempted to address a lack of consistency from game to game in supporter organization and social events on match days.
To achieve this goal the American Outlaws became a nationwide, non-profit supporters' group.
Some American Outlaws members wear U.S. flag bandanas over their faces and commonly wear soccer supporter scarves.
Some branches of the American Outlaws have their own scarves specific to their branch.
The US Men's National team has had a tremendous following on social media, especially Twitter and Instagram in recent years.
Interest in young American players and the attention they bring has led to an increase in foreign investment in US players.

===
Home stadium ===
The United States does not have a dedicated national stadium like other national teams; instead, the team has played their home matches at 112 venues in 29 states and the District of Columbia.
Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium, located in the national capital of Washington, D.C., has hosted 24 matches, the most of any stadium.
The State of California has hosted 113 matches, the most of any state, and the Los Angeles metropolitan area has hosted 74 matches at several venues in and around the city of Los Angeles.
The Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum hosted 20 matches from 1965 to 2000, but fell out of use due to its age.
The Rose Bowl, a 92,000-seat venue in Pasadena, has hosted 17 national team matches, as well as the 1994 FIFA World Cup Final, the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup Final, and the 1984 Olympics Gold Medal Match.
===
Media coverage ===
ESPN and Fox Sports 1 evenly split the English language rights for U.S. Soccer broadcasts from 2015 to 2022.
Univision Deportes has the Spanish language rights to all U.S. Soccer broadcasts from 2015 to 2022.
These agreements do not apply to FIFA World Cup away qualifiers, whose rights are distributed by the host country.
Therefore, these matches can often be found on other networks such as beIN Sports and Telemundo.

==
Recent schedule and results ==
The following is a list of match results from the previous 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.

===
2020 ===
=== 2021 ===
=== 2022
===
==
Coaching staff ==
Coaching staff
Technical staff


==
Players ==
For all past and present players who have appeared for the national team, see List of United States men's international soccer players.

===
Current squad ===
The following 23 players were named to the squad for the friendly against Northern Ireland on March 28, 2021.Caps and goals are updated as of March 28, 2021 after the match against Northern Ireland.

===
Recent call-ups ===
The following players have also been called up to the United States squad within the last twelve months.

==
Player records ==
As of March 28, 2021.

Players in bold are still active with the United States.

==
Competitive record ==
For all past match results of the national team, see single-season articles and the team's results page.

For the all-time record of the national team against opposing nations, see the team's all-time record page.
The U.S. regularly competes at the FIFA World Cup, the CONCACAF Gold Cup, and the Summer Olympics.
The U.S. has also played in the FIFA Confederations Cup, Copa América by invitation, as well as several minor tournaments.

The best result for the United States in a World Cup tournament came in 1930 when the team reached the semifinals.
The team was composed of six naturalized internationals, five of them from Scotland and one from England.
The best result in the modern era is the 2002 World Cup, when the U.S. reached the quarterfinals.
The worst world Cup tournament results in the modern era were group stage eliminations in 1990, 1998, and 2006, although the country failed to even qualify for the final tournament in 2018.

In the Confederations Cup, the United States finished in third place in both 1992 and 1999, and were runner-up in 2009.
The United States appeared in their first intercontinental tournament final at the 2009 Confederations Cup.
In the semifinals, the United States upset top ranked Spain 2–0, to advance to the final.
In the final, the United States lost 3–2 to Brazil after leading 2–0 at halftime.

The U.S. men's soccer team have played in the Summer Olympics since 1924.
From that tournament to 1980, only amateur and state-sponsored Eastern European players were allowed on Olympic teams.
The Olympics became a full international tournament in 1984 after the IOC allowed full national teams from outside FIFA CONMEBOL & UEFA confederations.
Ever since 1992 the men's Olympic event has been age-restricted, under 23 plus three overage players, and participation has been by the United States men's national under-23 soccer team.

In regional competitions, the United States has won the CONCACAF Gold Cup six times, with their most recent title in 2017.
Their best ever finish at the Copa América was fourth-place at the 1995 and 2016 editions.

===
FIFA World Cup ===


===
CONCACAF Gold Cup ===
CONCACAF Championship 1963–1989, CONCACAF Gold Cup 1991–present


===
Summer Olympics ===


===
Copa América ===
South American Championship 1916–1967, Copa América
1975–present
=== FIFA Confederations Cup ===


===
CONCACAF Nations League ===


==
Honors ==
Major competitions
FIFA World CupThird place (1):
1930
FIFA Confederations CupRunners-up (1):  2009
Third place (2):  1992,
1999CONCACAF Championship / CONCACAF Gold CupChampions (6):  1991, 2002, 2005, 2007, 2013, 2017
Runners-up (6):  1989, 1993, 1998, 2009, 2011, 2019
Third place (2):  1996, 2003Summer OlympicsSilver medal (1):  1904
Bronze medal (1):  1904Minor competitions
U.S. CupChampions (3):  1992, 1995, 2000
Runners-up (1):  1999
Third place (2):  1993,
1996Marlboro CupChampions (2):  1989, 1989
Runners-up (3):  1987, 1988, 1989
Third place (1):
1990North American Nations CupRunners-up (2):  1949, 1991
Third place (2):  1947, 1990


== See also ==
Fútbol de Primera Player of the Year
United States men's national under-17 soccer team
United States men's national under-20 soccer team
United States men's national under-23 soccer team
U.S. National Soccer Team Players Association
U.S. Soccer Athlete of the Year
United States
women's national soccer team


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
US Soccer Schedule at USSF
US Soccer Results at USSF
USA Matches at FIFA
US National Soccer Team Players Association
US soccer team at Association of Football Statisticians
United States at FootballDatabase.eu
USA Men's National Team:
All-time Results, 1885–1989
USA Men's National Team: All-time Results, 1990–present
USA Men's National Team:
Current Value of Players on Team
Ann Walton Kroenke (born December 18, 1948) is an heir to the Walmart fortune.
Kroenke and her sister, Nancy Walton Laurie, inherited stock from her father, Bud Walton (died 1995), who was the brother and an early business partner of Walmart founder Sam Walton.
She is the owner of the Denver Nuggets of the NBA and Colorado Avalanche of the NHL.Her husband, Stan Kroenke, is the majority owner and CEO of the Los Angeles Rams (NFL), Arsenal (Premier League), Colorado Rapids (Major League Soccer), and Colorado Mammoth (National Lacrosse League).

== See also ==
List of billionaires
List of female billionaires


==
References ==
The National Basketball Association (NBA) has faced a multitude of criticisms from sports publications, fans, and its own players.

==
Racial and cultural issues ==
Since the late 1990s, and especially since the retirement of Michael Jordan in 1999, the NBA has been criticized for embracing hip hop culture.
While some observers have argued that this criticism has more to do with race than hip hop itself, it is a fact that the league is very much connected to hip hop culture.
Rappers Nelly and Jay-Z had ownership stakes in NBA teams (the Charlotte Hornets and Brooklyn Nets respectively), and many artists have worn NBA throwback jerseys in music videos.
In turn, the NBA plays rap and hip-hop in arenas during games.
NBA video games NBA 2
K and NBA Live use hip-hop in their soundtracks, and ABC/ESPN also use the music during its coverage.
Players in the NBA have tried having rap or hip hop careers themselves (Shaquille O'Neal, Kobe Bryant, Tony Parker, Allen Iverson, Chris Webber, Damian Lillard and Ron Artest are some examples) and several also dress and act in ways that are in accordance with the hip hop culture (for example, the tattoos and jewelry worn by several players).

Some have argued that the criticism of the NBA is hypocritical, considering the relative lack of criticism of Major League Baseball (MLB), National Hockey League (NHL) or National Football League (NFL) players.
Some have also noticed that music genres and sports partnerships are not limited to the NBA, with alternative rock and hard rock being associated with the NHL, and country music being associated with NASCAR.
This criticism has remained a major factor in the NBA's unorthodox place in the American cultural sphere, where the league's cultural image can be off-putting to (mostly white) sports fans who readily dismiss the league from their personal viewing diet.

===
Donald Sterling ===
====
Accusations of discrimination ====
In February 2009, Los Angeles Clippers owner Donald Sterling was sued by former longtime Clippers executive Elgin Baylor for employment discrimination on the basis of age and race.
The lawsuit alleges Sterling told Baylor that he wanted to fill his team with "poor black boys from the South and a white head coach".
The suit alleges that during negotiations for Danny Manning, Sterling said "I'm offering a lot of money for a poor black kid."
The suit noted those comments while alleging "the Caucasian head coach was given a four-year, $22-million contract", but Baylor's salary had "been frozen at a comparatively paltry $350,000 since 2003".
====
Accusation of racism ====
On April 25, 2014, TMZ Sports released what it said is an April 9, 2014 audio recording of a conversation between Sterling and his mistress, V. Stiviano.
According to TMZ, Sterling and Stiviano argued in regards to a photo Stiviano posted on Instagram in which she posed with Magic Johnson.
In the audio recording, Sterling allegedly tells Stiviano: "It bothers me a lot that you want to broadcast that you’re associating with black people."
and, "You can sleep with [black people].
You can bring them in, you can do whatever you want", but "the little I ask you is ... not to bring them to my games".
Clippers president Andy Roesen issued a statement the following day, indicating that his organization was unsure if it was a legitimate and unaltered recording, that the sentiments attributed to Sterling did not reflect Sterling's views, and that the woman on the recording was being sued by the Sterling family and had "told Mr. Sterling that she would 'get even' with him".
The Los Angeles chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) cancelled its plans for the following month to award Sterling for a second time with its lifetime achievement award.
President Barack Obama characterized the recording attributed to Sterling as "incredibly offensive racist statements".
Obama then stated, "When ignorant folks want to advertise their ignorance, you don’t really have to do anything, you just let them talk.
"
On April 29, the NBA, upon confirming the taped conversations, announced that Sterling has been banned for life and fined $2.5 million.

===
Dress code ===
Perhaps mainly because of the above-mentioned criticism, the NBA instituted a dress code in 2005, banning all clothing associated with the hip hop culture.
Players were instructed not to wear jewelry, throwback jerseys, headphones, indoor sunglasses and other accessories, and instead were told to wear "business casual" clothing.
The dress code, characterized by some as "clearly and unapologetically directed toward suppressing hip-hop culture", was instantly controversial and a topic on many sports radio talk shows for several days.

Baggy shorts, also a symbol of hip hop culture, were banned by the league as well, which instituted a rule on the length of players' shorts while playing.
Tights, which players started to wear under their shorts in the 2005–06 season (though not a symbol of hip hop culture) were banned as well.
No players were fined for dress code violations during the 2005–06 season.
The league has also attempted to more greatly distance itself from hip hop since the infamous Pacers–Pistons brawl in 2004; in the 2005 NBA All-Star Game, country music stars Big and Rich performed at halftime, a move that was ridiculed by TNT analyst and former NBA player Charles Barkley.
In addition, as noted later in this article, ABC Sports (after relying on hip-hop music early on) has used artists such as Rob Thomas and Tom Petty for the NBA Finals in recent years.

==
Team relocation controversies ==


===
Vancouver Grizzlies move to Memphis ===
The Vancouver Grizzlies moved to Memphis, Tennessee after the 2000–01 NBA season.
On January 25, 2001, it was announced that the Grizzlies would be sold by Orca Bay Sports & Entertainment to Michael Heisley, who originally intended to keep the team in Vancouver.
However, the team moved, in part due to the weak Canadian dollar, lack of local ownership, and the unwillingness of some players to live in Canada.
After a bidding war between Memphis, Louisville, Anaheim and New Orleans, Heisley selected Memphis as the relocation destination for the Grizzlies on March 26, 2001.
Heisley selected Memphis because it offered a better deal and had better local executive leadership than Louisville.
Eventually, the NBA Board of Governors approved the team's plans to move to Memphis on July 4, 2001 and the team became the Memphis Grizzlies for the 2001–02 NBA season.

===
Seattle SuperSonics move to Oklahoma City ===
The Seattle SuperSonics moved to Oklahoma City after the 2007–08 NBA season.
After failed efforts to persuade Washington state government officials to provide funding to update KeyArena, the SuperSonics' ownership group, led by Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz, sold the team to Professional Basketball Club LLC (PBC), an investment group headed by Oklahoma City businessman Clay Bennett.
After failing to persuade local governments to fund a US$500 million arena complex, Bennett's group notified the NBA that it intended to move the team to Oklahoma City and requested arbitration with the city of Seattle to be released from its lease with KeyArena.
When the request was rejected by a judge, Seattle sued Bennett's group to enforce the lease that required the team to play in KeyArena through 2010.
On July 2, 2008, a settlement was reached that allowed the team to move under certain conditions.
Details of the settlement revealed that PBC would pay the city of Seattle $45 million immediately in exchange for breaking the KeyArena lease and an additional $30 million if Seattle was not given a replacement team in five years.
Also, according to the conditions of the settlement, the Sonics' name and colors could not be used by the team in Oklahoma City, but could be taken by a future team in Seattle, although no promises for a replacement team were given.
The Oklahoma City team would retain the franchise history of the SuperSonics, which could be "shared" with any future NBA team in Seattle.
The team moved to Oklahoma City immediately and became the Oklahoma City Thunder, beginning play for the 2008–09 NBA season.

==
Altercations ==


===
Latrell Sprewell choking incident ===
In 1997, Latrell Sprewell was involved in arguably the most infamous incident in the NBA prior to the Pacers–Pistons brawl seven years later.

During a contentious practice, then-Golden State Warrior Sprewell was involved in an altercation with head coach P.J. Carlesimo in which he choked his coach and threatened to kill him.

The incident brought mainstream attention, but not quite the amount of criticism of the league as a whole as later controversies would.
While some wondered if Sprewell's actions were indicative of a growing trend in the league, others tempered that belief with the idea that it was an isolated incident.
Then active player Buck Williams said this on PBS:
Now it's a different way.
It's a different player.
And I think what's happening
, you know, in our environment, in our society, is sort of—it just reflects what's happening in NBA.
I mean, a lot of the players are young and sort of misunderstood.
And it takes a very special coach, and it takes quite an understanding organization to try to deal with the new athlete.

Sprewell would have his image redeemed somewhat after a run to the NBA Finals with the New York Knicks in 1999.
However, after a contentious battle with the Minnesota Timberwolves over his salary in 2004, his image took another hit.
Sprewell retired for good in 2005.
After his retirement, he suffered several financial difficulties, including his home being foreclosed on and having his yacht forcibly seized and sold at auction.

===
Pacers–Pistons brawl ===
After a massive altercation between Indiana Pacers players and Detroit Pistons fans on November 19, 2004, the NBA came under severe criticism from the national and mainstream media.
Commentators, and those familiar with the event outside the sports media, were divided over the issues of who should primarily be blamed for the incident.
Anger and blame was placed on the players, at NBA Union Chief Billy Hunter, who protested the length of suspensions, the fans who sparked the melee and the referees who did not put a stop to it.
Some in the media viewed the brawl as a statement on the disconnect between white fans and black players.
USA Today's Ian O'Connor wrote:

Commentators are examining the widening gulf between overwhelmingly black NBA teams and the white fans who follow them.
It's healthy to ask tough questions about the uneasy state of race relations in sports and beyond; the more these issues are addressed in public forums,
the better the chance of not having to examine them in the future...
Sometimes we see race when we should simply see foolishness and hate.
That's the product of living inside a sports culture where equal opportunity on the coaching, executive and ownership levels remains an elusive ideal.

In the wake of the brawl, the NBA came under harsh scrutiny from some outlets.
Noted conservative radio personality (and former ESPN NFL analyst)
Rush Limbaugh said the brawl was "hip-hop culture on parade" and also added the statement that "NBA uniforms are now in gang colors.
They are in gang styles."
NBA commissioner David Stern, in a 2006 interview, made this comment about the brawl-related criticism:

When Ron Artest went into the stands, it was, 'All those players are ...' ...
And I know for a fact that they're not all the same,
so I wonder why they're so easily generalized.
Maybe we're not doing as good of a job as we should be doing, or maybe there's something else at work.

===
Knicks–Nuggets brawl ===
The Knicks-Nuggets brawl was an on-court altercation at an NBA game between the New York Knicks and Denver Nuggets at Madison Square Garden on December 16, 2006.
This altercation was the most penalized on-court fight since the Pacers–Pistons brawl.

All ten players on the court at the time of the altercation were ejected, and seven players total were suspended.
Carmelo Anthony of the Nuggets was suspended for 15 games, while J. R. Smith and Nate Robinson were suspended for 10 games each.
Neither coach was suspended; still, some believed that then-Knicks coach Isiah Thomas should have been suspended for allegedly telling his players to foul any Nuggets player who attempted a dunk or layup.
NBA Commissioner David Stern received criticism for not including Thomas in the suspensions.
Some viewed Stern's leniency as evidence of a special relationship with Thomas.
Thomas was accused of trying to bring back the mentality of the late 1980s Detroit Pistons, who were known for their physical play.
Various columnists and observers found Thomas' actions inappropriate; before the fight, Thomas was seen warning Anthony not to go into the lane.
ESPN analyst and former NBA player Greg Anthony stated that "I never had a coach say that to an opponent ...
I've had a coach say, do a better job protecting our territory.
That's a little different.
"The
fight brought a large amount of media attention, and was a topic on mainstream news broadcasts, including World News with Charles Gibson.
Several columnists claimed that the NBA had been set back several years, and many used the fight as evidence of the league being a haven for thugs.
Knicks guard Steve Francis noted that the media reaction to the fight and the suspensions itself were "racially motivated".
Francis argued that MLB and the NHL had fights worse or equal to the Knicks/Nuggets altercation and rarely faced the type of media attention and scrutiny that the NBA received.
Several columnists agreed, including Sam Smith (who called the coverage "racist and nonsense" in a piece), J. A. Adande and David Aldridge.

==
Age limit ==
In 2005, the NBA was in the midst of creating a new collective bargaining agreement.
One of the main topics of the deal was the league's desire to create a new age limit for players to enter the NBA draft.

The idea of an age limit had been talked about for several years, after the entrance into the league of several high school players.
While several players who have entered the league out of high school have become successes (Kobe Bryant, LeBron James, Kevin Garnett, Dwight Howard, J. R. Smith, Amar'e Stoudemire, Jermaine O'Neal, Rashard Lewis, Tracy McGrady, and decades ago, Shawn Kemp and Moses Malone), others have been relative failures (for example, Ndudi Ebi, James Lang, Kwame Brown, Sebastian Telfair, Eddy Curry, Robert Swift, DeSagana Diop).
Those in favor of an age limit made the argument that players entering the league out of high school did not know the fundamentals of playing professional basketball and also were not mature enough to handle playing in the NBA.

Well, they are physically mature enough to be part of the NBA, and they are great young players.
But as you frame the issue, the question is whether a couple of years more of seasoning would increase their maturity, their skills, their collegiate programs and ultimately what it could do for sending messages to kids who are practicing their skills who should think about getting an education rather than coming right to [the] NBA.

Proponents of the age limit included Michael Wilbon, who argued that it was important for young players to get an education.
Wilbon's belief, while held by many, has also been referred to as "simplistic" and "[reflective] not just [of] hypocrisy but a reimagination of reality as well".
Michael Mccann of the Mississippi College School of Law made this argument:
In stark contrast to popular myth, this Article finds that players drafted straight out of high school are not only likely to do well in the NBA, but are likely to become better players than any other age group entering the league. ...
Beyond excellence in performance, high school players can also earn substantially more over the course of their NBA careers ...
players who bypass college may earn as much as $100 million more over the course of their careers than had they earned a college diploma.

Greg Anthony was one prominent NBA personality against the age limit.
Anthony's belief was that people should be able to make their own decisions about whether or not to enter the league, and that (quoting an article and not Anthony himself) "players from inner-city high schools aren't academically qualified for college because of the lower quality of education compared to their suburban counterparts".
This led him into conflict with Wilbon and Stephen A. Smith.
On an April 2005 edition of NBA Shootaround, Anthony and Smith got into a heated debate about the age-limit.
This came only days after Anthony was the primary interviewer in a discussion with Indiana Pacers forward Jermaine O'Neal.

The interview was described by Sports Illustrated writer Mark Bechtel as "...
Greg Anthony putting words in O'Neal's mouth then saying something along the lines of, 'Is that what you meant?'
And then O'Neal would say, 'Exactly.'
"
It came on the heels of O'Neal discussing the age limit in the context of race, and as he was in the midst of growing media attention and criticism.

As a black guy, you kind of think [race is]
the reason why it's coming up.
You don't hear about it in baseball or hockey.
To say you have to be 20, 21 to get in the league, it's unconstitutional.
If I can go to the U.S. Army and fight the war at 18, why can't you play basketball for 48 minutes and then go home? ...
In the last two or three years, the Rookie of the Year has been a high school player.
There were seven high school players in the All-Star game, so why we even talking [about] an age limit?

As noted in the article The Real Color of Money: Controlling Black Bodies in the NBA by David Leonard, O'Neal was roundly attacked for his opinion, with many accusing him of playing the race card.

With the agreement on a new collective bargaining agreement, the age limit was put into place.
Any person attempting to enter the NBA draft must wait until the calendar year of his 19th birthday, and must also be at least one year out of high school.
However, since the implementation of these rules, certain players have used alternative methods to enter the draft, to the point where some players declare while even still playing in high school.
Players like Brandon Jennings, Emmanuel Mudiay, and Terrance Ferguson have entered their respective NBA drafts while spending a year out overseas.
More recently, some players like Satnam Singh, Thon Maker, and Matur Maker have entered their respective NBA drafts while being considered as high school postgraduates, meaning they've played a fifth year of high school basketball for various reasons instead of going to college.
Furthermore, both Latavious Williams and Mitchell Robinson entered their NBA drafts by entering the NBA Development League (now NBA G League) and skipping out college for a year respectively.

==
No tolerance rule ==
At the start of the 2006–07 NBA season, the NBA instituted a new rule regarding in-game player complaints.
The "no tolerance rule", as it was referred to by players and the media, allowed referees to call technical fouls when players complained too vehemently about calls.

The season started with a spike in the number of technical fouls and ejections.
There were "one-hundred-four technicals and seven ejections in the first fifty-one games", while "only seven games of the first fifty-one games thus far have had no technical fouls".
Denver Nuggets forward
Carmelo Anthony, who would be suspended for his participation in a fight later that year, was suspended on opening night of the season after two technical fouls.

Although Anthony wasn't looking at or speaking to referee Ted Washington, he received a second technical with the Nuggets behind by two points in the third quarter.
He got the "T" for throwing his headband to the floor after being called for his fourth foul.

Some observers viewed the rule as unfair and taking the passion out of the game; others believed that it only served to take pressure off of referees who made bad calls.

I don't like it.
Basketball is an emotional game; guys are always going to express their thoughts about calls.
...
There are times you are going to disagree.
You shouldn't get a "T" for nit-picky things.

Over-the-top complaints and gestures should certainly be penalized, but the rule goes too far.
Does David Stern believe that disallowing the players' protests will fool fans into accepting the infallibility of the refs?

Others agreed with the rule, viewing it as a much needed policy to cut down on the "whining" by players in the league.

Nobody likes the scowling, the arm-waving, the stomping and ball-slamming, certainly not after a meaningless call in the second quarter of some game in mid-November.
And such ridiculousness was one reason why too many consumers perceived NBA players as self-absorbed, overbearing, churlish and out of touch. ...
Too many are out of touch with the people who pay the freight.
Who pays to come to the arena to see this demonstrative complaining?
Nobody.
The notion some players have put forth, that the NBA is trying to take the emotion from the game, is so preposterous
it's insulting.

After the initial spike at the start of the season, the amount of technical fouls and ejections declined significantly towards the middle of the year.
Several players, including Denver Nuggets guard Allen Iverson, were still ejected on technical fouls; Iverson's ejection came during his first game against his former team, the Philadelphia 76ers, and he was later fined by the league for claiming that referee Steve Javie ejected him on the basis of a feud the two supposedly had.

==
Conspiracy Theories ==


===
Big-market team bias ===
Some NBA fans have accused the league of conspiring to have large-market teams and popular players succeed in the postseason.
Since 1980, every NBA Finals has involved at least one of the following teams: Boston Celtics, Chicago Bulls, Detroit Pistons, Golden State Warriors, Houston Rockets, Los Angeles Lakers, Miami Heat or San Antonio Spurs.
Additionally, in that span, every NBA Finals has involved at least one of the following All-Star players:
Larry Bird, Magic Johnson, Isiah Thomas, Michael Jordan, Hakeem Olajuwon, Shaquille O'Neal, Tim Duncan, Kobe Bryant, LeBron James or Stephen Curry.

Many of these accusations are based on the premise that the NBA desires large markets and popular players for ratings purposes.
Former CBS Sports president Neal Pilson disputes the idea that matchups have the biggest effect on ratings:
Ratings are a factor, but the 'conspiracy theory' misses the whole point.
It has nothing to do with a great matchup, it has to do with the total number of games.
NBC would trade a great matchup that's a sweep in a flash for a bad match up that goes seven games.

This conspiracy has only increased with the rise of so-called "superteams" in free agency, where star players (free agents or not) "team up" with other players of similar stature on a large-market team in a lucrative location.
The term has evolved after being brought about by James' public free-agent declaration in 2010's The Decision.
Notable examples of players leaving a smaller market to either join or create said "superteam" include James (Cleveland to Miami), Kevin Durant (Oklahoma City to Golden State), and Paul George (Oklahoma City to LA Clippers).
The first two moves in particular drew considerable backlash, especially James's due to favorite son status in his home state.
Some have even speculated this has caused NBA ratings in recent seasons to drop due to a lack of narrative surprise in the regular season.

===
1984 NBA Finals – Celtics vs. Lakers ===
The 1984 NBA Finals was highly anticipated, with the Boston Celtics and the Los Angeles Lakers playing in their eighth Finals matchup ever since their first showdown in 1969.
It also featured two of the biggest young stars of the era, Larry Bird and Magic Johnson, who had previously faced off in the finals of the 1979 NCAA Division I Basketball Tournament, where Magic's Michigan State team defeated Bird's Indiana State squad.

Game 6 proved controversial when the Lakers were sent to the foul line on numerous occasions thanks to questionable calls.
This led Larry Bird to claim that Commissioner David Stern had requested that the game be officiated in the Lakers' favor in hopes of extending the series to a seventh game.

Stern told a fan that the NBA needed a seven-game series, that the league needed the money.
When the commissioner makes a statement like that to a fan, you know it's going to be tough.
When Stern makes a statement like that, things are going to happen.
You just don't make statements like that and not expect anything out of it.
He's the commissioner and he shouldn't be saying anything like that.
The NBA wanted a seventh game because they wanted to make more money and they got their wish.
There is no reason for me to lie.
He said it.
He's a man and he'll live up to it.
He may say he said it in jest.
But I'm out there trying to make a living and win a championship.

Despite his conspiracy claim, the Celtics did win in Game 7, earning a 111–102 victory.

=== 1988 NBA Finals - Pistons vs. Lakers ===
The 1988 NBA Finals was yet another highly anticipated matchup, with the Detroit Pistons entering into the Finals for the first time ever against the Los Angeles Lakers.
It also featured two of the biggest stars in their prime with Magic Johnson and Isiah Thomas.

The Pistons took a 3–2 series lead.
With 14 seconds remaining in Game 6 and the Pistons up 102–101, Bill Laimbeer was called for a foul on Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.
Laimbeer fouled out on the call and Abdul-Jabbar made both free throws to give the Lakers a 103–102 victory.
The Lakers won Game 7 108–105, clinching the title.
In his 1993 book, The Winner Within, Lakers coach Pat Riley referred to the call as "that phantom skyhook foul."
===
2001 Eastern Conference Finals –
Bucks vs. Sixers ===
In 2001, the Milwaukee Bucks played the Philadelphia 76ers in the Eastern Conference Finals.
The small-market Bucks (who had not even been featured on NBC that year prior to the second round of the Playoffs) did not have any "big-time" stars, with the exception of Ray Allen (who, despite being popular, was not in the upper-echelon of NBA players in terms of endorsements).
Their opponent that year
, the 76ers had the polarizing and popular Allen Iverson, who had a multitude of shoe deals and mainstream recognition.
The Sixers also featured that year's winners of the MVP award in Iverson, Defensive Player of the Year award in Dikembe Mutombo, Sixth Man of the Year award in Aaron McKie, and Coach of the Year award in Larry Brown.
During game 5, there were numerous major favourable calls for the 76ers.
Glenn Robinson had not gone to the foul line in any of the previous games, causing them to be viewed as suspect.
Allen later voiced the claim that the league preferred the Sixers to be in the Finals as opposed to Milwaukee.

I think there's no question about that.
The league, as a marketing machine, the bottom line is about making money, it behooves everybody for the league to make more money, and the league knows that Philadelphia is going to make more money with L.A. than we would with L.A.
This controversy is largely based on complaints levied by members of the Bucks organization regarding the officiating of the series.
Glenn Robinson, Sam Cassell and then-head coach George Karl joined Allen in complaining about the officiating and hinting that the league was against them.
Karl and Allen were both fined for their comments.
In Game 6 of the tensely fought series, Bucks forward Scott Williams threw an elbow at Iverson and was subsequently suspended for the deciding Game 7.
(
Iverson had already missed a game, the Bucks Game 3 win, and been limited in others after being hit by the Bucks earlier in the series.)
After the Bucks lost Game 7 on the road, Sports Illustrated columnist Marty Burns insinuated that the suspension may have been a form of payback by the league:
Williams' elbow to Iverson's chin warranted the flagrant 2 ruling, which kept Williams out of Game 7, but the Bucks' public airing of such potentially damaging charges to the NBA probably didn't help their case.

While normally a starter, Williams generally played limited minutes and averaged just over 4 points per game during the portion of the series in which he played.
He was suspended because this was his third flagrant foul of the playoffs.

The Sixers were fourth in the league in regular season free throws attempted.
The Bucks, largely a jump shooting team, were 25th.

=== 2002
Western Conference Finals – Kings vs. Lakers ===
The 2002 Western Conference Finals between the Sacramento Kings and Los Angeles Lakers was one of the most memorable in league history.
The popular (though small-market) Kings led the two-time defending NBA champion Lakers three games to two heading into Game 6 at Staples Center, a game which would prove to be the most infamous of the series.
The game, which the Lakers won by four, featured several disputable calls, including a late game no-call involving Mike Bibby—after he was bleeding from being elbowed in the nose by Kobe Bryant.
This game was the epitome of the major issue in the series.
Both teams complained about the officiating at different points in the series (the Kings in Game 6 and the Lakers in Games 2 and 5).
Quoting then-ESPN basketball analyst David Aldridge:
There is nothing I can say that will explain 27 free throws for the Lakers in the fourth quarter – an amount staggering in its volume and impact on the game.
It gave me pause.
How can you explain it?
How can you explain a game where Scot Pollard fouls out when he's two feet from Shaquille O'Neal, or that Doug Christie is called for a ridiculous touch foul just as Chris Webber spikes Bryant's drive to the hoop, or that Mike Bibby is called for a foul deep in the fourth quarter after Bryant pops him in the nose with an elbow?

Former presidential candidate Ralph Nader weighed in on the series, voicing his displeasure with the officiating:
At a time when the public's confidence is shaken by headlines reporting the breach of trust by corporate executives, it is important...
for there to be maintained a sense of impartiality and professionalism in commercial sports performances...
That sense was severely shaken in the now notorious officiating during Game 6 of the Western Conference Finals between the Los Angeles Lakers and the Sacramento Kings...
When (Washington Post writer Michael)
Wilbon writes that ‘The Kings and Lakers didn't decide this series ...
three referees did..’
when many thousands of fans, not just those in Sacramento, felt that merit lost to bad refereeing, you need to take notice beyond the usual and widespread grumbling by fans and columnists about referees ignoring the rule book and giving advantages to home teams and superstars.

The Kings would go on to lose Game 7 of the series at home.
Former NBA referee Tim Donaghy filed in court papers in 2008 saying that Game 6 was fixed by the NBA.
NBA Commissioner David Stern denies the allegations.
Lawrence Pedowitz, who led a review of the league's officiating following the outbreak of the scandal, concluded that, while Game 6 was poorly officiated, no concrete evidence existed of that game being fixed.
===
Accusation from Jeff Van Gundy ===
During a 2005 playoff series against the Dallas Mavericks, Houston Rockets coach Jeff Van Gundy was fined a record amount for a coach, $100,000, for asserting that he had a source within the league who informed him that the referees were being instructed to call more fouls on Yao Ming, due to protests by Mavericks owner Mark Cuban.
===
2006
NBA Finals – Dallas vs. Miami ===
The 2006 NBA Finals came the year after a series that saw the second-lowest ratings in NBA Finals history.
After the Detroit Pistons and the small-market San Antonio Spurs slugged it out in a seven-game series, the 2006 Finals was considered more attractive because it featured the relatively large markets Miami Heat and Dallas Mavericks and superstars Dirk Nowitzki, Shaquille O'Neal, and Dwyane Wade.

With the series tied at two games apiece, Game 5 was pivotal.
On the final possession in overtime, Wade received an inbounds pass from mid court.
Because Wade had already been in the front court prior to the inbounds of the ball, some argue that he should have been ruled ineligible to receive the pass in the backcourt and the Heat should have been called for a backcourt violation.
After receiving the ball, Wade went on to drive to the basket, drawing a foul on Nowitzki.
Replays would reveal that Nowitzki barely touched Wade, further angering Mavericks fans.
However, the replay also showed Mavericks' guard Devin Harris grabbing Wade's arm.
In between Wade's free throws, Maverick Josh Howard looked to coach Avery Johnson to see if he wanted to call for time.
Howard made a timeout gesture towards his coach; referee Joe Derosa saw this and charged Dallas with their final timeout.

Without a timeout, the Mavericks were forced to inbound from full court after Wade hit his second free throw.
Unable to get off a shot from inside of half court as time expired, the Mavericks lost the game and the series two nights later.
Game 5 had 38 fouls called against the Mavericks with only 26 against the Heat.
The Mavericks shot 25 free throws as the Heat shot 49.
After Game 5, Mavericks owner Mark Cuban was livid; he was quoted by The Miami Herald as screaming at David Stern that "[his] league is rigged".
Cuban denied making the statement, and went on to write:

Any prudent, rational person can easily see it.
The games are not rigged.
Thats a complete insult to the players on the court and the incredible amount of effort they put into preparing for and playing the games.
All 82 regular season and post season games.
The NBA couldn't rig the games if it wanted to.
And it doesn't want to.
Its that simple.

Despite his denial, Cuban was fined $250,000 by the league, not for his alleged comments, but for general "acts of misconduct" following the game.

In Game 5, Wade shot a total of 25 free throws, equaling the entire Mavericks team total.

In Game 6, suspicions ran even higher as the Heat were awarded 37 free throws compared to the Mavericks’ 23.
Wade shot a total of 21 free throws, nearly matching the Mavericks’ team total, including those from a foul called after bumping into Nowitzki, who was standing in Wade's way during the last 10 seconds of play, which cost them the game and allowed the Heat to walk away with their first championship.
Following the season, Mavericks owner Mark Cuban allegedly hired a former FBI agent to investigate the series.
He supposedly dropped this investigation due to the risk of him being banned from the league for life.

=== 2007
Western Conference Semi-finals – Suns vs. Spurs ===
In what some media outlets claimed were the true 2007 NBA Finals that year, the 2007 Western Conference Semi-Finals match bettered heated rivals in the Phoenix Suns and the San Antonio Spurs under what would be the most controversial series between the two to date.
The popular Phoenix Suns squad under the Seven Seconds or Less and the small-market San Antonio Spurs kicked off the series with a 111–106 Spurs win with a collision between Steve Nash and Tony Parker, with Nash having a deep cut on his nose that later forced him to sit out for a good portion of Game 1.
After a dominant 101–81 performance from the Suns in Game 2, the Spurs would end Game 3 with a 108–101 win over the Suns and Manu Ginóbili would have a bruised, black eye after he was poked by Shawn Marion.
However, near the end of Game 4, the series would reach its critical breaking point.

In the last minute of Game 4, where the Suns would win 104–98 and even up the series, Robert Horry of the Spurs collided with Steve Nash during a play and pushed Nash into the scorer's table mid-court.
During this altercation, Raja Bell of the Suns would try to help his teammate out of there, but was stopped by the referees and players at hand, including Amar'e Stoudemire and Boris Diaw, who were on the team's bench at the time of the altercation.
As a result of the altercation between Horry and Nash, not only would Horry receive a two-game suspension for his outburst, but Diaw and Stoudemire would also be suspended for Game 5 as well, with the only rule that league commissioner David Stern said they violated at that point
was leaving the bench during an altercation.
Suns head coach Mike D'Antoni weighed in on the suspensions of Stoudemire and Diaw, seeing as how they were important pieces for the Suns, questioning the fairness on their suspensions despite not being instigators in it:
We have the most powerful microscopes and telescopes in the world in Arizona, (and) you could use those instruments and not find a shred of fairness or common sense in that decision", D'Antoni said after the Suns' morning shooting session (May 16).
"
That's kind of how it feels.
It really benefits no one.
It doesn't benefit us, obviously.
It doesn't benefit the Spurs.
It doesn't benefit the fans.
It doesn't benefit the NBA.

The suspensions would prove to be the Suns' downfall near the end of the series.
Despite leading most of Game 5 at home, the Suns would lose it 88–85 and would then lose Game 6 and
the series in San Antonio 114–106, being down by as many as 20 points in the third quarter at one point despite the returns of Stoudemire and Diaw.
The call on their suspensions would be further questioned and criticized in 2009 after a similar situation occurred with the Boston Celtics, yet certain key players on their team didn't receive similar suspensions themselves.
In the aftermath of the 2007 Playoffs, one of the referees that was involved with this series, Tim Donaghy, was involved in a betting scandal that claimed fix-ups on certain NBA games and playoff series.
During a 2011 interview, he admitted that he felt the Suns were the better team that season, but the series was poorly officiated from the very start until the bitter end.
In his 2009 book Personal Foul: A First-Person Account of the Scandal That Rocked the NBA, Donaghy stated the following about the series, particularly about his supervisor during the series, Tommy Nuñez:
My favorite Tommy Nunez story is from the 2007 playoffs when the San Antonio Spurs were able to get past the Phoenix Suns in the second round.
Of course, what many fans didn't know was that Phoenix had someone working against them behind the scenes.
Nunez was the group supervisor for that playoff series, and he definitely had a rooting interest.
Nunez loved the Hispanic community in San Antonio and had a lot of friends there.
He had been a referee for 30 years and loved being on the road; in fact, he said that the whole reason he had become a group supervisor was to keep getting out of the house.
So Nunez wanted to come back to San Antonio for the conference finals.
Plus, he, like many other referees, disliked Suns owner Robert Sarver for the way he treated officials.
Both of these things came into play when he prepared the referees for the games in the staff meetings.
I remember laughing with him and saying, "You would love to keep coming back here."
He was pointing out everything that Phoenix was able to get away with and never once told us to look for anything in regard to San Antonio.
Nunez should have a championship ring on his finger.

===
2007 NBA Finals – San Antonio vs. Cleveland ===
The 2007 NBA Finals are considered to have the lowest television ratings in NBA history, after the San Antonio Spurs swept the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Many fans instead expected a Detroit Pistons rematch with the Spurs from the 2005 NBA Finals.
Rasheed Wallace, who then played power forward for the Pistons following the 2006–07 NBA season, claimed that the league wanted to make more money by featuring LeBron James in the Finals instead of the Pistons, just to make more excitement rather than the boring matches like they had two years ago.

I still don't think they beat us, we beat ourselves, And I think we also fell victim to that personal NBA thing where they are trying to make it a world game and get (television) ratings.
They wanted to put their darling (LeBron) in there
(the NBA Finals)
and they did, and look what ended up happening.
This game ain't basketball anymore
, it's entertainment, It's starting to get like the WWF.
There ain't no real wrestling anymore either.
It's all fake.

Despite his controversial statement around the start of the next season, the Pistons were able to make it back to the 2008 NBA Playoffs as a second seed, in which they managed to defeat Philadelphia after rallying from a 2 games to 1 deficit and Orlando in the next round 4 games to 1, before reaching the Eastern Conference Finals again and ending up losing to the eventual champion Boston Celtics for the third year in a row.
That would lead to the downfall of the team following the start of the 2008-09 NBA season, in which several players from their 2004 championship team either ended up departing or retiring.

=== 2009
Eastern Conference First Round – Bulls vs. Celtics ===
During a 2009 playoff series between the Boston Celtics and Chicago Bulls, many Bulls fans felt that the referees were favoring the Celtics.
In Game 5, Celtics guard Rajon Rondo made hard contact with the face of Bulls' center Brad Miller, with just 2 seconds left in overtime with the Celtics leading by two.
Earlier in Game 5, Rondo tripped Bulls guard Kirk Hinrich, forcing him to get stitches to close the resulting wounds he got from being tripped.
The hit on Miller left him with a bleeding mouth, but because the foul was ruled a personal foul, Miller had to shoot the free throws, or he would not have been allowed to return, and the Celtics would pick the replacement shooter.
Had the foul been ruled a flagrant, the Bulls would have been able to pick the replacement shooter.
Miller would miss the first free throw, and then had to miss the second on purpose to give the Bulls a chance to tie the game, but the free throw did not hit the rim and the Celtics got possession and ran out the clock.
Rondo admitted after the game that he did not have a play on the ball.
In Game 6, near the end of the first quarter, Rondo threw Hinrich into the scorer's table in a fashion similar to Robert Horry's body slam of Steve Nash 2 years earlier.
Rondo was assessed a flagrant 1, which allowed for him to stay in the game, rather than a flagrant 2 which would have meant an ejection (which was Horry's punishment for his similar foul).
Furthermore, after both games, the league reviewed the incidents in question and decided not to suspend Rondo or upgrade the fouls, while Horry's body slam earned him a 2-game suspension.
Meanwhile, Orlando Magic center Dwight Howard was suspended for Game 6 of the Magic's series vs. the Philadelphia 76ers after the league reviewed tape of him elbowing Sixers center Samuel Dalembert in the head in Game 5.
It was ruled a technical on the floor, but after review, the league upgraded the foul to a flagrant 2.
===
2009 NBA Finals – Magic vs. Lakers ===
The 2009 NBA Finals was one of the most forgettable matchups and featured the Orlando Magic and Los Angeles Lakers.
It was mockingly dubbed as the 'Disney Series'.
While many fans claimed that it should've been a matchup between Cleveland and the Lakers and a duel of superstars Kobe Bryant and LeBron James following the knee injury of Boston Celtics' power forward Kevin Garnett.
Others believed the Magic should have won the championship instead of the Lakers, due to many calls which were claimed to have been favouring the Lakers, along with nine out of ten analysts favouring the Lakers to be the winning team, compared to only one favouring the Magic to win.
Many of the news also hinted about Jameer Nelson returning to the line up to play during the regular season, where he led the Magic to sweep the Lakers following the presumable season-ending injury of a torn labrum in his right shoulder during a home game vs. Dallas on February 2, 2009.
But it was later confirmed that he would be playing.
While the series went to L.A. with the Lakers up 2–0, it went back to Orlando for game 3.
A controversial call on Dwight Howard after attempting to block Kobe Bryant has raised questions for the league about favoring L.A all the way.
Following the call, Bryant only hit one out of two free throw at the line.
In the game, Los Angeles had a terrible free throw percentage, which lead to Orlando winning that game.

In Game 4, the most intense moment of the game came during the first half.
The Magic had a 12-point lead and outscored the Lakers by as much as 49-37 before going into halftime.
In the third quarter, the Lakers came out and outscored the Magic 30–14 and took the lead
67–62.
Questioning about Stan Van Gundy wanting to keep Jameer Nelson playing for rest of the 4th quarter came under heavy criticism for not letting Rafer Alston to play, especially with the decision of whether or not to foul Orlando with 11 seconds left, which ultimately led to their downfall heading into Overtime following Derek Fisher hitting a pivotal 3-pointer to tie it at 87 due to Nelsons poor defense and was questioned after the game.

I thought we had a very, very bad third quarter, and then it wasn't so much one guy over the other.
It was just we had a unit in the fourth quarter that I thought was playing real well.
And then you get down to the point where Rafer hasn't played in 10 or 12 minutes.
I thought it would be hard to bring him back.
Jameer wasn't doing a whole lot, but he also wasn't hurting us at all.
The unit had played pretty well so that's why I stayed with it.

Another argument came during overtime, with Nelson and Lewis double teaming Bryant, Nelson got hit by Bryant's elbow and no foul was called, before Fisher hit another 3-pointer to take the lead 94–91, which let the Lakers win the game by that score and take a 3–1 lead.
That raised questions about which calls the referees failed to call, following another infamous series years ago, in which a similar incident happened in Game 6 of that season's Western Conference Finals after Kobe's elbow to Mike Bibby with less than 30 seconds left.
Only this time with Jameer Nelson, but was rebuffed.

I doubt that [Kobe] did it on purpose, My ears are ringing right now.
But the ref's not going to call that.

Later on, Rafer Alston's commented on the league for the no call.

There were times he was out there cursing the refs out
and they weren't calling technical fouls, I would get ejected [for that], but they won't eject Kobe.

However, all arguments about the officiating fell on deaf ears as the Lakers won  game 5 for their 15th championship.

===
NBA Draft ===
The 1985 NBA draft was the first to use the NBA Draft Lottery.
Prior to that year, there was a coin flip between the teams with the worst record in each conference to see which team would get the first pick in the draft.
The Golden State Warriors, which represent the San Francisco Bay Area, finished with the worst record in the NBA during the 1984–85 season and would have had the first draft choice under the previous system.
That year, Georgetown center Patrick Ewing was the favorite to be the number one pick in the draft.
The lottery was established out of concern that the Houston Rockets had been intentionally playing poorly in order to draft the best players, such as centers Ralph Sampson and Hakeem Olajuwon in 1983 and 1984 respectively.

During the first live televised draft lottery ceremony, the league used a system where sealed envelopes representing the teams with the worst records were mixed in a tumbler, and then drawn by NBA Commissioner David Stern one at a time to determine which of these clubs would get the first pick onwards.
However, when these envelopes were added to the tumbler, one envelope was put in forcibly and banged against the edge, bending the corner, while all the rest of the envelopes were set in gently.
Stern closely watched the tumbler spinning and took a deep breath when drawing for the first pick, and went for the envelope with the bent corner, which upon opening the envelope, it was revealed that the New York Knicks logo was inside.
The large-market New York Knicks, who finished with the third-worst record in the league that season, eventually used the first pick to draft Ewing who would become a legend on the team and lead the Knicks to the 1994 NBA Finals.
(
Although the Knicks also reached the 1999 NBA Finals, Ewing was injured during that time).
Nevertheless, the "bent envelope" fueled speculation that the league staged the result.
As a response to the controversy, the NBA would update their system to the more modern weighted lottery system in 1990, which gives the worst teams better odds at receiving the top 3 (later 4) picks of the NBA draft.
Nevertheless, the system would receive updates in both 1994, when the Orlando Magic landed back-to-back #1 picks despite their second year having only one lottery combination possible in their chances of winning it, and 2019, after noticing the Philadelphia 76ers looked to lose on purpose for multiple seasons for higher draft picks under Sam Hinkie's regime.

For the 2003 NBA draft, the Cleveland Cavaliers and Denver Nuggets each had equal chances of drafting first overall, with the Cavaliers ultimately winning out.
With high school basketball standout and future four-time NBA MVP LeBron James being the consensus number one pick in that year's draft, there was some speculation as to whether or not that year's lottery was rigged in favor of the Cavaliers, due to James being a native of nearby Akron, Ohio.
Following James' departure for the Miami Heat in 2010, the Cavaliers would be involved in further speculation in regards to winning three out of four NBA drafts between 2011 and 2014, some of which included the idea of LeBron James returning to the Cavaliers altogether from these drafts; James would ultimately return to Cleveland in 2014.

For the 2008 NBA draft, despite having a 1.6% chance of obtaining the number one pick, projected by many to be Chicago native Derrick Rose,
the Chicago Bulls still were awarded the first overall pick and subsequently selected Rose as the first pick.
Rose would go on to win NBA Rookie of the Year in the 2008–09 season and would win the NBA MVP in the 2010–2011 season while leading the Bulls to the Eastern Conference Finals that same season.

The New Orleans Hornets won the rights to the first overall selection in the 2012 draft.
The Hornets were a league-owned team prior to the draft, leading to continued conspiracy theories about the lottery process.
Further suspicions were raised in 2016 and 2017, where former 76ers player Dikembe Mutombo congratulated Philadelphia for winning the first overall pick in the 2016 draft early via Twitter and recently hired Lakers president of basketball operations Magic Johnson and coach Luke Walton stating that the Lakers were going to get a Top 3 pick in the 2017 draft despite having higher odds of losing the pick to Philadelphia weeks before the draft lottery even began that year respectively.
The latter selection also had the Lakers be in prime position to take Lonzo Ball, a prime high school and college standout point guard from nearby Chino Hills, California, with his father LaVar talking about him being on the Lakers months before the event took place.

==
Fines and suspensions ==


===
Criticism of referees and officiating ===
Players, coaches or front office members criticizing referees, officials or suggesting in any way that the league has conspiracy theories would result in an automatic fine of a minimum of $25,000.
Media and fans see this as the league trying to discourage such discussions and comments, as they indeed have things to hide.
The league also fears such would have impact ratings and popularity, resulting in lower ratings and most importantly, revenue.

=== Gestures ===
Sam Cassell's Big Cahones dance celebration (from Major League II) are now seen as "obscene gestures".
Among those who have also been fined for "dancing" are Caron Butler, Andray Blatche, Marco Belinelli, Andre Iguodala and Jameer Nelson.
The fine has been documented to be a minimum of $15,000.

===
Restgate and scheduling ===
In November 2012, San Antonio Spurs coach Gregg Popovich was fined $250,000 for sending four players home (including stars Tim Duncan, Tony Parker and Manu Ginóbili) before a nationally televised game against the defending champion Miami Heat.
It was the Spurs' fourth game in five nights and sixth game in nine nights, all of which were on the road.
Commissioner David Stern released a letter before the game claiming Popovich had done a disservice to the league, fans and Miami ticket buyers by not giving them the game they paid to see.
Most disagreed with Stern, saying Miami fans were there to see LeBron James and the Heat, not the Spurs.
Many felt this was a cultural revenge move by Stern, who in the past had openly admitted he disliked the Spurs' success due to the lack of ratings they brought to the Finals as a small market team.
The Spurs ended up leading for most of the game and only lost in the last minute, making Stern appear even more foolish for claiming the game was ruined before it even began.
Stern later said that if Popovich had simply kept the players with the team he wouldn't have fined him, which went against his initial claim that the product on the court was diminished by who didn't play.

The incident also called into question the league's scheduling practices, such as cramming so many games into a short amount of time, especially like in the Spurs' case where the team had to travel between each game.
Some called for an end to four-games-in-five-nights and five-games-in-seven-nights situations as it could put the players' health at risk and diminishes the product on the court.

===
Joey Crawford ===
Joey Crawford was once suspended by the league after a confrontation with Spurs forward Tim Duncan.
Duncan was ejected for laughing on the sidelines in a game against the Mavericks in the 2006–07 season.
After a meeting between Crawford and the league office, the NBA decided to suspend Crawford for the remainder of the season and made him attend anger management courses.

==
Selective TV replays ==
While the league has implemented TV replays, as of the 2013–14 season, plays are not reviewable unless they are end of quarter plays, as well as the last 2 minutes of regulation and overtime periods.
In many cases, referees have opted not to review final plays of the game, which would have impact on the final win-loss outcome.
In the 2013–14 season, regular season games such as the Heat-Pacers, Mavericks-Timberwolves, Mavericks-Pelicans, Clippers-Mavericks, games have resulted in the controversial calls in the final play of the game that changed the outcome.
In some cases, the NBA issued official statements after the game, admitting to the errors; however, the game's outcome remained unchanged.
Many believe that such statements merely made as a PR move, although no action is done to improve the integrity of the game.

Many criticize too much time spent on replays that could have been resolved within short amounts of time.
Oftentimes, the amount of time spent puts the game into long halts.
The league is seen as intentionally operating in a way to give negative perception of replays in general, as well as merely exaggerating their image of trying to keep the integrity of the game honest.

==
Accusations of network bias ==
During its twelve-year run of covering the NBA, NBC Sports televised a substantial number of games featuring the Chicago Bulls, New York Knicks and Los Angeles Lakers.
In the prime-time slot, from 5:30 p.m EST to 8:00 p.m EST, NBC aired games almost exclusively featuring New York City, Chicago or Los Angeles (incidentally, those three cities are the top three television markets in the United States, and have been historically the three most populous cities).
Several fans and media analysts viewed this as favoritism, and fans of teams like the Houston Rockets who, despite being a large market (and Houston being the USA's fourth most populous city), being one of the best teams in the early-to-mid-1990s, winning the title in 1994 and 1995, and featuring a superstar in Hakeem Olajuwon, were not featured on NBC at the level of the other three teams, felt as if they were being snubbed.
From 1990 to 2002 (NBC's run of covering the NBA), the Bulls, Lakers, and Knicks played in six, four and two NBA Finals respectively, every Finals featuring one or more of those teams except 1995, when the Rockets swept the Orlando Magic to win their second consecutive NBA championship.
Until 1998, the Chicago Bulls were a dominant team, and during the early to mid-1990s, the New York Knicks were also in the NBA's elite.
From 1997 to 2002, the Los Angeles Lakers also joined the ranks of the best in the NBA.

==
Microfiber game ball ==
After the 2005–06 season, David Stern announced that the league would use a new microfiber ball for the 2006–07 season.
The microfiber ball replaced the previously used leather balls.
The league claimed the new ball would provide better grip than the leather counterparts, especially when wet from player's sweat.
Still the majority of players (notably Phoenix Suns point guard Steve Nash) expressed dislike for the new ball, saying among other things that it became slippery when wet, bounced awkwardly and gave players cuts.
The largest complaint came from the fact that players had not been consulted before the new ball was put into play.
The NBA Players Association filed an unfair labor practice lawsuit against the league because of that fact, subsequently dropping it after the league announced that it would revert to the leather balls starting on January 1, 2007.
In a humorous move, the Washington Wizards played a video on the Verizon Center scoreboard welcoming back the "new old ball".
Despite complaints, scoring and field goal percentage went up while the microfiber ball was used.
Some individual players, however, including Chicago Bulls guard Ben Gordon and then Seattle SuperSonics guard Ray Allen, saw their usually high three-point shooting percentages decline.
A more rigorous study found that while shooting percentages did in fact increase, so did turnover rates.
In the aftermath, Commissioner Stern said that players would have more input on future decisions.

==
Referee gambling scandal ==
In July 2007, reports of an investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) were made public, which alleged that during the 2005–06 and 2006–07 NBA seasons, referee Tim Donaghy bet on games in which he officiated.
On August 15, 2007, Donaghy pleaded guilty to two federal charges related to the investigation, and a year later he was sentenced to 15 months in prison and three years of supervised release.
As a result, the general reaction by the media was that the NBA's popularity would be hurt by the news of this scandal.

==
Gilbert Arenas/Javaris Crittenton gun incident ==
On December 24, 2009, it was revealed that Gilbert Arenas of the Washington Wizards had admitted to storing unloaded firearms in his locker at Verizon Center and had surrendered them to team security.
In doing so, Arenas not only violated NBA rules against bringing firearms into an arena, but also violated D.C. ordinances as well.
On January 1, 2010, it was also reported that Arenas and teammate Javaris Crittenton had unloaded guns in the Wizards' locker room during a Christmas Eve argument regarding gambling debts.
The D.C. Metropolitan Police and the U.S. Attorney's office began investigating, and on January 14, 2010, Arenas was charged with carrying a pistol without a license, a violation of Washington, D.C.'s gun-control laws.
Arenas pleaded guilty on January 15 to the felony of carrying an unlicensed pistol outside a home or business.
His sentencing hearing was scheduled for March 26.On January 6, 2010, the NBA suspended Arenas indefinitely without pay until its investigation was complete.
NBA Commissioner David Stern said in a statement that "his ongoing conduct has led me to conclude that he is not currently fit to take the court in an NBA game.
"
By nearly all accounts, Stern felt compelled to act when Arenas' teammates surrounded him during pregame introductions prior to a game with the Philadelphia 76ers
and he pretended to shoot them with guns made from his fingers.
The Wizards issued a statement of their own condemning the players' pregame stunt as "unacceptable."
On January 27, 2010, Arenas and Crittenton were suspended for the rest of the season, after meeting with Stern.
Both players would be removed from the team at the end of the season, with Crittenton being waived and Arenas being traded to the Orlando Magic.
Crittenton would never play in the NBA again after that season (eventually being involved with a manslaughter case), while Arenas would be amnestied a year later before finishing his NBA career with the Memphis Grizzlies in 2012.

==
2019–2020
Hong Kong protests ==
In early October 2019, the Houston Rockets general manager Daryl Morey issued a tweet that supported the 2019–2020 Hong Kong protests.
The NBA subsequently apologized in a statement saying the tweet was "regrettable".
The perceived insufficiency of the NBA's defense of Morey's tweet and double standard relative to the league's history of political activism were criticized by US politicians and third-party observers; critics further compared the incident to an October 2 South Park episode "Band in China" which parodies the self-censorship of the American entertainment industry to meet Chinese censorship demands.
The statement also drew criticism from mainland Chinese state-run media for the perceived insufficiency of the apology and led to the suspension/termination of all Mainland Chinese sponsors of the NBA.
This led to both Republican and Democratic congresspeople, including Julian Castro, Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz to make public statements criticizing both Chinese and NBA actions.

NBA commissioner Adam Silver later defended league's response to the tweet, supporting Morey's right to freedom of expression while also accepting the right of reply from the government of and businesses from mainland China.

An article by Fox Business said that the NBA would look to Africa and India for growth if the league were to sever ties with mainland China as a result of the tweet.

==
2020
Black Lives
Matter protests ==
Following a four-month hiatus the NBA resumed play in August 2020 at the Bubble held at Walt Disney World during the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the build-up to the closed-door tournament, the death of George Floyd in May and the resurgence of Black Lives Matter protests during that time forced the hand of the NBA, a league looking to stand with its majority-Black player base.
As a result, the league permitted players to wear league-approved messages on the back of their jerseys, and relaxed their long-standing position on not standing for the U.S. national anthem.
The league also painted "BLACK LIVES MATTER" at center court for both of their venues for the tournament.
Many critics, mostly conservative news media personalities and politicians such as U.S. President Donald Trump and Ted Cruz, attacked the NBA for its public embracement of the movement.
When Jonathan Isaac, an Orlando Magic player and a devout Evangelical Christian, both refused to kneel during the anthem in solidarity with his teammates or wear the team-approved "Black Lives Matter" t-shirt given to him, sales of his jersey rose in approval.
On the other hand, San Antonio Spurs head coach Gregg Popovich and
Miami Heat player Meyers Leonard received criticism for doing the same, though they wore the "Black Lives Matter" tees while standing.
===
NBA player walkout ===
In response to the shooting of Jacob Blake in Kenosha, Wisconsin, NBA players in the midst of their playoff anchored a wildcat strike in protest, setting off a chain reaction throughout North American sports where no professional games were played in any major league on August 26.
While this did not receive major backlash as the earlier social-justice focused programs did, it represented a showing of player power that many American sports fans have found themselves uncomfortable with, especially with regard to the NBA.

The league and its players formed several initiatives in the wake of the walkout, the most notable of them being a pledge to turn several NBA venues into voting sites for the upcoming U.S. presidential election.

===
2020
NBA Finals ratings ===
The record-low ratings for the 2020 NBA Finals, which saw the Los Angeles Lakers defeat the Miami Heat in six games, were widely panned by apolitical pundits and conservative critics, with myriad theories given as to why the ratings for the event dropped 65% from 2019.
Some cited the NBA's embrace of the Black Lives Matter movement, while others cited the league's struggles in the ratings as playing at an abnormal time of year, especially with the MLB postseason and the NFL regular season—two traditional fall events—undercutting casual fan interest, as opposed to the traditionally robust numbers the NBA's final gets in June.
A columnist for Outkick attributed the declining NBA ratings to the league's "woke" politics, cord-cutting, and the lack of playing time for star players.
Dan McQuade of Defector Media stated that critics of NBA players who express their personal political views on the court were relying on racist "coded language," likening it to the aforementioned dress code controversy.

===
LeBron
James Controversial Tweet ===
In April 2021
LeBron James tweeted an image of a police officer with the caption “YOU’RE NEXT #ACCOUNTABILITY.”
the aforementioned tweet garnered a lot of backlash.
James later deleted the tweet.

== See also ==
National Football League controversies
Criticism of NASCAR


==
References ==
Ryan Joseph Kalil (born March 29, 1985) is an American film and television producer and former NFL center.
He played college football at USC, where he was a member of two national championship teams, was named a first-team All-American, and won the 2006 Morris Trophy.
He was drafted by the Carolina Panthers in the second round of the 2007 NFL Draft, where he played for 12 seasons.
He also played 1 season with the New York Jets.

Kalil was selected to the Pro Bowl in 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013, and 2015.

==
Early life ==
Kalil was born Ryan Joseph Kalil in 1985 to Frank and Cheryl Kalil.
His father, Frank, played football for the University of Arkansas and the University of Arizona.
He was drafted by the National Football League Buffalo Bills in 1982 and later played in the United States Football League until 1984.
His mother, Cheryl (Van Cleave), was Miss California in 1981.
He is of Lebanese and Mexican heritage and has two siblings.
His brother, Matt, is a former starting offensive tackle at USC and was drafted fourth overall by the Minnesota Vikings in 2012.
They were the third set of brothers to play on the same offensive line in the NFL when Matt joined Ryan on the Panthers in 2017 and the first set of brothers to do it in 24 years.
Their sister Danielle sang the national anthem at the Vikings–Panthers game, which featured both her brothers, on October 13, 2013.

==
In media ==


===
Film ===
Kalil has interests in the film industry, having made claymation films as a child.

He's directed fellow USC-alumnus Will Ferrell on a football training spoof for the NFL Network and his short film, The Take Off, which premiered at The 34th Annual Santa Barbara International Film Festival on January 29, 2019.Kalil founded Mortal Media in 2016 with friend Blake Griffin.
Kalil and Griffin have sold eight movie and television projects, five of which are in active development, most notably reboots of White Men Can't Jump and Disney’s The Rocketeer.

===
Books ===
In June 2016, Deadline Hollywood announced he will serve as an executive producer along with Dwayne Johnson producing Sony Pictures film "Son of Shaolin."
Kalil financed production of the underlying graphic novel.
Ryan Kalil, Shawn Kittelsen and Chris B. Murray created Savage Game, a Comixology Originals 60-page sci-fi graphic novel that is a high-tech version of The Island of Dr. Moreau.
Kalil also co-wrote The Rookie Handbook with former Carolina offensive line teammates Jordan Gross and Geoff Hangartner.
The Rookie Handbook is a humorous and insightful look at the life of an NFL rookie.
It's designed to give a behind the scenes glimpse at life in the big leagues for the legions of NFL fans.

==
Early career ==


===
High school career ===
Born in Tucson, Arizona and raised in Corona, California
, Kalil went to Servite High School in Anaheim, California, where he was teammates with future New England Patriots wide receiver/special teams and fellow NFL future All Pro Matthew Slater.

===
College career ==
=
Kalil attended the University of Southern California, where he played for the USC Trojans football team.

He was a 2005 Sports Illustrated All-American, won the USC Trojans' Bob Chandler Award in 2005 and Courage Award in 2004, and was on the watch list for the Lombardi Award.

Kalil was on the official watch list for the Rimington Trophy for the top college football center and the Outland Trophy watch list for the best lineman.

He was named to the 2005 and 2006 Pac-10 coaches and Rivals.com
All-Pac-10 team First Team.
He was a Pro Football Weekly All-American choice and a Rivals.com second-team
All American and SI.com honorable mention All-American.

Kalil was voted "lineman of the year" by his Trojans teammates and won the 2006 Morris Trophy.
He was invited to play in the Senior Bowl prior to the 2007 NFL Draft.

In 2003, Kalil and the Trojans finished the regular season 11–1 and ranked No.
1 in the AP and coaches' polls.
However, USC was left out of the BCS championship game after finishing third in the BCS behind Oklahoma and LSU.
The Trojans went to the Rose Bowl and played University of Michigan.
That 2003 season saw split national champions, as LSU won the BCS title, while USC was crowned champion by the AP.
Kalil appeared in two BCS Championship Games:
2005’s win against the University of Oklahoma and 2006’s loss to University of Texas.

==
Professional football career ==
Kalil ran the 40-yard dash in 4.94 seconds at the 2007 NFL Combine and bench pressed 225 pounds 34 times.

His performances at the combine and the Senior Bowl impressed scouts and led many analysts to project he would be selected in the first or second round of the 2007 NFL Draft.
===
Carolina Panthers ===
Pre-draft predictions turned out to be correct, as Kalil was selected in the second round of the draft with the 59th pick by the Carolina Panthers.
He was the first center to be selected in the 2007 draft and joined his teammate from the USC Trojans, Dwayne Jarrett, who the Panthers also selected in the second round.

In 2007, Kalil started three games at center.

In 2008, Kalil was named the full-time starter at center.
He started in all 12 games that he appeared, missing four games due to injury.

In 2011, Kalil received a franchise tag from the Carolina Panthers.
On August 19, 2011, the Panthers signed Kalil to a six-year $49 million deal, making him the highest paid center in NFL history.
He was selected to the Pro Bowl as the starting center of the NFC team.

On February 7, 2016, Kalil was part of the Panthers team that played in Super Bowl 50.
In the game, the Panthers fell to the Denver Broncos by a score of 24–10.It was announced on December 23, 2015 that Kalil was one of ten players on the Carolina Panthers voted into the 2016 Pro Bowl, making it his fifth appearance.
He could not play in the Pro Bowl due to the Panthers appearance in Super Bowl 50.
For the 2015 season, PFF rated Kalil as the third-best run-blocking center in the NFL.
He was ranked 79th by his fellow players on the NFL Top 100 Players of 2016.On June 6, 2016
, Kalil signed a two-year extension with the Panthers.
He had been dealing with a shoulder injury for several weeks before leaving the Week 11 game against the New Orleans Saints.
He was placed on injured reserve on November 29, 2016, ending his season.
In 2017, Kalil started only six games after dealing with a neck injury for most of the season.

On December 31, 2018, Kalil announced his retirement from the NFL after 12 seasons.

===
New York Jets ===
On August 1, 2019, Kalil came out of his brief retirement to sign a one-year contract with the New York Jets.
He was placed on injured reserve on November 16, 2019.

==
Personal life ==
Kalil resides in Manhattan Beach, California, with his wife, Natalie, and their four children.
Ryan started the Kalil Family Foundation with his wife, which works to greatly accelerate lupus research and improve life for people living with lupus.
The foundation also supports pioneering solutions to end homelessness in the United States and abroad.
Kalil was announced as one of the investors in an almost all-female group that was awarded a new franchise in the National Women's Soccer League, the top level of women's sport in the U.S.
The new team, since unveiled as Angel City FC, is set to start play in 2022.

== Notes ==


==
External links ==
Ryan Kalil on Instagram
Ryan Kalil on Twitter
Carolina Panthers bio
Bio at USCTrojans.com
Kalil and Will Ferrell at NFL.com
Panthers franchise center Ryan Kalil
Tej Lalvani (born 13 July 1974) is a British businessman and the CEO of the UK's largest vitamin company Vitabiotics, founded by his father Kartar Lalvani.
He is best known for being one of the dragons on the BBC television series Dragons' Den from 2017 to 2021.

According to the Sunday Times Rich List in May 2019, he has a net worth of £390 million.

==
Early life and business career ==
Tej grew up in Bangalore, Karnataka Southern India, and spent his childhood between India and the United Kingdom before settling in London when he was 16.
He graduated with a bachelor's degree from Westminster Business School at the University of Westminster in 1996, and started his career working in the warehouse of his father's company Vitabiotics, before succeeding him as CEO.Along with his wife, Lalvani runs a property investment business in London.
In 2012, Lalvani was named Young Entrepreneur at the Asian Business Awards as well as Young Entrepreneur of the Year by TiE in 2013.
In October 2017, he ranked at number 48 on the GG2 Power List of the most influential Asian people in Britain.

==
Dragons' Den ==
Lalvani succeeded Nick Jenkins as the next "dragon" on Dragons' Den after the departure of Steve Parish who left before filming due to other business commitments.

In January 2021, Lalvani announced his departure from the show to focus on the expansion of his business.
Series 18, which will be his final series, started in spring 2021.

==
Personal life ==
Lalvani is of Indian descent.
The Lalvani family is of Sindhi heritage.
In 2011, Lalvani married  Tara Ruby in London.
His mother is a former Miss India and a Miss World runner-up.
Lalvani lives in London and aside from his business interests, he composes music and plays drums, keyboard and guitar.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Tej Lalvani at IMDb
Official website
The following list includes all current and former arenas used by current and defunct teams playing in the National Basketball Association (NBA).
Other information included in this list are arena locations, seating capacities, years opened, and in use.

While there are 30 NBA teams, there are currently only 29 full-time arenas, as both Los Angeles teams, the Lakers and Clippers, share Staples Center, although the Clippers plan to build a new arena by 2024.
The United Center has the highest capacity of any current NBA arena at 20,917.
Madison Square Garden and the Phoenix Suns Arena are the only current arenas not to be named after a corporate sponsor; however, the latter is only a temporary name until a new naming rights contract can be secured.

==
Current arenas ==


===
Map of current arenas ===


==
Future or proposed arenas ==


==
Former arenas ==


==
Defunct teams ==


==
Neutral venues ==


==
See also ==
National Basketball Association
List of basketball arenas
List of American Basketball Association arenas
List of current Major League Baseball stadiums
List of National Hockey League arenas
List of current National Football League stadiums
List of Major League Soccer stadiums
List of Major League Lacrosse stadiums
List of U.S. stadiums by capacity
List of NCAA Division
I
basketball arenas


=
=
References ==


==
External links ==
Hoops Corner
Inside Arenas
NBA arenas on Ballparks.com
Josh Rouse (born March 9, 1972) is an American folk/roots pop singer-songwriter.
Originally from Nebraska, Rouse began his recording career in Nashville in 1998 and later relocated to Spain.
In 2014, Rouse won a Spanish Goya Film Award in the category of Best Original Song for  "
Do You Really Want To Be In Love?"
from the motion picture La Gran Familia Española.

==
Biography ==
Born in the rural town of Oshkosh, Nebraska, he moved to various places during his childhood including Utah, California, Wyoming, and Georgia.
He began writing songs aged 18, and following his nomadic childhood, he eventually moved to Clarksville, Tennessee to attend college (although he soon dropped out and moved to Nashville, Tennessee and worked as a parking valet), where he met some local musicians and began recording.
The initial recordings he put to tape eventually became his debut release, Dressed Up Like Nebraska (1998).
The album received critical acclaim from music writers.
Billboard wrote that it was "a dark-horse gem", and "[a]s pure and unpretentious as any singer-songwriter album issued this year".
He went on to collaborate with Kurt Wagner on an EP the following year, and toured in support of artists such as Mark Eitzel, Aimee Mann, and Vic Chesnutt.
Home (2000) and Under Cold Blue Stars (2002) followed before he began a working relationship with producer Brad Jones on 1972, released in 2003.
"
Directions" from Home was used on the soundtrack to Cameron Crowe's film Vanilla Sky.
After his first marriage ended, Rouse relocated to Spain to be with his then girlfriend (and now wife)
Paz Suay and has resided there off and on since 2004.
His last album recorded before the move, Nashville, was released in 2005 and reached number 66 on the UK Albums Chart.
Rouse and Suay moved back to the US to promote his 2007 album Country Mouse City House, but they returned to Spain after Suay became pregnant.
He collaborated with Suay as 'She's Spanish, I'm American', the duo releasing a self-titled EP in 2007.
His music took on Spanish and Latin American influences and albums such as El Turista included songs sung in Spanish.
Rouse and Suay have two children.
On November 1, 2019, Rouse released the holiday album
The Holiday Sounds Of Josh Rouse.
==
Discography ==
Studio albums
Dressed Up Like Nebraska (1998)
Home (2000)
Under Cold Blue Stars (2002)
1972 (2003)
Nashville (2005)
Subtítulo (2006)
Country Mouse City House (2007)
El Turista (2010)
Josh Rouse and The Long Vacations (2011)
The Happiness Waltz (2013)
The Embers of Time (2015)
Love in the Modern Age (2018)
The Holiday Sounds of Josh Rouse (2019)EPs and mini-albums

Chester with Kurt Wagner (1999)
Bedroom Classics, Vol.
1
(2001)
Bedroom Classics, Vol.
2
(2005)
She's Spanish, I'm American with Paz Suay (2007)
Bedroom Classics, Vol.
3
(2008)
Bedroom Classics, Vol.
4
(2016)Soundtracks
La Gran Familia Española (Original Score)
(2013)Compilations
The Smooth Sounds of Josh Rouse (2004)
The Best of the Rykodisc Years (2008)Singles

"Directions" (2000)
"Christmas With Jesus" (2001)
"
Feeling No Pain" (2002)
"Nothing Gives Me Pleasure" (2002)
"Love Vibration" (2003)
"Come Back (Light Therapy)" (2004)
"Winter in the Hamptons" (2005)
"It's the Nighttime" (2005)
"Julie (Come Out of the Rain)" (2013)
"Some Days
I'm Golden
All Night" (2015)
"Businessman" (2018)Downloads

Kcrw.
Com Presents...
Josh Rouse Live With Guitar & Strings (2006)
Live Shepherds Bush Empire
December 7, 2007 (2008)
KCRW Morning Becomes Eclectic April 20, 2006,
Outtakes (2008)
Valencia EP – Bedroom Classics (2009)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Josh Rouse at AllMusic
Martin Long (born 26 August 1950) is a businessman and founder of the Churchill Insurance Company.

==
Career ==
Long began his career working in a number of insurance companies.
He went on to become managing director of Halifax Insurance.
Together with Peter Wood, he founded Direct Line in 1985, the first telephone-only insurance company in the UK.
Four years later, Long broke away to form Churchill, a company he would manage himself until its purchase by the Royal Bank of Scotland in 2003, a deal that is said to have earned Long £50 million.
He retained his job of running Churchill until 2004, when he left to set up his own property company.
Long was also one of the owners of Crystal Palace Football Club, holding 25% of the club's shares.
After American investors Josh Harris and David Blitzer made a deal with Crystal Palace F.C., Long now holds 2.5% with the Americans and Steve Parish being the majority share holders.

==
References ==
The Boston Celtics ( SEL-tiks) are an American professional basketball team based in Boston.
The Celtics compete in the National Basketball Association (NBA) as a member of the league's Eastern Conference Atlantic Division.
Founded in 1946 as one of the league's original eight teams, the Celtics play their home games at TD Garden, which they share with the National Hockey League (NHL)'s Boston Bruins.
The Celtics are regarded as one of the most successful basketball teams in NBA history; the franchise is tied with the Los Angeles Lakers for most NBA Championships won with 17 (accounting for 23.6 percent of all NBA championships since the league's founding) and currently holds the record for the most recorded wins of any NBA team.
The Celtics are one of the two charter BAA franchises (the other is the New York Knicks) still playing in their original city.

The Celtics have a notable rivalry with the Los Angeles Lakers, which was heavily highlighted throughout the 1960s and 1980s.
During the two teams' many match-ups in the 1980s, the Celtics' star, Larry Bird, and the Lakers' star, Magic Johnson, had an ongoing feud.
The franchise has played the Lakers a record 12 times in the NBA Finals (including their most recent appearances in 2008 and 2010), of which the Celtics have won nine.
Four Celtics players (Bob Cousy, Bill Russell, Dave Cowens and Larry Bird) have won the NBA
Most Valuable Player Award for an NBA record total of 10 MVP awards.
Both the nickname "Celtics" and their mascot "
Lucky the Leprechaun" are a nod to Boston's historically large Irish population, and also to the Original Celtics, a marquee team prior to the NBA.The Celtics' rise to dominance began in the late 1950s, after coach Red Auerbach acquired center Bill Russell, who would become the cornerstone of the Celtics dynasty, in a draft day trade in 1956.
Led by Russell and superstar point guard Bob Cousy, the Celtics won their first NBA championship in 1957.
Russell, along with a talented supporting cast of future Hall of Famers including John Havlicek, Tom Heinsohn, K. C. Jones, Sam Jones, Satch Sanders, and Bill Sharman, would usher the Celtics into the greatest period in franchise history, winning eight consecutive NBA championships throughout the 1960s.
After the retirement of Russell in 1969, the Celtics entered a period of rebuilding.
Led by center Dave Cowens and point guard JoJo White, the Celtics returned to championship caliber, winning two NBA titles in 1974 and 1976.
The Celtics again returned to dominance in the 1980s.
Led by the "Big Three" that featured Larry Bird, Kevin McHale, and Robert Parish, the Celtics won the 1981, 1984, and 1986 championships.
After winning 16 championships throughout the 20th century, the Celtics, after struggling through the 1990s, rose again to win a championship in 2008 with the help of Kevin Garnett, Paul Pierce, and Ray Allen in what was known as the new "Big Three" era.
The Celtics returned to the NBA Finals in 2010, only to lose to the Lakers in a seven-game series.

By the start of the 2013 season, none of the "Big Three" were still with the team, which ushered in a new era for the team.
With the help of newly hired head coach Brad Stevens, the team began rebuilding.
In his second season, Stevens led the Celtics to a return to the playoffs in 2015.
During the 2016-17 season, the Celtics clinched the top seed in the Eastern Conference, but were eliminated in the Conference Finals.
Led by Jayson Tatum and Jaylen Brown, the team returned to the Conference Finals in 2018 and 2020, losing both times.

==
Franchise history ==


===
1946–1950:
Early years ===
The Boston Celtics were formed on June 6, 1946, by Boston Garden-Arena Corporation president Walter A. Brown as a team in the Basketball Association of America, and became part of the National Basketball Association after the absorption of the National Basketball League by the BAA in the fall of 1949.
In 1950, the Celtics signed Chuck Cooper, becoming the first NBA franchise to draft a black player.

=== 1950–1957:
Arrival of Bob Cousy and Red Auerbach ===
The Celtics struggled during their early years, until the hiring of coach Red Auerbach.
In the franchise's early days, Auerbach had no assistants, ran all the practices, did all the scouting—both of opposing teams and college draft prospects—and scheduled all road trips.
One of the first great players to join the Celtics was Bob Cousy, whom Auerbach initially refused to draft out of nearby Holy Cross because he was "too flashy.
"
Cousy's contract eventually became the property of the Chicago Stags, but when that franchise went bankrupt, Cousy went to the Celtics in a dispersal draft.

After the 1955–56 season, Auerbach made a stunning trade, sending perennial All-Star Ed Macauley to the St. Louis Hawks along with the draft rights to Cliff Hagan for the second overall pick in the draft.
After negotiating with the Rochester Royals—a negotiation that included a promise that the Celtics owner would send the highly sought-after Ice Capades to Rochester if the Royals would let Russell slide to #2—Auerbach used the pick to select University of San Francisco center Bill Russell.
Auerbach also acquired Holy Cross standout, and 1957 NBA Rookie of the Year, Tom Heinsohn.
Russell and Heinsohn worked extraordinarily well with Cousy, and they were the players around whom Auerbach would build the champion Celtics for more than a decade.

=== 1956–1969
:
The Bill Russell era ===
With Bill Russell, the Celtics advanced to the 1957 NBA Finals and defeated the St. Louis Hawks in seven games, the first of a record 17 championships.
Russell went on to win 11 championships, making him the most decorated player in NBA history.
In 1958, the Celtics again advanced to the NBA Finals, this time losing to the Hawks in 6 games.
However, with the acquisition of K.C. Jones that year, the Celtics began a dynasty that would last for more than a decade.
In 1959, the Celtics won the NBA Championship after sweeping the Minneapolis Lakers, the first of their record eight consecutive championships.
During that time, the Celtics met the Lakers in the Finals five times, starting an intense and often bitter rivalry that has spanned generations.

In 1964, the Celtics became the first NBA team to have an all African-American starting lineup.
On December 26, 1964, Willie Naulls replaced an injured Tom Heinsohn, joining Tom 'Satch' Sanders, K.C. Jones, Sam Jones, and Bill Russell in the starting lineup.
The Celtics defeated St. Louis 97–84.
Boston won its next 11 games with Naulls starting in place of Heinsohn.
The Celtics of the late 1950s–1960s are widely considered as one of the most dominant teams of all time.
Auerbach retired as coach after the 1965–66 season and Russell took over as player-coach, which was Auerbach's ploy to keep Russell interested.
With his appointment Russell became the first African-American coach in any U.S. pro sport.
Auerbach would remain the general manager, a position he would hold well into the 1980s.
However, the Celtics' string of NBA titles ended when they lost to the Philadelphia 76ers in the 1967 Eastern Conference Finals.
The aging team managed two more championships in 1968 and 1969, defeating the Los Angeles Lakers each time.
Russell retired after the 1969 season, effectively ending a Celtics dynasty that had garnered an unrivaled 11 NBA titles in 13 seasons.
The team's run of 8 consecutive is the longest championship streak in U.S. professional sports history.

===
1970–1978: Cowens/Havlicek/White era ===
The 1970 season was a rebuilding year, as the Celtics had their first losing record since the 1949–50 season.
However, with the acquisition of Paul Silas and future Hall of Famers Dave Cowens and Jo Jo White, the Celtics soon became dominant again.
After losing in the Eastern Conference Finals in 1972, the Celtics regrouped and came out determined in 1973 and posted an excellent 68–14 regular season record.
But the season ended in disappointment, as they were upset in seven games by the New York Knicks in the Conference Finals.
John Havlicek injured his right shoulder in game six and was forced to play game seven shooting left handed.
The Celtics returned to the playoffs the next year, defeating the Milwaukee Bucks in the NBA Finals in 1974 for their 12th NBA Championship.
Boston took a 3-2 series lead and had a chance to claim the title on their home court.
However, the Bucks won Game Six in Boston when Kareem Abdul-Jabbar nestled in a hook shot with 3 seconds left in the game's second overtime, and the series returned to Milwaukee.
Cowens was the hero in Game 7, scoring 28 points as the Celtics brought the title back to Boston for the first time in five years.

In 1976, the team won yet another championship, defeating the Phoenix Suns in six games.
The Finals featured one of the greatest games in NBA history.
With the series tied at two games apiece, the Suns trailed early in the Boston Garden, but came back to force overtime.
In double overtime, a Gar Heard turn-around jumper at the top of the key sent the game to a third overtime, at which point the Celtics prevailed.
After the 1976 championship and a playoff appearance in 1977, Boston went into another rebuilding phase.
In the 1977 NBA draft, the Celtics drafted a young forward from UNC Charlotte named Cedric Maxwell.
"
Cornbread" Maxwell did not contribute much in his rookie season, but he showed promise.
Auerbach's job became even tougher following the 1977–78 season in which they went 32–50 as Havlicek, the Celtics' all-time leading scorer, retired after 16 seasons.
The Celtics owned two of the top eight picks in the 1978 NBA draft.
Auerbach took a risk by selecting junior Larry Bird of Indiana State with the sixth overall pick, knowing that Bird would stay in college for his senior year but believing that his potential would make him worth the wait.
The team retained Bird's rights for one year and signed him soon after he led Indiana State to the NCAA Championship game.

In 1978, Celtics owner Irv Levin traded franchises with Buffalo Braves owner John Y. Brown Jr..
Two weeks before the swap of franchises was made official, details of a six-player trade between the two teams were reported.
Boston sent Freeman Williams, Kevin Kunnert, and Kermit Washington to the Braves for "Tiny" Archibald, Billy Knight, and Marvin Barnes.
The move turned Boston fans against Brown, both because Kunnert and Washington were seen as key pieces of the team's future and because Auerbach publicly stated that he was not consulted about the trade.

=== 1979–1992
: The Larry Bird era ===
The relationship between Brown and Auerbach worsened with Brown's decision to acquire Bob McAdoo in February 1979 in exchange for three first-round draft picks that Auerbach had planned to use to rebuild the franchise.
Again, Brown made the trade without consulting Auerbach.
Auerbach almost left Boston to take a job with the New York Knicks as a result.
With public support strongly behind Auerbach, Brown sold the team to Harry Mangurian in 1979 rather than run the risk of losing his famed general manager.
The Celtics would struggle through the season, going 29–53.
Newcomers Chris Ford, Rick Robey, Cedric Maxwell and Nate Archibald failed to reverse the team's momentum.

Larry Bird debuted for the Celtics during the 1979–80 season.
With a new owner in place, Auerbach made a number of moves that would bring the team back to prominence.
He almost immediately traded McAdoo, a former NBA scoring champion, to the Detroit Pistons for guard M. L. Carr, a defensive specialist, and two first-round picks in the 1980 NBA draft.
He also picked up point guard Gerald Henderson from the CBA.
Carr, Archibald, Henderson and Ford formed a highly competent backcourt, blending in well with the talented frontcourt of Cowens, Maxwell and Bird.
With Bird winning NBA Rookie of the Year honors the team went
61–21
, a 32-game improvement from the previous season.
Playing strong in the playoffs, the Celtics fell to the Philadelphia 76ers in the Eastern Conference Finals.
After the season, Auerbach completed one of the most lopsided trades in NBA history, garnering a pair of future Hall of Famers for a pair of first-round draft picks.
Seeking to improve the team immediately, Auerbach sent the team's two first-round draft picks to the Golden State Warriors for both center Robert Parish and the Warriors' first round pick.
He then used the pick the Celtics obtained from Golden State to select University of Minnesota power forward Kevin McHale.
The "Big Three" of Bird, McHale and Parish played together for the Celtics until 1992, won three NBA championships together, and were later described as the best NBA frontcourt of all time.
Despite losing center Dave Cowens to retirement late in training camp, the Celtics went 62–20 under coach Bill Fitch in 1980–81.
Once again, the Celtics faced the 76ers in the Eastern Conference Finals, falling behind 3-1 before coming back to win Game Seven, 91–90.
The Celtics went on to win the 1981 NBA Championship over the Houston Rockets, with Maxwell being named NBA Finals MVP.Following the 1981–82 NBA season, the Celtics once again met the 76ers in the playoffs.
This time, they lost in seven games.
In 1983 the Celtics were swept in the playoffs (a first for the franchise) by the Milwaukee Bucks; afterwards, Fitch resigned and the team was sold to new owners led by Don Gaston.
In 1983–84, the Celtics, under new coach K. C. Jones, would go 62–20 and return to the NBA Finals after a three-year hiatus.
Boston came back from a 2–1 deficit to defeat the Lakers for their 15th championship.
Bird renewed his college rivalry with Lakers star Magic Johnson during this series.
After the season, Auerbach officially retired as general manager, but maintained the position of team president.
He was succeeded by Jan Volk.
In 1985, the Lakers and Celtics met again in the Finals, with the Lakers winning.
This was the first time the Lakers had defeated the Celtics in the Finals and the only time the team had won a championship at Boston Garden.
During the following off-season, the Celtics acquired Bill Walton from the Los Angeles Clippers in exchange for Cedric Maxwell.
Walton had been an All-Star and league MVP while leading the Portland Trail Blazers to the 1977 NBA championship, but injuries had hobbled him since.
Considered the best-passing center in NBA history, he stayed healthy and was a big part of the Celtics' success in 1986.

The Celtics won the second pick in the 1986 NBA draft and drafted University of Maryland star Len Bias, one of the most heralded prospects of his era.
Bias died 48 hours later of an accidental cocaine overdose.
Despite the tragedy, the Celtics remained competitive in 1986–87, going 59–23 and again winning the Eastern Conference Championship.
They were defeated in the Finals by the Lakers in six games.

In 1988, the Celtics lost in six games to the Detroit Pistons in the Eastern Conference Finals.
Following the season, head coach K.C. Jones retired and was replaced by assistant Jimmy Rodgers.
Boston's hopes for 1988–89 faded when Bird underwent a procedure to remove bone spurs in his feet early in the season, and the Celtics won just 42 games before a first-round playoff defeat to the Pistons.
Bird returned in 1989–90 and led the Celtics to a 52–30 record.
In the playoffs, the Celtics collapsed after winning the first two games in a best-of-five series against the New York Knicks, losing three straight games and the series.
After the playoffs, Rodgers was fired and replaced by assistant coach and former Celtics player Chris Ford.

Under Ford's leadership, the Celtics improved to 56–26 in 1990–91, recapturing the Atlantic Division title even though Bird missed 22 games with several injuries.
The Celtics again lost to the Pistons in the playoffs.
In 1992, a late-season rally allowed a 51–31 Celtics team to catch the New York Knicks and repeat as Atlantic Division champions.
After sweeping the Indiana Pacers in the first round, the Celtics lost a seven-game Eastern Conference Semifinals series to the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Back injuries limited Bird to only 45 regular-season games, and just four of ten in the playoffs.
After thirteen NBA seasons and a gold medal at the Barcelona Olympics with the Dream Team, continued back trouble led Bird to retire in 1992.

=== 1993–1998:
Rebuilding ===
The loss of Bird and aging of the team's other veteran stars forced coach Chris Ford into rebuilding mode.
Hopes centered on 26-year-old Reggie Lewis, a small forward out of Boston's Northeastern University.
In the first round of the 1993 playoffs Lewis fainted during Boston's four-game series loss by the Charlotte Hornets.
An examination revealed heart problems, but Lewis was able to get doctors to clear him for a comeback.
Before he could make it he died of a heart attack while shooting baskets at Brandeis University during the off-season.
The Celtics honored his memory by retiring his number 35.
With Kevin McHale having retired after the Celtics' playoff loss to the Hornets, Boston's original Big 3 era came to an end in 1994 upon Robert Parish's signing with Charlotte.
The team collapsed, finishing out of the playoffs with a 32–50 mark.

In 1994, the Celtics hired former player and legendary towel-waving cheerleader M. L. Carr as the team's new vice president of basketball operations.
Working alongside general manager Jan Volk, Carr selected University of North Carolina star Eric Montross with Boston's first round pick in the 1994 NBA draft.
Montross became the new heir apparent in the paint, but failed to develop and was eventually traded.
1994–95 was the Celtics' final season in the Boston Garden.
The Celtics signed aging Dominique Wilkins as a free agent, who led the team in scoring with 17.8 PPG.
Second-year player Dino Rađa, a power forward from Croatia, added an interior presence the team had been lacking in 1993–94.
The Celtics made the playoffs, losing to the heavily favored Orlando Magic in 4 games.
In 1995, the Celtics moved from the Boston Garden to the Fleet Center (later TD BankNorth, then TD Garden).
Carr fired Chris Ford and took the coaching reins himself.
After drafting Providence College star Eric Williams, the Celtics struggled to a 33–49 record.

Things got worse in 1996–97 as the Celtics lost a franchise record 67 games, setting an unwanted NBA record winning only once against other Atlantic Division teams and just fifteen victories overall.
In spite of the emergence of 1st-round draft pick Antoine Walker Carr's coaching stint was deemed a failure, and he took another job in the organization when owner Paul Gaston convinced star college coach Rick Pitino to join the franchise as the team's president, director of basketball operations, and head coach.
Pitino's appointment as team president was controversial as Auerbach, the incumbent who had filled that role for more than 25 years, first heard about the change from local media.
Unfortunately for the franchise, Pitino was not the savior everyone hoped he'd be.
Auerbach bore the insult of being elbowed out with dignity, even as the team failed to improve.

The Celtics received the third and sixth draft picks in the 1997 NBA draft, and used the picks to select a brand new backcourt through Chauncey Billups and Ron Mercer.
The young team that lost 67 games the year before was dismantled, with David Wesley, Dino Rađa and Rick Fox being let go, and Williams traded to the Denver Nuggets for a pair of second round draft picks
(Williams would return to the Celtics in 1999 and played for four years).
Walter McCarty was also acquired in a trade with the Knicks.
With a promising start, upsetting the defending champions Chicago Bulls at home on opening night, and hard play from the youngsters that led to leaderships in turnovers and steals, the team improved its victories from 15 to 36 despite many losing streaks.
Billups was subsequently traded to the Raptors during his rookie year, and Mercer was traded to the Nuggets during his third season.

=== 1998–2013:
The Paul Pierce era ===
The following year in the 1998 NBA draft, the Celtics drafted Paul Pierce, a college star who had been expected to be drafted much earlier than the Celtics' 10th overall pick.
Pierce had an immediate impact during the lockout-shortened 1998–99 NBA season, averaging 19.5 points and being named Rookie of The Month in February as he led the league in steals.
However, the Celtics continued to struggle as Pitino failed to achieve meaningful success.
After Boston lost to the Toronto Raptors on March 1, 2000, on a buzzer-beater by Vince Carter, Pitino delivered the memorable "walking through that door" speech, invoking Bird, McHale and Parish, which has been frequently cited over the years as a reality check for organizations wrestling with bygone glory.
He resigned in January 2001.Following the resignation of Rick Pitino, the Celtics saw modest improvement under coach Jim O'Brien.
Paul Pierce matured into an NBA star and was ably complemented by Antoine Walker and the other players acquired over the years.
While the team was 12–21 when Pitino left, O'Brien's record to finish the season was 24–24.
Following the 2000–01 season O'Brien was given the job of head coach on a permanent basis.
As a result of numerous trades, the Celtics had three picks in the 2001 NBA draft.
They selected Joe Johnson, Joe Forte, and Kedrick Brown.
Only Johnson managed to succeed in the NBA, becoming a perennial All-Star after leaving the Celtics.

The Celtics entered the 2001–02 season with low expectations.
The team's success in the latter stages of 2000–01 was largely forgotten, and critics were surprised when the team, along with the New Jersey Nets, surged to the top of the Atlantic Division ahead of the Philadelphia 76ers, who were fresh off a trip to the NBA Finals.
The Celtics won a hard-fought 5-game series with the 76ers in the first round, 3–2.
Pierce scored 46 points in the series-clinching blowout at the Fleet Center.
In the Conference Semifinals, the Celtics defeated the favored Detroit Pistons 4–1.
In their first trip to the Eastern Conference Finals since 1988, the Celtics jumped out to a 2–1 series lead over the Nets, after rallying from 21 points down in the fourth quarter to win Game 3, but would lose the next three games to fall 4–2.In 2003, the Celtics were sold by owner Paul Gaston to Boston Basketball Partners L.L.C., led by H. Irving Grousbeck, Wycliffe Grousbeck and Steve Pagliuca.
The team made it back to the playoffs but were swept by the Nets in the second round, despite bringing Game 4 to double overtime.
Before their elimination, the team hired former Celtics' guard Danny Ainge as general manager, moving Chris Wallace to another position in the organization.
Ainge believed the team had reached its peak and promptly sent Antoine Walker to the Dallas Mavericks (along with Tony Delk).
In return, the Celtics received the often-injured Raef LaFrentz, Chris Mills, Jiří Welsch, and a first-round pick in 2004.
The Celtics made the playoffs, only to be swept in the first round by the Indiana Pacers, losing all 4 games by blowout margins.

==== 2004–2007
: Arrival of Doc Rivers ====
The Celtics were a young team under new coach Doc Rivers during the 2004–05 season, having drafted youngsters Al Jefferson, Delonte West and Tony Allen in the 2004 Draft.
Yet they seemed to have a core of good young players, led by Pierce and rookie Al Jefferson, to go along with a group of able veterans.
The Celtics went 45–37 and won their first Atlantic Division title since 1991–92, receiving a boost from returning star Antoine Walker in mid-season.
The Pacers defeated them in the first round yet again, with the series culminating in an embarrassing 27-point loss in Game 7 at the Fleet Center.
After the season Walker was traded again, this time to the Miami Heat.
Despite Pierce's career season, in which he averaged career-highs in points (26.8), the Celtics missed the playoffs with a 33–49 record, owing largely to a young roster and constant roster shuffling, which saw the likes of Marcus Banks, Ricky Davis and Mark Blount traded for underachieving former first-overall pick Michael Olowokandi and former all-star Wally Szczerbiak.

The Celtics continued to rebuild in the 2006 NBA draft.
The Celtics selected Kentucky point guard Rajon Rondo, who was to become a key piece in the team's revival.
In the second round the Celtics added center Leon Powe.
The 2006–07 season was a gloomy one for the franchise, starting with the death of Red Auerbach at 89.
Auerbach was one of the few remaining people who had been a part of the NBA since its inception in 1946.
The Celtics went 2–22 from late December 2006 through early February 2007 after losing Pierce to injury, the result of a stress reaction in his left foot.
At first, the Celtics received a much needed boost from guard Tony Allen but he tore his ACL and MCL on a needless dunk attempt after the whistle.
The Celtics compiled a record of 24–58, second-worst in the NBA, including a franchise record 18-game losing streak.
At the end of the season, the Celtics, with the second worst record in the NBA, were at least hopeful that they could secure a high draft pick and select either Greg Oden or Kevin Durant to help rebuild the franchise, but the Celtics fell to fifth in the Draft Lottery.

====
2007–2012:
The new "Big Three": Pierce, Allen, and Garnett ====
In the summer of 2007, general manager Danny Ainge made a series of moves that returned the Celtics to prominence.
On draft night, he traded No.
5 pick Jeff Green, Wally Szczerbiak and Delonte West to Seattle for perennial all-star Ray Allen and Seattle's second-round pick (which the team used to select LSU's Glen "Big Baby" Davis).
The Celtics then traded Ryan Gomes, Gerald Green, Al Jefferson, Theo Ratliff, Sebastian Telfair, and a first-round draft pick to the Timberwolves in exchange for superstar power forward Kevin Garnett.
These moves created a new "Big Three" of Pierce, Allen, and Garnett.

In the 2007–08 season, Celtics completed the largest single-season turnaround in NBA history.
The team went 66–16
in the regular season, a 42-game improvement over its 2006–07 record.
However, the team struggled in the early rounds of the playoffs, needing seven games to defeat the Atlanta Hawks in the first round and another seven to defeat the Cleveland Cavaliers in the conference semifinals.
The Celtics then beat the Detroit Pistons in six games in the Eastern Conference Finals, winning two road games.
For the 11th time in league history, and for the first time since 1987, the Celtics and the Lakers faced off in the NBA Finals.
The Celtics won Game One at home 98–88, fueled by strong play by Garnett and Pierce's dramatic comeback from a second-half knee injury.
They won Game Two 108–102 despite nearly blowing a 24-point lead in the fourth quarter.
As the series shifted to Los Angeles, the Lakers stifled Pierce and Garnett in Game Three and won 87–81.
However, the Celtics would overcome a 24-point deficit in Game 4 to win 97–91, making the largest in-game comeback in NBA Finals history.
After again blowing a large lead, the Lakers hung on to win Game 5 103–98, sending the series back to Boston.
In Game 6, the Celtics overpowered the Lakers, winning 131–92 and clinching their 17th NBA title.
Paul Pierce was named Finals MVP.
With the win Celtics set a record for most games a team had ever played in a postseason with 26.The 2008–09 Celtics started off the season at 27–2, the then-best starting record in NBA history.
They also had a franchise record 19-game streak.
After the All-Star Break, Kevin Garnett was injured in a loss against the Utah Jazz and missed the last 25 games of the season.
Garnett was eventually shelved for the playoffs.
The 2009 Celtics still finished with 62 victories, but their playoff run would end against the Magic in the second round.
In 2009, with the return of Garnett from injury and the additions of Rasheed Wallace and Marquis Daniels, the Celtics started the season 23–5 and at one point had the best record in the NBA.
However, Doc Rivers decided to lessen his aging stars' minutes to keep them fresh for the playoffs.
As a result, the Celtics sputtered to an even 27–27 record the rest of the way and finished the 2009–10 regular season with a 50–32 record.
Despite being the fourth seed in the Eastern Conference, the Celtics managed to make the NBA Finals.
Rajon Rondo emerged as a star during postseason play.
For the 12th time, the Celtics faced the Lakers in the Finals.
After taking a 3–2 lead heading into Los Angeles for Game Six, the Celtics appeared poised to win their 18th title.
However, starting center Kendrick Perkins suffered a severe knee injury early in Game Six, and the Celtics went on to lose the series in seven games.

During the 2010 offseason, with Perkins expected to be out until February 2011, the Celtics signed two former All-Star centers, Shaquille O'Neal and Jermaine O'Neal.
Shaquille O'Neal's presence wound up leading to Perkins' departure: the Celtics were 33–10 in
games Perkins had missed during the year due to injury and had a 19–3 record in games when O'Neal played over 20 minutes.
Consequently, Perkins was traded to the Oklahoma City Thunder in February, when the Celtics were 41–14 and led the Eastern Conference despite another rash of injuries.
Following the trade, however, they proceeded to win only 15 of their final 27 games.
They finished with a 56–26 record, sliding to the third seed.
The 2010–11 season still provided three landmarks: The Celtics became the second team to reach 3,000 victories, Paul Pierce became the third Celtic to score 20,000 points (the others are Larry Bird and John Havlicek), and Ray Allen broke the NBA record for most career three-pointers.
The 2011 NBA playoffs started with the Celtics sweeping the New York Knicks 4–0 in the opening round.
In the second round, they were ousted by eventual Eastern Conference champions Miami Heat in five games.
Shaquille O'Neal, limited to 12 minutes in two games of the second round, retired at the end of the season.
The Celtics started the lockout-shortened season 0–3, as Pierce was out with a heel injury.
At the All-Star break, the Celtics were below .500 with a 15–17 record.
However, they were one of the hottest teams in the league after the break, going 24–10
the rest of the year and winning their fifth division title in a row.
The Celtics made the playoffs as the fourth seed in the Eastern Conference.
In the playoffs, the Celtics faced the Atlanta Hawks in the first round, beating them in six games led by strong play from Pierce and Garnett.
In the conference semifinals, the Celtics defeated the 76ers in seven games.
The Celtics faced the Miami Heat in the Eastern Conference Finals, losing in seven games to the eventual NBA champions.

The 2012 off-season started with the Celtics having only six players under contract.
While Kevin Garnett was signed to a new contract, Ray Allen signed with the Miami Heat for less money than the Celtics offered; this move brought the five-year "Big Three" era to a somewhat acrimonious end.
The Celtics finished the season with 41 wins.
The Celtics trailed the New York Knicks 3-0 in the first round of the 2013 NBA playoffs before losing the series in six games.
In Game Six, the Celtics nearly completed a comeback when they went on
a 20–0 run to cut the lead to four.

=== 2013–2017
:
End of the "Big Three" Era and Rebuilding ===
During the off-season, head coach Doc Rivers was allowed to terminate his contract.
He departed the Celtics to coach the Los Angeles Clippers, and the Celtics received a 2015 unprotected first-round pick as compensation.
A few days later, Pierce, Garnett (who waived a no-trade clause), Jason Terry, and D. J. White, were traded to the Brooklyn Nets for Keith Bogans, MarShon Brooks, Kris Humphries, Kris Joseph, Gerald Wallace, and three future first-round draft picks (2014, 2016, 2018), together with the right to swap 2017 first-round picks with Brooklyn.
The deal marked the start of a youth movement for the team.

On July 3, 2013, the Celtics announced that Brad Stevens, the head coach of Butler University, would replace Doc Rivers as head coach.
Halfway through the season, in January, Rajon Rondo made his return and was named the 15th Team Captain in team history, and the team furthered the youth movement by acquiring two draft picks in a three team trade that sent Jordan Crawford and MarShon Brooks to the Golden State Warriors while the Celtics received the Heat center Joel Anthony.
The 2013–14 season marked the Celtics' first missed playoffs since the "Big Three".
The next off-season, the Celtics drafted Marcus Smart with the 6th overall pick and James Young with the 17th overall pick in the 2014 NBA draft, and signed Evan Turner.
The 2014–15 season had several roster moves, the most prominent being Rondo and rookie Dwight Powell traded to the Dallas Mavericks for center Brandan Wright, forward Jae Crowder, veteran point guard Jameer Nelson, and future picks.
A total of 22 players spent time with the Celtics, leading scorer and rebounder
Sullinger suffered a season-ending
left metatarsal stress fracture, and the team was only tenth in the East with 28 games remaining.
However, midseason acquisition Isaiah Thomas helped the team win 22 of their last 34 games, finishing the season with a 40–42 record, enough for the seventh seed in the Eastern Conference Playoffs.
The Celtics were swept by the second seeded Cleveland Cavaliers in the first round.

In the 2015 NBA draft Boston selected Terry Rozier, R.J. Hunter, Jordan Mickey, and Marcus Thornton with the 16th, 28th, 33rd, and 45th selections respectively.
During the off-season, the Celtics signed forward Amir Johnson and traded Gerald Wallace and Chris Babb in exchange for Warriors forward David Lee.
The Celtics finished the 2015–16 NBA season with a 48–34 record, earning the fifth seed in the Eastern Conference.
They played the fourth seed Atlanta Hawks in the first round of the playoffs.
After leading by 3 points in the fourth quarter of Game 1, guard Avery Bradley went down with a hamstring injury, making him sit out for the rest of the series.
The Celtics lost the series 4–2 to the Hawks, ending their season.

On July 8, 2016, the Celtics signed four-time All-Star Al Horford.
The Celtics finished the 2016–17 season with a 53–29 record and clinched the top seed in the Eastern Conference.
After a hip injury ended Thomas' impressive playoff run in game 2 of the Eastern Conference Finals, the Celtics eventually lost to the Cavaliers in five games.

===
2017–present:
The Brown/Tatum era ===
In the 2016 NBA draft, the Celtics selected Jaylen Brown with the third pick.
At the time, he was a tenacious defender with raw athletic ability who is now an elite offensive threat.
For the 2017 NBA draft, the Celtics won the draft lottery, earning them the first pick.
They were projected to select freshman guard Markelle Fultz, but the pick was subsequently traded to the Philadelphia 76ers in exchange for the third pick in the 2017 draft and future picks.
The 76ers would go on to draft Fultz, while the Celtics used the third pick to select freshman forward Jayson Tatum.
Semi Ojeleye, Kadeem Allen, and Jabari Bird were selected with the 37th, 53rd, and 56th selections, respectively, in the second round.
At the start of the off-season, the team signed Tatum and Ante Žižić, among others, with the biggest acquisition being the signing of Gordon Hayward.
On August 22, 2017, the Celtics agreed to a deal that sent Isaiah Thomas, Jae Crowder, Žižić, and the Brooklyn Nets' 2018 first round draft pick to the Cleveland Cavaliers in exchange for Kyrie Irving.
An additional draft pick (Celtics' 2020 second round) was later added to the package from the Celtics to the Cavaliers after doctors revealed that Thomas's injury was more significant than initially anticipated.
By the end of the off-season, only four Celtics' players remained from the 2016–17 team, with Marcus Smart being the longest tenured Celtic from the 2014 NBA draft.
On the team's opening night game in the first quarter against the Cavaliers, Hayward suffered a fractured tibia and dislocated ankle in his left leg, causing him to be ruled out for the rest of the regular season.
Despite the loss, the Celtics went on a 16-game winning streak, which also went down as the fourth-longest winning streak in the teams' history.
The streak started with a 102–92 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers on October 20 and ended on November 22 to the hands of the Miami Heat with a 98–104 loss.
The Celtics finished the year with a 55–27 record, good enough for second place in the Eastern Conference.
In the playoffs, they defeated the Milwaukee Bucks in the First Round in seven games, and continued the feat in the Conference Semifinals by defeating the Philadelphia 76ers in five games before losing to the Cleveland Cavaliers in seven games in the Conference Finals.

The Celtics finished the 2018–19 season with a 49–33 record.
Analysts started questioning team's performance and chances for the championship when the Celtics had a 10–10 record after the first 20 games on November 24, 2018.
The Celtics then won the next eight games improving their record to 18–10.
During the eight-game win streak, the Celtics defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers 128–95, the New York Knicks 128–100, and also defeated the Chicago Bulls by 56 points (133–77), setting a record for the largest margin in a victory in franchise history, while also tying the record for largest victory margin by an away team.
On February 9, 2019, the Celtics lost 129–128 to the Los Angeles Lakers after former Celtic Rajon Rondo hit the first game-winning shot in his NBA career.
The Celtics finished the regular season place fourth in the Eastern Conference.
During an April 7 game, Marcus Smart injured his hip and was ruled out for the rest of the regular season and the first round of the playoffs.
In the 2019 playoffs, the Celtics swept the Indiana Pacers in the first round, and then lost to the Milwaukee Bucks in five games.
The Celtics held four picks in the 2019 NBA draft.
Following a series of transactions, the team landed Romeo Langford with the 14th pick and also added Grant Williams, Carsen Edwards, and Tremont Waters (2020 G-league Rookie of the year).
During the 2019 offseason, Kyrie Irving and Al Horford signed with the Brooklyn Nets and Philadelphia 76ers, respectively.
On June 30, 2019, the Celtics and point guard Kemba Walker agreed to a four-year maximum contract worth $141 million.
On July 6, 2019, the Celtics officially acquired Walker in a sign and trade with the Charlotte Hornets; the Celtics sent guard Terry Rozier and a protected 2020 second-round draft pick to Charlotte in exchange for Walker and a 2020 second-round draft pick.
On July 1, 2019, the Celtics agreed to a two-year contract with center Enes Kanter.
On July 25, 2019, the Celtics agreed to a rookie contract with 7 ft 5 in (2.26 m) center Tacko Fall.
Following the suspension of the 2019–20 NBA season, the Celtics were one of the 22 teams invited to the NBA Bubble to participate in the final 8 games of the regular season.
In the 2020 playoffs, the Celtics swept the Philadelphia 76ers in the first round, beat the Toronto Raptors in a seven-game series, and fell to the Miami Heat in the Eastern Conference Finals in six games.

== Rivalries ==


===
Los Angeles Lakers ===
The rivalry between the Boston Celtics and Los Angeles Lakers involves the two most storied franchises in NBA history.
It has been called the NBA's best rivalry.
The two teams have met a record twelve times in the NBA Finals, starting with their first Finals meeting in 1959.
They would go on to dominate the league in the 1960s and the 1980s, facing each other six times in the 1960s, three times in the 1980s, in 2008, and in 2010.

The rivalry had been less intense since the retirements of Magic Johnson and Larry Bird in the early 1990s, but in 2008 it was renewed as the Celtics and Lakers met in the Finals for the first time since 1987, with the Celtics winning the series in six games.
They faced off once again in the 2010 NBA Finals which the Lakers won in seven games.
The two teams are tied for the highest numbers of championships (17); together, the 34 championships account for almost half of the 74 championships in NBA history.

===
Atlanta Hawks ===
The Celtics–
Hawks rivalry is a rivalry in the Eastern Conference of the National Basketball Association that has lasted for over five decades, although the two teams have played each other since the 1949–50 season, when the then-Tri-Cities Blackhawks joined the NBA as part of the National Basketball League and the Basketball Association of America merger.
However, the Blackhawks could not field a truly competitive team until they moved to St. Louis as the St. Louis Hawks after a four-year stopover at Milwaukee.
The two teams have faced each other eleven times in the NBA Playoffs, four times in the NBA Finals, with the Celtics winning ten of twelve series against the Hawks, including three out of four NBA Finals.
While the Hawks have only defeated the Celtics twice out of eleven series in the NBA Playoffs, they still often managed to make their series with the Celtics memorable.
The rivalry intensified in 2016 with Hawks All-Star Center Al Horford spurning the team and joining the Celtics.
===
Brooklyn Nets ===
The Boston Celtics were once rivals of the New Jersey Nets during the early 2000s due to their respective locations and their burgeoning stars.
The Nets were led by Jason Kidd and Kenyon Martin, while the Celtics were experiencing newfound success behind Paul Pierce and Antoine Walker.
The rivalry began to heat up in the 2002 Eastern Conference Finals, which was preceded by trash talking from the Celtics who claimed Martin was a "fake" tough guy.
Things progressed as the series started, and on-court tensions seemed to spill into the stands.
Celtics' fans berated Kidd and his family with chants of "Wife Beater!"
in response to Kidd's 2001 domestic abuse charge.
When asked about the fan barbs being traded, Kenyon Martin stated, "Our fans hate them, their fans hate us."
Bill Walton said at the time that Nets-Celtics was the "beginning of the next great NBA rivalry" during the Eastern Conference Finals in 2002 with the Nets advancing to the NBA Finals, though New Jersey would go on to sweep Boston in the 2003 playoffs.
In 2012, the year the Nets returned to New York in the borough of Brooklyn, there were indications that the rivalry might be rekindled when an altercation occurred on the court on November 28, resulting in the ejection of Rajon Rondo, Gerald Wallace, and Kris Humphries.
Rondo was suspended for two games in the aftermath, while Wallace and Kevin Garnett were fined.
The story was revisited on December 25, when Wallace grabbed Garnett's shorts and the two had to be broken up by referees and players alike.
However, the rivalry between the Nets and the Celtics appeared significantly cooled off by the June 2013 blockbuster trade that dealt Celtics stars Garnett and Paul Pierce to the Nets in exchange for Wallace, Humphries, and others.
This move was billed as a merger of the two Atlantic Division teams.
Celtics announcer Sean Grande said "It's almost as if you found a great home for these guys.
You couldn't have found a better place.
These guys will be in the New York market, they'll be on a competitive team, they'll stay on national TV.
It's funny, because the enemy of my enemy is my friend.
So with Celtics fans feeling the way they do about the Heat, feeling the way they do about the Knicks, the Nets are going to become almost the second [Boston] team now.
"
The trade would end up crippling the Nets who posted a record of 151–259 following the trade including three consecutive seasons with fewer than 30 wins from 2016 to 2018.
Brooklyn would win just one playoff series with Garnett and Pierce, neither of whom were with the team by the close of the 2014–2015 season.
The Celtics would use Brooklyn's draft picks to acquire Jaylen Brown and Jayson Tatum through the draft in 2016 and 2017 respectively and Kyrie Irving via trade, en route to consecutive appearances in the Eastern Conference Finals in 2017 and 2018.
Irving then left to the Nets in the 2019 Free Agency.

===
Detroit Pistons ===
The rivalry between the Celtics and the Detroit Pistons peaked in the 1980s, featuring players such as Larry Bird, Kevin McHale, Robert Parish, Isiah Thomas, Bill Laimbeer, Dennis Rodman, and Joe Dumars.
These teams met in the NBA playoffs five times in 7 seasons from 1985 to 1991, with the Celtics winning in 1985 and 1987, and the Pistons coming out on top en route to back-to-back Finals appearances in 1988 and their championship seasons of 1989 and 1990.
Led by Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett and Ray Allen in the 2008 Eastern Conference Finals the Celtics defeated the Pistons in 6 games to advance to the NBA Finals where they went on to beat the Lakers also in 6 games.

===
New York Knicks ===
The rivalry between the Celtics and the New York Knicks stems from the location of the teams, both of which are in the NBA's Atlantic division.
It is one of many rivalries between Boston and New York teams.
Boston and New York are also the only two original NBA franchises that have remained in the same city for the duration of their existence.
The teams have played 512 games against each other during the regular season, with the Celtics winning 276 times.
The two teams have also faced each other 61 times during the playoffs, with the Celtics winning 34 times.

===
Philadelphia 76ers ===
The Celtics and the Philadelphia 76ers are the two teams who have the most meetings in the NBA playoffs, playing each other in 19 series, of which the Celtics have won 12.
The 76ers are considered as the Celtics' biggest rival in the Eastern Conference.
The rivalry reached its peak when players Bill Russell and Wilt Chamberlain of the 76ers played each other from 1965 to 1968.
Their play would result in the Celtics not winning every NBA Finals series in the 1960s when the 76ers won in 1967.

===
Washington Wizards ===
One of the most recent and unexpected rivalry that has been created between the Celtics is with the Washington Wizards.
Although both teams had engaged in a fight in 1984, the rivalry intensified during the 2015–16 season in a January regular season game after Jae Crowder was given a technical foul.
Crowder then began to exchange words with then Wizards coach Randy Wittman.
It began to escalate that off-season when the Celtics were trying to sign Al Horford.
It was publicly reported that Jae Crowder emphasized that the Celtics beat the Wizards in all of their meetings that season and should sign with them rather than Washington.
In their first meeting of the 2016–17 season, Wall hit Marcus Smart in the back-court when they were up by 20 late in the 4th quarter.
Wall was hit with a Flagrant 2 foul and was promptly ejected.
Smart immediately got back up and began to scuffle with Wall.
Their words continued even after being separated with Wall telling Smart to meet him out back after the game.
No incident was reported between the two following the game.
In their next meeting, the Celtics won 117–108.
However, after the game Wall and Crowder exchanged words in front of the Wizards bench.
Crowder ended up trying to jab his finger at Wall's nose and Wall tried to fight back with a slap.
Teammates and coaches from both sides had to step in and separate the two teams but the players continued to yell while entering their respective locker rooms.
Police officers had to be on guard between the two locker rooms to ensure no further confrontation.
Otto Porter is quoted as calling the Celtics as dirty.
Isaiah Thomas replied "If playing hard is dirty, then I guess we are a dirty team.
"In
their next game in January, the Wizards wore all black to enter the game.
The notion was that it is similar to the attire of a funeral.
Their decision worked as they defeated the Celtics 123–108.
The two teams would go on to meet in the Conference Semifinals in the 2017 Playoffs.
In Game 1, Markieff Morris landed on Horford's ankle after shooting a jumpshot.
Morris sprained his ankle and had to miss the rest of the game which was a 123–111 loss.
Morris believed that Horford did this intentionally.
In Game 2, Morris retaliated by grabbing Horford by the waist and pushed him into the seats.
In Game 3, Kelly Olynyk set a hard screen on Kelly Oubre.
Olynyk's shoulder hit Oubre in the chin causing him to drop to the floor.
Oubre angrily rose and pushed Olynyk down onto the floor.
Oubre was then assessed a flagrant 2 foul and was ejected while also being suspended for Game 4.
No significant altercations erupted in the rest of the seven game series in which the Celtics would go on to win.
The rivalry has since dissipated as the Celtics have retooled their roster but
their match-ups are still seen as significant as they played on Christmas in 2017.

== Season-by-season record ==
List of the last five seasons completed by the Celtics.
For the full season-by-season history, see List of Boston Celtics seasons.

Note:
GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses,
% =
Winning Percentage;


== Records, retired numbers and awards ==
The Celtics are tied with the Los Angeles Lakers for an NBA record 17 Championships.
Celtics have won 8 in a row, and 11 championships in 13 years.
They also have 56 playoff appearances.
The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame have 45 enshrined players who played for the Celtics, and the franchise has retired 22 jersey numbers, more than any other American sports team.
===
FIBA Hall of Fame ===
FIBA, the body which governs international basketball, has selected two players associated with the Celtics to the FIBA Hall of Fame for contributions to international basketball.

==
Home arenas ==


==
Players ==


===
Current roster ===


===
Retained draft rights ===
The Celtics hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA.
A drafted player is ostensibly either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him, is allowed to sign with any non-NBA teams.
In this case, the team retains the player's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player's contract with the non-NBA team ends.
This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams.

===
Captains ===


===
Franchise leaders ===
Bold denotes still active with team.

Italic denotes still active but not with team.

Points scored (regular season) (as of the end of the 2019–20 season)
Other statistics (regular season) (as of the end of the 2019–20 season)


==
Coaches ==


===
Head coaches ===
There have been 17 head coaches in Celtics' history.
Red Auerbach is the most successful franchise's head coach having won 9 NBA championships with the team.
Celtics' legend Bill Russell took coaching duties from Auerbach and led them to 2 NBA championships while playing and coaching at the same time.
The other two coaches that won 2 NBA titles with the team are Tom Heinsohn and K. C. Jones.
Both Bill Fitch and Doc Rivers led the Celtics to 1 NBA championship the latter being the most recent coach to do so.
Brad Stevens is the team's current head coach.

===
Assistant coaches ===


==
Logos and uniforms ==


===
Logos ===
The Boston Celtics logo since 1968 features a leprechaun spinning a basketball, named Lucky, originally depicted with a large basketball for a background.
It was originally designed by Zang Auerbach, the brother of Celtics head coach Red Auerbach.
Through the 1995–96 season, the logo's only colors were black, white and green.
Then for the 1996–97 season, celebrating the club's 50th anniversary, the logo got a full-color treatment.
Lucky's face and hands were both painted tan, while gold was included on the vest, bow tie and hat, as well as brown on the ball and shillelagh, and black on its pants and shoes.
The Celtics also have various alternative logos, with the most popular being a white shamrock with the letters "Celtics" above it, wrapped in a green circle, which has been used since the 1998–99 season.
The alternate logo is based on logos used by the Celtics before they used the Zang Auerbach leprechaun.
For much of its history, the shamrock was trimmed in gold, as seen in the old team warmup jackets.
A new secondary logo, unveiled in 2014, featured a variation of the leprechaun logo, in silhouette form.

===
Uniforms ===


====
Primary uniforms ====
For much of their history, the Celtics wore green uniforms on the road and white uniforms at home.
The basic template of the current Celtics' uniforms were formalized in the 1950s, and along the way they made a few adjustments in the lettering and stripes.

Among the more notable changes in the uniforms were the switch from serifed to sans-serif block lettering in 1968, the addition of names in 1972, and the incorporation of the three-leaf shamrock logo in 1998.
While the white uniforms remained largely intact, the green uniforms have featured either the city name (1950s–1965; 2014–present) or the team name (1965–2014).

When Nike became the NBA's uniform provider in 2017, they decided to eliminate the "home" and "away" uniform designations.
Thus the white Celtics uniforms became known as the "Association" uniforms while the green uniforms became the "Icon" uniforms.
Both sets are now used regardless of home and road games.
In January 2017, the Celtics signed a multi-year deal with General Electric where they became the "exclusive Data and Analytics partner" for the team.
As part of the deal, GE agreed to pay the Celtics more than $7 million per year to have the uniforms with a GE logo prominently placed on the left shoulder of jerseys in green and white.
This was the first time a corporate logo were placed on the game uniforms.
Along with the GE logo, the Nike logo now emblazons the right shoulder of the Celtics' uniforms.

In November 2020, the Celtics signed a multi-year deal with Vistaprint who became the main jersey sponsor of the team.

====
Alternate uniforms ====
From 2005 to 2017, the Celtics wore alternate green uniforms with black lettering and trim featuring the word "Boston" on the front side.
One noticeable difference in the alternate uniforms were the black panels with a green shamrock, reminiscent of the original Celtics uniforms worn in the late 1940s.
A gray uniform set was also used from 2014 to 2017.
Dubbed "Parquet Pride", the uniforms featured sleeves (a prominent figure in Adidas' NBA uniforms), white letters with green trim, the silhouetted leprechaun logo on the shorts, the shamrock logo on the left leg, and a parquet-like pattern on the sides.
For 2017 and beyond, the Celtics will wear black "Statement" uniforms (labeled by Nike in reference to the league's third jerseys).
Its features include green letters with white trim, green panels with black shamrock and white player names.
The team name is prominently featured in front.
Starting in 2021, the "Statement" uniform would feature the Jordan Brand logo, a feature previously exclusive to the Charlotte Hornets uniforms.

====
Special uniforms ====
Between 2006 and 2017, the Celtics wore special St. Patrick's Day uniforms.
The initial uniforms were worn from 2006 to 2013 and it strongly resembled their regular green uniforms save for gold and white trim and the city name in front.
For 2014 and 2015, the uniforms were sleeved, replaced the city name in front in favor of the team name, and now resembled their green/black alternates.
In 2016 and 2017, the uniforms were again sleeveless and featured the city name in front, but kept the previous striping.

During the NBA Europe Live Tour prior to the 2007–08 season, the Celtics used the alternate road jerseys in their game against the Toronto Raptors in Rome, except that the words "Boston" on the front side of the jersey and the shamrock on the shorts and on the reverse side of the jersey contained the green, white and red tricolors of the Italian flag.
In the second game in London, the regular road jerseys featured a patch containing the Union Jack.

At the 2008–09 season opener against the Cleveland Cavaliers, the Celtics wore a modified version of their home uniforms, accented with gold, to commemorate last season's championship team.

The Celtics have also worn special edition Christmas Day uniforms since the 2008–09 season.
For the first four games, they wore their regular green uniforms modified with the NBA logo inside a snowflake.
Then in the 2012–13 season, they wore monochrome uniforms with green lettering trimmed in white.
For the 2016–17 season, the Celtics wore a special green uniform with a more ornate script lettering, but without the additional striping.

Starting with the 2017–18 season, the Celtics wore special edition "City" uniforms designed by Nike.
Their first "City" uniforms were in gray and featured a pattern of the parquet floor throughout, a green shamrock with white trim on the left leg, green letters with white trim, Red Auerbach's signature near the uniform tag, and a portion of the 2008 championship banner on the beltline.
For the 2018–19 season, the Celtics wore white "City" uniforms with green letters and shamrocks trimmed in gold.
It also has Red Auerbach's signature near the uniform tag and a gold-trimmed alternate Celtics logo on the beltline.
In addition, the Celtics wore an "Earned" edition uniform exclusive only to the 16 teams that made the 2018 NBA playoffs.
Their rendition is a palette swap of the "City" uniforms with a green base and gold letters and shamrocks with white trim.
The Celtics' "City" uniform for the 2019–20 season featured a green base and a stylized "Boston" wordmark and numbers in gold with black trim.
A Celtic knot in the shape of a shamrock adorn the beltline.
The 2020–21 Celtics' "City" uniform was patterned after the 17 championship banners that adorn the TD Garden rafters.
The uniform, which is white with thick green stripes, features the full name in Futura Condensed stacked in front, and Red Auerbach's signature and quote "The Boston Celtics are not a basketball team.
They're a way of life."
appears above the manufacturer's tag.
The Celtics also released a second "Earned" uniform after qualifying in the 2020 NBA playoffs; this design features a dark green base with Celtic and lime green striping, and the letters were rendered in Celtic green with white trim.
====
Memorial patches ====
During the 2006–07 season, the Celtics wore a commemorative patch of a black shamrock with the nickname "Red" in green letters on the right top of the jersey in remembrance of Red Auerbach, who died shortly prior to the beginning of the season.
The team has honored deceased members of the Celtics family with a commemorative black band on the left shoulder strap of the jersey.
It has been featured ten times to date: Walter Brown (1964–65), Bob Schmertz (1975–76), Joan Cohen (1989–90), Johnny Most and Reggie Lewis (1993–94), Dorothy Auerbach (2000–01), Dennis Johnson (2006–07), Jim Loscutoff (2015–16), Jo Jo White (2017–18), John Havlicek (2018–19), Tom Heinsohn, and K. C. Jones (both 2020–21).
During the 2019–20 season, the Celtics wore a black band in honor of two people who had never been part of the Celtics organization; former NBA commissioner David Stern and former Los Angeles Lakers star Kobe Bryant.
The Celtics have also worn a black band for reasons not directly related to the franchise, such as the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013, and the death of Isaiah Thomas' younger sister during the 2017 NBA playoffs.

====
Uniform traditions ====
The team also had the tradition of wearing black sneakers through most of their history, except from the late 1960s to the mid-1980s, when they wore green sneakers.
According to legend, Celtics patriarch Red Auerbach had a problem with the white sneakers, claiming that the white sneakers can easily get dirty; hence starting a long tradition with the black sneakers.
But prior to the 2003–04 season, current Celtics general manager Danny Ainge and captain Paul Pierce suggested wearing white sneakers, in due part to a growing number of teams wearing black sneakers.
Auerbach gladly accepted and the white sneakers have remained since on home games.
They still wore the black sneakers on away games, but in the 2008–09 season, they wore white sneakers with green and gold accents while wearing their St. Patrick's Day jerseys on the road.
Most recently, when the Celtics play on Christmas Day, they wore white or green sneakers with red and gold accents.
Since the 2009–10 season, the NBA relaxed its rules on specified sneaker colors, and Celtics players are now seen wearing custom-made and personalized sneakers at home and on the road, although for the most part they wear either green, white or black sneakers.

The Celtics were the only team to wear warmup jackets with the player names on the back.
During the 1980s, this style was dominant in most NBA warmup jackets, but by the late 1990s, this style gradually declined.
The Celtics, however, kept the design in keeping with tradition, before discontinuing the practice after the 2011–12 season in favor of a templated jacket design common to all 30 teams.

==
Television and radio ==
NBC Sports Boston is the Boston Celtics' main television outlet, having aired its games since 1981 when the station was known as PRISM New England.
In 1983, it rebranded as SportsChannel New England.
Like all the other SportsChannel networks, the New England channel was rebranded as Fox Sports New England when former owner Cablevision entered into a partnership with Liberty Media and News Corporation in 1998.
Comcast purchased Cablevision's original network stake in 2001, then acquired the remaining stake in what was now FSN New England in 2007 and rebranded the network as Comcast SportsNet New England.
In 2017, all CSN networks (including CSN New England) were renamed as NBC Sports Regional Networks in reference to Comcast's current ownership of NBCUniversal.

Mike Gorman provides the play-by-play with former Celtics' player Brian Scalabrine serving as analyst.

All Celtics games are heard on radio through Beasley Broadcast Group's WBZ-FM (98.5, otherwise branded as "The Sports Hub"), with play-by-play from Sean Grande and color commentary from Cedric Maxwell, a deal in place since the 2013–14 season.

==
Management ==


===
Ownership history ===
*
Sale not approved by NBA


===
Team presidents ===


===
General managers ===


===
Other ===


==
Medical staff ==


===
Team physicians ===


===
Team athletic trainers ===


==
Boston Celtics Communications ==
Boston Celtics Communications is a broadcasting division of the Celtics.
In September 1989, the team through its owners, Don Gaston, Alan N. Cohen and Paul Dupee acquired radio station WEEI (on the 590 frequency now known as WEZE) from CBS Radio, as well as Fox affiliated station WFXT from Fox Television Stations.
The sale was completed on May 10, 1990.

CBS discontinued its association with WEEI that year, and they instead joined ABC Direction.
WEEI, which had already carried Celtics broadcasts since 1987, expanded its sports programming to cover the Boston Bruins and certain Sports Byline USA and CBS Radio Sports broadcasts.
However, WEEI was sold off in 1994, and would later reemerge as the name of an ESPN-radio affiliate, Sportsradio 850 WEEI.

WFXT continued to carry the Fox network programming; however, during the team's ownership of the station, they broadcast the team's games and they also had a news share agreement with regional cable news channel New England Cable News in 1993.
WFXT meanwhile was reacquired by Fox Television Stations group, and once again was Fox owned-and-operated from 1995.

== See also ==
The Auerbach Center, official Celtics practice facility (opened June 2018)
The Sports Museum (at TD Garden)
Reebok Pro Summer League, a former summer league operated by the Celtics
List of Boston Celtics Head Coaches
Boston Celtics Draft History
Celtics-Lakers
Rivalry
Boston Celtics All-Time Roster
Boston Garden
TD Garden
Boston Celtics
Radio Network
Sports in Boston


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
This is a list of oldest and youngest National Basketball Association players.
The National Basketball Association (NBA) is a men's professional basketball league in North America.
The NBA was founded in 1946 as the Basketball Association of America (BAA).
The league adopted its current name at the start of the 1949–50 season when it merged with the National Basketball League (NBL).The oldest person ever to play in the NBA
was Nat Hickey, a coach who activated himself as a player for a game two days before his 46th birthday.
The youngest player ever to play in the NBA was Andrew Bynum, who played his first game only six days after his 18th birthday.
The oldest active player is Miami Heat power forward Udonis Haslem, who is currently 40 years old.
The youngest active player in the NBA is Oklahoma City Thunder forward Aleksej Pokuševski, the 17th overall pick in the 2020 NBA draft, who is currently 19 years old and was born on December 26, 2001.

==
Key ==


==
Oldest players ==
The oldest player ever to play in the NBA was Nat Hickey who played one game in the 1947–48 season when he was 45 years and 363 days old.
Hickey, who was coaching the Providence Steamrollers at the time, decided to activate himself and played in a game for the Steamrollers.
In his first game as a player for the Steamrollers, he missed all six of his shot attempts and only scored two points from three free throw attempts; he only played in one more game before retiring as a player two days shy of his 46th birthday.
The second-oldest player is Kevin Willis.
Willis, who had played 20 seasons (excluding the 1988–89 season he missed due to injury) in the league before he sat out the 2005–06 season and earned a contract with the Dallas Mavericks on April 2, 2007.
He then played 5 games for the Mavericks at the age of 44.
The third-oldest player is Hall of Famer Robert Parish.
Parish, who played with the Boston Celtics in the 1980s, played his last season with the Chicago Bulls at the age of 43.
He played in 1,611 regular season games during his 21-year career, more than any other player in NBA history.
When the Bulls won the 1997 Finals, Parish became the oldest player ever to win the NBA championship.
There are currently 30 players who played in the NBA after they turned 40.

The oldest active player is Udonis Haslem, who is now 40 years old.
Haslem played his first game in the 2003–04 NBA season and is playing his 18th season.
Haslem is the only player born before 1984 who is still active and under contract with an NBA team.

===
All-time ===
===
Active ===


==
Youngest players ==
NBA players usually come from U.S. college basketball.
In the past, a college player had to complete his four-year college eligibility before he could enter the league through the NBA Draft or as a free agent.
In the 1970s, the league began to allow college underclassmen and high school players to enter the league.
However, the trend of drafting high school players only began in the mid 1990s.
This has led to more younger players entering the league directly after high school graduation.
In 2005, the league and the players' union agreed on a new collective bargaining agreement that includes a minimum age limit which requires that players who wish to enter the league must be at least 19 years old on December 31 of the year of the draft, and at least one year removed from high school.
International players who did not play college basketball also have to be at least 19 years old on the same date to be able to play in the NBA.
Despite a trend toward drafting younger players, the NBA has a higher average age than it had in the 1980s.
However, since the NBA introduced the minimum age limit in 2005, the league's average age has decreased in the past few seasons.
The youngest player to ever play in the NBA was Andrew Bynum who played his first game at the age of 18 years and 6 days old.
Bynum, who was also the youngest player ever selected in the NBA Draft, went into the NBA straight out of high school.
Jermaine O'Neal and Kobe Bryant, both drafted in 1996, were the second- and third-youngest players.
Serbian Darko Miličić was the youngest player ever to play in an NBA Finals game.
He played for the Detroit Pistons in Game 3 of the 2004 Finals at the age of 18 years and 356 days old.
The Pistons won the 2004 Finals and Miličić
became the youngest player ever to win the NBA championship, being only five days away from his 19th birthday at the time.
There are currently 28 players who played in the NBA before they turned 19.
Nineteen of them came to the league straight out of high school, while 7 of them are international players who never played basketball in the U.S. high schools or colleges before they entered the NBA, and only one player, Devin Booker, played one year of college before entering the NBA all while remaining 18 years old throughout the process.

===
All-time ===
===
Active ===


==
See also ==
List of National Basketball Association career games played leaders
List of National Basketball Association seasons played leaders
List of oldest professional athletes by sport


==
References ==
General
Specific
William P. Egan is an American venture capitalist.
He is the founder and general partner at Alta Communications, a venture capital firm, and Marion Equity Partners, a private equity firm, both based in Boston, Massachusetts.
Egan also founded Alta's predecessor firm, Burr, Egan, Deleage & Co.
(BEDCO) in 1979 and has identified and backed several of America's leading growth companies in the information technology, life sciences, and communications industries.
Egan is also a limited partner, along with fellow BEDCO founder Craig Burr, at Nobska Partners, also in Boston.

==
Early life and education ==
Egan received his B.A. from Fairfield University in 1967 where he was a member of the Fairfield University Men's Rugby Football Club.

He then received an MBA from The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1969.

==
Career ==
Egan was previously a partner at TA Associates.
He began his career as a manager of Venture Capital for New England Enterprise Capital Corporation.
Egan is past president and chairman of the National Venture Capital Association and serves on several boards of directors of communications, cable, and information technology companies, as well as the biopharmaceutical company Cephalon.
Egan is a long-standing member of the Fairfield University board of trustees and was honored for his contributions to the university with an Alumni Service Award in 1995.
The Egan Chapel of St. Ignatius Loyola is named in honor of Egan's parents, John and Marion Egan.
Egan's gifts to the university is the largest donation received by Fairfield to date.
The nursing school at Fairfield University was renamed due to this donation.
Egan is a trustee of University of Pennsylvania and a graduate board member of The Wharton School.

His success in the venture capital industry has a chapter dedicated to his story in the book
Done Deals: Venture Capitalists Tell Their Stories.

(pp.
269–278, by Udayan Gupta, Harvard Business School Press, ISBN 978-0-87584-938-6)
Egan is an owner of the Boston Celtics through his partnership with Boston Basketball Partners LLC.Eganis on the board for The Wharton Center for Leadership and Change Management.

==
Personal life ==
He and his wife Jacayln Egan (formerly Jacalyn Conklin) have donated large sums to Fairfield University and divide their time between Boston, Massachusetts, and Newport, Rhode Island.
Egan and his wife are part-owners of the Boston Celtics of the National Basketball Association through his partnership with Boston Basketball Partners, LLC.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Alta Communications Profile
Marion Equity Partners Profile
William Egan biography at Nobska Partners
BusinessWeek Executive Profile
Fairfield University Alumni Service Award Profile
Michael Perry James (born August 18, 1990) is an American professional basketball player for the Brooklyn Nets of the National Basketball Association (NBA).
He was a high school basketball standout playing for Grant High School in Portland, and played college basketball for Eastern Arizona College and Lamar University.
He's also best known for being the first player in NBA history to go from a two-way contract to a regular contract, all while never being sent down to the NBA G League in the process.

==
Early life ==
James, the son of Lisa Behrndt, was born and raised in Portland, Oregon.
While in Portland, he played basketball for Grant High School under coach Tony Broadous.
In 2007–08, as a senior, he was ranked the No.
3 Player in the state and No.
184 overall.
He was also only recruited by Division III universities at the time.
James averaged 15 points, 4 rebounds and 3 steals per game.
The team went on to win the 2008 Oregon state championship, defeating Oregon City for it.

==
College career ==


===
Eastern Arizona College ===
James started his college career at Eastern Arizona College, a national junior college where he played under coach Maurice Leitzke.
In his first year, he averaged 20 points per game shooting 42 percent overall, 33.3 percent from three-point range and 78 percent free throws.
He was named all-conference and all-region teams as well as being ranked No.
40 best junior college player by Rivals.com.
As a sophomore, he was the fourth leading scorer in the NJCAA Division
I recording 26 points per game.
In addition he contributed 5 rebounds, 4 assists and 2 steals.

===
Lamar University ===
In 2010, James transferred to an NCAA Division I school, Lamar University in Beaumont, Texas.
Here he played under coach Steve Roccaforte in 2010–11 and under coach Pat Knight for the 2011–12 NCAA season.
Playing a little over 18 minutes a game, he averaged 12.5 points, 2.4 rebounds, 1.8 assists and 1.1 steals.
He led the team in scoring, even though he only started two out of twenty-four games for the season.
He included a 52-point game on January 4, 2011 against Louisiana College, which Lamar Cardinals won 114–62, breaking the previous record of 50 set by Mike Oliver in 1980.
In addition, he broke Lamar University's Montagne Center record for most points scored in a single game with 52, field goals made with 18, field goal attempts with 35, three-pointers made with 11 and three-pointer attempts with 21.
In his senior season (2011–12), he averaged 17.1 points, 3.2 rebounds, 2 assists and 1.6 steals per game shooting 45.3 percent overall.
One notable game of his was against the 2012 NCAA champion University of Kentucky, where he scored 29 points.
His senior season ended in the first round of the 2012 NCAA Tournament with a loss against Vermont.
By the end of his season, he was named All-Southland First Team, Southland Tournament MVP and Southland Conference Player of the Week three times in four weeks.
He had majored in general studies during his time there.

==
Professional career ==


===
International career ===
In August 2012, James signed with Zagreb of Croatia for the 2012–13 season.
In December 2012, he left Zagreb.
In February 2013, he signed with Hapoel Galil Elyon of Israeli second tier league for the rest of the season.

In July 2013, James signed with Paffoni Omegna of Italy under their DNA Silver Basket league name for the 2013–14 season.
That season, they finished in fourth place for the DNA Silver portion of the league.

In August 2014, James signed a one-year contract with Kolossos Rodou of Greece.
On December 2, 2014, he left Kolossos and signed with the Spanish club Laboral Kutxa Baskonia of the Liga ACB for the rest of the season.
In July 2015, James joined the Phoenix Suns for the 2015 NBA Summer League.
That same month, after a successful Summer League performance, he re-signed with Baskonia for one more season.
During that season, Saski Baskonia would reach the EuroLeague Final Four, losing to the Fenerbahçe Ülker and the PBC Lokomotiv Kuban for a fourth-place performance.

On July 3, 2016, James signed with Panathinaikos in Greece for the 2016–17 season.
That year saw him perform his best work in the EuroLeague yet.
He helped the Panathinaikos win both the Greek Cup title and the Greek Basket League championship in the 2016–17 season.
He was later named the Greek Basket League's Most Spectacular Player that year as well.

===
Phoenix Suns (2017) ===
On July 3, 2017, James signed with the Phoenix Suns and joined the team for the 2017 NBA Summer League.
In the 2017 Summer League, he led the team in points and assists, averaging 20.5 points off of 53.8% shooting and 5.0 assists per game, as well as record 5.2 rebounds and 1.8 steals in 33.2 minutes per game for the six games the Suns played during the event.
James' contract with the team was a two-way affiliate deal, their first in franchise history.
He also became the first player to sign a two-way contract in the NBA after spending multiple years overseas in international leagues.
While James was eligible to split his time between Phoenix and their Northern Arizona Suns G League affiliate, he would never utilize the G League's abilities during his two-way contract.
James made his NBA debut on October 18, 2017 against the Portland Trail Blazers, recording 12 points that night.
James became the first player to sign a two-way contract to also start with the team that signed him on, as he became the starting point guard on the October 23 game against the Sacramento Kings under interim head coach Jay Triano.
That night, James recorded 18 points and a team-high 7 assists in a 117–115 win over the Sacramento Kings.
During his first four games of the season, James recorded at least 10 or more points with increased minute production in each game.
On Halloween night, James recorded his first 20-point game with 24 points scored and four steals recorded in a 122–114 win over the Brooklyn Nets.
On November 26, 2017, he scored a career-high 26 points in a 119–108 loss to the Minnesota Timberwolves.
James would play his last game under his original two-way contract on December 5 against the Toronto Raptors, recording 10 points in a 126–113 loss that night.
During this time, James would be considered the biggest success story to date revolving around the NBA's newest implemented system.
On December 7, 2017, James contract with the Suns was converted to a one-year regular season deal, after Phoenix waived Derrick Jones Jr.
However, on December 23, 2017, over two weeks after signing his one-year deal, James was waived by the Suns.

===
New Orleans Pelicans (2018) ===
On January 14, 2018, the New Orleans Pelicans signed James to a new two-way contract.
Much like his tenure with Phoenix, James was never assigned to the NBA G League during his two-way contract with New Orleans.
On February 10, 2018, he was waived by the Pelicans after appearing in four games.

=== Return to Panathinaikos ===
On February 13, 2018, Panathinaikos announced the return of James.
He started the season playing shooting guard for the Greens, alongside Nick Calathes.
On March 22, James scored the game winning shot with 5.8 seconds left against Maccabi Tel Aviv.
He finished the game with 27 points.

=== Olimpia Milano (2018–2019) ===
On July 13, 2018, Olimpia Milano signed James to a multi-year contract.
Over 30 games of the 2018–19 EuroLeague season
, he averaged league-high 19.8 points, along with 6.8 assists and 3.8 rebounds per game.
He won the Alphonso Ford Trophy, given to the top scorer of the EuroLeague.
But despite the statistically excellent season, the incoming Olimpia Milano coach, Ettore Messina, declared Mike James wouldn't be part of the 2019–20 team plans.
James and the Italian team eventually reached an agreement and mutually parted ways on July 29, 2019.

===
CSKA Moscow (2019–2021) ===
On August 5, 2019, James signed a one-year contract with CSKA Moscow of the VTB United League and the EuroLeague.
===
Brooklyn Nets (2021–present) ===
On April 23, 2021, James signed a 10-day contract with the Brooklyn Nets.
On the same day of his signing, James debuted for the Nets against the Boston Celtics, logging eight points on 3-of-8 shooting from the field and 1-of-1
from three to go along with two rebounds and two assists across 21 minutes in a 109–104 win.

==
Career statistics ==


===
EuroLeague ===
===
NBA ===
====
Regular season ====


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Career statistics and player information from NBA.com and Basketball-Reference.com
Lamar Cardinals bio
Mike James at acb.com (in Spanish)
Mike James at esake.gr (in Greek)
Mike James at euroleague.net
Simon Jordan (born 24 September 1968) is an English businessman who made his fortune in the mobile phone industry.
In 2000, he purchased Crystal Palace Football Club and remained chairman of the club until administration in early 2010.
In 2002, he co-founded and funded the car magazine Octane, selling his 50% shareholding in 2006.
In 2006, he opened the restaurant Club Bar and Dining in London's Warwick Street, Jordan sold it to the Ottolenghi Group in 2010 who renamed the restaurant Nopi.

==
Early life ==
Jordan was an accomplished young footballer signing schoolboy forms with both Chelsea and Crystal Palace
He has described himself as being "good enough to be a professional, but mentally I wasn't interested.
You often get players who have bags of talent, but not the required application.
I was one of them.
"
All this happened whilst he was at Purley High School for Boys in Old Coulsdon.
His father Peter Jordan used to play for Crystal Palace F.C., although never appeared for the first team.

In the late 1980s or early 1990s he was invited by a friend, James Wright, to join him in his business, Wright Connections, selling mobile phones via adverts placed in Loot and Exchange and Mart.
Jordan and Wright rented an office from Delta 5, another mobile phone dealer, and the business lasted for a short time before changing its name to Corporate Cellular Ltd (CCL).
This business was not considered to be a great success either
and Jordan left in the early 1990s.

In 1994, Jordan and Andrew Briggs set up their own mobile phone retail company called the Pocket Phone Shop.
They started with £30,000 and a 3,500 sq ft (330 m2) unit in Slough, and after forming an agreement with service provider Astec, the business flourished.

By 2000 the Pocket Phone Shop had 208 outlets nationwide, employed 1100 staff and was forecasting a turnover of £102m for the 1999/00 financial year.
Pocket Phone Shop was seen as one of the main rivals in its sector to leader The Carphone Warehouse – the organisation that Jordan and Briggs both worked for before launching their own venture.

At its peak the Pocket Phone Shop enlisted the services of Ulrika Jonsson to promote its new store openings, but the relationship turned sour when Jordan sued Jonsson claiming she had not fulfilled her promotional activities.
It is unknown what the outcome of this action was.

==
Crystal Palace ==
Jordan and Briggs left Pocket Phone Shop in 2000 after selling the company to One2One for reportedly circa £80m
That year, Singapore financier Jerry Lim bought Crystal Palace Football Club, a club that had been hours from extinction, from the administrators, and immediately sold the club to Jordan.
Then aged 32
, Jordan immediately appointed himself chairman, making him the youngest chairman of a Football League club.
Having been born "100 yards from the ground" Jordan had been a lifelong fan, and he noted "I have been prepared to put my money into something I truly believe in, and my first job is to turn the fortunes of this club around."
Jordan also vowed that the club would be promoted to the Premiership, within five years.
In fact they achieved this in four years
However, despite owning the club, Jordan did not own the ground, which belonged to Ron Noades, who had been chairman until 1998.

Jordan was a very high profile, controversial and outspoken owner, holding very strong views on player and manager conduct, as well as the inefficiencies of the Football Industry
Jordan caused a storm in July 2008 by announcing his plans to sell the club and move away from football altogether, stating he had "been disillusioned with football for a long time".
This occurred following a Football Association tribunal's decision on the John Bostock transfer to Tottenham Hotspur left Jordan to declare "It's a panel of halfwits".
Palace were awarded only £700k, having valued Bostock at £5m.

No potential buyers came forward to make a bid for Palace, and the club have become embroiled in deep financial trouble.
Rumours persist of personal financial difficulties as Jordan faced "cashflow" problems relating to wage payments at the club in November and December 2009.
On 26 January 2010 Crystal Palace went into administration and Jordan's ownership came to an end.

===
Managers ===
Jordan gained a reputation as a manager-killer early in his Palace reign, though this changed as his reign progressed.
Between 2000 and 2003 no fewer than the following five managers departed the manager's post: Steve Coppell (August 2000), Alan Smith (April 2001), Steve Bruce (November 2001), Trevor Francis (April 2003), and Steve Kember (November 2003).
Of these, only Coppell and Bruce left of their own accord, with Coppell's departure brought about by a personality clash and Bruce's resignation leading to a high court case.
Iain Dowie was appointed in December 2003 and the club bounded up the table from the relegation zone to win promotion in May 2004, beating West Ham United at Cardiff's Millennium Stadium in the play-off final, fulfilling Jordan's promise of promotion within five years.
However, the club remained in the Premier League for just one season before being narrowly relegated in 2005.
In May 2006, having accepted Dowie and Jordan had differences but the same goal, Dowie left the club by mutual consent.
However, towards the end of the month Dowie joined Charlton Athletic as their new manager, prompting Jordan to issue a legal writ against him, claiming Dowie had lied about his reasons for departure.

Peter Taylor, an ex-Palace player was installed on 13 June 2006.
However, his reign would last just 16 months, ending on 8 October 2007 with the sack.
Jordan stated he wanted Taylor to be remembered as a good player for Palace rather than a bad manager.
On 11 October at a press conference he unveiled Neil Warnock as the new manager, which failed to surprise many as the two were reported to be good friends.
Jordan's choice appeared to have been a good one, since the club embarked on a superb run of form that saw them move from the relegation places into the 2007–08 season play-offs, but the relationship between the pair ended in a dispute after Warnock left the club to join Queens Park Rangers following the Eagles' entering administration.

===
Dowie Court Case ===
Jordan succeeded in his High Court battle against Dowie, with The Hon.
Mr Justice
Tugendhat ruling that Dowie had lied when negotiating his way out of his contract at Palace.
Dowie won the right to appeal against that decision, leading to it being heard in the Court of Appeal.
In April 2008, Crystal Palace F.C settled out of court with Iain Dowie, and issued the following statement.

"Prior to appeal being heard a mutually satisfactory settlement of all matters has now been reached on terms acceptable to Crystal Palace Football Club
"


===
Selhurst Park ===
In October 2006 Jordan claimed to have purchased the freehold to Selhurst Park from Ron Noades for £12m, using an investment mechanism that kept his identity secret.
He claimed the obfuscation had been necessary due to the "very, very difficult" relationship he had with Noades.
Palace were now seen to be safe for the future.
It later transpired that the freehold had been bought by the company Selhurst Park Limited, which was owned by another company.
A maze of ownership finally showed the legal ownership being 60% Paul Kemsley and 40% a venture capital company owned by HBOS.
Simon Jordan has since offered the freehold for sale with the intention of taking back a long lease on the property.
Simon Jordan's exact position on the freehold was unknown, although Jordan later agreed a 25-year lease for Selhurst Park.
Selhurst Park Limited later went into administration (separate from Crystal Palace Football Club's own administration), leading to the stadium being purchased by the CPFC 2010 consortium, led by Steve Parish at the same time as the consortium buying Crystal Palace F.C.
== Career as a columnist ==
As of the 2005–06 season, Jordan wrote a fortnightly column for The Observer newspaper.
A particular column, written by Jordan, led to him being charged by the Football Association with bringing the game into disrepute.
The case was heard on 7 December 2005 with a charge of improper conduct proven.
Jordan was given a suspended fine of £10,000.

But, backed by other journalists and by media advisor Max Clifford, Jordan indicated his intention to appeal, stating "I didn't start this fight, but it's not something I'm going to walk away from.
"
His appeal was heard on 10 April, and was rejected by the three-member panel, two votes to one.

Jordan commented in his 16 March column in The Observer that he and his advisors were "now considering taking this through the courts.
Any legal action I take won't be about wasting time or resources on a petty point of principle – it'd be an attempt to see the whole thing unravel."

Jordan also used the column to highlight the inconsistencies in the F.A. disciplinary panel.

The same panel decided no disciplinary action would be taken against Paul Jewell, manager of Wigan, who had been charged on the basis of making comments similar to Jordan's.

Jordan described the compliance process as being "based on mood", noting: "There's no frame of reference, no consistency – and, yes, it's personal.
It amounts to me not being able to say a referee is incompetent while others can, using the same language.
"Jordan, Simon (16 April 2006).
"
Shameless angst of papers who promote gambling".
The Observer.
London.

Whilst awaiting the outcome of the appeal, it appeared as though the events were having an effect upon him, as on 26 February 2006 it was reported by The News of the World newspaper that Jordan was tired of being chairman, and wanted to go back to being a regular fan.
He has since reported in his 5 March 2006 Observer column that he was misquoted and that he had simply restated what he had said eight months before,
that "I don't plan to stay at Palace or in football all my life.
I'd like to return to the stands 'as quickly as possible', but I won't sell until I've secured a sound legacy – Premiership football and a new ground"Jordan did not continue writing for the Observer in the 2006–07 season.

He started writing again with  his own column entitled ‘ Simon Jordan’s Big opinion ‘ in the Sun from August 2019 to November 2020, highlighting amongst other things ,  the big issues and challenges facing football during the pandemic


==
Television and Radio ==
Aside from appearances in football-related programmes, Jordan's first major TV appearance was in early 2007, appearing in Fortune:
Million Pound Giveaway for ITV along with fellow millionaires the Ann Summers managing director Jacqueline Gold (daughter of West Ham chairman David Gold,; entrepreneur Duncan Bannatyne; MOBO Awards founder Kanya King; and former Conservative Member of Parliament-
turned-novelist Jeffrey Archer.

In May 2019, Jordan appeared on BBC's Question Time.

In 2018, Jordan began a relationship with the leading sports Broadcaster TalkSPORT, featuring on shows with Danny Kelly and being nominated as sports pundit of the year in 2019
in 2020 after the success of his appearances, he joined JIm White on one of Talksports flagship
shows  


==
Film production ==
In 2006 Jordan part funded and exec - produced ‘ Sweeney Todd’ a film featuring Ray Winstone and Tom Hardy
In 2008, Jordan produced the film version of Telstar based on the play about the life of record producer Joe Meek.
The film followed Jordan's production of the play of the same title at London's New Ambassadors Theatre.
The film was solely funded by Jordan and featured Kevin Spacey, James Corden and JJ Feild.
It was reasonably well-received by critics opening in 45 screens in the UK and selling releases in 32 countries


==
Author ==
In 2012 Simon Jordan published an account of his life,  an autobiography "Be Careful What You Wish For".
The book recounts his business success in the cellular phone business, but mostly focuses on his time as the youngest ever owner of a professional football club as chairman of Crystal Palace Football Club.

The book was a critical and commercial success , it was published by Random House achieved an award at The British Sport books awards and was a finalist in the William Hill sports awards,


==
Personal life ==
Jordan dated a series of high profile women in the early 2000’s including Alex Best ( former wife of George Best ) and model Sophie Anderton
It was reported by the Daily Mirror's website in January 2006 that Jordan had bought girlfriend Meg Mathews (the former wife of Oasis guitarist Noel Gallagher)
a Porsche worth £100,000 for Christmas, along with a personalised number plate, and that the couple had been together since July 2005.
However Jordan gave details of the ending of this relationship in March 2006, admitting that it had been Mathews who had ended the relationship, while attacking the News of the World, which had reported that Jordan had "ditched Mathews" the week before.
Jordan wrote of the matter in his Observer column, "the piece belittled someone who has been very important to me over the last nine months.
"In
June 2006, a woman accused of stalking Jordan, Tara Stout, 36, posed in a Union Jack bikini and high heels, then put on tiny shorts and a revealing top to face Bow Street Magistrates Court in Central London over a case regarding Jordan.
The pair also faced each other in court in October of that year, when Stout was found guilty of harassing Jordan.
Jordan has a daughter with his ex-partner Suzi Walker, a girl called Cameron, born in January 2008.On 21 March 2018 at about 13:00 GMT, Jordan was robbed of his £100,000 watch during a gunpoint robbery in Croydon, South London.
Jordan is in a relationship with businesswoman and broadcaster Michelle Dewberry, and in July 2020, the couple had a baby boy.
Jordan has resided in Marbella and London.

==
References ==
The men's national basketball team of the United States won the gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics  in Beijing, China.
They qualified for the Olympics by winning the FIBA American Championships 2007 held in Las Vegas, Nevada.
The team was nicknamed the "Redeem Team", a play on an alternative name for the legendary 1992 squad that was called the "Dream Team", and a reference to the fact that the United States came away with disappointing Bronze Medals during the 2004 Summer Olympics and the 2006 FIBA World Championship.
Kobe Bryant was named the team captain and Mike Krzyzewski was named the head coach of the 2008 team."
An ESPN program, Road to Redemption, followed the team's preparations.

The United States defeated Spain 118–107 in the final to win the gold.
Dwyane Wade was the leading scorer for team USA averaging 16 points per game.
The withdrawal of all major stars prior to the 2004 Olympics and an embarrassing performance of those young and inexperienced who were called to replace them prompted USA Basketball to change its approach to the formation of a national team.
As a result, the organization initiated a long-term project that saw NBA players committing to play for the team long before the start of the 2008 Olympics (instead of hastily accepting invitations merely weeks prior to the start of the tournament).
Many 2008 Olympians participated in the 2007 Americas championships, where the US won gold, thus qualifying for the Olympics.
The final roster featured eleven NBA All-Stars, a Hall of Fame coach, and two NBA MVPs.

==
Record ==


===
Preliminary Round ===
The team competed in Group B of the Preliminary Round


===
Tournament bracket ===


==
Roster ==
The following is the United States roster in the men's basketball tournament of the 2008 Summer Olympics.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
USA Basketball, official site
The expansion of the National Basketball Association has happened several times in the league's history since it began play in 1946.
The most recent examples of the expansion of the NBA are the Charlotte Hornets and Miami Heat in 1988, Minnesota Timberwolves and Orlando Magic in 1989, Toronto Raptors and Vancouver Grizzlies in 1995 (who relocated to Memphis in 2001), and New Orleans Pelicans in 2002.The fewest teams the NBA has ever had was eight teams in both 1947–48 and 1955–56.

==
Early years: 1946–1966 ==
There was a lot of expansion and moving of organizations in the early years of the NBA.
During this twenty year time period is when notable franchises entered the NBA like the Syracuse Nationals (now the Philadelphia 76ers), the Philadelphia Warriors (now the Golden State Warriors), Minneapolis Lakers (now the Los Angeles Lakers), and Rochester Royals (now the Sacramento Kings).

During this time period the league experienced its first substantial growth, although it was short-lived, as the league was back down to nine teams by 1961.

==
Expansion Era: 1966–1980 ==
During a span of fifteen years, 14 of the 30 current teams were brought into the league, beginning with the Chicago Bulls in 1966.
The San Diego Rockets (now Houston Rockets) and Seattle SuperSonics (now Oklahoma City Thunder) joined one year later, with the Phoenix Suns and Milwaukee Bucks following them in 1968.
After two more seasons, in 1970, the Buffalo Braves (now Los Angeles Clippers), Cleveland Cavaliers, and Portland Trail Blazers all began play.
The New Orleans Jazz (now Utah Jazz) became the league's 18th franchise in 1974.

Following the 1975–76 season, the NBA merged with the American Basketball Association, a competing league that had operated for nine seasons beginning in 1967.
With the ABA–NBA merger, four ABA teams became members of the NBA: the Denver Nuggets, Indiana Pacers, New York Nets (became New Jersey Nets, now Brooklyn Nets) and the San Antonio Spurs.
In 1980, the Dallas Mavericks were created as the league's 23rd member.

==
Modern expansion: 1988 to 2004 ==
The NBA has added seven more franchises from 1988 to present, the latest in 2004.
Four teams were created in 1988 and 1989:
the original Charlotte Hornets (now New Orleans Pelicans), the Miami Heat and Orlando Magic, both in Florida, and the Minnesota Timberwolves.
In 1995 the NBA created two new teams in Canada, its first since the inaugural 1946–47 season with one in Toronto; namely, the Toronto Raptors and Vancouver Grizzlies (now Memphis Grizzlies).
The league expanded to 30 with the present Charlotte Hornets in 2004, initially as the Charlotte Bobcats.

==
Team timeline ==
See Timeline for the history of teams who participated in the NBA.
==
Expansion drafts ==
There have been 11 expansion drafts in NBA history.

===
Merger with ABA ===


==
Possible expansion cities ==


===
Seattle ===
Seattle is the most populous metropolitan area and the second-largest American media market without an NBA franchise.
The city previously hosted the Seattle SuperSonics from the 1967–68 season until the 2007–08 season, after which the team was sold and relocated to Oklahoma City.
The sale and relocation stemmed from team and local officials being unable to come to an agreement to build a new arena for the team in the Seattle area.
Seattle is widely considered the leading candidate to host a potential NBA expansion team.
It was reported in 2013 that the Sacramento Kings were close to moving their franchise to Seattle, but the NBA Board of Owners voted against relocation, thus ensuring that the Kings would remain in Sacramento, California.
As of 2018, the only statements that had been made by the NBA about it returning to Seattle had been that it would likely be through league expansion.
On December 3, 2018, the renovation of what was once the KeyArena (now Climate Pledge Arena) began, bringing the arena to current NBA standards and in preparation for the upcoming National Hockey League (NHL) expansion franchise, the Seattle Kraken.
In late 2020, NBA commissioner Adam Silver said that Seattle is "at the top of the list" for when the NBA next "invariably" expands.
In addition to the NHL expansion Kraken, Seattle is currently home to the Seattle Seahawks of the National Football League (NFL), Seattle Mariners of Major League Baseball (MLB), Seattle Sounders FC of Major League Soccer (MLS), and Seattle Storm of the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA).
===
Las Vegas ===
Las Vegas has long been rumored as a potential destination for a future NBA franchise.
The city already hosts the NBA Summer League, which as of 2018, all league teams participate in.

The 2007 NBA All-Star Game took place in the city at the Thomas & Mack Center on the campus of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
The arena is home to the UNLV Runnin' Rebels team of NCAA Division
I's Mountain West Conference (MW).In 2001
, Las Vegas was included in the list of cities
the Vancouver Grizzlies were considering relocating to, before the team ultimately chose to move to Memphis, Tennessee to become the Memphis Grizzlies.
T-Mobile Arena, opened in 2017 and home of the National Hockey League (NHL)'s
Vegas Golden Knights, has been suggested as a potential destination for a future franchise in the city.
Las Vegas mayor Carolyn Goodman has been a vocal supporter of landing an NBA team for the city, including personally contacting NBA commissioner Adam Silver in early 2021.
In addition to the NHL's Golden Knights, who began play in 2017, Las Vegas is also home to the National Football League (NFL)'s Las Vegas Raiders, who relocated to the city in 2020.

===
San Diego ===
San Diego is the most populous city and second-most populous metropolitan area (after Seattle) in the United States without an NBA franchise.
San Diego is also part of the San Diego–Tijuana transborder metropolitan area, home to an estimated 5.6 million residents as of 2020.
The city hosts three NCAA Division
I men's basketball programs: the San Diego State Aztecs of the Mountain West Conference (MW), the San Diego Toreros of the West Coast Conference (WCC) and the UC San Diego Tritons of the Big West Conference (BWC).
San Diego has been widely regarded as one of the most under-served pro sports markets in the United States, a view that gained additional traction following the 2017 departure of the National Football League (NFL)'s Chargers to Los Angeles.
The city currently hosts only Major League Baseball (MLB)'s San Diego Padres among major professional sports leagues.

San Diego's history with professional basketball spans multiple teams, all encompassed within an 18 year period from 1967 to 1984.
The city hosted the NBA's San Diego Rockets (now Houston Rockets) from 1967 to 1971, the American Basketball Association (ABA)'s San Diego Conquistadors/Sails (defunct) from 1972 to 1975, and the NBA's San Diego Clippers (now Los Angeles Clippers) from 1978 to 1984.
All three teams' time in the city were cut short due to complications surrounding the San Diego Sports Arena in combination with ownership issues.

The Rockets, who joined the NBA as an expansion team in 1967, were purchased and relocated to Houston, Texas following four seasons in San Diego after founding owner Robert Breitbard encountered financial turmoil due to a tax-assessment issue surrounding the San Diego Sports Arena, which he had developed and also owned the land lease for.
The tax issue led to the arena's two tenants, the Rockets and original San Diego Gulls hockey team (also owned by Breitbard), to be served an eviction notice in 1970, just three years after the arena opened.
Breitbard turned down at least 14 out-of-town offers to buy the team, hoping to keep it in San Diego, but without another large arena in the San Diego area, the tax issue ultimately forced Breitbard to sell the team to the Houston ownership group in a move the NBA hurriedly approved, fearing the franchise might otherwise fold.
The 1971 NBA All-Star Game was played in the city at the San Diego Sports Arena, where the Rockets hosted the game just months before being sold and relocated.

The Conquistadors (later Sails), were the first and only expansion team of the American Basketball Association (ABA), joining in 1972.
The team was forced to play its first two seasons at a pair of small 3,200 seat venues, Peterson Gymnasium then Golden Hall, due to a feud between team owner Leonard Bloom and the new San Diego Sports Arena operator Peter Graham, who had lost out to Bloom for the rights to the expansion franchise.
The feud was finally resolved prior to the team's third season, allowing it to move to the Sports Arena.
The franchise, newly rebranded as the Sails, was abruptly folded shortly after beginning its fourth season in 1975 after ownership learned the team was to be shut out of the upcoming ABA
–NBA merger, reportedly at the insistence of then-Los Angeles Lakers owner Jack Kent Cooke.
Cooke had feuded with the San Diego franchise's ownership over the Conquistadors’ 1973 signing of Wilt Chamberlain away from the Lakers to be a player-coach, which led to a legal dispute that resulted in Lakers ownership successfully suing Chamberlain and relegating him to only coaching duties with the Conquistadors.
The Clippers, who had relocated from Buffalo, New York (where they were known as the Buffalo Braves), were purchased by Los Angeles developer Donald Sterling in 1981 after their third season in San Diego.
The team played three more seasons in San Diego that were mired by persistent attempts by Sterling to relocate the team to Los Angeles.
Sterling was officially denied permission by the NBA to move the team to Los Angeles in both 1982 and 1984.
After the 1984 rejection, Sterling moved the team to Los Angeles anyway, triggering a lawsuit filed by the NBA in federal court against Sterling, which aimed to return the Clippers to San Diego at threat of the league dissolving the franchise.
Sterling ultimately prevailed over the league after a counter-suit and the team did not return to San Diego.
San Diego also hosted the Golden State Warriors for six games (initially planned for more) during the 1971–72 NBA season following the Rockets departure to Houston.
The Warriors notably changed their name from "San Francisco" to "Golden State" prior to the season as the team was searching for a new home arena and looked to split the season between the San Francisco Bay Area and San Diego before committing to a new permanent home.
The team ultimately stayed in the Bay Area, settling full-time in Oakland the following season.
In 1994, the Minnesota Timberwolves nearly relocated to San Diego to play in a proposed new downtown arena before the City of Minneapolis agreed to purchase the team's arena, Target Center, with $80 million in public bonds to help the team out of financial trouble.
In 2001, the Vancouver Grizzlies, before moving to Memphis to become the Memphis Grizzlies, listed San Diego among the cities it was considering relocating to.
Longtime NBA commissioner David Stern, when asked about the potential return of the NBA to San Diego, routinely underscored the need for a new arena in the region for it to be considered for a franchise.
In 2016, responding to reports of a potential new arena in downtown San Diego, Bob Newman, president of AEG Facilities, stated “I think as far as the future is concerned, we’re as excited about a future arena in San Diego as we are any market in the world.
"On
August 29, 2020, following a competitive proposal selection process, mayor Kevin Faulconer announced that city officials had selected a development team to build a new privately-funded sports arena and entertainment district at the site of the San Diego Sports Arena in the city's Midway District.
In January of 2021, new mayor Todd Gloria, on the topic of the new arena, stated "we would welcome the NBA’s interest."
He continued by saying "...
this project is not dependent on recruiting new professional sports.
This is a world-class entertainment (venue) for San Diegans".

===
Louisville ===
Louisville, Kentucky has attempted to attract an NBA team several times, including the Buffalo Braves in 1978, the Cleveland Cavaliers in 1983, and the Houston Rockets, Charlotte Hornets, and Vancouver Grizzlies in the early 2000s.
The Grizzlies in particular came very close to relocating to Louisville, with Louisville being the other finalist city before the team chose Memphis, Tennessee, where they are now known as the Memphis Grizzlies.
Louisville has two basketball arenas with capacities in line with current NBA arenas, each of which is currently home to an NCAA Division I basketball team.
The downtown KFC Yum!
Center, which opened in 2010, holds 22,090 and hosts the Louisville Cardinals of the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC).
Freedom Hall, opened in 1956 (though renovated several times), holds 18,252 and hosts the Bellarmine Knights of the Atlantic Sun Conference (ASUN), who made the jump to Division I in 2020.
Both arenas have hosted well-attended NBA exhibition games.
Louisville previously hosted major professional basketball with the Kentucky Colonels of the American Basketball Association (ABA) from 1967 to 1976, the entire duration of the league.
The team folded when it was left out of the ABA–NBA merger.
During their nine seasons playing at Freedom Hall, the Colonels won the most games and had the highest winning percentage of any franchise in the league.
The team won the ABA Finals in 1975.
===
Vancouver ===
Vancouver in Canada is the third-largest Canadian city and has a metropolitan area population of 2.6 million as of 2021.
Vancouver previously hosted the Vancouver Grizzlies, who began play as an NBA expansion team in 1995 along with the Toronto Raptors in the league's first expansion into Canada.
The team played at General Motors Place (now known as Rogers Arena) and was sold and relocated to Memphis, Tennessee in 2001 after experiencing financial difficulty and poor play throughout most of its six seasons in Vancouver.
The franchise is now known as the Memphis Grizzlies.

The city is currently host to the National Hockey League (NHL)'s Vancouver Canucks and Major League Soccer (MLS)'s Vancouver Whitecaps FC.
===
Montreal ===
Montreal in Canada is the second-largest Canadian city and is one of the largest markets in North America without an NBA franchise.
It has a metropolitan population of 4 million and has an arena suitable for basketball, the Bell Centre, which can hold up to 22,000 attendees.
In addition, the city has regularly hosted the Toronto Raptors' preseason games.
In 2018, a group of local businesspeople led by Michael Fortier announced their intention of seeking investors for an expansion team.
Montreal currently hosts the National Hockey League (NHL)'s Montreal Canadiens and Major League Soccer (MLS)'s CF Montréal.
===
Kansas City ===
Kansas City, Missouri previously hosted the Kansas City Kings from 1972 to 1985 (including three years where the team was shared with Omaha, Nebraska) until they moved to Sacramento, California, where they are now known as the Sacramento Kings.

Kansas City has a larger media market than current NBA cities
Milwaukee, Oklahoma City, New Orleans, and Memphis.
The city has the T-Mobile Center, an arena opened in 2007 that seats 18,972.
It has hosted the Big 12 men's basketball tournament and both the men's and women's NCAA Division
I men's basketball tournament games.
The city is also home to the College Basketball Hall of Fame.

Kansas City is currently host of the National Football League (NFL)'s Kansas City Chiefs, Major League Baseball (MLB)'s
Kansas City Royals, and Major League Soccer (MLS)'s Sporting Kansas City.
===
Pittsburgh ===
Pittsburgh has a modern arena, PPG Paints Arena (which opened in 2010), that holds over 19,000 for basketball.
It was rumored for a short time that the Detroit Pistons were moving to Pittsburgh, and Pittsburgh was one of the cities mentioned by David Stern as a possible relocation site.
Pittsburgh has a long basketball tradition with college programs
Pitt, Duquesne, and Robert Morris in the area.

Pittsburgh previously hosted the Pittsburgh Pipers/Condors of the American Basketball Association (ABA) for the 1967–68 season and from 1969 to 1972
(the franchise spent the 1968–69 season in Minnesota).
The Pipers won the ABA Finals in 1968.
The city has also hosted the 1995 CBA finalist Pittsburgh Piranhas, the Pittsburgh Rens of the ABL and the Pittsburgh Ironmen of the BAA.

Pittsburgh currently hosts three major professional sports teams: the National Hockey League (NHL)'s Pittsburgh Penguins (who are the primary tenants of PPG Paints Arena), the National Football League (NFL)'s Pittsburgh Steelers, and Major League Baseball (MLB)'s Pittsburgh Pirates.

===
Hampton Roads, Virginia ===
The Hampton Roads metropolitan area in Virginia has no major league sports team, but in August 2017, there was a proposal to bring an NBA team to the area's largest city, Virginia Beach whenever a sports arena is approved and built to host the team in the future.
The region previously hosted the Virginia Squires of the American Basketball Association (ABA) from 1970 to 1976.

===
Mexico City ===
Since 1992, the NBA Global Games have had NBA games hosted in different places around the world, with Palacio de los Deportes in Mexico City (the capital and most populous city in Mexico) being one of the venues for hosting preseason games and regular season games.
The arena has a capacity of over 20,000.

On December 7, 2017, reports stated that the NBA would put a NBA G League team in the city.
Commissioner Adam Silver also made a statement that the NBA had been in discussions to open an NBA Academy in that city for Latin American and Caribbean players.
The team is scheduled to begin play in the 2021–22 NBA G League season.

==
Teams ==
The NBA originated in 1946 with 11 teams, and through a sequence of team expansions, reductions, and relocations currently consists of 30 teams.
The United States is home to 29 teams and one is located in Canada.

In the following table it shows current NBA teams that are participating in the 2020–21 NBA season, in which city they are located, when the club was founded, joined the NBA, number of times relocated and times the franchise name has changed.

===
Current ===
Notes:


===
Former ===
== See also ==
List of defunct National Basketball Association teams
List of relocated National Basketball Association teams
Timeline of the National Basketball Association


==
References ==
The USA women's national under-17 basketball team is the women's basketball team, administered by USA Basketball, that represents the United States in international under-17 and under-16
(under age 17 and under age 16) women's basketball competitions, consisting mainly of the FIBA Americas Under-16 Championship for Women and FIBA Under-17 World Championship for Women.
These events replaced the USA Basketball Women's Youth Development Festival.

The usual sequence is for the U16 team to play in a regional championship in one year, with the top three qualifying teams being invited to a World Championship in the following year, as the U17 team.
The first FIBA Americas U16 Championship For Women was held in 2009.

The qualifying teams were invited to the 2010 FIBA U17 World Championship for Women held in France.

The events are on a two-year cycle, with U16 events in 2009 and 2011, and the corresponding U17 events in 2010 and 2012.

The U16 team becomes the U17 team, with largely the same players and coaches, although invitations are not automatic and changes can occur.

==
Record ==
2009
U16:
1st 
2010 U17:
1st 
2011
U16:
1st 
2012
U17:
1st 
2013
U16:
1st 
2014 U17:
1st 
2015 U16: 3rd 
2016 U17:
3rd 


== 2011
U16 results ==
The USA team opened the 2011 FIBA Americas U16 Championship in Mexico City  with a game against Brazil on Monday, 13 June.
Although the USA team started the game with a 6–0 run, the team from Brazil responded, and held a 34–31 lead at halftime.
The USA team held Brazil to eight points in the third period to retake the lead.
The USA squad held on to win the first game with a score of 71–54.
Mercedes Russell, from Springfield High School in Springfield Oregon, set USA single game records for points and rebounds, with 21 and 15 respectively.
The USA team faced the team from Argentina on the following day.
The score was close for the early part of the game, with both teams tied at nine points apiece, then a lead by Argentina at 14–13, and a lead by the US at 17–16.
The USA put on a 17–0 run in the second quarter to take a large lead, and continued on to a win with a score of  82–46.
Rebecca Greenwell from Owensboro Catholic High School in Owensboro
Kentucky was the leading scorer with 22 points.
The USA team faced Venezuela on the following day, Wednesday.
The USA team opened up an early lead, and held the Venezuela team to single digit scoring for the first three periods.
The USA team won with a final score of 114–32.
Rebecca Greenwell tied with Stephanie Mavunga from Brownsburg High School in Indianapolis Indiana for the scoring lead; each player had 18 points.
The win qualified the team for the medal rounds.
After a day off, the USA team faced Puerto Rico in the semifinal game.
The USA team jumped out to a ten-point margin in the first quarter, but a 23–0 run in the second quarter produced a commanding lead that would not be challenged.
The USA won, with a final score of 99–51.
Rebecca Greenwell repeated as the scoring leader, with 20 points.
The gold medal game on Saturday was a rematch between the US and first round opponent Brazil.
While the earlier game had been close at the half, in this game, the USA outscored Brazil 19–8 in the first period, and held a 21-point lead by halftime.
The USA went on to win the game, the gold medal and a n invitation to the 2012 world championships with a score of 73–40.
Jannah Tucker's seven steals set a USA U16 single game record, eclipsing the previous record of five steals in a game.
Rebecca Greenwell shared tournament MVP honors with Izabella Frederico Sangalli of Brazil.

==
2012
U17 results ==
The 2012 U17 World Championship was held in Amsterdam 17–26 August 2012.
The USA squad underwent training at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida between 28 May and 1 June, then re-assembled at the U.S. Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado from the first through the eighth of August.
The team then flew to Caorle, Italy for more training, including exhibition games against some of the teams.
The team then traveled to Amsterdam, for the World Championships.

===
Preliminary round ===
The twelve qualifying teams are separated into two groups, with six teams in each group.

The first five rounds are played as a round-robin, which each team playing all five of the other teams in their group.
The preliminary rounds were scheduled for 17—22 August, with 20 August as an off day.

The first game for the USA team was against South Korea.
Although South Korea tried to utilize a full-court press, the USA team was able to break the press, and scored 72 points in the first half.
Rebecca Greenwell and Brianna Turner each scored 20 or more points, while Linnae Harper set a USA U17 record with five steals.

Mercedes Russell scored 17 points on perfect shooting from the field, hitting all eight of her field goal attempt.
The USA won 131–89.The second preliminary round game was against Canada.
The game was close at first, with the USA team holding a six-point lead at the end of the first quarter, 18–12.
In the second quarter,  Diamond DeShields scored eleven of her game total 29 points to help extend the USA lead.
The USA team held Canada to 21% shooting, and ended up with an 86—47 victory.
In addition to her team high 29 points, DeShields also had five steals, tying the USA U17 record set the day before.
The third game was against Italy.
The USA team had five scorers in double digits, lead by Rebecca Greenwell with 16 points.
The USA team held the Italian team to under 17% field goal shooting for the game, leading to an 83–43 victory.
The USA team started slow against Belgium, holding only a four-point lead at the end of the first quarter.
Although they opened up the lead to 16 points by halftime, the Belgian team cut the lead back to eight in the third period.
The USA team responded with an 11–4 run to extend the lead to 15, then broke open the game in the fourth quarter, and won by thirty points
80–50.
Diamond DeShields had a double-double with 14 points and 11 rebounds, while Linnae Harper broke her own steals record by swiping seven in the game.
The team hit 7 of 11 three-point attempts to set a record for three-point shooting.
The USA team had little trouble with Mali in the final game of the preliminary round.
Four bench players had more minutes than the starter with e most minutes, but the USA team still managed to set a record for the largest margin of victory in U17 history, admittedly brief, as it only goes back to 2010.
The final score was 98–28.
===
Quarterfinals ===
The USA advanced to the quarterfinals with a game against the fourth place team in Group B, Australia.
The USA team scored first, but Australia at on an 11–1 run to take a seven-point lead.
The Australian team still lead by five at the end of the first quarter.
The USA team out-scored the Aussies
22–13 in the second period, but this left them with only a four-point margin at halftime.
The USA team extended the margin in the third quarter, and again in the fourth, ending up with a win 89–68.
The USA did not shoot well, hitting only a third of their shots, but blocked 16 shots, a USA U17 record, and Linnae Harper broke her own steals record with eight.
The win advances the USA team to the semi-finals against Canada, a team they beat earlier in the preliminary rounds.

===
Semifinals ===
The semifinal game against Canada resembled the quarterfinal game in many respects.
The USA scored the first three points, then gave up a run to give up the lead.
The USA team shot poorly, again hitting a third of their shots, but garnered 23 steals, lead by Harper's seven.
They forced the Canadians into 31 turnovers, and ended up with an 84–59 win, in a game in which every USA player scored.
The win sets up the gold medal game against Spain.

===
Finals ===
The gold medal game matched up the US with Spain.
The opening of the game looked headed toward a blowout.
The USA had a 22–8 lead at the end of the first quarter.
However, the team from Spain did not quit, and out-scored the US in the second quarter.
They were unable to take the lead, but cut the margin to single digits.
The game continued to see-saw, with the USA opening up a large lead, then Spain responding and trimming the margin to single digits.
Spain was unable to close the gap, and the USA ended up earning the gold medal with a 75–62 win.

The MVP of the Tournament was presented to Diamond DeShields.
Teammate Linnae Harper was also named to the All Tournament team.

== 2013
U16 results ==
The 2013 FIBA Americas U16 Championship was held in Cancun, Mexico.
In the opening game, the USA team took on Brazil.
They scored the first eight points of the game, and went on to open up a commanding lead.
The USA won 76–20, with Asia Durr scoring 20 points.
During one stretch starting at the end of the first quarter, and extending into the second, the team scored 21 consecutive points.
In the second game, the USA faced the team from Argentina.
Asia Durr again led all scorers, with 23 points.
Crystal Dangerfield scored 16  on 7 of 9 shooting.
DeJanae Boykin had a double-double with 12 points and 12 rebounds.
The USA team had a 23-point lead at halftime, but outscored their opponents 38–6
in the third period to leave no doubt as to the outcome, winning easily, 98–28.

In the last game of preliminary round play, the USA faced Costa Rica.
The USA completely out matched their opponents, with seven players reaching double figures, led by Katie Lou Samuelson's 20 points.
Costa Rica held a brief lead at 4–2, but the USA team scored the nest 33 points to put the game away.
The final score was 106–19.
The win secured the USA position in the 2014 FIBA U17 World Championship, because the top four finishers in the U16 event are qualifiers.

===
Semifinals ===
The USA faced the host team, Mexico in the semis.
Mexico started out with an early lead, up 5–4 in the second minute, but the USA team then scored the next 25 points.
Three players shared top scoring honors, each with 16 points: Lauren Cox, Arike Ogunbowale and  Katie Lou Samuelson.
The final score was 101–29.
===
Finals ===
In the first four games, the outcome was all but decided by the end of the first quarter.
In the gold medal game against Canada, the results would be very different.
Canada entered the game with a 4–0 record, the same as the USA team.
The game started with low scoring, neither team managing to reach double digits in the quarter.
At the end of the first quarter the teams were tied 9–9.
The scoring picked up in the second quarter, but by both teams.
The USA team, after hitting only 3 of their first 16 field goal attempts, went on a 10–0 run to take an eight-point lead, but Canada did not fold, and responded to tie the game.
The teams were tied at 27 points each at halftime.
The teams traded baskets early in the third period, but then the USA went on a 22–0 run to take a large lead.
The USA extended the lead until it reached 38 points in the fourth quarter.
Canada outscored the USA over the final minutes, but the game was out of reach, and the USA went on to win the game 82–48, and the gold medal.
Asia Durr was named the tournament MVP.
She had set three single game records for the U16 tournament, including most points, 26, most steals, 8, and most field goal attempts 22.
Teammate Katie Lou Samuelson also set a record.
She hit 8 three-pointers on only eight attempts in the final game, to set a record for three-pointers made and three-point shooting percentage for a game.

==
2014
U17 results ==
The 2014 FIBA U17 World Championship For Women were held in Klatovy and Plzeň, Czech Republic.
Prior to the official matches, some teams played friendlies in Nogent-sur-Seine, France.

===
Exhibitions ===
The USA team took on China in a match on 20 June 2014.
The game was close at the end of the first quarter, with the USA holding a six-point lead, 23–17.
The USA extended the lead at halftime to 15 points.
In the second half, the USA team continued to extend the lead, and ended the game with a 40-point victory, 89–49.
The five starters for the USA squad all scored in double digits, led by Arike Ogunbowale with 16 points.
The USA took on Canada in the second exhibition.
The game began as a close match, with the USA holding only a three-point lead at halftime, 33–30.
In the third period, the USA held Canada to nine points, and extended the lead, then stepped up defensively and offensively in the fourth period, outscoring Canada 31–6 to win the game 80–45.
Joyner Holmes recorded a double-double with 14 points and 11 rebounds.
The third and final exhibition was against the host team, France.
The opening period was close, with the USA holding on to a slim lead, 18–15.
The USA outscored France in the second period by 20–8, to take a large lead at halftime.
The USA hit 47% of their shots in the first half while holding France to % shooting.
These numbers would almost reverse in the second half, with the USA shooting under 30% and France hitting 57% of their shots.
The halftime lead of 15 points was cut to only two points at the beginning of the last period.
France outscored the US in the final period to win the game
78–72.

===
Preliminary round ===
The USA faced China in the first game of the preliminary round.
The two teams had played each other in a friendly match the week before in France.
The USA shot poorly, hitting under 30% of their shots in the first half, but defense helped the USA team hold China to four points in the opening quarter.
China did better ant
he second quarter, but was only able to cut the lad to seven points.
The offense started working for the US in the third quarter, when the USA scored 25 points, and the USA went on to win
69–41.
Katie Lou Samuelson, who had not played in any of the exhibition games, tied a USA U17 record for three-pointers attempted, hitting four of ten attempts.
Samuelson led all scorers with 22 points, while Lauren Cox led the team in rebounds with 12.The second opening round game was against France, a team that had beaten the USA a week earlier.
This time the result was very different.
The USA scored first, never trailed, and went on to a convincing 88–40 win.
The team shot better than they had the previous day, hitting 46% of their shots, and holding France to 28% shooting.
The USA outscored France in each quarter, but especially in the final quarter scoring 26 points and holding France to a single point.
Samuelson was the leading scorer with 17 points, while Asia Durr led the team in assist with four, and scored 14 points.
Sabrina Ionescu was the leading rebounder with six rebounds and led the team in steals with four.
Early in the final game of the opening round, the USA scored 22 consecutive points against Mali to set the tone for the game.
The USA only allowed six points in the first quarter, then improved to allowing only four in the second quarter, and only gave up three in the third period.
By then, the outcome was not in doubt, and the USA went on to win
78–22.
Joyner Holmes had a double-double with 12 points and 11 rebounds.

===
Medal rounds ===
The USA faced Canada in the quarter finals.
The teams were familiar with each other, as they had played in an exhibition  in France a week earlier.
The game started slowly, with Canada holding an early 5–3 lead, when Ogunbowale scored seven straight points as part of a 13–0 run to open up a USA lead.
Samuelson hit back to back three-pointers in the second quarter and the USA held a comfortable 41–14 lead at the half.
After a strong third quarter, the team from Canada came back and outscored the US in the final period, but by then the game was out of reach.
The USA won
86–45.
Joyner Holmes was the leading scorer with 24 points.
In the semi-final game against Hungary, the USA team gave up 26 points in the first quarter, but still managed to end the quarter with a six-point lead, largely due to six three-pointers hit by Samuelson, a USA Women’s U17 record.
The second period was lower scoring, with the USA scoring 14 to Hungary's 13.
In the third and fourth periods, the USA extended the lead, ending with a 91–63 win.
Samuelson was the leading scorer with 25 points, but Asia Durr led the team with 24 efficiency points, with 14 scoring points, along with three steals, four rebounds and a team leading six assists.
Kristine Anigwe recorded a double-double with 14 rebounds and 14 points.
In the gold medal game, both the US and Spain entered the game undefeated.
The USA started well, opening up an early 7–2 lead, but Spain came back strong.
The lead changed hands in the first half, with the USA holding on to a five-point lead at halftime.
The USA scored the first six points of the second half to push the lead to double digits, but Spain cut the lead back to just two points at the end of the third period.
Spain hit three-pointers in the final period and took the lead; the game was tied at 71 points each late in the game.
The USA team outscored Spain by just 6–4 over the remaining time to win the game and the gold medal.
Spain's Ángela Salvadores scored 40 points for her team and was awarded the tournament MVP honors, but it wasn't quite enough.
USA's Lauren Cox scored 20 points, while the team set a USA U17 record for blocked shots, with eight.
USA’s Joyner Holmes and Katie Lou Samuelson were named to the all-tournament team.

== 2015 U16 results ==
The 2015 FIBA Americas U16 Championship was held in  Puebla, Mexico.
Eight teams from North, South and Central America qualified for the event, which will crown a champion for the event, and that team will be automatically qualified for the U17 World Championship in 2017.
===
Preliminary round ===
USA team faced Argentina in their first game.
The USA team started out slowly, but led Argentina 17–8 by the end of the first quarter.
The USA team outscored Argentina in each of the four quarters, and ended up winning 80–48.
Alexis Morris and Andre Espinoza-Hunter shared high scorer honors with 16 points each Valencia Myers was the leading rebounder with eight rebounds.
All 12 players participated with every player earning at least 10 minutes.
In the second game, the USA team faced Honduras.
The team started out even slower than they did against Argentina falling behind early and ending the first quarter with a one-point deficit
13–12.
They came alive in the second quarter outscoring Honduras 26–7.
That opened up a largely
they would never relinquish an end of the game with the win
86–41.
Honesty Scott-Grayson was the leading scorer for the US, with 18 points.
Desireé Caldwell recorded 10 assists, which is a USA Women’s U16 record.
The third game was against the host team Mexico.
The host team started with a very early lead 5–2, but Alexis Morris would hit a three as the start of a 9–0 run to open up a lead for the USA.
Morris would go on to score 15 points in the game.
USA had a small lead at the end of the first quarter which they extended in the second
but the third quarter with an outscore the host
32–13 put the game out of reach.
Destiny Littleton was the leading scorer for the US with 17 points.
Aquira DeCosta ad a double double with 10 points and 12 rebounds.
The final score, in favor of the US, was 85–44, which advances the USA team to the medal rounds.

===
Medal rounds ===
The USA team took on Brazil in the semifinals.
The USA team fell behind early and was as many as 22 point behind.
They worked even the score and got to within six points in the fourth.
But could not close the gap and lost 73–63.
By virtue of the top four finish in the event the team automatically qualifies for the 2016 FIBA U17 World Championship.
The bronze medal game was a rematch between the US and Mexico
a team the USA had beaten earlier.
This time would be no different although the margin of victory was larger.
The USA team jumped to a 22–6 lead in the first quarter and outscored the opponents and each quarter including a 10–0 fourth-quarter.
The final score was 81–24 in favor of the USA team.

==
2016
U17 results ==
The 2015 FIBA U17 World Championship was held in Zaragoza, Spain from June 22 to July 2, 2016.
Sixteen countries, including the USA competed.

===
Preliminary rounds ===
The USA defeated South Korea 104 – 45 in their first game setting several records, including team records for rebounds
with 85 free throws aid with 31 and free throws attempted with 43.
Aquira DeCosta set an individual record with 17 rebounds.
The second game was against the Czech Republic.
Although the USA team led by as much as 15 points, the Czech team cut the margin to three points with just under seven minutes left in the game.
The USA team went on to win 72–63.

In the game against Italy, the Italian team lead for more than half the game, but the USA team put together a 12–0 run late in the game to take the lead in hang on for the win 59–55.
In the final preliminary round game the USA beat Brazil 79 – 62.
Christyn Williams scored 19 points, including hitting all seven of her feet throw attempts to tie a record for free-throw percentage.
===
Quarterfinals ===
The USA took on France in the quarterfinals.
The USA had a three-point lead with just over six minutes left in the game but the defense held France scoreless for the final six minutes; the USA finished with a 56–45 win.

===
Semi-finals ===
Both Australia and USA were undefeated going into their semi final match.
The Australian team took an early lead and never gave up the lead.
The USA attempted several comebacks but were never able to overtake the Aussies.
The final score in favor of Australia was 73–60.
===
Bronze medal game ===
The USA faced China and the bronze medal game.
Although the USA had a double-digit lead at halftime they only led by two points with just over five minutes left.
The USA extended the lead to eight points and held China scoreless for 3+1⁄2 minutes to end up with a 65–50 win and the bronze medal.

==
Coaches and results ==
Head coaches, assistant coaches and managers for the U16 and U17 teams, through 2016.
==
Players ==
Players participating on U16 and U17 teams, 2009 through 2016.

== See also ==
USA Basketball
United States women's national basketball team
United States women's national under-19 basketball team
USA Women's Pan American Team
USA Women’s World University Games Team
United States
women's national 3x3 team
FIBA Under-19 World Championship for Women
FIBA Americas Under-18 Championship for Women
United States men's national basketball team
United States
men's national under-19 basketball team
United States
men's national under-17 basketball team


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official site U17
Official site U16
The USA Basketball Women's National Team, commonly known as the United States Women's National Basketball Team, is governed by USA Basketball and competes in FIBA Americas.
The team is by far the most successful in international women's basketball, winning eight out of ten Olympic tournaments it had entered.
It also won eight of the last eleven World Cups (including the last three), and ten titles overall.
The team is currently ranked first in the FIBA World Rankings.

In 2016, it was named the USA Basketball Team of the Year for a record sixth time (having been previously honored in 1996, 2000, 2004, 2008, and 2012).
It was also named the USOC Team of the Year in 1996.The team is one of the most dominant in all Olympic sports, with a 66–3 record in Olympic play (no Olympic losses since 1992, no losses in any tournament since 2006), and a record six consecutive titles.
If they win their seventh straight championship in 2021, they will tie the US men’s basketball team (1936–1968, their winning streak) for the most consecutive Olympic team victories in all Olympic sports, men or women.

==
Competitive record ==


==
Team ==


===
Current roster ===
The following is the United States roster for the 2018 FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup.

===
Past rosters ===


==
Records ==


===
Olympic ===


====
Players medal leaders ====


====
Coaching staff ====


====
Statistics ====


====
All-time results ====


===
World Cup ===


====
All-time results ====


==
See also ==
United States
women's national under-19 basketball team
United States women's national under-17 basketball team
United States women's Pan American basketball team
United States women's World University Games basketball team
United States women's William Jones Cup basketball team
United States
women's national 3x3 team
Timeline of women's basketball
United States men's national basketball team
United States
men's national under-19 basketball team
United States men's national under-17 basketball team
USA Basketball
Basketball in the United States


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
FIBA profile
Michael Whitaker Smith (born October 7, 1957) is an American musician who has charted in both contemporary Christian and mainstream charts.
His biggest success in mainstream music was in 1991 when "Place in This World" hit No.
6 on the Billboard Hot 100.
Over the course of his career, he has sold more than 18 million albums.
Smith is a three-time Grammy Award winner, an American Music Award recipient, and has earned 45 Dove Awards.
In 1999, ASCAP awarded him with the "Golden Note" Award for lifetime achievement in songwriting, and in 2014 they honored him as the "cornerstone of Christian music" for his significant influence on the genre.
He also has recorded 31 No.
1 Hit songs, fourteen gold albums, and five platinum albums.
He has also starred in two films and published 14 books including This
Is Your Time, which he worked with Christian author Gary Thomas to write.

==
Early life ==
Michael Whitaker Smith was born to Paul and Barbara Smith in Kenova, West Virginia.
His father was an oil refinery worker at the Ashland Oil Refinery, in nearby Catlettsburg, Kentucky.
His mother was a caterer.
He inherited his love of baseball from his father, who had played in the minor leagues.
As a child, he developed a love of music through his church.
He learned piano at an early age and sang in his church choir.
At the age of 10, he had "an intense spiritual experience" that led to his becoming a devout Christian.
"
I wore this big cross around my neck," he would recall, "It was very real to me."
He became involved in Bible study and found a group of older friends who shared his faith.
After his older Christian friends moved away to college, Smith began to struggle with feelings of loneliness and alienation.
After graduating from high school, he gravitated toward alcohol and drugs.
He attended Marshall University while developing his songwriting skills but dropped out after one semester.
He also played with various local bands around Huntington, West Virginia.
During that time, his friend Shane Keister, who worked as a session musician in Nashville, encouraged him to move to Nashville, the Country Music capital, and pursue a career in music.
In 1978, Smith moved to Nashville, taking a job as a landscaper to support himself.
He played with several local bands in the Nashville club scene.
He also developed a problem with substance abuse.

I really started losing touch when I moved to Nashville, around April of '78.
I was smokin' marijuana, drinking, doing some other drugs; just being crazy, you know.
My mom and dad knew what I was doing.
But they never hassled me; they just prayed for me.
And I felt convicted by God.
Every time I'd wake up
I knew:
This isn't me.
But I couldn't change myself.

In November 1979, Smith suffered a breakdown that led to his recommitment to Christianity.
The next day he auditioned for a new contemporary Christian music (CCM) group, Higher Ground, as a keyboardist and got the job.
His lead vocals were heard on much of CCM radio with the single, "I Am".
It was on his first tour with Higher Ground, playing mostly in churches, that Smith was finally able to put the drugs and alcohol behind him.

==
Music career ==


===
Beginning, MOR and Christian rock era (1981–1989) ===
In 1981, while he was playing keyboards for Higher Ground, Smith was signed as a writer to Meadowgreen Music, where he wrote numerous gospel hits penned for artists such as Sandi Patty, Kathy Troccoli, Bill Gaither and Amy Grant, to the effect that some of these popular worship songs can now be found in church hymnals.
The following year, Smith began touring as a keyboardist for Grant on her Age to Age tour.

He would eventually become Grant's opening act and recorded his first Grammy-nominated solo album
The Michael W. Smith Project (which he also produced himself) in 1983 on the Reunion Records label.
This album contained the first recording of his hit "Friends", which he co-wrote with his wife Deborah.
By the time Smith's second album Michael W. Smith 2 was released in 1984, he was headlining his own tours.
In 1986, Smith released The Big Picture.

After the release of his 1988 effort, i 2 (EYE), Smith once again collaborated with Grant for her "Lead Me On" world tour.
The following year, Smith recorded his first Christmas album, simply titled Christmas (1989).

===
Mainstream venture and inspirational pop albums (1990–1999) ===
In 1990, Smith released Go West Young Man, his first mainstream effort, which included the mainstream crossover hit single "Place in This World".
The song peaked at No.
6 on the Billboard Hot 100.
In 1992, he released Change Your World, which included the No.
1 adult contemporary hit
"I Will Be Here for You".
In 1993 Smith released his first box set, The Wonder Years and his first greatest hits album, The First Decade (1983–1993).
The latter also includes two new songs, "Do You Dream of Me?"
and "Kentucky Rose".

In 1994, Smith appeared as a guest pianist on the album Swing, Swang, Swung by Christian rock band Guardian.
In 1995, Smith released his eighth album
I'll Lead You Home, which combines the pop style of his secular albums with a touch of religious feel.
Live the Life (1998) and This Is Your Time (1999)
follow the same style.
In 1998, Smith also released his second Christmas album, Christmastime.

Smith collaborated with Jim Brickman on "Love of My Life", a romantic love song for Brickman's album Destiny in 1999.
The song went to chart at No.
9 on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks.
Also in 1999, he became the first Christian artist to receive the ASCAP "Golden Note" Award for lifetime achievement in songwriting.

===
Instrumental and live worship albums (2000–2003) ===
Nearly all of Smith's albums include at least one instrumental track, and in 2000, Smith recorded his first all instrumental album, Freedom.
The following year, Smith released his first all-worship music album, Worship, on September 11.
This album was followed by a sequel, Worship Again in 2002.
Both albums were recorded live in concert.
Worship Again also includes a song that Smith wrote called "There She Stands", inspired by the September 11, 2001 attacks.
He performed this song live for the 2004 Republican National Convention, saying that President George W. Bush, who he said is a fan and a family friend, had asked him to write a song about the attacks.
In 2002, Smith released a live concert DVD titled Worship, filmed live in Edmonton, Alberta at YC Alberta.
The concert includes songs from both Worship (2001) and Worship Again (2002).
It immediately topped the Billboard video charts and went gold in both the U.S. and Canada.

Smith won the Male Vocalist of the Year award at the GMA Music Awards in 2003.
The same year he also released his second greatest hits album, The Second Decade (1993–2003), which includes a new single called "Signs".

===
Contemporary Christian albums (2004–2010) ===
Smith's album, Healing Rain, was released in 2004 and debuted at No.
11 on the Billboard Hot 200 Chart.
The title track rose to No.
1 on the Radio & Records Charts and a music video for the song was released.
The album combines the pop style of his previous recordings with the religious feel of his two live worship albums.

It was also nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album.
In 2006 he released Stand, which is similar to Healing Rain (2004) in style and genre but with more Christian-themed songs.
Also in 2006, Smith did the score and soundtrack to the film
The Second Chance, which he also starred in.
He also released a single from the soundtrack album, "All in the Serve".

In October 2007, he released his third Christmas album, It's a Wonderful Christmas.
On June 20, 2008, Smith recorded his third live Worship album at the Lakewood Church in Houston, Texas, titled A New Hallelujah.
It was released in October 2008.
That same month he began a tour with Steven Curtis Chapman.
In September 2010, he released Wonder, which follows the CCM style of Healing Rain (2004) and Stand (2006).

===
Orchestral instrumental, hymns, and studio worship albums (2011–2016) ===
Smith's second instrumental album, Glory, was released on November 22, 2011.
Unlike his first instrumental album, Freedom (2000), this album features a 65-piece orchestra at
AIR Studios Lyndhurts Hall in London and Wildwood Recording Studio in Nashville.
The following year he released his third compilation album, Decades of Worship (2012).

Smith's concert in Draper, Utah, on July 24, 2012 was almost canceled due to a complaint filed by a Utah resident on July 16, 2012.
He claimed that a show "conflated with prayer and worship" should remain in church or private property, not in the "public's backyard".
The following day the city council decided to cancel the concert, but a day later they decided to host the show as planned after all, following a criticism from a Utah evangelical group that equated cancelling the concert to an assault on religious liberty.
The Mayor of Draper and several city council members were present at the event and were recognized for their support.

In 2014, Smith released three albums, Hymns, Sovereign, and The Spirit of Christmas.
Hymns is Smith's first effort at doing his own rendition of traditional hymns, and it was released exclusively at Cracker Barrel Old Country Store on March 24, 2014.
The album sold 12,000 copies in its first week of release and debuted at No.
24 on the US Billboard 200.
It was also the best-selling Christian music album for the week of April 19, 2014, and won a 2014 Dove Award for "Inspirational Album of the Year".
Sovereign, released on May 13, 2014, is his first studio worship album and his first album released through Capitol Records, after leaving his long-time label Reunion Records in 2013.
The album sold almost 16,000 copies in its first week, and debuted at No.
10 on the Billboard 200, making it the highest charting album in his career as of 2014.
The Spirit of Christmas, officially released as Michael W. Smith & Friends: The Spirit of Christmas, is Smith's first duet album.
Released on September 30, 2014, it features duets with Carrie Underwood, Lady Antebellum, Little Big Town, Jennifer Nettles, Martina McBride, Vince Gill, Bono, Amy Grant, and Michael McDonald.
The album marks Smith's third new album in 2014 to enter the Billboard 200, peaking at No.
16 as of December 2014.
It also won a 2015 Dove Award for "Christmas Album of the Year".

Smith, along with Amy Grant, was honored as the "cornerstone of Christian music" by ASCAP in 2014 for his significant influence on the genre.
In 2015, Smith and his son Tyler wrote the score and soundtrack for the film 90 Minutes in Heaven, which he also has a small acting role in.

In November 2015, Smith and Amy Grant started their annual Christmas tour again after a roughly 15-year break.
Smith's second hymns album, called Hymns II - Shine on Us, was released on January 29, 2016.
Like his first hymns album released in 2014, the album was sold exclusively at Cracker Barrel Old Country Store.

On June 21, 2016, Smith released a new single titled
"He Will Never End" which was originally released in March 2016 as a bonus track on the Target exclusive edition of The Passion:
New Orleans soundtrack CD (2016).
On June 27, 2016, he released the music video for the single which was filmed entirely in Israel in April 2016.Later in 2016, Smith released a Christmas musical project in a collaboration with Wes King, Bradley Knight, and
Luke Gambill called Almost There – A Christmas Musical.
The musical is named after a song Smith wrote a few years ago for his Christmas album
The Spirit of Christmas (2014).

===
A Million Lights and Surrounded (2017–present) ===
On August 11, 2017, Smith released a new single, "A Million Lights", which marks a departure from his previous sound.
It is the lead single and title track from his pop album released on February 16, 2018.
A week after, on February 23, 2018, Smith released another album called Surrounded which is his first live worship album in ten years.
The two albums became his 30th and 31st top 10 entries in Billboard's Top Christian Albums chart, the most among solo artists in the span of his career.
In May 2018, Smith launched a new children's book series, Nurturing Steps, which he created with VeggieTales co-creator Mike Nawrocki.
The first book, Nighty Night and Good Night, was released May 8.
He also released his first children's album, Lullaby, to accompany the book.
On August 30, 2018, Smith hosted a free event at Nashville's Bridgestone Arena called "Surrounded: A Night to Pray, Worship and Be Awakened".
The event will be broadcast on TBN later this year in 175 countries worldwide.
On February 22, 2019, Smith released Awaken: The Surrounded Experience, a live worship album.

==
Acting career ==
In 1994, Smith made his acting debut as Billy Holden in Secret Adventures: "Shrug".
In 2006, Smith was the lead actor in The Second Chance, a film directed by Steve Taylor.
He also did some of the score and soundtrack for this film.

In 2015, Smith starred as Cliff McArdle in the film adaptation of the best-selling book 90 Minutes in Heaven by Don Piper.
In addition, he collaborated with his son on the score and soundtrack for this film.

Smith also starred as James the disciple in The Passion, a live musical film that was aired on FOX on March 20, 2016.

==
Other ventures ==
In 1994, Smith opened a teen club, named Rocketown, in Nashville, Tennessee (6th Avenue).
Later in early 2003, the club was moved to a new location—a renovated warehouse in downtown Nashville.
The venue offers a large dance floor, extensive indoor skate park, and a café hosting live acoustic music.

In 1996, Smith opened his own record label, Rocketown Records.
The label was named after a song on his third album The Big Picture.
The first artist signed was Chris Rice, who had written "Go Light Your World", a No.
1 hit song by Kathy Troccoli, in 1995.
Smith didn't record under the label himself until 2018.

Smith is actively involved in volunteer service and is vice chair of the President's Council on Service and Civic Participation, which is chaired by Jean Case of the Case Foundation.
He is also an avid spokesperson for sponsoring children through Compassion International.
Smith was active in Billy Graham Crusades as well as Samaritan's Purse.
Smith sang "Just As I Am" in a tribute to Graham at the 44th GMA Dove Awards.
He also sang it at the memorial service honoring Graham at the United States Capitol rotunda on February 28, 2018.

==
Personal life ==
Smith is married to Deborah "Debbie" Kay Davis (b. 1958) and has five children: Ryan, Whitney Katherine Mooring (married to Jack Mooring of the band Leeland), Tyler Michael (keyboard player for the United Tour), Anna Elizabeth, and Emily Allison.
He resides in the Nashville suburbs and spends time at his farm.
Smith attended Belmont Church in Nashville, Tennessee and is mentored by its long-time pastor, Don Finto.
Smith is also the founding pastor of New River Fellowship church in Franklin, Tennessee, where he was the lead pastor from 2006 to 2008.
Smith and his wife remain involved members of the church.

Smith was a personal friend of former President George H. W. Bush and is a friend of his son, former President George W. Bush.
Smith was invited to play at the 2004 Republican National Convention singing "
There She Stands", as well as the state funeral of George H. W. Bush at the National Cathedral in Washington, DC, on December 5, 2018, singing "Friends".
Smith is also friends with U2 singer Bono
and they have collaborated on a Christmas album as well as One Campaign.
Alderson-Broaddus College awarded Smith the degree
Doctorate of Music honoris causa in 1992.Smith was also named one of People magazine's "Most Beautiful People" in 1992.In 2018, he sang and played piano at Billy Graham's memorial and funeral.
In June 2019, Smith signed a declaration by Franklin Graham, that stated "President Trump's enemies continue to try everything to destroy him, his family, and the presidency.
In the history of our country, no president has been attacked as he has.
"
The declaration asked that "God would protect, strengthen, embolden and direct" Trump.
== Works ==


===
Discography ===


===
Publications ===


===
Audio books ===
The Gospels Come to Life.
Irving, Texas:
Gospels Come to Life, 2003.

===
Filmography ===
Secret Adventures: Shrug (1994)
as Billy Holden
The Second Chance (2006) as Ethan Jenkins
90 Minutes in Heaven (2015) as Cliff McArdle


==
Awards ==
Grammy Awards

1984 Best Gospel Performance, Male for Michael W. Smith 2
1995 Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album for I'll Lead You
Home
2002
Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album for Worship AgainGrammy nominations
1983 Best Gospel Performance, Male for Michael W. Smith Project
1986 Best Gospel Performance, Male for The Big Picture
1988 Best Gospel Performance, Male for I 2(Eye)
1989
Best Gospel Vocal Performance, Male for "Holy, Holy, Holy"
1990
Best Pop Gospel Album for Go West Young Man
1998
Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album for Live the Life
2000
Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album for This
Is Your Time
2002
Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album for Worship
2006
Best Christian Pop Album for Healing Rain
2008
Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album for Stand
2019 Best Contemporary Christian Music Album for SurroundedDove Awards

1985 Songwriter of the Year
1987 Pop/Contemporary Album of the Year for The Big Picture (producer, artist)
1988 Long Form Music Video of the Year for "The Big Picture Tour Video" (artist)
1990 Short Form Music Video of the Year for
"I Miss the Way" (artist)
1991 Pop/Contemporary Album of the Year for Go
West Young Man (producer, artist)
1992
Choral Collection of the Year for The Michael W. Smith Collection (artist)
1992 Musical Album of the Year for Change Your World (artist)
1992 Song of the Year for "Place in this World" (artist)
1993
Praise and Worship Album of the Year for Songs from the Loft (artist)
1993 Recorded Music Packaging of the Year for The Wonder Years (artist)
1994
Musical Album of the Year for Living on the Edge (artist)
1996 Songwriter of the Year
1996 Special Event Album of the Year for My Utmost For His Highest (artist)
1997
Special Event Album of the Year for Tribute:
The Songs of Andrae Crouch (artist)
1998 Children's Music Album of the Year for Sing Me to Sleep
Daddy (artist)
1998
Special Event Album of the Year for God With Us: A Celebration of Christmas Carols and Classics (artist)
1998 Enhanced CD of the Year for Live the Life – Maxi Single
(artist)
1999 Artist of the Year
1999 Pop/Contemporary Album of the Year for Live the Life (producer, artist)
1999
Producer of the Year
1999 Special Event Album of the Year for Exodus (artist)
2000 Short Form Music Video of the Year for
"This is Your Time" (artist)
2000 Song of the Year for "
This Is Your Time" (artist)
2000 Songwriter of the Year
2001 Pop/Contemporary Album of the Year for This
is Your Time (producer, artist)
2001
Youth/Children's Musical Album of the Year for Friends
4 Ever (artist)
2002 Album of the Year for Worship (producer, artist)
2002
Artist of the Year
2002
Inspirational Recorded Song of the Year for "Above All" (artist)
2002
Instrumental Album of the Year for Freedom (producer, artist)
2003
Album of the Year for Worship Again (producer, artist)
2003 Artist of the Year
2003 Long Form Music Video of the Year for Worship DVD/Video (producer, artist)
2003
Male Vocalist of the Year
2008 Christmas Album of the Year for
It's a Wonderful Christmas
2009
Inspirational Recorded Song of the Year for "A New Hallelujah"
2009
Praise & Worship Album of the Year for A New Hallelujah
2012
Best Instrumental Album of the Year for Glory
2014 Inspirational Album of the Year for Hymns
2015 Christmas Album of the Year for The Spirit of ChristmasAmerican Music Awards

1992 Favorite New Adult Contemporary ArtistGospel Music Hall of Fame
2009
Inductee


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Michael W. Smith at AllMusic
Michael W. Smith at IMDb
Transcript of February 10, 2006 interview with Larry King
This is a list of notable individuals who are or were natives, or notable as residents of, or in association with the city of New Orleans, Louisiana, United States.

==
Academia ==
Will W. Alexander, first president of Dillard University and head of the Commission on Interracial Cooperation
Stephen Ambrose, historian and University of New Orleans professor
William Balée, anthropologist and Tulane University professor
Charles C. Bass, physician and researcher in tropical medicine and dental health
Elizabeth Bass, physician, educator, and suffragist
Stanhope Bayne-Jones, physician, member of US Surgeon General's Committee linking smoking to cancer
Joan W. Bennett, biologist and former Tulane University professor
Cyril Y. Bowers, physician and endocrinology researcher
Rick Brewer, president of Louisiana College since 2015;
born in New Orleans in 1956
Douglas Brinkley, historian, author and former University of New Orleans and Tulane University professor
Brené Brown, professor of social work; author
George E. Burch, pioneering physician, cardiovascular disease researcher, medical school professor
John R. Conniff, educator and university administrator
Scott Cowen, president of Tulane University
Michael DeBakey, pioneer in heart surgery
Albert W. Dent, president of Dillard University, chief executive of Flint-Goodridge Hospital
Henry C. Dethloff, American historian
James H. Dillard, educator, advocate for education of African-Americans
Michael T. Dugan, educator and accounting scholar
Joseph Ewan, botanist and biology professor
Alcée Fortier, folklorist, historian, and university professor
Mary L. Good, scientist and university professor
Clifton H. Johnson, historian and founder of the Amistad Research Center
Eamon Kelly, President of Tulane University
Salman Khan, educator
James A. Knight, psychiatrist, theologian, and medical ethicist
Rudolph Matas, innovative surgeon at Tulane Medical School
Gordon H. Mueller, historian and administrator at the University of New Orleans
Alton Ochsner, surgeon and medical researcher, founded the Ochsner Medical Center
Max Rafferty, public school administrator and writer
Ed Renwick, political scientist and television commentator
Andrew V. Schally, endocrinologist and Nobel Laureate
Mary S. Sherman, cancer researcher and physician
Royal D. Suttkus, biologist, founder of a major ichthyology collection
Lewis Thomas, physician, researcher, and author of popular non-fiction
Jeffrey Vitter, computer scientist and Purdue University dean
Harold E. Vokes, zoologist and paleontologist


==
Architecture ==
James Freret, architect, designed many 19th century homes in New Orleans
William Alfred Freret, architect, supervising architect for federal building in the 19th century
James Gallier Jr., architect, designed the French Opera House in New Orleans
Moise H. Goldstein Sr.,
architect of extensive designs in the early 20th century
Henry Howard, 19th century Irish-American architect
Albert C. Ledner, 20th century architect
Leon C. Weiss, architect commissioned by
Huey P. Long


== Arts and literature ==
Enrique Alferez, sculptor
John James Audubon, painter, ornithologist, naturalist
Vernel Bagneris, playwright, actor, director, singer, dancer
E. J. Bellocq, photographer
Eloise Bibb Thompson, poet, fiction writer, and playwright
Skip Bolen, photographer
Poppy Z. Brite, writer
William S. Burroughs, writer
George Washington Cable, writer
Milburn E. Calhoun, book publisher
Georgine Campbell, painter
Truman Capote, writer
John Churchill Chase, writer and cartoonist
Kate Chopin, writer, feminist
Ben Claassen III, illustrator and comics artist, DIRTFARM
Andrei Codrescu, poet and commentator
Florestine Perrault Collins, photographer
Alice Dalsheimer, poet
Edgar Degas, artist
Thomas Dent, poet and writer
George Washington Dixon, newspaper editor
Alexander John Drysdale, artist
George Dureau, artist and photographer
William Faulkner, writer
Daniel F. Galouye, science fiction writer
Whitney Gaskell, writer, attended Tulane Law School which was the setting of her
2006 novel
Testing Kate
Rolland Golden,
artist
Shirley Ann Grau, writer
Lafcadio Hearn, writer
Knute Heldner, artist
Lillian Hellman, writer
George Herriman, Krazy Kat cartoonist
Emma Churchman Hewitt, writer, journalist
May Hyman Lesser, medical illustrator
Walter Isaacson, writer, journalist, public policy analyst
Harnett Kane, author of southern history, geography, culture, and fiction
Frances Parkinson Keyes, writer
Grace King, writer
Dominique Lapierre, writer
Elmore Leonard, author
Michael Lewis, writer
Shantrelle P. Lewis, curator
Bunny Matthews, cartoonist
Louis-Alphonse Maureau, painter
Robert Bledsoe Mayfield, artist
John McCrady, artist
James Michalopoulos, artist
Alice Dunbar Nelson, poet, journalist and political activist
Isadora Newman, artist, poet, storyteller, sculptor
David Ohle, writer
Paul E. Poincy, artist
Matthew Randazzo V, writer
Anne Rice, writer of vampire tales and other Gothic fiction
John T. Scott, artist and sculptor
Kendall Shaw, abstract expressionist painter
John Kennedy Toole, writer of A Confederacy of Dunces
Alexandrea Weis, author
Lucille Western, actress


==
Business and economics ==
Frank Abadie, businessman and horse race promoter.

Micaela Almonester, 19th-century businesswoman and real estate developer
George Bissell, entrepreneur, founded the first oil company in the United States
Isaac Delgado, businessman and philanthropist, benefactor of Delgado Community College
Constant C. Dejoie Sr.,
business leader
William C. Edenborn, railroad magnate, industrialist and inventor
Charles E. Fenner, businessperson, co-founder of Fenner & Beane, a forerunner of Merrill Lynch
Ruth Fertel, businesswoman, Ruth's Chris Steakhouse
Avram Glazer, businessman and sports franchise owner
Leon Godchaux, businessman and sugar merchant
Daniel Henry Holmes, 19th-century businessman
Victor Kiam, entrepreneur
Thomy Lafon, businessman, human rights activist
John McDonogh (1779–1850), shipping, land speculation (world's largest private landholder ca.
1850), philanthropist and namesake of many New Orleans schools
Alexander Milne, 18th-century businessman and entrepreneur
Oliver Pollock, merchant, financier of the American Revolutionary War
Benjamin M. Rosen, computer entrepreneur
John G. Schwegmann, supermarket innovator
Clay Shaw, businessman
Edgar B. Stern Sr, businessperson and philanthropist
Judah Touro, businessman and philanthropist
Martin de Villamil or Martin Villamil (1783–1843), businessman
David Voelker, businessman and philanthropist
Samuel Zemurray, businessman and philanthropist


==
Cuisine ==
Owen Brennan, restaurateur
Leah Chase, chef
Al Copeland, restaurateur, Popeye's Chicken & Biscuits and Copeland's restaurants
Ruth Fertel, restaurateur, Ruth's Chris Steak House
Beulah Levy Ledner, pastry chef
Austin Leslie,
chef


==
Crime ==
Axeman of New Orleans, mysterious mass murderer
Sylvestro Carolla, mafia boss
Antoinette Frank, former New Orleans Police Officer, convicted murderer
Ivory Harris, drug trafficker and weapons trafficker
Jean Lafitte, pirate and brother of Pierre Lafitte
Pierre Lafitte, pirate and brother of Jean Lafitte
Delphine LaLaurie, socialite and sadist
Carlos Marcello, businessman and mafia
boss
Lee Harvey Oswald, assassin
Ronald A. Williams II, murdered New Orleans police officer


==
Fictional ==
Mr. Bingle, snowman that assisted Santa Claus and worked at Maison Blanche Department Store
Benjamin Button, man who is born old and grows young, in a film loosely adapted from an F. Scott Fitzgerald short story
Louis de Pointe du Lac, vampire appearing in Anne Rice's The Vampire Chronicles
Ignatius J. Reilly, hero of John Kennedy Toole’s novel
A Confederacy of Dunces (1980)
Seymore D. Fair, 1984 Louisiana World Exposition Mascot, celebrity cartoon character,
advocate for animal, people, and planet welfare
Gambit, Marvel Comics superhero (X-Men)
Marcel Gerard, vampire appearing in Julie Plec's The Originals
Hazel Levesque, previous residence before moving and first death, appearing in Heroes of Olympus by Rick Riordan
Morgus the Magnificent, mad scientist and horror movie host
Dwayne Cassius "King" Pride, NCIS Supervisory Agent, NCIS:
New Orleans
Benjamin Sisko, Starfleet captain (Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine)


=
= Film and television ==
Bryan Batt, actor
Sandra Bullock, actress, resident
Kitty Carlisle, entertainer
Paul Carr, actor
John Carroll, actor and singer
Laura Cayouette, actor and author
Patricia Clarkson, actor
Marshall Colt, psychologist and former actor
Frank Joseph Davis, television journalist and cookbook author
Ellen DeGeneres, comedian, talk show host
Vance DeGeneres, actor, screenwriter, and musician (bass)
Raquel "Rocsi" Diaz, television host and personality on BET's 106 and Park
Faith Domergue, actress
Donna Douglas, actress
(Ellie Mae from The Beverly Hillbillies)
Allison Harvard, runner-up of twelfth cycle of America's Next Top Model
Dwight Henry, actor
Gloria Henry, actress born in New Orleans in 1923
Cheryl Holdridge, actress and Mouseketeer
Indigo, actress
Eddie Jemison, actor
Bayn Johnson, former child actress and singer
Leatrice Joy, actress
Dorothy Lamour, actress
John Larroquette, actor
Sabrina LeBeauf, actress
Anthony Mackie, actor
Evan Mather, director
Tristin Mays, actress
Adah Isaacs Menken, actress
Taylor Miller, actress
Garrett Morris, comedian (SNL), actor
Arthel Neville, journalist
Chris Owens, burlesque performer and entrepreneur
Pauley Perrette, actress
Tyler Perry, actor, director
Wendell Pierce, actor, Detective Bunk Moreland in The Wire
Godfrey Reggio, experimental filmmaker/documentarian (Qatsi trilogy)
Al Shea, actor and theatre critic
Harry Shearer, actor, voice actor, comedian, writer, musician, radio host, director and producer, best known for voicing various characters on The Simpsons
Neferteri Shepherd, model and actress
Sydney Shields, stage actress
Richard Simmons, entertainer
Harold Sylvester, film actor
Jay Thomas, actor
Sam Trammell, actor,
best known for his role as Sam Merlotte in True Blood
Ben Turpin, silent film comedian
Ray Walston, actor
Carl Weathers, actor, football player
Walter Williams, creator of Mr. Bill
Tommy Wiseau, actor, director
Cora Witherspoon, actress
Reese Witherspoon, actress
Grace Zabriskie, actress
Bianca Del Rio, drag queen and comedian; best known for winning the sixth season of RuPaul's Drag Race


==
Journalism ==
Jim Amoss, journalist and newspaper editor
James Carville, Democratic Party political consultant and pundit
Buddy Diliberto, sports journalist
Dorothy Dix, journalist
Christopher Drew, investigative reporter
Charles L. "Pie" Dufour, newspaper columnist and historian
Hap Glaudi, television sportscaster
Victor Gold, journalist and political consultant, reared in New Orleans
Bryant Gumbel, television anchor
Greg Gumbel, television sportscaster
Ira B. Harkey Jr., newspaper journalist, civil rights advocate
Jim Henderson, television sportscaster
Iris Kelso, journalist for three New Orleans newspapers and WDSU television commentator
Hoda Kotb, television anchor
Mel Leavitt, television journalist and historian
Angus Lind, newspaper journalist
Wayne Mack, television sportscaster
John Maginnis, journalist, political commentator, and author of The Last Hayride, The Cross to Bear, and The Politics of Reform
Ora Mae Lewis Martin, journalist
Mary Matalin, Republican Party political consultant
Bill Monroe, NBC television journalist
Arthel Neville, television anchor
Cokie Roberts, ABC television journalist and commentator for National Public Radio
Nash Roberts, television meteorologist
Garland Robinette, investigative journalist
Howard K. Smith, television anchorman
Ronnie Virgets, writer and broadcast journalist


==
Law, politics, and military ==
Bryan Adams, former member of the Louisiana House of Representatives from Jefferson Parish since 2012; born in New Orleans.

Reverend Avery Alexander, civil rights leader, state legislator
Andres Almonaster y Rojas, Spanish civil servant in colonial New Orleans, also a philanthropist
Jeff Arnold, former member of the Louisiana House for the Algiers section, 2002–2016
John B. Babcock,
Medal of Honor recipient
Algernon Sidney Badger, government official during and after Reconstruction
Amy Coney Barrett, U.S. Supreme Court Justice and academic
P.G.T. Beauregard, Confederate general and inventor
Clyde F. Bel Jr., businessman and state representative for Orleans Parish, 1964–1972 and 1975–1980
Judah P. Benjamin, U.S. Senator, Confederate Attorney General, Secretary of War and Secretary of State
David H. Berger, commandant of the United States Marine Corps
Hale Boggs, former U.S. Representative
Lindy Boggs, former U.S. Representative and retired U.S. Ambassador to The Vatican
Thomas Hale Boggs Jr., lawyer/lobbyist in Washington, D.C., born in New Orleans in 1940, son of Hale and Lindy Boggs, brother of Cokie Roberts and Barbara Boggs Sigmund
Joseph Bouie Jr., Democratic member of the Louisiana House of Representatives for District 97 in Orleans Parish since 2014; retired faculty member and administrator at Southern University at New Orleans
Stephen Bradberry, community organizer, Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award laureate
Juan Davis Bradburn, freedom fighter for Mexico, officer in the Battle of New Orleans
Henry Braden, politician
Elward Thomas Brady Jr., state representative from Terrebonne Parish 1972–1976, born in New Orleans
Donna Brazile, political strategist
Jared Brossett, member of the New Orleans City Council since 2014; state representative for District 97, 2009–2014
J. Marshall Brown, insurance agent and politician
Peppi Bruneau, attorney and former member of the Louisiana House of Representatives
Benjamin F. Butler, administrator of Union-occupied New Orleans during the Civil War
John A. Butler, U.S. Marine Corps officer and Navy Cross
recipient
Pascal F. Calogero Jr., Chief Justice Louisiana Supreme Court
Gary Carter Jr., member of the Louisiana House from the Algiers neighborhood, effective 2016
James Carville, political consultant, political science professor
Harry Connick Sr.,
district attorney, father of singer Harry Connick Jr.
A.G. Crowe, politician
Milton Joseph Cunningham, attorney, state legislator, state attorney general for three nonconsecutive terms ending in 1900
Bernard de Marigny, politician and land developer
Étienne de Boré, first Mayor of New Orleans in the U.S. administration
Jean Noel Destréhan, early Creole politician and plantation owner
David Duke, state representative for Metairie 1989–1992;
White nationalist
H. Garland Dupré, attorney and politician; Speaker of the Louisiana House 1908–1910;
U.S. representative from Louisiana's 2nd congressional district, 1910–1924
Frank Burton Ellis, attorney, politician, federal judge
Albert Estopinal, former U.S. representative and member of both houses of the Louisiana State Legislature
Olaf Fink, member of the Louisiana State Senate 1956–1972; New Orleans educator
C.B. Forgotston, attorney, political activist, state government watchdog
Hoffman Franklin Fuller, professor-emeritus at Tulane University Law School, authority on tax law
Henry L. Fuqua, governor who defeated Huey Long in an election
Randal Gaines, state representative since 2012 for St. Charles and St. John the Baptist parishes; former assistant city attorney in New Orleans
Gerald J. Gallinghouse, U.S. Attorney for the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana 1970–1978; known for prosecuting corruption in government
Jim Garrison, district attorney of Orleans Parish
Robert T. Garrity Jr., attorney and former state representative for Jefferson Parish
Charles Gayarré, state legislator noted for his histories of Louisiana
Newt Gingrich, U.S. Congressman from Georgia, Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives
Nicholas Girod, early mayor of New Orleans
John Grenier, Birmingham lawyer and Alabama Republican Party figure, born in New Orleans in 1930
F. Edward Hebert, Democrat U.S. Representative for Louisiana's 1st congressional district, 1941–1977
Cynthia Hedge-Morrell, former member of the New Orleans City Council for District D, 2005–2014
Frederick Jacob Reagan Heebe, former judge of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana
David Heitmeier, state senator for District 7 since 2008, optometrist
Francis C. Heitmeier, state senator for District 7, 1988–2008; businessman and lobbyist
David Hennessy, police chief, assassinated in 1890
Clay Higgins, Republican member of the United States House of Representatives for Louisiana's 3rd congressional district; born in New Orleans in 1961
Stephanie Hilferty, Republican state representative for Orleans and Jefferson parishes, effective January 2016
Walker Hines, former state representative
Jean Joseph Amable Humbert, army general, subordinate to Andrew Jackson at the Battle of New Orleans
Bernette Joshua Johnson, Chief Justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court since 2013; associate justice, 1994–2013, native and resident of New Orleans
Jeannette Knoll, associate justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court; reared and educated in New Orleans, where the court meets; resides in Marksville
Mary Landrieu, state representative, state treasurer, U.S. senator
Mitch Landrieu, state representative, lieutenant governor, former mayor of New Orleans
Moon Landrieu, judge and politician, mayor of New Orleans
Hank Lauricella, former professional football player; state senator from Jefferson Parish, 1972–1996
Bob Livingston, Republican former U.S. Representative for 1st congressional district
Lt.
Gen. James Longstreet, Confederate general
Bessie Margolin, labor lawyer
Danny Martiny, state senator from Jefferson Parish, born in New Orleans
Harold A. Moise, state representative for the 12th Ward, Orleans civil court judge 1937–1948, and associate justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court 1948–1958
Ernest Nathan Morial, American political, legal, and civil rights leader
Marc Morial, former mayor, son of Ernest Nathan Morial
deLesseps Story Morrison, former mayor and ambassador to the Organization of American States
deLesseps Morrison Jr., late state representative
William Mumford, Confederate resistor in Union-occupied New Orleans during the Civil War
Ray Nagin, former mayor of New Orleans
Michael H. O'Keefe, president of the Louisiana State Senate 1976–1983; convicted felon
Alejandro O'Reilly, governor of Louisiana, known as "Bloody O'Reilly"
James E. Paxton, district attorney of Louisiana 6th Judicial District based in St. Joseph, practiced law in New Orleans 1988–1993
Leander Perez, district judge, district attorney, and president of the Plaquemines Parish Commission Council
P.B.S. Pinchback, politician
Loulan Pitre, Jr., New Orleans lawyer and former state representative for Lafourche Parish
Edward Joseph Price, state representative for District 58, Gonzales businessman, and former resident of New Orleans
William P. Quigley, activist attorney and academic
Max Rafferty, educator author and columnist, California politician, born in New Orleans in 1917
Cokie Roberts, journalist, daughter of Hale and Lindy Boggs
Angelo Roppolo, political consultant from Shreveport, born in New Orleans in 1920
Steve Scalise, House Minority Whip and U.S. Representative of Louisiana's 1st district
Tom Schedler, former state senator from St. Tammany Parish and current Louisiana secretary of state
Pat Screen, Louisiana State University quarterback, lawyer, and former Mayor-President of East Baton Rouge Parish
Ronal W. Serpas, Superintendent of the New Orleans Police Department since 2010
Joseph A. Shakspeare, Mayor of New Orleans at the time of the March 14, 1891 lynchings
Eric Skrmetta, attorney from Metairie, Louisiana; Republican member of the Louisiana Public Service Commission for District 1
Jefferson B. Snyder, lived in New Orleans 1893–1897; later district attorney in three delta parishes in northeast Louisiana 1904–1948
James Z. Spearing, attorney, school board member, U.S. representative from Louisiana's 2nd congressional district, 1924–1931
James Sutterfield, first Republican member of the Louisiana House of Representatives from Orleans Parish since Reconstruction; served 1970–1972
Dorothy Mae Taylor, first African-American woman to serve in the Louisiana House, 1971–1980; member of the New Orleans City Council, 1986–1994
Charles Laveau Trudeau, early 19th century mayor of New Orleans
A.P. Tureaud, attorney
Jorge Ubico, exiled president of Guatemala
José de Villamil (or José Villamil), father of the independence of Ecuador
David Vitter, U.S. Senator, 2005–2017
David Voelker, businessman
Frank Voelker Jr., lawyer, politician
John Volz, late U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Louisiana
Chatham Roberdeau Wheat, leader of the Louisiana Tigers during the US Civil War
Edward Douglass White, Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court
John C. White, Louisiana education superintendent since 2012; superintendent of the Recovery School District in New Orleans, 2011
Robert Wilkie, National Security Assistant to the President
Clint Williamson, U.S. Ambassador, White House policy official, United Nations envoy
John Minor Wisdom, judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Andrew Young,
politician


==
Math, science, and invention ==
Ruth Benerito, inventor of wrinkle-free cotton
Alfred H. Clifford, mathematician
Isaac Cline, meteorologist and writer
Andrew Higgins, ship builder and inventor
Emile Lamm, inventor
Theodore K. Lawless, dermatologist, medical researcher, and philanthropist
Jean Alexandre LeMat, inventor
Abraham Louis Levin, physician and inventor of the Levin Tube
Levi Spear Parmley, inventor of dental floss
Mark Plotkin, ethnobotanist
John Leonard Riddell, inventor of the binocular microscope
Norbert Rilleaux, inventor, engineer
A. Baldwin Wood, inventor and engineer


==
Music ==
August Alsina, singer/songwriter
Phil Anselmo, musician
Louis Armstrong, musician and entertainer
B.G., rapper
Baby Boy Da Prince, rapper
Achille Baquet, musician
George Baquet, musician
Paul Barbarin, musician and composer
Pat Barberot, band leader
Dave Bartholomew, musician, composer, promoter
Jon Batiste, singer, composer, pianist, jazz musician
Sidney Bechet, musician
Better Than Ezra, rock group
Birdman aka Baby, rapper, producer
Big Freedia, bounce artist
Terence Blanchard, musician and composer
Buddy Bolden, musician, early jazz figure
Sharkey Bonano, Jazz musician
James Booker, musician
Connee Boswell, singer, member of the Boswell Sisters singing group
Helvetia "Vet" Boswell, singer, member of the Boswell Sisters singing group
Martha Boswell, singer, member of the Boswell Sisters singing group
Jimmy Bower, guitarist, drummer
Pud Brown, jazz musician
George Brunis, jazz trombonist
Collie Buddz, reggae/dancehall artist
C-Murder, rapper
Cane Hill, nu-metal group
Paul Caporino, songwriter, musician, lead singer of M.O.T.O.
Alton "Big Al" Carson, blues singer
Alex Chilton, songwriter, guitarist, music producer, lead singer of the Box Tops and Big Star
Choppa, rapper
Merry Clayton, singer
Jon Cleary, funk and R&B musician
Lee Collins, jazz trumpeter
Harry Connick Jr., musician and entertainer
Cowboy Mouth, band
Barry Cowsill, musician
Paul Crawford, jazz musician, music historian
Curren$y, rapper
Edmond Dede, musician, composer
Fernando del Valle, operatic tenor
DJ Khaled, DJ
Dr. John, musician
Johnny Dodds, jazz clarinetist and saxophonist
Fats Domino, musician
Lee Dorsey, singer
Down, metal band
Tom Drummond, bassist of Better Than
Ezra
Champion Jack Dupree, pianist, singer
Frankie Dusen, jazz trombonist
Ernie K-Doe, singer, "Emperor of the Universe"
Lars Edegran, bandleader
Lionel Ferbos, jazz musician
Frankie Ford, singer, entertainer
Pops Foster, jazz musician
Pete Fountain, musician, clarinet player, jazz, pop, and swing
Frank Froeba, musician, jazz, pianist, band leader
The Funky Meters, musicians and singers
Kevin Gates, rapper
George Girard, musician
Victor Goines, jazz musician, dean of jazz at the Juilliard School
Louis Moreau Gottschalk, pianist and composer
Kevin Griffin, musician, lead singer for Better than Ezra
Gudda Gudda, rapper
Donald Harrison, musician
Clarence "Frogman" Henry, singer and musician
Al Hirt, musician, trumpet, jazz, pop, and swing
Moses Hogan, musician, composer
Linda Hopkins, blues and gospel singer
Noah Howard, jazz musician
Armand "Jump" Jackson, blues drummer and bandleader
Mahalia Jackson, gospel singer
Pervis Jackson, rhythm & blues singer
Luke James, R&B singer, actor
Jay Electronica, rapper and producer
N.O. Joe, music producer, musician
Little Sonny Jones, blues singer
Juvenile, rapper
Freddie Keppard, jazz cornetist
Kid Ory, musician
Kidd Kidd, rapper
Earl King, musician
Solange Knowles, musician, songwriter
Papa Jack Laine, bandleader
Nick LaRocca, early jazz figure
Meghan Linsey, singer-songwriter, contestant from The Voice season 8
Lil' Fizz, singer, rapper
Lil Romeo, rapper
Lil Wayne, rapper
Lloyd, singer
Rico Love, singer/songwriter
Mac, rapper
Magic, rapper
Magnolia Shorty, New Orleans bounce artist
Mack Maine, rapper
Dave Malone, songwriter, guitarist, music producer, guitarist and vocalist in The New Orleans Radiators
Mannie Fresh, rapper, producer, disc jockey
Wingy Manone, jazz trumpeter, and singer
Angélica María, Mexican singer-songwriter and entertainer, "La Novia de Mexico"
Branford Marsalis, musician, alto, soprano, tenor, and baritone saxophones
Ellis Marsalis Jr., musician and educator, piano
Ellis Marsalis Sr.,
music patron, businessman and advocate
Jason Marsalis, musician (drums, vibraphone)
Wynton Marsalis, musician, trumpet, cornet, flumpet, flugelhorn
Master P, rapper, businessman, and mogul
Cosimo Matassa, music studio entrepreneur
Irvin Mayfield, musician
The Medicine Men, producers, singers (Mo B. Dick and Odell), rappers (KLC and Mo B. Dick)
The Meters, musicians and singers
Lizzie Miles, singer
Mr. Quintron, organist
Deacon John Moore, musician and bandleader
Jelly Roll Morton, musician and composer, early jazz figure
Teedra Moses, R&B and soul singer-songwriter
Mutemath, band
Mystick Krewe of Clearlight
Mystikal, rapper
The Neville Brothers, musicians and singers
Ivan Neville, phunk, R&B
Randy Newman, musician
Normani, born Normani Kordei Hamilton, singer
Frank Ocean, singer
Joe "King" Oliver, musician
Lisette Oropesa, opera singer, soprano
Jimmy Palao, musician, bandleader
Earl Palmer, musician
Robert Parker, musician and singer
Partners-N-Crime, rap duo
Nicholas Payton, musician
Marguerite Piazza, operatic soprano
Piggy D., bassist
George Porter Jr., musician
Louis Prima, musician (trumpet), singer, bandleader, entertainer, aka "The King of the Swing"
Professor Longhair, born Henry Byrd, pianist, singer
The Radiators, rock band
Mac Rebennack, "Dr. John"
Rebirth Brass Band, band
Trent Reznor, musician, producer
Dawn Richard, former member of Danity Kane and Diddy-Dirty Money
Jason Ross, Seven Mary Three frontman
Kermit Ruffins, jazz trumpeter, singer and composer
Paul Sanchez, singer-songwriter and guitarist
Silkk
the Shocker, rapper
Bill Sinegal, bassist and songwriter
Skull Duggery, rapper
Soulja Slim, rapper
Stooges Brass Band, New Orleans funk brass band
Suicideboys, rap duo/group, aka "$UICIDEBOY$"
Babe Stovall, blues singer and guitarist, "Mr. Bojangles"
Supagroup, rock band
Irma Thomas, rhythm and blues singer, aka "Soul Queen of New Orleans"
Allen Toussaint, musician, composer, record producer
Norman Treigle, opera singer
Trombone Shorty, born Troy Andrews, musician
Turk, rapper
George Wein, founder of the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival
Charles "Hungry" Williams, Rhythm & Blues drummer
"Scarface" John Williams, singer
Spencer Williams, songwriter
Young V, rapper
Linnzi Zaorski
Zebra,
band


==
Religion ==
Antonio de Sedella, early Roman Catholic leader in New Orleans
Henriette DeLille, founder of the order of the Sisters of the Holy Family
Jesse Duplantis, televangelist
J. D. Grey, pastor, former president of the Southern Baptist Convention
Marie-Madeleine Hachard, Ursuline abbess, documented early history of New Orleans
Philip Hannan, former archbishop of New Orleans
Francis L. Hawks, clergyman, first president of Tulane University
Jerome LeDoux, Roman Catholic priest
Joseph Francis Rummel, former archbishop of New Orleans
Francis Xavier Seelos, missionary who ministered to victims of yellow fever epidemics
John William Shaw, former archbishop of New Orleans


==
Sports ==
Ashley Ambrose, NFL player, Atlanta Falcons and New Orleans Saints, graduated from Alcee Fortier High School
Nehemiah Atkinson, professional tennis player and coach
Tom Benson, owner of the New Orleans Saints
Delvin Breaux, gridiron football player
Stanley Brundy (born 1967), basketball player
Cethan Carter, football player
Will Clark, former Major League Baseball star, infielder
Tazzie Colomb, IFBB professional female bodybuilder and powerlifter
Ernie Danjean, former Green Bay Packers linebacker
Orleans Darkwa, professional football player
Tom Dempsey, former NFL kicker, held longest field goal record for over 43 years
David Dixon, professional sports advocate for New Orleans Saints, Louisiana Superdome, USFL, World Championship Tennis
Scott Dohmann, former MLB pitcher
Corey Dowden, former NFL defensive back
Clyde Drexler, former University of Houston and NBA star, member of Basketball Hall of Fame
Bobby Duhon, professional football player
Marshall Faulk, professional football star (St. Louis Rams), member of Pro Football Hall of Fame
Steve Foley, former defensive back for Denver Broncos
Matt Forte, running back for Chicago Bears, New York Jets
John Fourcade, former NFL and CFL quarterback, sports analyst
De'Aaron
Fox, point guard for Sacramento Kings
Nolan Franz, former Green Bay Packers wide receiver
Harry P. Gamble, football player, swimmer, gymnast, boxer, and attorney
Eddie Garcia, former Green Bay Packers placekicker
Larry Gilbert, Major League Baseball player
Tookie Gilbert, Major League Baseball player
Tad Gormley, athletic trainer, coach, and official
Danny Granger, forward for NBA's Indiana Pacers, Miami Heat
Adrian Hardy, NFL player
Chris Henry, former NFL wide receiver
Chris Horton, safety, Washington Redskins
Kevin Hughes, former NFL offensive tackle
Tory James, former cornerback for Cincinnati Bengals
Avery Johnson, former National Basketball Association player, former coach of Dallas Mavericks
Junkyard Dog, stage name of Sylvester Ritter, former professional wrestler
Robert Kelley, Washington Redskins running back
Shaun King, former NFL quarterback
Kerry Kittles, former NBA player for New Jersey Nets
Dominik Koepfer, professional tennis player
Lester Lautenschlaeger, football player, politician, first director of New Orleans Recreation Department
Kendrick Lewis, NFL free safety, played for Kansas City Chiefs and Baltimore Ravens, attended Ole Miss
Michael Lewis, former New Orleans Saints
wide receiver
Rydell Malancon, former NFL linebacker
Archie Manning, former New Orleans Saints quarterback, father of Peyton and Eli
Eli Manning, New York Giants quarterback
Peyton Manning, former Indianapolis Colts and Denver Broncos quarterback
Pete Maravich, basketball Hall of Famer, played for LSU and NBA's New Orleans Jazz
Sammy Martin, former New England Patriots running back
Tyrann Mathieu, player for NFL's Kansas City Chiefs
Bo McCalebb, Macedonian basketball player who plays for Montepaschi Siena
Max McGee, NFL player on five championship teams
Sylvester McGrew, former Green Bay Packers
defensive end
Greg Monroe, college basketball player for Georgetown University
Paul Morphy, world chess champion
Patrick Mullins, professional soccer player
Steve Mura, retired pitcher in Major League Baseball
Eddie Murray, prolific NFL placekicker
Antonio Narcisse, football player
Mel Ott, Major League Baseball Hall of Famer
Micah Owings, MLB pitcher
Robert Pack, NBA player, assistant coach for New Orleans Pelicans
Emmett Paré, professional tennis player and coach
Joe Pasternack, head basketball coach at UC
Santa Barbara
Audrey Patterson, first African-American woman to win Olympic medal
Chris Quinn, former NBA player and current Miami Heat assistant coach
Eldridge Recasner, former NBA player
Ham Richardson, professional tennis player
Alana Shipp, American/Israeli IFBB professional bodybuilder
Nate Singleton, former wide receiver for San Francisco 49ers
Neil Smith, former defensive end, Kansas City Chiefs
Truett Smith, former football player
Rusty Staub, Major League Baseball player
Kordell Stewart, former NFL quarterback
Patrick Surtain, former NFL cornerback
Ron Swoboda, former New York Mets outfielder
Ike Taylor, cornerback, Pittsburgh Steelers
Roosevelt Taylor, safety, 1963 NFL champion,
Chicago Bears
Taryn Terrell, professional wrestler for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling
Mike Wallace, wide receiver for Pittsburgh Steelers
Ron Washington, longtime manager of MLB's Texas Rangers
Reggie Wayne, wide receiver for Indianapolis Colts
Aeneas Williams, former cornerback for St. Louis Rams
Jason Williams (born 1983), basketball player for Hapoel Be'er Sheva of the National Basketball League of Israel
John "Hot Rod" Williams, longtime professional basketball player
Korey Williams, Canadian Football League player


==
Other ==
Ruby Bridges, commemorated for her role, as a child, in racial integration of the New Orleans Public School System
Betty DeGeneres, LGBT rights activist
Caroline Dormon, horticulturalist and historian
David Ferrie, pilot investigated in the assassination of President Kennedy
Myra Clark Gaines, socialite and subject of the longest lawsuit in US history
Jean Margaret Gordon, suffragette
Kate M. Gordon, suffragette
Margaret Haughery, philanthropist
Marie Alice Heine, first American Princess of Monaco
Sir Lady Java, drag queen, actress and transgender rights activist
Blaine Kern, Mardi Gras float designer and builder
TJ Kirk, Youtuber
Marie Laveau, "voodoo queen"
Eleanor McMain, civic activist
Sally Miller:
The Lost German Slave Girl
Allison 'Tootie' Montana, Mardi Gras Indian, "chief of chiefs"
Paul Morphy, unofficial world chess champion
Homer Plessy, early civil rights activist
Edith Rosenwald Stern, philanthropist
Paul Tulane, benefactor of Tulane University
Sylvanie Williams, educator and women's club activist


==
See also ==
List of people from Louisiana
List of Loyola University New Orleans people
List of Tulane University people


==
References ==
The 1984 United States men's Olympic basketball team competed in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, representing the United States.

The USA's senior men's team, was led by coach Bob Knight, who was also the head coach of the Indiana Hoosiers at the time.
The team won the tournament's gold medal.

It was the last amateur level U.S.A. team to win an Olympic gold medal in men's basketball.
The team was considered to be one of the strongest in U.S.A.'s history at that time, as it featured four of
the five 1984 consensus first team
All-Americans, in Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing, Wayman Tisdale, and Sam Perkins.
Due to the 1984 Summer Olympic Games boycott, which was led by the Soviet Union and involved 14 Eastern Bloc countries and allies, the Soviet Union national team and the Hungarian national team withdrew from the tournament.
However, the 1980 Summer Olympic Games gold medalists, Yugoslavia, defied the boycott to play at the tournament, and ultimately won the bronze medal.

==
Roster ==


==
Olympic trials ==
Trials for the team were held in April 1984 at Knight's regular base of operations at Indiana's campus in Bloomington.

Seventy players attended the trials.

Kentucky post players Sam Bowie and Melvin Turpin chose to skip the trials, in order to concentrate on the upcoming 1984 NBA draft, and Keith Lee of Memphis State, Len Bias of Maryland and Kenny Smith of North Carolina, ultimately pulled out as well.

Knight led the trials with assistant coaches George Raveling, Don Donoher and C. M. Newton, whittling the prospects down to twenty, by the end of the first week of the trials.
During the trials, Auburn junior Charles Barkley impressed with his performance - most observers felt he and North Carolina shooting guard
Michael Jordan were the two top performers.

However, Barkley's and Knight's strong personalities did not mesh, and Barkley was one of the last cuts from the roster.
Released along with Barkley, in the penultimate cut from 20 to 16 players in May, were John Stockton of Gonzaga, Terry Porter of Wisconsin-Stevens Point, and Maurice Martin of Saint Joseph's.
Knight's final cut to twelve players came in June, and the final four let go
were Tim McCormick of Michigan, Lancaster Gordon of Louisville, Johnny Dawkins of Duke and Barkley's Auburn teammate
Chuck Person (Dawkins and Person served as alternates for the team).

The most controversial selection was Knight's own Indiana player, Steve Alford, who was the team's youngest member at 19 and not expected by most to make the team.
Prior to the Olympics, the team played eight games against NBA All-Star teams including Larry Bird, Magic Johnson, Kevin McHale, Robert Parish, Isiah Thomas  and Mark Aguirre and won all eight.
==
Olympic tournament ==
The team went 8–0 in the Olympic tournament, averaging 95.4 points per game, and holding their opponents to 63.3.

Four players averaged double-figures in scoring: Michael Jordan (17.1), Chris Mullin (11.6), Patrick Ewing (11.0) and Steve Alford (10.3).

Wayman Tisdale led the team in rebounding (5.9 per game), while Leon Wood led the team in assists (7.9 per game).

===
Results ===
USA 97, China 49
USA 89, Canada 68
USA 104, Uruguay 68
USA 120, France 62
USA 101, Spain 68
USA 78, Federal Republic of Germany 67
USA 78, Canada 59
USA 96, Spain 65


==
Legacy ==
The 1984 Summer Olympics was a coming-out party for Michael Jordan, who led the U. S. team in scoring and dazzled the worldwide viewing audience with his athleticism and speed, including during the sweep of the NBA All-Stars before the Olympics.
In addition to Jordan, the team featured two other future Hall of Fame members in Patrick Ewing and Chris Mullin (both of whom would later reunite with Jordan, as a part of the 1992 Dream Team).

Jordan recalled that while this Olympic experience was exciting, it had also been trying because of Knight: "I don't know if I would have done it if I knew what Knight was going to be like.
"The
Olympics and trials helped the draft stock of several players.
Vern Fleming and Jeff Turner parlayed their Olympic exposure into first-round spots in the 1984 NBA draft, while several players that were cut from the team, either received strong recommendations from Knight (future Hall of Fame member John Stockton and Tim McCormick), or benefited from exposure from the trials (Charles Barkley and Lancaster Gordon).

== See also ==
1984 Summer Olympics
Basketball at the 1984 Summer Olympics
United States at the 1984 Summer Olympics
United States
men's national basketball team


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Team profile at USA Basketball official site
S. Ryan Smith is an American billionaire businessman.
He is the executive chairman and cofounder of Qualtrics, an experience management company based in Provo, Utah, United States.
In 2016, he was included in Fortune's "40 Under 40".
In October 2020, Smith agreed to purchase the Utah Jazz from the Miller family for US$1.66 billion, and on December 18, the NBA's Board of Governors unanimously approved the transfer of ownership.

==
Early life and education ==
Smith was born in Eugene, Oregon.
His father, Scott M. Smith, worked as a university professor and is one of the co-founders of Qualtrics.
Ryan's mother, Nancy Smith Hill, holds a Ph.D. in information systems and is an entrepreneur.
While he was attending Brigham Young University’s Marriott School of Business, he founded Qualtrics with his father, and his brother, Jared Smith.
During his junior year he dropped out of school to spend more time working on Qualtrics, though he eventually returned to school and finished his degree in 2016.

==
Utah Jazz ==
On October 28, 2020, Gail Miller announced that Smith had agreed to purchase a majority stake in the Utah Jazz NBA franchise.
The purchase agreement also included Vivint Arena, the Salt Lake City Stars of the NBA G League, and management of the Salt Lake Bees.
Miller had previously put the team into a legacy trust with the objective of keeping the Jazz in Utah.
As part of the announcement, Miller stated, "I am fully persuaded that with this sale, the objectives of the (Larry H. Miller) trust will be honored, and the new owners have made the same commitment to keep the team in Utah."
==
Wealth ==
As of March 2021, Forbes estimated Smith's net worth at $1.5 billion.

==
Personal life ==
Ryan is married to Ashley Smith.
They live together in Provo, Utah with their five children.
Smith is a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

==
References ==
Stephen Parish (born 1965) is the part-owner and chairman of Crystal Palace Football Club.

==
Early life and education ==
Parish was born in Forest Hill, London, attending Christ Church School and later Colfe's School.

==
Career ==
Steve Parish began his career working in computer graphics.
He went on to buy a stake in a company called Adplates Ltd, assuming control of the business and renaming it Tag Worldwide, transforming it from a London-based business to a global production powerhouse with 2,800 employees in 13 countries.
He sold the business to Deutsche Post DHL Group’s Willliam Lea in 2011.
In April 2017, it was announced that Parish was going to join the Dragons' Den line-up for the 15th series of the show.
However, it was later announced by Parish that he had withdrawn.
===
Crystal Palace Football Club ===
In June 2010, Parish led a consortium called 'CPFC 2010' to acquire Crystal Palace and save the club from a second spell in administration and from imminent liquidation after negotiating a £3.5m deal to buy Selhurst Park from Lloyds Bank.
He became chairman and leading shareholder of the Club with three fellow supporters, Stephen Browett, Jeremy Hosking and Martin Long.
In January 2011, Parish unveiled plans to move Crystal Palace to a new 40,000-seat stadium at their original home – now the National Sports Centre.
In May 2013, the South London based club were promoted to the English Premier League after beating Watford in the play-off final at Wembley Stadium, beginning an unbroken seven-season stay in English football’s top division, a record for the Club.

A deal was completed in December 2015 with US investors David Blitzer and Josh Harris, in which they each took an 18% stake in the Club, injecting £50m capital and becoming co-owners alongside Parish, who remained chairman.
In 2016, Crystal Palace reached the FA Cup Final but were beaten 2-1 by Manchester United.

In December 2017, Parish announced £
75m-£100m plans to redevelop Selhurst Park, commissioning stadium architects KSS to build a new five-story Main Stand to increase the capacity from 26,000 to 34,000, transforming the matchday experience and providing enhanced community facilities.
After the scheme was granted planning permission by Croydon Council in April 2018, Parish said: "This project will not only transform the stadium, which has been our home since 1924, but it will also have a positive impact on the south London community”.
Parish revealed plans in October 2019 for a £20m redevelopment of the Club’s Academy, having secured a long-term lease for the site in Beckenham in December 2018, with enhanced playing and welfare facilities for the Club’s young players.
In July 2020, a month after Bromley Council granted planning permission, the Academy was awarded Category 1 status by the Premier League.
In May 2020, Parish was credited by influential TV pundit Gary Neville with playing a key role in the return of Premier League football after the coronavirus pandemic following his support for ‘Project Restart’ in a Sunday Times column.
In a Sunday Times column in October 2020, Parish explained why the Premier League was right to reject ‘Project Big Picture’, a plan by six of its members to restructure the league, and in April 2021, Parish was very critical of the proposed European Super League, calling it a "self-appointed elite".

==
References ==
The National Basketball Players Association (NBPA) is a labor union that represents National Basketball Association (NBA) players.

It was founded in 1954, making it the oldest trade union of the four major North American professional sports leagues.
However, the NBPA did not get recognition by NBA team owners until ten years later.
Its offices are located in the historic Park and Tilford Building in New York City.
It was briefly a trade association after dissolving as a union during the 2011 NBA lockout.

==
History ==


===
Founding and struggle for recognition (1954-1957) ===
In 1954, Celtics star point guard Bob Cousy and friend and unofficial agent Joe Sharry.
canvassed long-tenured players on each of the league's teams by mail, including the fledgling NBA's stars Paul Arizin and Dolph Schayes, and received support from the majority to approach the NBA President Maurice Podoloff.
Cousy and the players sought basic improvements of conditions including being paid for promotional activities, a limit of twenty exhibition games per season, impartial dispute arbitration, and moving expenses for traded players.
While back pay for players of folded franchises was granted by Podoloff, the NBA refused to acknowledge the players association or make other changes until Cousy approached the AFL-CIO in 1957 and the players threatened a strike.

===
Recognition, early successes, stalled negotiations (1957-1964) ===
After formal recognition by the NBA, the NBPA won its players per diem payments and travel expenses and an increase in the playoff pool payment, and the majority of the previously demanded conditions.
In 1958, however, dismayed at the lack of dues payments by players, Cousy would resign his position from frustration.
He was succeeded by Celtics
second year player Tom Heinsohn, who had studied labor relations at university and worked as a pension planner for an insurance company in his day job, and whose father was a union official in Union City, New Jersey.
Heinsohn began negotiating a pension plan for players, asking $100 per month for five years of service and $200 per month for ten years of service for players aged over 65.
Negotiations stalled with new NBA President Walter Kennedy and the NBP and the league entered a stalemate for most of 1964.

=== 1964
All Star game strike ===
At the 1964 NBA All-Star Game in Boston, the Heinsohn organised a wildcat strike to force the NBA owners to recognise the union's demands.
The game was to be the struggling NBA's first live television broadcast, and the league had to this point ignored the NBPA's demands delivered to league offices during the NBA off-season, and repeatedly refusing to meet with or acknowledge executive director Larry Fleisher as the union's authorized bargaining agent.
The NBPA presented the assembled team owners with a list of demands to be met before
the All Star game would be played: the pension plan, athletic trainers for every team, and the removal of matinee Sunday games after Saturday night games from the schedule.
After twenty-two minutes of the players holding out in a locker room, the door of which was guarded by a Boston police officer and with owners threatening the players with blacklisting and punishment, league commissioner Walter Kennedy agreed to the player's demands, and the live broadcast went to air after a slight delay.

===
Salary cap ===
In 1983, players and owners reach a historic agreement, that introduced the "salary cap" era into professional sports.

This was believed to be the first salary cap in any major professional sports league in the United States.

=== 1995 NBA labor dispute ===
The NBA experienced its first work stoppage, when owners imposed a lockout, that lasted from July 1 through September 12, when players and owners reached an agreement.

Because the lockout took place during the off-season, no games were lost.

===
1998–99 lockout ===
The second NBA lockout, which ran into the 1998–99 season, lasted almost 200 days, and wiped out 464 regular-season games.

After players and owners reached an agreement, the season did not start until February 5, 1999, with each of the 29 NBA teams playing a 50-game schedule.

===
2011 lockout ===
The current collective bargaining agreement was reached in July 2005, and expired at 12:01 EST on July 1, 2011, following completion of the 2010–11 NBA season, resulting in a lockout, similar to the 2011 NFL lockout.
ESPN has reported that the owners and players failed to reach an agreement and broke off negotiations, and that the owners began a lockout immediately after the collective bargaining agreement expired.
On November 14, the NBPA was converted from a union into a trade association, enabling the players as individual employees to be represented by lawyers in a class action antitrust lawsuit against the league, calling the lockout an illegal group boycott.
The NBPA re-formed as a union on December 1, receiving support from over 300 players, exceeding the requirement for at least 260.

=== 2013–present
===
In February 2013, Billy Hunter was ousted unanimously as executive director of the National Basketball Players Association (NBPA) amid charges of nepotism and other concerns.
17 months later on July 29, 2014, Michele Roberts, a Washington, D.C. litigator, was elected as the new executive director of the National Basketball Players Association.
She became the first female executive director of NBPA and the first woman to head a major professional sports union in North America.
She would help avoid an opt-out labor dispute from occurring in 2017 with negotiations taking place early in 2016.

In February 2018 at All-Star Weekend, the NBPA unveiled its new marketing and licensing arm, THINK450, the innovation engine of the NBPA.
The union controls the intellectual property rights of the 450 players as a group off the court, giving way for brand partnerships and sponsorship opportunities.

After the season had been suspended earlier in the year, on June 5, 2020, the NBPA approved negotiations with the NBA to resume the regular season for 22 teams in the NBA Bubble.
During the 2020 NBA Finals, NBPA President Chris Paul announced that over 90% of the NBA has now registered to vote for the 2020 presidential election.
He also stated that 15 teams in the league are 100% registered to vote.
According to a tweet by Top Ball Coverage, the league only had 20% of players registered to vote in the 2016 presidential election.
The players took multiple actions in the NBA Bubble: writing phrases or names on the back of their jerseys to support the Black Lives Matter movement, boycotting games in response to the shooting of Jacob Blake, and taking a knee during the national anthem to discriminate against racial inequality and police brutality.

==
Leadership ==


===
Executive directors ===
Larry Fleisher (1970–1988)
Charles Grantham (1988–1995)
Simon Gourdine (1995–1996)
Alex English (1996, interim)
Billy Hunter (1996–2013)
Michele Roberts (2014–present)


===
Presidents ===
Bob Cousy:
(1954–1958)
Tom Heinsohn: (1958–1965)
Oscar Robertson: (1965–1974)
Paul Silas: (1974–1980)
Bob Lanier: (1980–1985)
Junior Bridgeman: (1985 – February 1988)
Alex English: (February 1988 – October 5, 1988)
Isiah Thomas: (October 5, 1988 – February 13, 1994)
Buck Williams: (February 13, 1994 – September 15, 1997)
Patrick Ewing: (September 15, 1997 – July 10, 2001)
Michael Curry: (July 10, 2001 – June 28, 2005)
Antonio Davis: (June 28, 2005 – November 19, 2006)
Derek Fisher: (November 19, 2006 – August 21, 2013)
Chris Paul:
(August 21, 2013–present)


===
Vice presidents ===
Roger Mason Jr.:
(August 21, 2013 – June 23, 2017)
Steve Blake: (August 21, 2013 – June 23, 2017)
Kyle Korver: (February 12, 2016 – June 23, 2017)
Carmelo Anthony: (June 23, 2017– February 18, 2019)
Stephen Curry: (June 23, 2017– February 18, 2019)
Pau Gasol: (June 23, 2017 – February 17, 2020)
LeBron James: (June 23, 2017 – February 2, 2020)
Andre Iguodala: (June 23, 2017–present)
Garrett Temple: (June 23, 2017–present)
Bismack Biyombo:(February 18, 2019 – present)
Jaylen Brown:(February 18, 2019 – present)
Malcolm Brogdon: (February 18, 2019 – present)
CJ McCollum: (February 18, 2018–present)
Kyrie Irving: (February 17, 2020 – present) 


===
Secretary-treasurers ===
James Jones: (February 6, 2017 – July 18, 2017)
Anthony Tolliver (2019–2021)
Harrison Barnes (2021–Present)


==
Initiatives ==
The NBPA organizes Sportscaster U., an annual broadcasting training camp at Syracuse University in association with the Newhouse School of Public Communications.
In past ten years, hundreds of NBA players have attended this camp, and went on to successful careers in broadcasting.

==
Awards ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Charlotte Hornets:
Bismack Biyombo elected as Vice President for NBPA
Captain Arthur "Art" Ryan Smith Jr. OC AOE DFC (May 16, 1919 – June 30, 2008) was a Canadian oilfield worker, fighter pilot, executive business man, philanthropist, magazine editor, advertising executive and politician on the municipal, provincial and federal levels of government.

==
Early life ==
Arthur Ryan Smith was born in Calgary, Alberta, on May 16, 1919, to Arthur LeRoy Smith, Member of Parliament for Calgary West from 1945 to 1951, and Sara Isobel Ryan.
He grew up in Calgary and in British Columbia.
He got his first job as an oil field worker at the age of 16 in Turner Valley, Alberta, and spent four years working in the oil patch.
At the outbreak of World War II Smith enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force and became a pilot.

He flew 34 combat missions on Lancaster bombers and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross.

When Smith returned home from the war he went back to work in the oil patch.
He worked his way up from roughneck to Assistant of the President at the Anglo-American Oil Company.
In 1952 he became editor for the publication Petroleum Exploration Digest.
Smith and Ron Butlin co-hosted a weekly sports radio show during the 1950s on CFAC.

==
Municipal politics ==
Smith was elected to Calgary city council in 1953 and served there until 1955 when he decided to run for a seat in the provincial legislature.

Smith returned to city council after retiring from federal politics in 1963.
He was elected in 1965 and remained in office until 1967.

==
Provincial politics ==
Smith ran as a candidate in the Calgary provincial electoral district in the 1955 Alberta general election.
He finished first in the vote counts on the first ballot.

He resigned in 1957 to run for Parliament.

==
Federal politics ==
Smith ran in the district of Calgary South in the 1957 federal election.
He won by 10,000 votes over Donald McKay.

In the election the following year, he won by 23,000 votes over the nearest candidate.

In the 1962 federal election.
His margin of victory was significantly reduced, but he still won in a landslide.
Smith retired from federal politics in 1963 at the dissolution of the house.
During his time as a Member of Parliament, he served as a delegate to the United Nations.

==
Late life ==
Smith became an influential business man after his career in public office.

In 1961 he and Milt Harradence used their political influence with Prime John Diefenbaker to make Lynn Garrison's Lancaster Memorial Fund a success.
This saw Lancaster FM-136, purchased from Crown Assets Disposal Corporation by Lynn Garrison, displayed at McCall Field, Calgary as a memorial to those who had trained under the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan.
Smith had won his Distinguished Flying Cross while flying Lancasters during World War II.
He served as an executive on numerous companies, sat on public boards, and volunteered in youth sports programs.
In 1988 he was appointed Chief of Protocol for the 1988 Winter Olympic Games in Calgary.
In 1998, Smith founded the Calgary Homeless Foundation, a registered charity committed to end homelessness in Calgary.

In 2006 he endorsed Mark Norris for the leadership of the Alberta Progressive Conservative Party.

==
Awards ==
Smith became a member of the Order of Canada in 1988 and an officer in 2003.
That same year he was also given an honorary doctor of laws degree from the University of Calgary.

He was awarded the Alberta Order of Excellence and in 1997 he became Honorary Colonel of the 416 Tactical Fighter Squadron.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Legislative Assembly of Alberta Members Listing

Arthur Ryan Smith – Parliament of Canada biography
Warren Easton Charter High School is a secondary school in New Orleans, Louisiana.
The Warren Easton Charter Foundation governs the school, which is chartered by New Orleans Public Schools.

==
History ==
The school was founded in 1843 as Boys High School.
It was the first high school in the State of Louisiana and as a public school was formed to educate the working-class population of the city of New Orleans.
By 1855 the school had expanded to four locations.
After the Civil War in 1867, the four Boys High Schools were merged into Consolidated Boys High School.
In 1911, the Orleans Parish School Board bought a property for a new high school and construction began during that year.
The school received its name in 1911, Warren Easton High School.
It was named after Warren Easton, the first Supervisor of Education of the State of Louisiana and the City of New Orleans.
The principal administrator and the faculty moved into 3019 Canal Street in 1913.
The school was originally an all-boys school and in 1952 the school became coeducational.
In 1967, Easton was racially integrated and in 1977 the school became a fundamental magnet school.
Prior to 2005, the school was directly under the authority of the Orleans Parish School Board.
In 2005, as Hurricane Katrina was about to hit, the New Orleans Regional Transit Authority (RTA) designated Easton as a place where people could receive transportation to the Louisiana Superdome, a shelter of last resort.
After Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans, the school was closed for one year.

In 2006, the school re-opened as a charter school and became Warren Easton Charter High School.
n 2007, actress Sandra Bullock adopted the school.
Bullock contributed thousands of dollars to the school and also helped to build an on-campus health clinic.

==
Curriculum ==
In the 1930s the school hosted German language classes for adults.
Chinese and Spanish are offered to students as a foreign language as of 2015.

==
Athletics ==
Warren Easton Charter athletics competes in the LHSAA.

==
Notable alumni ==
Salvador Anzelmo,
Louisiana state representative
Lynn Dean, member of the Louisiana State Senate, 1996 to 2004; former parish president for St. Bernard Parish
Charles Foti (Class of 1953), former Attorney General of Louisiana; former criminal sheriff of Orleans Parish
Pete Fountain, clarinetist
Royce Johnson, actor
Anthony Mackie (Class of 1997), Actor
Master P (Class of 1987), rapper
Lee Harvey Oswald, assassin of US President John F. Kennedy
Louis Prima, Bandleader
Clay Shaw, businessman implicated by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison in the assassination of Kennedy
Trombone Shorty (Class of 2004), Trumpet player
Steve Van Buren,
NFL halfback


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Warren Easton Charter High School website
Josh Kroenke (born May 7, 1980) is an American heir to the Walmart family inheritance and to Kroenke Sports & Entertainment, his father's sports-media conglomerate.
He is involved in running the Denver Nuggets basketball franchise, the Colorado Avalanche ice hockey franchise, the Colorado Rapids soccer franchise, and Arsenal.
The company co-owns Elitch Gardens Theme Park as well.
In 2021, Kroenke was involved in an aborted effort to end the traditional European football system by creating a closed European Super League which would have included Arsenal and several other teams.

==
Early life ==
Josh Kroenke was born on May 7, 1980.
His father is Stan Kroenke and his mother, Ann Walton Kroenke.
Through his mother, he is a member of the Walton family, the richest family in the world, who founded Walmart and still own a controlling interest.
He has a sister, Whitney Kroenke Burditt.
He grew up in Columbia, Missouri, and attended Rock Bridge High School.
He graduated from the University of Missouri, where he received a full basketball scholarship.
While in college, Kroenke found himself involved in a scandal which led to the resignation of Larry Eustachy, the coach of the Iowa State basketball team.
In 2003, Eustachy, a friend of Josh's father Stan Kroenke, attended a student party with Josh in Columbia, Missouri.
Photos of Eustachy drinking with college students at the party later surfaced and led to his resignation from his position at Iowa State.

==
Career ==
He now serves as the President of both the National Basketball Association's Denver Nuggets and  National Hockey League's Colorado Avalanche.
In 2013, he was appointed by his father, the majority shareholder, to the board of English association football club Arsenal as a non-executive director.
As directors of Arsenal, the Kroenkes have garnered significant antipathy from supporters who feel that they have no ambition and are merely using it for their own profit at the expense of the team's decline.

In April 2021, Arsenal were announced as a founding member of the European Super League, which would have effectively ended the pyramid system of European football and placed Arsenal in a closed league without prospects for meritocratic relegation and promotion.
Arsenal and the five other English clubs involved backed out within two days after a strong backlash.
After the aborted attempt to end the European football system, Arsenal protested and called for the Kroenke family to sell the club.
The Kroenke family released a statement saying they would not sell the club.

==
Personal life ==
Kroenke resides in Denver, Colorado.
Kroenke purchased an 1,885-square foot condo for $1.4 million in 2007.
Prior to his move to Denver, Kroenke lived in New York City.
He and his sister, Whitney Kroenke Burditt, purchased a 1,735-square-foot condominium, with a 400-square-foot roof deck, a small balcony and views of the Empire State Building for $2.7 million in 2005.
They sold it in 2007 for $2.45 million—below both the initial listed price of $2.995 million and their final asking price of $2.55 million.

==
References ==
The COVID-19 pandemic reached the U.S. state of Indiana on March 5, 2020 and was confirmed on March 6.
As of January 28, 2021, the Indiana State Department of Health (ISDH) had confirmed 619,995 cases in the state and 9,504 deaths.
As of July 3, 2020, all 92 counties had reported at least 10 cases with Pike County being the last to surpass this threshold.
As of December 29, 2020, Indiana has administered 76,000 COVID-19 vaccine doses, equivalent to 1.13% of the population.

==
Timeline ==


===
March 2020 ===
On March 6, Indiana health officials announced the first confirmed case of COVID-19 in Indiana, and Governor Eric Holcomb declared a public health emergency in the state.
The first case was a Marion County (Indianapolis) resident who had attended the BioGen conference in Boston.
On March 16, the first death from COVID-19 was announced.
Governor Holcomb also ordered all bars, restaurants, and nightclubs to close to in-house patrons; only take-out would be permitted.
On March 19, Governor Holcomb announced numerous actions in response to the pandemic.

These included the following:
The State of Emergency was to be extended for another 30 days beyond its previously scheduled expiration of April 5.

All K-12 schools (both public and private) were to remain closed until at least May 1, and all state-mandated standardized tests were canceled.

An Executive Order prohibiting evictions and foreclosures was issued.

Utilities were prohibited from disconnecting services.

Extensions for paying income taxes (to July 15) and property taxes (60 days beyond May 11) were granted.
On March 20, Marion County had its second death, making three for the state.
On March 21, the fourth death occurred in the state, in Muncie (Delaware County).

Three additional deaths occurred on March 22, one each in Scott, Marion, and Allen Counties.
On March 23, Governor Holcomb issued a 'stay at home' order effective March 25 through April 7.

He put the following restrictions in place:
Public gatherings were limited to 10 people
Non-essential businesses were ordered to close or allow employees to work from home.

Some examples of businesses closed included hair and nail salons, entertainment venues, theaters, and fitness centers.

Essential businesses included grocery stores, pharmacies, home improvement stores, auto repairs, medical providers, gas stations, pet care, trades, and professional services like accountants and law offices.

Penalties for violating the order could include a fine of up to $1,000 and 180 days in jail, though the Governor was vague about how enforcement would work and said police would not pull over motorists.
Governor Holcomb issued additional executive orders closing many state government offices, extending state-issued licenses and permits 60 days, and giving the Indiana Alcohol and Tobacco commission the authority to suspend or revoke liquor licenses for establishments that were not complying with a previous directive to engage in carryout sales only.
On March 26, eight residents and two staff members of a Johnson County, Indiana senior home tested positive for COVID-19.The spike in deaths on March 31 also includes some deaths from previous days.

Reporting of those deaths had been delayed pending tests confirming COVID-19.For the month of March, Indiana had 123 deaths from COVID-19, all from the second half of the month, and 2,560 cases.

Marion County had the most cases at 1,117, but cases were reported in 83 of Indiana's 92 counties.

A total of 14,375 tests were conducted.
Due to delays in receiving test results, March death totals were gradually revised upward in later months.

The first deaths, two, were actually on March 9, and the total number of deaths in March was 214.

(Each date's report is actually from the previous date ending at 11:59 pm.)
===
April 2020 ===
On April 1, Marion County extended their stay-at-home order until May 1 and closed all golf courses (effective April 3).On April 2, Indiana Superintendent of Public Instruction, Dr. Jennifer McCormick, announced that all K-12 schools would provide remote instruction for the remainder of the 2019–2020 school year.

The new order also permitted them to conclude the school year once they had provided 20 days of remote learning after April 2 (meaning the school year could end as soon as May 1), even if school had not met for 160 days.
On April 3, Governor Holcomb extended the stay-at-home order by two weeks, to April 20, and the state public health emergency by 30 days, to May 3.On April 12, cases were reported in all 92 of Indiana's counties.
On April 17, Governor Holcomb announced that the stay-at home order would be extended on April 20 to May 1.On April 27, 65 positive cases had been confirmed at a nursing home in Clarksville.

===
May 2020 ===
On May 1, Governor Holcomb announced a five-stage plan detailing the gradual reopening of business sectors in Indiana, with the final stage, completely reopening the state without restrictions, culminating on July 4.
The previous statewide lock down was retroactively deemed Stage One.
Stage Two began on May 4, with retail and commercial businesses operating at 50% capacity and mall common areas restricted to 25% capacity.
A week after entering Stage 2, restaurants can open at 50% capacity for dine-in service and personal services can be performed by appointment only.
People who can work from home are still strongly encouraged to do so.
Bars, gyms, entertainment events and venues such as zoos, concert halls, movie theaters, bowling alleys, amusement parks, playgrounds, adult day cares, casinos, community swimming pools and camps are not open during Stage 2.
However, churches will reopen on May 8.
Religious services were specifically exempted from the 25-person rule.

Additional restrictions remained in place for the three hardest-hit counties: Cass County, Lake County, and Marion County.
The continued progression of the plan is contingent on 4 guiding principles:
"The number of hospitalized COVID-19 patients statewide has decreased for 14 days.
"

"The state retains the ability to test all Hoosiers who are COVID-19 symptomatic, as well as healthcare workers, essential workers, first responders, and others as delineated on the ISDH website.
"

"The state retains its surge capacity for critical care beds and ventilators.
"

"Health officials have systems in place to contact all individuals who test positive for COVID-19 and complete contact tracing."
=== June 2020 ===
On June 3, Governor Holcomb issued Executive Order 20–30, extending the public health disaster emergency declaration to July 4.
=== August 2020 ===
Not long after public schools reopened (for the first time since March), one student and one school staff member tested positive for COVID-19.
The student tested positive on the first day of class.
The student was isolated in the school clinic under the "Positive COVID-19 Test Protocol".
Nurses began contact tracing procedures.
Under the protocol, close contacts are expected to quarantine for 14 days before they can return to school.
Staff and students who test positive can return to school after a 10-day isolation period if they have been non-symptomatic for 72 hours.
Between August 8 and August 25, the University of Notre Dame had a total of 408 confirmed positive cases.
One of Notre Dame's student newspapers, The Observer, published a front page editorial titled, "Don't Make Us Write Obituaries".
In-person classes for undergraduates were canceled for two weeks.
Students were not sent home.
On August 20, Purdue University suspended a cooperative house and 36 students for attending an off-campus party.

=== September 2020 ===
On September 1, 30 out of 40 fraternities and sororities at Indiana University Bloomington were quarantined.
The test positivity rate was 8.1%  among students living in fraternity and sorority housing, and 1.63% among students living in residence halls.
An outbreak of 14 cases was announced at Wabash College.
The number of confirmed cases at Notre Dame was 577.On September 2, Notre Dame had put security personnel at its off-campus COVID-19 quarantine and isolation sites, because some students had been  leaving their quarantine locations.

Classes resumed at Notre Dame, with the goal of phasing in all classes for in-person instruction by September 7.
Indiana University recommended that all 40 Greek life houses be closed.

=== January 2021 ===
On January 11, a confirmed case of a new, more contagious SARS-CoV-2 variant from the United Kingdom was reported in Indiana.

==
Impact on sports ==


===
National Basketball Association ===
On March 12, the National Basketball Association announced the season would be suspended for 30 days, affecting the Indiana Pacers.
On June 4, the NBA announced a preliminary plan to restart the season on July 31 with 22 teams, including the Pacers, playing all the remaining games at Walt Disney World Resort.
Teams would also practice and be housed there for the remainder of the season.

===
Women's National Basketball Association ===
On June 15, the Women's National Basketball Association announced plans to start the delayed 2020 season in late July, playing a 22-game season followed by traditional playoffs at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida.
Under the plan, all WNBA teams (including the Indiana Fever) would practice and be housed at IMG Academy for the entire season and would play all games without fans in attendance.

===
National Collegiate Athletic Association ===
On March 12, the National Collegiate Athletic Association, headquartered in Indianapolis, canceled all winter and spring tournaments, most notably the Division
I men's and women's basketball tournaments, affecting colleges and universities statewide.
The announcement came as men's basketball teams from Michigan and Rutgers were warming up on-court at Bankers Life Fieldhouse for the third game of the Big Ten men's basketball tournament.

===
Auto racing ===
On March 26, the IndyCar Series announced that the 2020 Indianapolis 500 would be held on August 24, 2020—marking the first time since the race resumed in 1946, after the conclusion of World War II, that it was not held on Memorial Day weekend.
Indianapolis Motor Speedway's road course race, the GMR Grand Prix, was held on July 4, 2020, during the NASCAR Cup Series' Brickyard 400 race weekend, as part of a double-header with the NASCAR Xfinity Series' Pennzoil 150, all of them held behind closed doors.
IndyCar had delayed the start of the 2020 season due to the pandemic.
New IndyCar and IMS owner Roger Penske disclosed in June that he preferred the 500 to be run with spectators in attendance (in order to showcase renovations made to the facility after he took ownership), and that he would be open to postponing the event to October if it cannot be held with fans in August.
On June 26, IndyCar announced that the 500 would be held in August with spectators, with capacity capped at half.
On August 4, the IMS announced that the race will be held without spectators.

===
Indiana High School Athletic Association ===
On April 2, the Indiana High School Athletic Association announced the cancellation of all spring sports tournament series events for the 2019–20 school year.

==
Impact on other events ==
On March 20, Governor Holcomb issued Executive Order 20–07, postponing the 2020 Indiana primary election, originally scheduled for May 5, to June 2.On
May 19, Gen Con organizers cancelled the 2020 Gen Con, converting 2020 registrations into registrations for Gen Con 2021 on August 5–8, 2021.On June 4, the Indiana State Fair was cancelled, having originally been scheduled for August 7 to August 23.
However, a modified 4-H Livestock Show will still take place.

==
Statistics ==


==
See also ==
Timeline of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States – for impact on the country
COVID-19 pandemic – for impact on other countries
COVID-19 at the University of Notre Dame – for impact on the University of Notre Dame, which is located in South Bend, Indiana
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Coronavirus information from the State of Indiana
The Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) is a professional basketball league in the United States.
It is currently composed of twelve teams.
The league was founded on April 22, 1996, as the women's counterpart to the National Basketball Association (NBA), and league play started in 1997.
The regular season is played from May to September, with the All Star game being played midway through the season in July (except in Olympic years) and the WNBA Finals at the end of September until the beginning of October.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, plans to hold a midseason tournament, the Commissioner's Cup, starting in the 2020 season were placed on hold.
Initially, regular-season Cup games were to be played through early July, followed by a final match in August.
The pandemic also led to the entire 2020 season being held without fans at the IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida.

Five WNBA teams have direct NBA counterparts and normally play in the same arena:
Indiana Fever, Los Angeles Sparks, Minnesota Lynx, New York Liberty, and Phoenix Mercury.
The Atlanta Dream, Chicago Sky, Connecticut Sun, Dallas Wings, Las Vegas Aces,  Seattle Storm, and Washington Mystics do not share an arena with a direct NBA counterpart, although four of the seven (the Dream, the Sky, the Wings, and the Mystics) share a market with an NBA counterpart, and the Storm shared an arena and market with an NBA team at the time of its founding.
The Dream, Sky, Sun, Wings, Aces, Sparks, and Storm are all independently owned.

==
History ==


===
League founded and play begins (1996–97) ===
The creation of the WNBA was officially approved by the NBA Board of Governors on April 24, 1996, and announced at a press conference with Rebecca Lobo, Lisa Leslie, and Sheryl Swoopes in attendance.
The new WNBA had to compete with the recently formed American Basketball League, another professional women's basketball league that began play in the fall of 1996 but would cease operation during its 1998–99 season.

The WNBA began with eight teams: the Charlotte Sting, Cleveland Rockers, Houston Comets, and New York Liberty in the Eastern Conference; and the Los Angeles Sparks, Phoenix Mercury, Sacramento Monarchs, and Utah Starzz in the Western Conference.
While not the first major women's professional basketball league in the United States (a distinction held by the defunct WBL), the WNBA is the only league to receive full backing of the NBA.
The WNBA logo, "Logo Woman", paralleled the NBA logo and was selected out of 50 different designs.
On the heels of a much-publicized gold medal run by the 1996 USA Basketball Women's National Team at the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, the WNBA began its first season on June 21, 1997 to little fanfare.
The first WNBA game featured the New York Liberty facing the Los Angeles Sparks in Los Angeles.
The game was televised nationally in the United States on the NBC television network.
At the start of the 1997 season, the WNBA had television deals in place with NBC (NBA rights holder), and the Walt Disney Company and Hearst Corporation joint venture channels, ESPN and Lifetime Television Network, respectively.
Penny Toler scored the league's first point.
===
Houston domination and league expansion (1997–2000) ===
The WNBA centered its marketing campaign, dubbed "We Got Next", around stars Rebecca Lobo, Lisa Leslie, and Sheryl Swoopes.
In the league's first season, Leslie's Los Angeles Sparks underperformed, and Swoopes sat out much of the season due to her pregnancy.
The WNBA's true star in 1997 was WNBA MVP Cynthia Cooper, Swoopes' teammate on the Houston Comets.
The Comets defeated Lobo's New York Liberty in the first WNBA Championship game.

The initial "We Got Next" advertisement ran before each WNBA season until it was replaced with the "We Got Game" campaign.

Two teams were added in 1998 (Detroit and Washington), and two more were added in 1999 (Orlando and Minnesota), bringing the number of teams in the league up to twelve.
The 1999 season began with a collective bargaining agreement between players and the league, marking the first collective bargaining agreement to be signed in the history of women's professional sports.

The WNBA also announced in 1999 that it would add four more teams for the 2000 season (the Indiana Fever, the Seattle Storm, the Miami Sol, and the Portland Fire), bringing the league up to 16 teams, with WNBA President Val Ackerman discussing expansion: "This won't be the end of it.
We expect to keep growing the league.
"In 1999
, the league's chief competition, the American Basketball League, folded.
Many of the ABL's star players, including several Olympic gold medalists (such as Nikki McCray and Dawn Staley) and a number of standout college performers (including Kate Starbird and Jennifer Rizzotti), then joined the rosters of WNBA teams and, in so doing, enhanced the overall quality of play in the league.
When a lockout resulted in an abbreviated NBA season, the WNBA saw faltering TV viewership.

On May 23, 2000, the Houston Comets became the first WNBA team to be invited to the White House Rose Garden.
Before this invitation, only men's sports teams had traveled to the White House.

At the end of the 2000 season, the Houston Comets won their fourth championship, capturing every title since the league's inception.
Led by the "Big Three" of Sheryl Swoopes, Tina Thompson, and four-time Finals MVP Cynthia Cooper, the Comets dominated every team in the league.
Under head coach Van Chancellor, the team posted a 98–24 record through their first four seasons (16–3 in the Playoffs).
After 2000, Cooper retired from the league, and the Comets' dynasty came to an end.
===
The L.A. Sparks; new league ownership and contraction (2001–2002) ===
The top contender in the 2001 season was the Los Angeles Sparks.
Led by Lisa Leslie, the Sparks posted a regular-season record of 28–4.
They advanced to their first ever WNBA Finals and swept the Charlotte Sting.

Looking to repeat in 2002, the Sparks again made a strong run toward the postseason, going 25–7 in the regular season under head coach Michael Cooper, formerly of the Los Angeles Lakers.
Again, Leslie dominated opponents throughout the Playoffs, leading the Sparks to a perfect 6–0 record through all three rounds, beating the New York Liberty in the 2002 Finals.

Teams and the league were collectively owned by the NBA until the end of 2002, when the NBA sold WNBA teams either to their NBA counterparts in the same city or to a third party as a result of the dot-com bubble.
This led to two teams moving: Utah moved to San Antonio, and Orlando moved to Connecticut and became the first WNBA team to be owned by a third party instead of an NBA franchise.
This sale of teams also led to two teams folding, the Miami Sol and Portland Fire, because new owners could not be found.

===
Bill Laimbeer leaves his mark (2003–2006) ===
The WNBA Players Association threatened to strike in 2003 if a new deal was not worked out between players and the league.
The result was a delay in the start of the 2003 preseason.
The 2003 WNBA Draft was also delayed, and negative publicity was gained from this strike.
After taking over a struggling franchise in 2002, former Detroit Pistons forward Bill Laimbeer had high hopes for the Detroit Shock in 2003.
The team was just 9–23 in 2002.
The Shock had three all-stars in the 2003 All-Star Game (Swin Cash, Cheryl Ford, and Deanna Nolan).
Laimbeer orchestrated a worst-to-first turnaround and the Shock finished the season 25–9 in first place in the Eastern Conference.
Winning the first two rounds of the Playoffs, the Shock faced two-time champion Los Angeles Sparks and Lisa Leslie in the 2003 Finals.
The Shock beat the Sparks, winning game three on a three-pointer by Deanna Nolan.

After the 2003 season, the Cleveland Rockers, one of the league's original eight teams, folded because the owners were unwilling to continue operating the franchise.

Val Ackerman, the first WNBA president, resigned effective February 1, 2005, citing the desire to spend more time with her family.
Ackerman later became president of USA Basketball.
On February 15, 2005, NBA Commissioner David Stern announced that Donna Orender, who had been serving as the Senior Vice President of the PGA Tour and who had played for several teams in the now-defunct Women's Pro Basketball League, would be Ackerman's successor as of April 2005.

The WNBA awarded an expansion team to Chicago (later named the Sky) in February 2006.
In the off-season, a set of rule changes was approved that made the WNBA more like the NBA.In 2006, the league became the first team-oriented women's professional sports league to exist for ten consecutive seasons.
On the occasion of the tenth anniversary, the WNBA released its All-Decade Team, comprising the ten WNBA players to have contributed, through on-court play and off-court activities, the most to women's basketball during the league's existence.

After missing out on the Finals in 2004 and 2005, the Shock bounced back in 2006 behind newly acquired Katie Smith, along with six remaining members from their 2003 Finals run (Cash, Ford, Holland-Corn, Nolan, Powell, and Riley).
The Shock finished second in the Eastern Conference and knocked off first-seeded Connecticut in the second round of the Playoffs.
The Shock faced reigning champion Sacramento Monarchs in a five-game series.
The Shock won game five on their home floor.

===
Bringing "Paul Ball" to the WNBA (2007–2009) ===
In December 2006, the Charlotte Bobcats organization announced it would no longer operate the Charlotte Sting.
Soon after, the WNBA announced that the Sting would not operate for 2007.
A dispersal draft was held on January 8, 2007.
Teams selected in inverse order of their 2006 records; Chicago received the first pick.

Former Los Angeles Lakers championship coach Paul Westhead was named head coach of the Phoenix Mercury on October 11, 2005, bringing his up-tempo style of play to the WNBA.
This fast-paced offense was perfect for his team, especially after the league shortened the shot clock from 30 seconds to 24 seconds in 2006.
Much like the early Houston Comets championship teams, the Phoenix Mercury had risen to prominence led by their own "Big Three" of Cappie Pondexter, Diana Taurasi, and Penny Taylor.

The Mercury was well-suited for the fast offense behind these three players.
Phoenix averaged a league-record 88.97 points per game in 2007; teams could not keep up with the new style of play, and the Mercury were propelled into first place in the Western Conference.
Facing the reigning champion Detroit Shock, the Mercury imposed their high-scoring offense with hopes of capturing their first title in franchise history.
Averaging 93.2 points per game in the Finals series, the Mercury beat Detroit on their home floor in front of 22,076 fans in game five to claim their first-ever WNBA title.

In October 2007 the WNBA awarded another expansion franchise to Atlanta.
Atlanta businessman Ron Terwilliger was the original owner of the new team.
Citizens of Atlanta were able to vote for their choices for the new team's nickname and colors.
The Dream, as they were named, played their first regular-season game on May 17, which was a 67–100 loss to the Connecticut Sun.

Paul Westhead resigned from the Mercury after capturing the 2007 title and Penny Taylor opted to stay home to prepare for the 2008 Summer Olympics, causing the Mercury to falter in 2008.
The team posted a 16–18 record and became the first team in WNBA history to miss the Playoffs after winning the championship in the previous season.
In their place, the Detroit Shock won their third championship under coach Bill Laimbeer, solidifying their place in WNBA history before Laimbeer resigned early in 2009, effectively ending the Shock dynasty.

During the 2008 regular season, the first-ever outdoor professional basketball game in North America was played at Arthur Ashe Stadium in New York City.
The Indiana Fever defeated the New York Liberty 71–55 in front of over 19,000 fans.

Late in 2008, the WNBA took over ownership of one of the league's original franchises, the Houston Comets.
The Comets ceased operations on December 1, 2008, after no owners for the franchise could be found.
A dispersal draft took place on December 8, 2008, and with the first pick, Sancho Lyttle was taken by the Atlanta Dream.

After an unsatisfying conclusion in 2008, the Mercury looked to bounce back to championship caliber.
New head coach Corey Gaines implemented Paul Westhead's style of play, and the Mercury averaged 92.82 points per game throughout the 2009 season.
Helped by the return of Penny Taylor, the Mercury once again locked up first place in the Western Conference and advanced to the 2009 Finals.
The championship series was a battle of contrasting styles as the Mercury (number one league offense, 92.82 points per game) had to face the Indiana Fever (number three league defense, 73.55 points per game).
The series went five games, including arguably one of the most thrilling games in WNBA history in game one of the series (Phoenix won in overtime, 120–116.
The Mercury beat the Fever in game five, this time on their home court, to capture their second WNBA championship.

Not only did Paul Westhead's system influence his Mercury team, but it created a domino effect throughout the league.
Young athletic players were capable of scoring more and playing at a faster pace.
As a league, the 2010 average of 80.35 points per game was the best, far surpassing the 69.2 average in the league's inaugural season.

===
Changing of the guard (2010–2012) ===
On October 20, 2009, the WNBA announced that the Detroit Shock would relocate to Tulsa, Oklahoma; the team is now called the Tulsa Shock.
On November 20, 2009, the WNBA announced that the Sacramento Monarchs had folded due to lack of support from its current owners, the Maloof family, who were also the owners of the Sacramento Kings at the time.
The league announced it would seek new owners to relocate the team to the San Francisco Bay area; however, no ownership was found and a dispersal draft was held on December 14, 2009.

The 2010 season saw a tight race in the East, with three teams being tied for first place on the final day of the regular season.
Five of the six teams in the East were in first place at some point during the season.
The East held a .681 winning percentage over the West, its highest ever.
In the 2010 Finals, two new teams represented each conference: the Seattle Storm and the Atlanta Dream.
Seattle made their first finals appearance since winning it all in 2004, and Atlanta, coming into the playoffs as a four seed, impressively swept its opponents in the first two rounds to advance to the Finals in only the third year of the team's existence.

After the 2010 season, President Orender announced she would be resigning from her position as of December 31.
On April 21, 2011, NBA commissioner David Stern announced that former Girl Scouts of the USA Senior Vice President and Chief Marketing Officer
Laurel J. Richie would assume duties as president on May 16, 2011.

The 2011 season began with strong publicity helped by the rising young stars of the league and the NBA lockout.

The 2011 NBA lockout began on July 1, 2011.
Unlike the previous lockout, which affected the WNBA, president Laurel J. Richie confirmed that this lockout would not affect the WNBA.
If the NBA season was shortened or canceled, the 2012 WNBA season (including the WNBA teams still owned by NBA owners) would run as planned.
The lockout ended on November 26, and NBA teams would play a 66-game regular season following the lockout.

Many news outlets began covering the league more frequently.
NBA TV, the television home of the NBA scheduled over 70 regular-season games to be televised (along with a dozen more on ESPN2 and ABC).
The new influx of young talent into the league gave many teams something to be excited about.
Players like Candace Parker of the Sparks, Maya Moore of the Lynx, DeWanna Bonner of the Mercury, Angel McCoughtry of the Dream, Sylvia Fowles of the Sky, Tina Charles of the Sun, and Liz Cambage of the Shock brought a new level of excitement to the game, adding talent to the teams of young veterans such as Diana Taurasi, Seimone Augustus and Cappie Pondexter.
The level of play seemed to be evidenced by higher scoring, better defense, and higher shooting percentages.
By the end of the 2011 regular season, nine of the twelve teams in the league had increased attendance over their 2010 averages.
Connecticut Sun center Tina Charles set a league record for double-doubles in a season with 23.
Also, Sylvia Fowles of the Chicago Sky became only the second player in WNBA history to finish a season averaging at least 20 points (20.0ppg) and 10 rebounds (10.2rpg) per game.
The San Antonio Silver Stars experienced boosts from their young players as well; rookie Danielle Adams scored 32 points off the bench in June and fellow rookie Danielle Robinson had a 36-point game in September.
Atlanta Dream forward
Angel McCoughtry was the first player in league history to average over 20 points per game (21.6ppg) while playing under 30 minutes per game (27.9mpg).

McCoughtry led her team to the Finals for the second straight year, but despite breaking her own Finals scoring record, the Dream was swept for the second straight year, this time by the Minnesota Lynx, which won its first title behind a fully healthy Seimone Augustus.

2012 featured a long Olympic break.
The Indiana Fever won that year's WNBA championship.
===
The Three to See (2013) ===
The much-publicized 2013 WNBA Draft produced Baylor University star Brittney Griner, Delaware's Elena Delle Donne, and Notre Dame All American Skylar Diggins (now Diggins-Smith) as the top three picks, the draft was the first to be televised in primetime on ESPN.
Griner, Delle Donne, and Diggins have thus been labeled "The Three
To See",
but with the draft also came standouts such as Tayler Hill, Layshia Clarendon and Alex Bentley.
The retirement of legends Katie Smith, Tina Thompson, Ticha Penicheiro, and Sheryl Swoopes coupled with the arrival of highly touted rookies and new rule changes effectively marked the end of an era for the WNBA and the ushering of another.
On the court, the Minnesota Lynx won their second title in three years, defeating the Atlanta Dream in the Finals and becoming the first team to sweep the playoff since the Seattle Storm.

The promotion of Griner, Delle Donne, and Diggins helped boost television ratings for the league by 28 percent, and half of the teams ended the season profitable.
The improved health of the league was on display after the season, when the Los Angeles Sparks' ownership group folded; it took the league only a few weeks to line up Guggenheim Partners to purchase the team, and the franchise also garnered interest from the ownership of the Golden State Warriors.

===
New CBA and Commissioner's Cup (2020) ===
During the 2018 season, the WNBA players' union opted out of the collective bargaining agreement (CBA) with the league, which then ended after the 2019 season.
In January 2020, the league and union announced that they had reached an agreement on a new CBA to take effect with the 2020 season and running through 2027.
Among the features of the new agreement are:
Total player compensation will increase by slightly over 50%.
While most of this increase will go to star players, all players will benefit to some degree, and both sides were interested mainly in limiting, if not eliminating, overseas play by the league's top players.

Players will be able to reach unrestricted free agency a year earlier than before.
The previous CBA allowed a team to designate a player as "core"—similar
to the NFL's franchise tag—four times.
This drops to three in 2020 and will drop further to two in 2022.

All player air travel to regular-season games will be, at a minimum, premium economy class.
Also, each player will have her own hotel room for road games.

Players will receive their full salary while on maternity leave.
Additionally, an annual childcare stipend of $5,000 per player will be provided; teams will make apartments of at least two bedrooms available to players with children, and add facilities for nursing mothers; and the league will offer family planning benefits that allow up to a $60,000 reimbursement for veteran players for expenses related to adoption, surrogacy, embryo preservation, or infertility treatment.

The CBA will transition toward severely penalizing veteran players for late arrival at WNBA training camps.
By the sixth year of the CBA, players with more than 2 years of service who miss the start of training camp will be suspended for the season.
Exceptions include serious injury, national team commitments for non-US players, college graduations, and other significant life events.

The CBA also addressed the issue of players serving on NBA coaching staffs during the traditional basketball season.
This came to a head during the 2019 offseason when the Washington Wizards, owned by the same company that owns the WNBA's Mystics, hired Mystics player Kristi Toliver as an assistant.
Under the previous CBA, teams were allowed only $50,000 per year to allocate to players as an enticement to not play overseas.
Because of the Mystics' and Wizards' shared ownership, the Wizards could only pay Toliver from the Mystics' $50,000 allocation—most of which had already been committed to Elena Delle Donne, a player who normally does not go overseas.
With the new CBA, veteran players can work as coaches in the NBA without a salary limit, regardless of the team's ownership structure.
Also in January 2020, the WNBA announced a new in-season tournament, the Commissioner's Cup, which would begin with the 2020 season.
Each team will play 10 Cup games during the season: specifically, the first home and road games against each team in its conference.
The final Cup games will be played in July, with the top team in the Cup standings from each conference advancing to a one-off Cup final in August.
The 2020 WNBA schedule originally included a month-long break in July and August to allow players to participate in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics.

The 2020 games have been postponed till 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, rendering the break unnecessary.

On April 3, 2020, the WNBA announced that the beginning of its own schedule would be postponed.
The 2020 entry draft took place as originally scheduled on April 17, although it was done remotely.

No details of the revised schedule were announced as of the time of the draft, and the Commissioners Cup was ultimately not held in 2020.

====
2020 season at IMG Academy ====
In June 2020, WNBA Commissioner Cathy Engelbert announced plans for the league to have a 22-game regular season, and a traditional playoff format, to be held exclusively at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida.
The players were housed at the Bradenton complex, and all games and practices took place there.
Players had until June 25 to let their teams know whether they planned to participate.

=== 'Count It' campaign celebrating 25th anniversary (2021) ===
On March 15, 2021 an announcement was made that the WNBA would introduce a ceremonial logo, basketball, and uniforms as part of its 25th anniversary celebratory campaign called 'Count It.'
==
Teams ==
The WNBA originated with 8 teams in 1997, and through a sequence of expansions, contractions, and relocations currently consist of 12 teams.
There have been a total of 18 franchises in WNBA history.

As of the league's most recent 2020 season, the Las Vegas Aces (formerly the Utah Starzz and San Antonio (Silver) Stars), Los Angeles Sparks, New York Liberty, and Phoenix Mercury are the only remaining franchises that were founded in 1997.

Arenas listed below reflect those intended for use in the league's next season in 2021.
These may be subject to change due to COVID-19.

Note


===
Relationship with NBA teams ===
Six WNBA teams are associated with an NBA team from the same market and are known as sister teams.
These teams include the Brooklyn Nets and New York Liberty, the Indiana Pacers and Fever, the Los Angeles Lakers and Sparks, the Minnesota Timberwolves and Lynx, the Phoenix Suns and Mercury, and the Washington Wizards and Mystics.
Of these teams, only the Sparks have completely separate ownership.
The Liberty had been associated with the New York Knicks, having been owned by the Knicks' parent company, The Madison Square Garden Company, but the team was sold in January 2019 to a group led by Joseph Tsai, then a minority owner of the Nets and now sole owner of that team.
Through the 2017 season, the San Antonio Spurs and Stars were also paired, but that relationship ended in October 2017 when the Stars were bought by MGM Resorts International and moved to Las Vegas.
Three WNBA teams are in the same market as an NBA team but are not affiliated.
Though located in the same market, the Chicago Sky is not affiliated with the Bulls, as evidenced by their differing home arenas: the Sky play at Wintrust Arena in Chicago's Near South Side, while the Bulls play at United Center in the city's Near West Side.
The Dallas Wings, which had been the Tulsa Shock before moving to the Dallas–Fort Worth Metroplex after the 2015 season, are not affiliated with the existing NBA team in the Metroplex, the Dallas Mavericks.
As with the Sky and Bulls, the Wings and Mavericks play in different areas, with the Wings playing at College Park Center in Arlington as opposed to the Mavericks playing in downtown Dallas at American Airlines Center.
While the Atlanta Dream shared State Farm Arena with the Hawks from the Dream's inception in 2008 to 2016 and again in 2019, the Hawks never held any ownership stake in the WNBA team.

The remaining WNBA team, the Seattle Storm, was formerly the sister team of the SuperSonics, but was sold to a Seattle-based group before the SuperSonics relocated and became the Oklahoma City Thunder.

The now-defunct Charlotte Sting, Miami Sol, Portland Fire, Cleveland Rockers, Orlando Miracle, Houston Comets and Sacramento Monarchs were also sister teams of the Hornets, Heat, Trail Blazers, Cavaliers, Magic, Rockets and Kings, respectively.
The Utah Starzz were affiliated with the Jazz before relocating to San Antonio as the Silver Stars under the ownership of the parent company of the Spurs in 2003.
Becoming the Stars in 2014, they shared the Spurs' team colors.
The team would eventually relocate to Las Vegas as the Aces in 2017.
The Detroit Shock was the sister team of the Pistons until the teams' owner sold the Shock to investors who moved the team to Tulsa, Oklahoma.
During its tenure in Tulsa, it was not affiliated with Oklahoma's NBA team, the Oklahoma City Thunder.

Five teams share a market with an NBA G League team.
Two of these also share arenas: the Dream share College Park and the Gateway Center Arena with the College Park Skyhawks while the Mystics share Washington, D.C. and St. Elizabeths East Entertainment and Sports Arena with the Capital City Go-Go.
Also, the Sparks share the Los Angeles market with the Agua Caliente Clippers and South Bay Lakers, the Wings share the Dallas–Fort Worth market with the Texas Legends, and the Liberty shares the New York City market with the Long Island Nets and Westchester Knicks.
Two other teams are located within 150 miles of WNBA teams (the Delaware Blue Coats and Fort Wayne Mad Ants being near the Mystics and Fever, respectively).
The Stars were also within 150 miles of a G League team (the Austin Spurs) before their move to Las Vegas.
The Shock shared the Tulsa market with the Tulsa 66ers until the latter team was relocated to become the Oklahoma City Blue in 2014, while the Mercury were about 100 miles from the Northern Arizona Suns before the Suns moved to Detroit.

===
Membership timeline ===


===
Relocated teams ===
Detroit Shock – 1998–2009
(relocated to Tulsa, Oklahoma)
Orlando Miracle – 1999–2002 (relocated to Uncasville, Connecticut)
Utah Starzz – 1997–2002
(relocated to San Antonio, Texas)
Tulsa Shock – 2010–2015 (relocated to Arlington, Texas)
San Antonio Stars – 2003–2017
(relocated to Las Vegas, Nevada)


===
Folded teams ===
Charlotte Sting – 1997–2006
Cleveland Rockers – 1997–2003
Houston Comets – 1997–2008
Miami Sol – 2000–2002
Portland Fire – 2000–2002
Sacramento Monarchs –
1997–2009


==
Season format ==


===
Regular season ===
Teams hold training camps in May. Training camps allow the coaching staff to prepare the players for the regular season and determine the 12-woman roster with which they will begin the regular season.
After training camp, a series of preseason exhibition games are held.

The WNBA regular season begins in May.
During the regular season, each team plays 36 games, 18 each home and away.
Each team plays three in-conference teams 4 times and the remaining in-conference teams three times (18 games).
Each team then plays the six out-of-conference teams three times (18 games).
As in the NBA, each team hosts and visits every other team at least once every season.

During years in which the Summer Olympics are held, the WNBA takes a month off in the middle of the season to allow players to practice and compete with their respective national teams.

===
WNBA Commissioner's Cup ===
The 2020 season was planned to be the first for the Commissioner's Cup, an in-season tournament.
Each team's first home and away games against each of its conference opponents, all of which were to be played in the first half of the season, were designated as Cup games.
After each team played its 10 Cup games, the top team in each conference's Cup standings would advance to the Commissioner's Cup Final, a single match held in August.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused the tournament to be scrapped for the time being.
===
WNBA
All-Star Game ===
In 1999, the league held its first-ever All-Star Game, where the best players of the Eastern Conference played against the best players of the Western Conference.
Since the All-Star games were ongoing, the West has been dominant until 2006, when the East finally won a game.

In July, the regular season pauses to celebrate the annual WNBA All-Star Game.
The game is part of a weekend-long event, held in a selected WNBA city each year.
The actual game is played on the selected WNBA team's home court.
The All-Star Game features star players from the Western Conference facing star players from the Eastern Conference.
During the season, fans vote for the players they would like to see start the game.
In 2004, The Game at Radio City was held in a place of a traditional All-Star Game.
The 2006 All-Star Game was the first game to feature custom uniforms that match the decade anniversary logo.
Since 2008, no All-Star Game has been held in any Summer Olympic year.
In 2010, an exhibition game (Stars at the Sun) was held.
Although the 2020 Summer Olympics were postponed to 2021 due to COVID-19, no All-Star Game was played in that season; there will likely be no All-Star Game in 2021.

Shortly after the All-Star break is the trading deadline.
After this date, teams are not allowed to exchange players with each other for the remainder of the season, although they may still sign and release players.
Major trades are often completed right before the trading deadline.

===
WNBA Playoffs ===
The WNBA Playoffs usually begin in late September, though in years of the FIBA World Cup they begin in August.
In the current system, the eight best teams by the regular-season record, without regard to conference alignment, qualify for the playoffs.
Having a higher seed offers several advantages.
Since the first two seeds get double byes, and the next two seeds get first-round byes, having a higher seed generally means one will be facing a weaker team.
The team in each series with a better record has a home-court advantage.
Since 2016 Verizon is the official sponsor.

The first two playoff rounds follow a tournament format with each team playing a rival in a single-elimination game, with the winners advancing to the next round and losers being eliminated from the playoffs.
For the first round, the matchups by seed are 5th vs 8th and 6th vs 7th.
In the second round, the matchups by seed are 3rd vs the lowest remaining seed and 4th vs the highest remaining seed.
In the semifinals, the matchups by seed are 1st vs the lowest remaining seed and 2nd vs the highest remaining seed.
This leaves two teams left to play each other in the WNBA Finals.
The first and second rounds consist of single-elimination games, while the semifinals are best-of-five series using a 2–2–1 home-court pattern, meaning that the higher-seeded team will have home court in games 1, 2, and 5 while the other team plays at home in game 3 and 4.
This pattern has been in place since 2016 (changed from the best-of-three series 1–1–1 format for four teams in each conference, where the higher seed hosted the opening game in the first two rounds).

===
WNBA Finals ===
The final playoff round, a best-of-five series between the two semifinal winners, is known as the WNBA Finals and is held annually, currently scheduled for October.
Each player on the winning team receives a championship ring.
Also, the league awards a WNBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award.
For this round, the series follows a 2–2–1 pattern, meaning that one team will have home court in games 1, 2, and 5, while the other plays at home in games 3 and 4.
The 2–2–1 pattern in the WNBA Finals has been in place since 2005.

==
League championships ==
The Houston Comets, Minnesota Lynx, and Seattle Storm hold the distinction of having won the most championships with 4 titles each.
The Comets folded in 2008.
The Lynx have the most appearances in the championship with 6, all occurring in the 7 years from 2011 to 2017.

Teams in red have folded.

Former teams that have no WNBA Finals appearances:
Cleveland Rockers (1997–2003)
Miami Sol (2000–2002)
Portland Fire (2000–2002)


==
Players and coaches ==
In 2011, a decade and a half after the launch of the WNBA, only two players remained from the league's inaugural season in 1997: Sheryl Swoopes and Tina Thompson.
Lisa Leslie was the longest-tenured player from the 1997 draft class; she spent her entire career (1997–2009) with the Los Angeles Sparks.
Sue Bird holds both of the league's most significant longevity records—number of seasons in the league (17)
and games played (519).

The members of the WNBA's All-Decade Team were chosen in 2006 on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the WNBA from amongst 30 nominees compiled by fans, media, coach, and player voting.
The team was to comprise the 10 best and most influential players of the first decade of the WNBA, with consideration also given to sportsmanship, community service, leadership, and contribution to the growth of women's basketball.

Players for the WNBA's Top 15 Team were chosen in 2011 on the anniversary of the league's fifteenth season from amongst 30 nominees compiled similarly to that of the All-Decade Team process.
This process was repeated for the league's 20th anniversary season in 2016 with the selection of the WNBA Top 20@20.

Over 30 players have scored at least 3,000 points in their WNBA careers.
Only nine WNBA players have reached the 6,000 point milestone: Diana Taurasi, Tina Thompson, Tamika Catchings, Cappie Pondexter, Katie Smith, Lisa Leslie, Sue Bird, Candice Dupree, and Lauren Jackson.
The scoring average leader is Cynthia Cooper, who averaged 21.0 points per game in five seasons with the Houston Comets (1997–2000, 2003).In 2007,
Paul Westhead of the Phoenix Mercury became the first person to earn both NBA and WNBA championship rings as a coach.

In 2008, 50-year-old Nancy Lieberman became the oldest player to play in a WNBA game.
She signed a seven-day contract with the Detroit Shock and played one game, tallying two assists and two turnovers in nine minutes of action.
By playing in the one game Lieberman broke a record that she had set in 1997 when she was the league's oldest player at 39.

Sue Bird, who has played for the Seattle Storm since 2002 (though she missed the 2013 and 2019 seasons to injury), holds the record for career assists with 2,888 in 519 regular-season games.
The record for most assists per game is currently held by Courtney Vandersloot, an American who also holds a Hungarian passport and represents that country internationally.
She has averaged 6.45 assists per game during her career with the Chicago Sky (2011–present).
Vandersloot also has the top four seasons in assists per game, with 8.1 in 2017, 8.6 in 2018, 9.1 in 2019, and 10.0 in 2020.

=== Milestones ===


===
Awards ===
Around the beginning of September (or late August in Olympic and FIBA World Cup years), the regular season ends.
It is during this time that voting begins for individual awards.
The Sixth Woman of the Year Award is given to the best player coming off the bench (must have more games coming off the bench than actual games started).
The Rookie of the Year Award is awarded to the most outstanding first-year player.
The Most Improved Player Award is awarded to the player who is deemed to have shown the most improvement from the previous season.
The Defensive Player of the Year Award is awarded to the league's best defender.
The Kim Perrot Sportsmanship Award is awarded to the player who shows outstanding sportsmanship on and off the court.
The Coach of the Year Award is awarded to the coach that has made the most positive difference to a team.
The Most Valuable Player Award is given to the player deemed the most valuable for her team that season.
The newest WNBA award is the Basketball Executive of the Year Award, first presented in 2017 to the team executive most instrumental in his or her team's success in that season.

Also named are the All-WNBA Teams, the All-Defensive Teams, and the All-Rookie Team; each consists of five players.
There are two All-WNBA teams, consisting of the top players at each position, with the first-team status being the most desirable.
There are two All-Defensive teams, consisting of the top defenders at each position.
There is one All-Rookie team, consisting of the top first-year players regardless of position.

====
Most recent award winners ====
All listed winners are from the 2020 season.

Notes


====
Retired numbers ====
Notes


====
Pending number retirements ====


===
Notable international players ===
A number of international players that have played in the WNBA have earned multiple all-stars or won MVP awards:

 Elena Baranova, Russia – among the first international players in the WNBA (1997), one-time All-Star (2001).

Zheng Haixia, China – first winner of the Kim Perrot Sportsmanship Award and first international player to win a WNBA award (1997)
Margo Dydek, Poland – first international player to be #1 draft pick (1998)
Lauren Jackson, Australia – two-time champion (2004, 2010), three-time MVP and eight-time All-Star
Ticha Penicheiro, Portugal – won a championship with the Monarchs in 2005 and four-time
All-Star
 Penny Taylor, Australia – three-time champion (2007, 2009, 2014) and four-time
All-Star
 Tammy Sutton-Brown, Canada –
two-time All-Star
 Sophia Young, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines – four-time
All-StarSome of these players, among them Penicheiro, Sutton-Brown, and Young played U.S. college basketball.

== Rules and regulations ==
Rules are governed by standard basketball rules as defined by the NBA, with a few notable exceptions:

The three-point line is 22 ft 1.75 in (6.75 m) from the center of the basket, with a distance of 22 ft (6.71 m) at the corners.
The main arc is essentially identical to that used by FIBA (effective October 1, 2012 for domestic competitions) and NCAA men's play (effective in 2019–20 in Division I and 2020–21
in Divisions II and III).
The WNBA corner distance, as measured from the center of the basket, is identical to that of the NBA; the FIBA and NCAA men's distance at the corners is 4 in (10.16 cm) shorter.

The regulation WNBA ball is a minimum 28.5 inches (72 cm) in circumference and weighs 20.0 ounces (570 g), 1 inch (2.5 cm) smaller and 2 ounces (57 g) lighter than the NBA ball.
Since 2004, this size has been used for all senior-level women's competitions throughout the world in full-court basketball.
Competitions in the half-court 3x3 variant used the women's ball until 2015, when a dedicated ball with the circumference of the women's ball but the weight of the men's ball was introduced.

Quarters are 10 minutes in duration instead of 12.Games are divided into four 10-minute quarters as opposed to the league's original two 20-minute halves of play, similar to FIBA and NCAA women's college rules (many WNBA players play in European, Chinese, or Australian leagues, which all use the FIBA rule set).

A recent trend with new WNBA rules has been to match them with a similar NBA rule.
Since the 2006 WNBA season:
The winner of the opening jump ball shall begin the 4th quarter with the ball out of bounds.
The loser shall begin with the ball out of bounds in the second and third quarters.
Previously under the two-half format, both periods started with jump balls, presumably to eliminate the possibility of a team purposely losing the opening tip to gain the opening possession of the second half.
This is not a problem under the four-quarters because the winner of the opening tip gets the opening possession of the final period.

The shot clock was decreased from 30 to 24 seconds.
The rule changes signaled a move away from rules more similar to those of college basketball and toward those that provide a more NBA-like game.
FIBA also uses a 24-second clock.
Also, come 2020, last 5 seconds of the shot clock counts down in tenths of a second.
The 2007 WNBA season brought changes that included:
The amount of time that a team must move the ball across the half-court line went from 10 to 8 seconds.

A referee can grant time-outs to either a player or the coach.

Two free throws and possession of the ball for a clear-path-to-the-basket foul.
Previously only one free throw was awarded as well as possession.
In 2012, the WNBA added the block/charge arc under the basket.
As of 2013 the defensive three-second rule and anti-flopping guidelines were introduced.
The three-point line was also extended; in 2017, that line extended into the corners to match the NBA's.

Since 2017, Tissot is the official timekeeper for the league, as it uses a unified game clock/shot clock system.

===
Court dimensions ===


==
Business ==


===
Finance ===
The WNBA is not able to support itself.
During the mid-2000s, the NBA spent more than $10 million per year to keep the WNBA financially solvent.
In 2007, teams were estimated to be losing $1.5 million to $2 million a year.
Due to the lack of viewership, the WNBA has not been profitable in past years.
The league projected losses through the 2010 season to be around $400 million.
The league has begun to do better financially in recent years.
In December 2010, Donna Orender said that the league had its first-ever "cash flow positive" team during the 2010 season.
In 2011, three teams were profitable, and in 2013, six of the league's 12 teams reported a profit.
The league has also signed extended television contracts with ESPN and sponsorship agreements with Boost Mobile.
===
Activism ===
As the popularity of the league has grown, players have gained more voice and power to perform as activists in many fields.
One of the activist players' main focuses is the inequality between men's and women's sports.
Many players such as Brittney Grinner, Breanna Stewart, and Maya Moore have spoken about equality between gender, sexual orientation, and race.
The players have also supported progressive social and political movements such as Black Lives Matter and others.
Shortly after the George Floyd protests began, the league and union decided in 2020 to put Black Lives Matter and Say Her Name slogans on warmup gear and opening weekend uniforms.
When team owner Senator Kelly Loeffler criticized the league's support for Black Lives Matter, her team wore black T-shirts with the slogan "VOTE WARNOCK", endorsing her election opponent Raphael Warnock, an African-American pastor who defeated Loeffler.

===
Sponsorships ===
On June 1, 2009, the Phoenix Mercury was the first team in WNBA history to announce a marquee sponsorship.
The team secured a partnership with LifeLock to brand their jerseys and warm-ups.
It was the first branded jersey in WNBA history.
Following the expiration of the LifeLock deal, the Mercury secured a new uniform sponsorship deal with Casino Arizona and Talking Stick Resort on February 3, 2014.Other teams eventually followed in the Mercury's footsteps to bring the total to 11 current teams with sponsorship deals right in front of their jerseys and some teams have sponsors on the upper left-hand shoulder:
Atlanta Dream – upper-left:
Buffalo Wild Wings
Chicago Sky – front:
University of Chicago Medicine & upper-left: Magellan Corporation
; team was formerly sponsored by Magellan Corporation
Connecticut Sun – front:
Yale-New Haven Health System & upper-left: Mohegan Sun
; team was formerly sponsored by Frontier Communications
Dallas Wings – front:
Texas Capital Bank & upper-left: Arlington Convention & Visitor Bureau;
team was formerly sponsored by American Fidelity Assurance
Indiana Fever – Salesforce.com;
team was formerly sponsored by Finish Line,
Inc.
Las Vegas Aces – upper-left:
MGM Resorts International
Los Angeles Sparks – front: EquiTrust Life Insurance;
team was formerly sponsored by Farmers Insurance
Minnesota Lynx – front: Mayo Clinic & upper-left:
Sharecare
New York Liberty – front:
FanDuel & upper-left: Hospital for Special Surgery; team was formerly sponsored by DraftKings
Phoenix Mercury – front:
Casino Arizona and Talking Stick Resort & upper-left: PayPal
Seattle Storm – front:
Swedish Medical Center & upper-left: Symetra
; team was formerly sponsored by Bing
Washington Mystics – front: GEICO; team was formerly sponsored by Inova Health SystemThe now-relocated Tulsa Shock (Osage Casino) and San Antonio Stars (H-E-B)
had jersey sponsorships at one time.

On August 22, 2011, the WNBA announced a league-wide marquee sponsorship with Boost Mobile.
The deal would allow the Boost Mobile logo to be placed on eleven of the 12 teams' jerseys (excluding San Antonio) in addition to branding on the courts and in arenas.
A source said the deal is a "multiyear, eight-figure deal".
On March 14, 2016, the WNBA completed a deal with Verizon Wireless to place its name on the front of 10 of 12 team jerseys, excluding the Stars and Sun, as well as in-arena advertising, and reserved commercial space during WNBA broadcasts.
The deal also includes the sponsorship of the All-Star Game, Inspiring Women Luncheon, and other unspecified events, but not the Monthly and Yearly Awards.
On March 28, the league introduced new uniforms bearing the new Verizon sponsor name, which eliminated white jerseys and made the secondary color a basis for a uniform.
The jersey font remained unchanged, as well as the primary color used for the away uniform.
Teams can use either jersey for home and away games.
Pictures of the jerseys can be viewed on the WNBA website.

In 2009, the Phoenix Mercury became the first American professional basketball team to feature advertisements on their uniform, when they sold an ad to LifeLock Insurance on the front of their jerseys, leading many people to wonder if ads on NBA uniforms were coming soon.
Since then several other WNBA teams have followed suit.
The NBA announced in the summer of 2016 that they will begin to feature advertisements on jerseys, with the first team to do so being the Philadelphia 76ers (with a StubHub sticker now on their jerseys).

Before the start of the 2011 season, every team announced a new look for their uniforms.
The supplier of the uniforms for the league, Adidas, upgraded all teams to new high-tech designs, much like they did for the NBA before the start of their season.

On April 8, 2019, the WNBA announced a multiyear marquee partnership with AT&T, making them the first non-apparel partner to have its logo featured on the front of all 12 team jerseys.
The jerseys officially debuted during the 2019 WNBA draft.
Sponsorships have come from major companies such as Boost Mobile and Farmers Insurance.
Pepsi and Nike have also partnered up with the WNBA.

===
Salaries, rosters, and collective bargaining ===
Before the 2009 season, the maximum team roster size was changed from 13 players (11 active and 2 inactive) to 11 players (all active).
Any team that falls below nine players able to play due to injury or any other factor outside of the control of the team will, upon request, be granted a roster hardship exception allowing the team to sign an additional player or players so that the team will have nine players able to play in an upcoming game or games.
As soon as the injured (or otherwise sidelined) player(s) can play, the roster hardship player(s)—not any other player on the roster—must be waived.

In March 2014, the WNBA and players signed a new, 8-year collective bargaining agreement, increasing the number of players on a roster to 12.The WNBA Draft is held annually every spring.
The minimum age is 22 years for American players and 20 years for international players, measured as of December 31 of the calendar year of the draft.
The draft is three rounds long, with each of the 12 teams in the league (trades aside) getting three picks each.
The draft order for the eight teams that made the playoffs the previous year are based on team records, and the team with the highest previous record will pick last.
For the remaining top four picks, a selection process similar to the NBA Draft Lottery is conducted for the four teams that did not qualify for the playoffs.

Previously, in 2008, a new six-year collective bargaining agreement was agreed upon between the players and the league.
The salary cap for an entire team in 2010 was $827,000 (although it was later lowered to $775,000).
By 2013 (the sixth year under this agreement), the cap for an entire team was $900,000.
In 2010, the minimum salary for a player with three-plus years of experience was $51,000 while the maximum salary for a six-plus year player was $101,500 (the first time in league history that players can receive over $100,000).
The minimum salary for rookies was $35,190.
Many WNBA players supplement their salaries by playing in European, Australian, or more recently Chinese women's basketball leagues during the WNBA offseason.
The WNBA has been criticized for paying female players less than their NBA counterparts, although this is attributed to the much greater revenues of the NBA.The decision of superstar Diana Taurasi to sit out the 2015 WNBA season was seen by some in the media as a harbinger of salary-related troubles in the future.
The Russian club for which she was playing at the time, UMMC Ekaterinburg, offered her a bonus well over the league's maximum player salary to sit out that season.
Taurasi accepted, largely because she had not had an offseason since playing college basketball more than a decade earlier.
Such offers have often been made to star American players, including Taurasi herself, but none were accepted until Taurasi did so in 2015.

A more recent incident that led to widespread media comment on the WNBA's salary structure was the torn Achilles suffered by reigning WNBA MVP Breanna Stewart while playing for another Russian side, Dynamo Kursk, in the 2019 EuroLeague Women final.
The injury came at a time when the WNBA and its players' union were preparing to negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement, following the union's announcement in November 2018 that it would opt out of the current CBA after the 2019 season.
With overseas leagues offering much higher salaries to many players than the WNBA currently provides, roughly 70% of the league's players go overseas in any given season.
While these players do not necessarily play as many games as NBA players do in their seasons, even participants in the NBA Finals get several months of rest in the offseason, something not available for WNBA players who also play overseas.
In a story on the ramifications of Stewart's injury, Mechelle Voepel of ESPN had this to say about the lead-in to the injury:For Stewart, her 2018 went like this: playing in China, brief time off, WNBA season, World Cup in the Canary Islands, brief time off, playing in Russia.
She hasn't had significant recovery time since before her senior season at UConn.
Now, she'll have time away from playing but while going through rehab and physical therapy.

The current CBA, which took effect in 2020, significantly increased minimum and maximum salaries.
The minimum league salary in 2020 was $57,000 for players with less than three years of experience, and $68,000 otherwise.
For most players, the 2020 maximum salary was $185,000; players who met specified criteria for league service had a maximum of $215,000.WNBA players are awarded bonuses for certain achievements.
Some of the bonuses given by the league (amount is per player), from 2020 to 2027 (the duration of the current CBA):
WNBA champion: $11,356; Runner-up: $5,678; Most Valuable Player:
$15,450; All-WNBA First Team member: $10,300; and All-Star Game participant: $2,575.
These were only modest increases from amounts provided before 2020.

===
Merchandise ===
The following shows the top jersey sales during the 2020 regular season, based on sales through the WNBA's official online store.
Three players made their top-10 debuts this season—rookies and college teammates Sabrina Ionescu and Satou Sabally, and 10-year veteran Courtney Vandersloot.
Two of the players in the top 10, Maya Moore and Elena Delle Donne, did not play in the 2020 season.
Ionescu suffered a severe ankle sprain in her third game and missed the rest of the season.

The following shows the top teams in merchandise sales during the 2020 regular season.

===
WNBA Presidents / Commissioners ===
The title of the league's chief executive was "President" before Cathy Engelbert became the first "Commissioner".

Val Ackerman, 1996–2005
Donna Orender, 2005–2010
Chris Granger, 2011 (interim)
Laurel J. Richie, 2011–2015
Lisa Borders, 2015–2018
Mark Tatum, 2018–2019 (interim)
Cathy Engelbert,
2019–present


==
Attendance ==
In 2012, the average attendance per game dropped from 7,955 to 7,457 (−6.3%).
Attendance per game stayed consistent at around 7,520 per game.
In 2015, the WNBA's attendance per game decreased by 3.4 percent to 7,318.
This was a record low for the WNBA since it was created in 1997.
Many teams have experienced drops in their attendance; (San Antonio Stars: −37.4%, Washington Mystics: −7.9%, Tulsa Shock: −7.2%)
these losses have caused the attendance of the WNBA to drop.

President Laurel Richie stated that after the 2015 season ends, they will create an expansion committee and begin evaluating if and how the WNBA should go about expanding their reach.

The 2018 and 2019 seasons each set the lowest average attendance in WNBA history (6,769 and 6,535).
However, about half of the decline in attendance from 2017 to 2018 was due to the New York Liberty moving from 19,812-seat Madison Square Garden to the 5,000-seat Westchester County Center.
While the Liberty had averaged over 9,000 fans in 2017, James Dolan, then the team's owner, noted that roughly half of the team's attendance in that season came from complimentary tickets.
Similarly in 2019, the Washington Mystics moved from the 20,356-seat Capital One Arena to the 4,111-seat St. Elizabeths East Entertainment and Sports Arena.
The Las Vegas Aces and New York Liberty each saw double-digit percentage losses in 2019, but half of the league's teams saw attendance increases in that season, and the number of sellouts was the same in both seasons (41).

==
Media coverage ==
Currently, WNBA games are televised throughout the U.S. by ABC, ESPN, ESPN2, Twitter, NBATV, CBS, and CBS Sports Network.

In the early years, two women's-oriented networks, Lifetime and Oxygen, also broadcast games including the first game of the WNBA.
NBC showed games from 1997 to 2002 as part of their NBA on NBC coverage before the league transferred the rights to ABC/ESPN.

In 2007, the WNBA and ESPN came to an 8-year television agreement.
The agreement would be the first to pay television rights fees to the league's teams.
Never before had an agreement promised rights fees to a women's professional league.
The agreement ran from 2009 to 2016 and is worth millions of dollars.
In June 2007, the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN.
The new television deal runs from 2009 to 2016.
A minimum of 18 games will be broadcast on ABC, ESPN, and ESPN2 each season; the rights to broadcast the first regular-season game and the All-Star game are held by ABC.
Additionally, a minimum of 11 postseason games will be broadcast on any of the three stations.
Along with this deal, came the first-ever rights fees to be paid to a women's professional sports league.
Over the eight years of the contract, "millions and millions of dollars" will be "dispersed to the league's teams".
In 2013, the WNBA and ESPN signed a six-year extension on the broadcast deal to cover 2017–2022.
In the new deal, a total of 30 games would be shown each season on ESPN networks.
Each team would receive around $1 million per year.
On April 22, 2019, CBS Sports Network reached a multi-year deal to televise 40 regular-season weekend and primetime WNBA games, beginning in the 2019 season.
Some teams offer games on local radio, while all teams have some games broadcast on local television stations:
From 2010 to 2011, the regular-season broadcast drew 270,000 viewers a growth of 5 percent from 2010's numbers.
As sponsorships continued to grow with deals from ESPN to air WNBA games on ESPN and ESPN 2.
The league did experience some success on the digital forefront.
It saw increases on its mobile page views by 26 percent along with a major increase in its social media space; Instagram grew by 51 percent this past year.

===
WNBA League Pass ===
In 2009, the WNBA announced the launch of WNBA LiveAccess, a feature on WNBA.com that provides fans with access to more than 200 live game webcasts throughout the WNBA season.
All of the WNBA LiveAccess games are then archived for on-demand viewing.
Most games (except broadcasts on ABC, ESPN or ESPN2, which are available on ESPN3) are available via this system.
The first use of LiveAccess was the E League versus Chicago Sky preseason game.
Before the 2011 season, LiveAccess was given an overhaul, and the system became more reliable and many new features were added.
Before the 2012 season, it was announced that users of LiveAccess would have to pay a $4.99 subscription fee to use the service.
In 2013, this was increased to $14.99.
In 2014 the streaming service was renamed WNBA League Pass.

WNBA League Pass is available as part of the WNBA App, the free mobile application available on iPhone, iPad and Android devices and costs US$16.99 for the season.
Games airing on ESPN, ESPN2 and CBS Sports Network, as well as other games taking place during the telecast windows of ESPN and ESPN2 games, are not available live on WNBA League Pass.
However, those games will be available on-demand shortly after the conclusion of their live broadcast.

===
Viewership ===
On the 2008 season opening day (May 17), ABC broadcast the Los Angeles Sparks and Phoenix Mercury matchup to showcase new rookie sensation Candace Parker.
The game received a little over 1 million viewers.

Ratings still remain poor in comparison to NBA games.
In 2008, WNBA games averaged just 413,000 viewers, compared to 1.46 million viewers on ESPN and over 2.2 million on ABC for NBA games.
In addition, WNBA games have much poorer visibility, attendance, and ratings than NCAA games.
However, ESPN viewership grew 35% in 2018 over 2017.
This became the impetus for the multi-year partnership in which CBS Sports Network will broadcast live WNBA games beginning with the 2019 season.

== All-time franchise history
==
1
The Connecticut Sun was known as the Orlando Miracle from 1999–2002.

2
The Dallas Wings were known as the Tulsa Shock from 2010–2015 and the Detroit Shock from 1998–2009.

3
The Las Vegas Aces were known as the Utah Starzz from 1997–2002, the San Antonio Silver Stars from 2003–2013, and the San Antonio Stars from 2014–2017.

== See also ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
General references ===
Evans, Jayda (July 16, 2007).
"
WNBA Gets First Rights Fee".
The Seattle Times.
Retrieved July 16, 2007.

Heath, Thomas (July 12, 2006).
"
A Matter of Value".
The Washington Post.
Retrieved July 12, 2006.

"Minimum NBA Salary".
Inside Hoops.
August 10, 2005.
Retrieved September 4, 2006.

"Salary Cap for 2004-05 Is $43.87 million".
National Basketball Association.
July 13, 2004.
Retrieved July 13, 2004.

"History of the WNBA".
Women's National Basketball Association.
Retrieved September 4, 2006.

"Start of Season Conference Call".
Women's National Basketball Association.
May 14, 2007.
Retrieved May 14, 2007.

"
Hoops Happening:
Today in women's basketball".
Tamryn Spruill.
May 1, 2018.
Retrieved September 15, 2018.

==
External links ==
Official website
WNBA statistics at Basketball-Reference.com
Ryan Craig Matthew Smith (born 10 November 1986) is an English footballer.

==
Career ==


===
Arsenal ===
An England youth international, Smith started his career at Arsenal.
He made his Arsenal debut against Rotherham United on 28 October 2003 at the age of 16.
Arsenal won the tie 9–8 on penalties with Smith converting his spot kick.
He also managed to start against Wolverhampton Wanderers and Middlesbrough.
All of the six matches in which he played for Arsenal were in the League Cup, including a game on 9 November 2004 against Everton which saw him go off injured after 20 minutes.

===
Leicester City ===
On 30 September 2005, Smith was signed by Leicester City on loan for the whole of the 2005–06 season.
He scored his first career goal in a 4–2 win over Sheffield United.
He returned to Arsenal on 10 March 2006.

===
Derby County ===
On 4 August 2006, Smith agreed personal terms on a 3-year contract with Championship outfit Derby County.
He made his debut in a 2–2 draw against Southampton on 6 August.
After struggling to adapt and break into a Derby side pushing for promotion, plus the arrival of several midfielders in the January transfer window, Smith was sold.

===
Millwall ===
Smith moved on loan to League One side Millwall on 21 March 2007 on an initial one-month loan deal, but this was extended on 17 April 2007 to run until the end of the 2006–07 season.
Smith impressed during his time on loan at Millwall and manager Willie Donachie expressed an interest in retaining the youngster's services.
In July 2007 Milwall paid £150,000 for Smith, who signed a two-year contract with the club.

===
Southampton ===
On 3 October 2008, he joined Southampton initially on a three-month loan.
The transfer became permanent on 1 January 2009, when Smith signed a 6-month contract.
He was released by Southampton on 2 May 2009.

===
Crystal Palace ===
On 26 August 2009, he signed a contract with Crystal Palace.
He made his Crystal Palace first team debut on 27 August in the 2–0 League Cup defeat to Manchester City coming on as a substitute in the second half.
He left on 25 January 2010 after coming to the end of his short-term contract.

===
Kansas City Wizards/
Sporting KC ===
On 27 January, Smith joined Grimsby Town on trial, playing for The Mariners in a behind the closed doors friendly against Hull City at Blundell Park.
On 2 February 2010, it was reported that Smith would join Kansas City Wizards on trial during their preseason training camp in Arizona, and on 2 March he signed a two-year deal with the club.
Smith scored on his Kansas City debut in a 4–0 win over D.C. United.

While still under contract to Sporting Kansas City, Smith left in June 2011, eventually trialing in Spain with Real Zaragoza in July.
Kansas City declined to transfer him, however.
===
Chivas USA ===
On 21 November 2011, Sporting Kansas City traded Smith's rights to Chivas USA in exchange for two 2012 MLS Supplemental Draft picks.

===
Xanthi ===
Smith signed with Greek club Skoda Xanthi F.C. on 29 December 2012.

==
Career statistics ==
(correct as of 30 March 2010)


==
Personal ==
Smith's father is American, from Alaska and his mother is of English heritage, with his grandparents hailing from Montego Bay.
He first attended St. Aloysius College secondary school, which was attended by West Ham United midfielder Joe Cole, before moving on to Highams Park School, where he was a classmate of Jamie O'Hara.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Ryan Smith at Major League Soccer
Ryan Smith at Soccerbase
Official website: www.ryansmith11.com
This is a list of episodes for the 1968-1975 television series Adam-12.
The first season was released on DVD in 2005 by Universal Home Entertainment, while all remaining seasons were released by Shout!
Factory.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1
(1968–69)
===
===
Season 2 (1969–70) ===


===
Season 3 (1970–71) ===


===
Season 4 (1971–72) ===


===
Season 5 (1972–73) ===


===
Season 6 (1973–74) ===


===
Season 7 (1974–75) ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Adam-12 at epguides.com
List of Adam-12   episodes at TV.com
Adam-12 – list of episodes at IMDb
Josh is a masculine given name, frequently a diminutive (hypocorism) of the given name Joshua, though since the 1970s, it has increasingly become a full name on its own.
It may refer to:


==
People ==


===
A–J ===
"Josh", an early pseudonym of Samuel Clemens (1835–1910), better known as Mark Twain,
American writer and lecturer
Josh A. Moore (born 1980), American former basketball player
Josh Adams (American football)
(born 1996), American football player
Josh Allen (linebacker) (born 1997), American NFL player
Josh Allen (offensive lineman) (
born 1991), American National Football League (NFL) player
Josh Allen (quarterback) (
born 1996), American NFL player
Josh Appelt (born 1983), American mixed martial artist
Josh Barnett (born 1977), American mixed martial artist and professional wrestler
Josh Beckett (born 1980),
American former Major League Baseball pitcher
Josh Bell (baseball, born 1986), American baseball player, formerly in Major League Baseball
Josh Bell (baseball, born 1992), American Major League Baseball player
Josh Bell (gridiron football), American NFL and Canadian Football League cornerback
Josh Binstock (born 1981), Canadian Olympic volleyball player
Josh Brolin (born 1968), American actor
Josh Carraway (born 1994), American football player
Josh Charles (born 1971), American actor
Josh Childress (born 1983), American basketball player
Josh Cooper (cryptographer) (1901–1981), British cryptographer
Josh Cooper (defensive end)
(born 1980), American football player, formerly in the NFL
Josh Cooper (wide receiver)
(born 1989), American former NFL player
Josh Culbreath (born 1932), American retired hurdler
Josh Duggar (born 1988), American reality TV participant and political activist
Josh Duhamel (born 1972), American actor and former model
Josh Dun (born 1988), American drummer and trumpeter, currently in the band
Twenty One Pilots
Josh Freeman (born 1988), American NFL player
Josh Gad (born 1981), American actor
Josh Gibson (1911–1947), American Negro league baseball catcher
Josh Groban (born 1981), American singer, songwriter, actor and record producer
Josh Guyer (born 1994), Australian professional baseball player
Josh Hall (disambiguation), multiple people
Josh Hamilton (actor) (born 1969), American actor
Josh Hamilton (born 1981), American Major League Baseball player
Josh Harris (internet) (born c. 1960), founder of pseudo.com
Josh Harris (long snapper) (born 1989), American NFL long snapper
Josh Harris (quarterback) (born 1982), American football quarterback
Josh Harris (running back) (born 1991), American football running back
Josh Hartnett (born 1978), American actor and movie producer
Josh Harvey-Clemons (born 1994), American football player
Josh Hawley (born 1979), American politician and current U.S. senator from Missouri
Josh Henderson (born 1981), American actor, model and singer
Josh Hoffman (born 1988), Australian rugby league player
Josh Holloway (born 1969), American actor
Josh Homme (born 1973), American singer, songwriter, musician, record producer and actor
Josh Hope (born 1998), Australian association football player
Josh Howard (born 1980), American basketball player, formerly in the National Basketball Association (NBA)
Josh Huff (born 1991), American football player
Josh Hutcherson (born 1992), American actor
Josh Jackson (basketball) (born 1997), American basketball player
Josh Jackson (cornerback) (born 1996), American football player
Josh Jackson (rugby league) (
born 1991), Australian rugby league player
Josh Jacobs (born 1998), American football player
Josh Jasper (born 1987),
All-American college football placekicker


==
=
K–Z ===
Josh Kennet (born 1987), English-Israeli footballer
Josh Klinghoffer (born 1979), American guitarist with the rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers
Josh Kronfeld (born 1971), New Zealand former rugby union flanker
Josh Law (born 1989), English footballer
Josh Lindblom (born 1987), American professional baseball player
Josh Love (born 1996), American football player
Josh Mahoney (born 1977), former Australian rules footballer
Josh Malihabadi (1894–1982), Pakistani poet
Josh Malone (born 1996), American football player
Josh Malsiyani (1883–1976), Indian poet
Josh Mansour (born 1990), Australian rugby league player
Josh Mayo (born 1987), American basketball player
Josh McCown (born 1979), American NFL player
Josh McDaniels (born 1976), American NFL offensive coordinator and former head coach
Josh McEachran (born 1993), English footballer
Josh McGuire (born 1990), Australian rugby league player
Josh McRoberts (born 1987), American basketball player
Josh Metellus (born 1998), American football player
Josh Miller (born 1970), American former NFL punter and current football analyst
Josh Morris (footballer, born 1991) (born 1991), English footballer
Josh Morris (politician) (born 1982),  Australian politician
Josh Morris (rugby league) (born 1986), Australian rugby league player
Josh Mostel (born 1946), American actor
Josh Nebo (born 1997), American basketball player in the Israeli Premier League
Josh Nurse (born 1996), American football player
Josh Oliver (born 1997), American football player
Josh Pais (born 1958), American actor and acting coach
Josh Pastner (born 1977), American college basketball coach
Josh Peck (born 1986), American actor
Josh Pearson (born 1997), American football player
Josh Radnor (born 1974)
, American actor, director, producer and screenwriter
Josh Ravin (born 1988), American professional baseball player
Josh Reynolds (American football) (
born 1995), American football player
Josh Reynolds (born 1989), Australian rugby league player
Josh Rosen (born 1997), American football quarterback for UCLA Bruins football
Josh Samuels (born 1991), American water polo player
Josh Satin (born 1984), American former Major League Baseball player
Josh Server (born 1979), American actor and comedian
Josh Shipp (basketball) (born 1986), American basketball player
Josh Smith (artist)
(born 1976), American artist
Josh Smith (left-handed pitcher) (born 1989), American Major League Baseball pitcher
Josh Smith (right-handed pitcher) (born 1987), American Major League Baseball pitcher
Josh Smith (footballer, born 1986), Australian rules footballer
Josh Smith (footballer, born 1994), Australian rules footballer
Josh Smith (rugby league)
(born 1979), Australian rugby league footballer
Josh Smith (born 1985), American NBA player
Josh Starling (born 1990), Australian rugby league player
Josh Sweat (born 1997), American football player
Josh Taves (born 1972), American former NFL player
Josh Thomas (defensive end) (born 1981), American football defensive end
Josh Thomas (cornerback) (born 1989), American football cornerback
Josh Thomas (comedian) (
born 1987), Australian comedian and actor
Josh Thomas (Australian footballer) (born 1991), Australian rules footballer
Josh Thomas (footballer, born 1999), English footballer
Josh Thomas (blues guitarist) (born 1970), Australian blues guitarist
Josh Tols (born 1989), Australian professional baseball player
Josh Tordjman (born 1985), Canadian hockey goaltender
Josh Uche (born 1998), American football player
Josh Wagenaar (born 1985), Canadian former footballer
Josh Walker (American football)
(born 1991), American NFL player
Josh Walker (Australian footballer) (born 1992), Australian rules footballer
Josh Walker (footballer, born 1989),
English footballer
Josh Watson (American football) (born 1996), American football player
Josh West (born 1977), British-American Olympic rower and Earth Sciences professor
Josh Weston, an actor from the United states
Josh Whitesell (born 1982), American former Major League Baseball and Nippon Professional Baseball player
Josh Widdicombe (born 1983), English stand-up comedian and presenter
Josh Wilcox (born 1974), American former NFL player
Josh Williams (American football) (born 1976), American former NFL player
Josh Williams (soccer)
(born 1988), American Major League Soccer player
Josh Woodrum (born 1992), American football player
Josh Woods (American football)
(born 1996), American football player
Josh Zeid (born 1987), American former professional baseball pitcher, formerly in Major League Baseball


==
Fictional characters ==
Josh Bauer (24), a minor character in season 6 of the American television series 24
Josh Chan, in the American television series
Crazy Ex-Girlfriend
Josh Lyman, in the American television series The West Wing
Josh Nichols, in the American television series Drake & Josh
Joshua "Josh" Washington, one of eight protagonists from the survival horror game Until Dawn
Josh Baskin, the protagonist of the film
Big


== See also ==
Jawsh 685, New Zealand music producer
Josh fight, a tongue-in-cheek 2021 event that took place in Lincoln, Nebraska
Basketball is a sport contested at the Summer Olympic Games.
A men's basketball tournament was first held at the 1904 Olympics as a demonstration; it has been held at every Summer Olympics since 1936.
In the 1972 Olympics, the final game between the United States and the Soviet Union was a controversial one, as the game was ended and replayed twice by a FIBA (International Basketball Federation) official without the authority to do so, before the Soviet Union won their first gold medal, which would have been won by the United States if the game was not started against the rules.
The U.S. filed a formal protest but was rejected by FIBA.
As a result, the United States refused to accept the silver medal, and no player has ever claimed his medal.
After a protest of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the United States boycotted the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
The Soviet Union boycotted the 1984 Summer Olympics boycott in response.
Both boycotts affected basketball at the Olympics, as both had successful basketball teams at the time.
The advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete" of the Eastern Bloc countries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the Western countries at a disadvantage.
The Soviet Union entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis.
In April 1989, through the leadership of Secretary General Borislav Stanković, FIBA approved the rule that allowed NBA players to compete in international tournaments, including the Olympics.
In the next Olympics, the 1992 Summer Olympics, the "Dream Team" won the gold medal at the 1992 Olympics Basketball, with an average winning margin of 44 points per game, and without calling a time out.
By this time, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia no longer existed, but their successor states continued to be among the leading forces.
Two newly independent countries of the former Yugoslavia and Soviet Union, Croatia and Lithuania, won the silver and bronze medals respectively.

The USA's Teresa Edwards is the all-time leader for the most Olympic medals in basketball, with four gold and one bronze.
Nine players have won four medals: the USA's Lisa Leslie, Sue Bird, Tamika Catchings, Diana Taurasi (each with four golds with the women's team) and Carmelo Anthony (three golds and one bronze with the men's team), the Soviet Union's Gennadi Volnov (one gold, two silver, one bronze) and Sergei Belov (one gold, three bronze), and Australians Kristi Harrower and Lauren Jackson (both with three silvers and one bronze).
Leslie, Bird, Catchings, and Taurasi are the all-time leaders for the most consecutive gold medal wins in basketball.
Six other individuals, all American, have won three golds—Katie Smith, Dawn Staley, Sheryl Swoopes, Seimone Augustus, Sylvia Fowles and Carmelo Anthony—and 23 other players, not including the previously mentioned, have won three medals.
The United States is by far the most successful country in Olympic basketball, with United States men's teams having won 15 of 18 tournaments in which they participated, including seven consecutive titles from 1936 through 1968.
United States women's teams have won 8 titles out of the 10 tournaments in which they competed, including six in a row from 1996 to 2016.
Besides the United States, Argentina is the only nation still in existence who has won either the men's or women's tournament.
The Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and the Unified Team are the countries no longer in existence who have won the tournament.
The United States are the defending champions in both men's and women's tournaments.
As of the 2016 Summer Olympics, 90 medals (30 of each color) have been awarded to teams from 20 National Olympic Committees.

Two gold medal-winning teams, both U.S. men's teams, were inducted to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2010.
The 1960 team featured four players who would eventually enter the Hall of Fame, a head coach who would enter the Hall as a contributor, and a team manager who entered the Hall as a coach.
The 1992 team, better known as the "Dream Team", had 11 future Hall of Fame players, along with three coaches who were inducted to the Hall as coaches (one of whom was previously inducted separately for his accomplishments as a player).On June 9, 2017, the Executive Board of the International Olympic Committee announced that 3x3 basketball would become an official Olympic sport as of the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo, Japan, for both men and women.

==
Men ==
Individuals who have been inducted to the Naismith Hall of Fame (including announced members awaiting induction) are indicated as follows:
Bold type: Inducted as players.

Italics: Inducted in a non-playing role.

===
Basketball ===


===
3x3
basketball ===


==
Women ==
Individuals who have been inducted to the Naismith Hall of Fame (including announced members awaiting induction) are indicated as follows:
Bold type: Inducted as players.

Italics: Inducted in a non-playing role.

===
Basketball ===


===
3x3
basketball ===


==
Athlete medal leaders ==


===
Men ===


===
Women ===


== Notes ==
a  The United States team members did not accept silver medals after a controversy in the gold medal game.

==
References ==
General"Results database".
International Olympic Committee.
Retrieved April 5, 2009.

"Basketball:
Basketball Men".
Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
Retrieved April 5, 2009.

"Basketball:
Basketball Women".
Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
Retrieved April 5, 2009.

"Olympic Review and Revue Olympique".
LA84 Foundation.
Archived from the original on May  1, 2009.
Retrieved April 5, 2009.

"Hall of Famers Index".
Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.
Retrieved April 4, 2012.
(
Hall of Famers inducted through 2011)
"
Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame Announces Class of 2012" (Press release).
Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.
April 2, 2012.
Archived from the original on April  5, 2012.
Retrieved April 4, 2012.
(
Induction class includes Don Barksdale, Katrina McClain, and Reggie Miller,
all listed above)Specific


==
External links ==
Basketball:
Men's Basketball at Sports-Reference.com
Basketball:
Women's Basketball at Sports-Reference.com
The men's tournament of basketball at the 1996 Olympics at Atlanta, United States began on July 20 and ended on August 4, when the United States defeated FR Yugoslavia 95–69 for the gold medal.

==
Participants ==
Angola
Argentina
Australia
 Brazil
China
Croatia
Greece
Lithuania
 Puerto Rico
 South Korea
United States (Host)
FR Yugoslavia


== Format ==
Twelve teams are split into 2 preliminary round groups of 6 teams each.
The top 4 teams from each group qualify for the knockout stage.

Fifth and sixth-placed teams from each group are ranked 9th–12th in two additional matches.

In the quarterfinals, the matchups are as follows: A1 vs. B4, A2 vs. B3, A3 vs. B2 and A4 vs. B1.

The eliminated teams at the quarterfinals are ranked 5th–8th in two additional matches.

The winning teams from the quarterfinals meet in the semifinals as follows: A3/B2 vs. A1/B4 and A2/B3 vs. A4/B1.

The winning teams from the semifinals dispute the gold medal.
The losing teams dispute the bronze.
Ties are broken via the following the criteria, with the first option used first, all the way down to the last option:

Head to head results
Goal average (not the goal difference) between the tied teams
Goal average of the tied teams for all teams in its group


==
Squads ==


==
Preliminary round ==
===
Group A ===


===
Group B ===


==
Tournament bracket ==


==
Quarterfinals ==
All times are local (UTC−5)


==
Classification round ==


===
Placement Matches (9–12th Place) ===


==== 11th–12th ====
==== 9th–10th ====
===
Placement Matches (5–8th Place) ===


====
7th–8th ====
====
5th–6th ====


=
= Semifinals ==


==
Finals ==


===
Bronze Medal match ===


===
Gold Medal match ===


==
Awards ==


==
Final standings ==


==
See also ==
Women's Tournament


==
References ==
1996 Olympic Games:
Tournament for Men, FIBA Archive.
Accessed December 22, 2016.

==
External links ==
Basketball at the 1996 Summer Olympics – Men's basketball at Sports Reference
Women's basketball is a team ball sport developed in the United States of America in the late 1800s, in tandem with its men's counterpart.
Women's basketball became popular, spreading from the east to west coast of the United States in large part via women's college competitions.
As of 2020, women's basketball is played globally, with basketball being one of the most popular and fastest growing sports in the world.
There are multiple professional leagues and tournaments for professional women basketball players.
The main North American league is the WNBA.
The FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup and Women's Olympic Basketball Tournament feature top national teams from continental championships.
In the US, the NCAA Women's Division I Basketball Championship is also popular.
The strongest European women's basketball clubs participate in the EuroLeague Women.

==
Early women's basketball ==
Women's basketball began in the fall of 1892 at Smith College.
Senda Berenson, recently hired as a young "physical culture" director at Smith, taught basketball to her students, hoping the activity would improve their physical health.
While for men, basketball was designed as an indoor addition to existing team sports such as baseball and football, basketball became the first women's team sport, followed shortly after by hockey, rowing, and volleyball.
Basketball's early adherents were affiliated with YMCAs and colleges throughout the United States, and the game quickly spread throughout the country.
However, Berenson was taking risks simply in teaching the game to women.
Nineteenth-century Victorian culture stressed the frailty of women and prioritized the status of women in the home, and Berenson expressed concern about the women suffering from "nervous fatigue" if games were too strenuous for them.
In order to keep it acceptable for women to play at all within Victorian ideals of refinement and gentility, she taught modified rules.
She increased participation to nine players per team, and the court was divided into three areas.
Three players were assigned to each area (guard, center, and forward) and could not cross the line into another area.
The ball was moved from section to section by passing or dribbling, and players were limited to three dribbles and could only hold the ball for three seconds.
No snatching or batting the ball away from another player was allowed.
A center jump was required after each score.
Variations of Berenson's rules spread across the country via YMCAs and women's colleges, where educated middle-class women were following the prevailing trend in men's games of playing intercollegiate sports.

Early basketball was played with peach baskets and soccer balls, similarly to the men's game, but women's uniforms again reflected the Victorian culture of the times and were designed to be practical, yet maintain the woman athlete's dignity and femininity.
While upper-class women had been playing sports at country clubs since the mid-nineteenth century, they were able to participate in activities such as tennis and croquet in full-length skirts and corsets.
However, similar attire was impractical for a more active sport like basketball, so the first trousers for women were worn.
Initially loose and covered by a knee-length skirt, these early pants were replaced soon after by loose bloomers over stockings.
Despite men being forbidden from watching these collegiate games, the attire still drew public ridicule.

Originally exclusively intramural, the first intercollegiate women's basketball game was played between teams from Stanford University and the University of California, Berkeley, on April 4, 1896.
Berenson herself opposed intercollegiate play for women, and prioritized the health and fitness benefits for a larger goal: she believed that women, newly entering the workforce and seeking paid jobs outside the home, were at a health-related disadvantage to men, which she saw as limiting women's opportunities and the possibility for equal wages.
For much of the early 20th century, other coaches and administrators felt similarly, due in part to an increasing sentiment that men's college sports were becoming too commercialized and exploitive of the athletes.
The women's branch of the National Amateur Athletic Foundation was founded in the 1920s, and the organization's goals included keeping women's sports non-competitive by discouraging travel and awards, discouraging publicity, and keeping women coaches and administrators in charge of women's sports.
From 1895 until 1970, the term "women's basketball" was also used to refer to netball, which evolved in parallel with modern women's basketball.

==
Recent women's basketball ==
The popularity of women's basketball grew steadily around the world for decades.
By the 1970s, the sport had attracted the notice the International Olympic Committee, which added women's basketball as an official sport of the Olympic Games in 1976, the men debuted in 1936.
Throughout the 1970s, funding for (and interest in)
women's basketball began to dramatically increase as schools receiving federal funding began to come into compliance with new laws mandating a lack of discrimination based on sex.
The sport was also gaining attention at the collegiate level, under the auspices of the Association of Intercollegiate Athletics for Women (AIAW).
America's first professional basketball league for women was founded in 1978 as the Women's Basketball League.
The WBL competed for three seasons, launching in 1979 with 8 teams.
The league expanded to 14 teams in 1980.
Financial issues, poor marketing, and the cancelation of America's participation in the 1980 Summer Olympic Games severely impacted the league's viability, and it collapsed at the end of its third season in 1981.
The next major development in women's basketball occurred in 1982 when the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) began to sponsor the sport..
After several failed attempts at women's professional leagues in the U.S., the NBA founded the WNBA in 1996.

The first nationally televised championship game occurred in 1979.

Ivy Kirkpatrick of Stephen F. Austin State University coordinated the collaboration between NBC Sports and the AIAW.

Only the title game was televised with Old Dominion University defeating Louisiana Tech University.

Thereafter the Women's Final Four has been televised as an annual event.

At the moment the WNBA consist of 12 Teams all over America.

== Rules and equipment ==
Basketball is a team sport in which two teams, most commonly with five players each, opposing one another on a rectangular court, compete with the primary objective of shooting a basketball through the defender's hoop.
The rules for women's basketball are identical to the rules for men's basketball.
The most noticeable differences are in the circumference of the women's basketball and the location of the women's three point line.
The circumference of the women's basketball is one inch (2.54 cm) less than the men's basketball.
The smaller ball was introduced for NCAA play in the fall of 1984..
The women's three-point line is one foot (0.30 m) closer to the basket than men's.
===
Basketball size ===
The regulation WNBA ball is a minimum 28.5 inches (72.4 cm) in circumference, which is one inch (2.54 cm) smaller than the NBA ball.
This is a standard size 6 ball.
As of 2008, this size is used for all senior-level women's competitions worldwide.

===
Court dimensions ===
The standard court size in U.S. college and WNBA play is 94 by 50 feet (28.65 by 15.24 m), while the FIBA standard court is slightly smaller at 28 by 15 m (91 ft 10.4 in by 49 ft 2.6 in) .
For most of its distance, the three-point line is 6.75 m (22 ft 2 in) from the middle of the basket under both FIBA and WNBA rules.
Near the sidelines, the three-point line runs parallel to the.sideline, at a distance of exactly 3 feet in the WNBA and 0.9 m in FIBA play.
Under NCAA rules, the three-point distance is 20 ft 9 in (6.32 m) for most of the width of the court, with a minimum distance of 4 ft 3 in (1.30 m) from the sidelines.
The WNBA, FIBA, and NCAA all use a block/charge arc near each basket, with the WNBA and NCAA distance at 4 ft (1.2 m) from the center of the basket and FIBA using a marginally wider radius of exactly 1.25 m (4 ft 1 in).

=== Shot clock ===
The WNBA shot clock was changed from 30 to 24 seconds, which has been in FIBA play since 2000, and has been used by the NBA since the shot clock was first introduced in 1954.
Both men's and women's NCAA college basketball use a 30-second shot clock; the men's clock was introduced in 1985 at 45 seconds, lowered to 35 seconds in 1993, and 30 seconds in 2015.

===
Game clock ===
Most high school games are played with four 8-minute quarters, while NCAA, WNBA, and FIBA games are played in four 10 minute quarters.
In 2015-2016 the NCAA changed the rules to 10 minute quarters from 20 minute halves.
High lobs or tip-ins can be attempted with up to 0.3 seconds left in the period per the Trent Tucker Rule.

Game Length and Quarters
Within the WNBA there are four quarters that will be ten minutes in length.

This has been a change that was made to help the speed of the game.

It was also an attempt to help the game flow.

There was also a rule added to not have a jump ball at the start of the second half as well.

==
Governance ==
Women's basketball is governed internationally by the International Basketball Federation (FIBA).
Since 1953 FIBA has hosted a world championship tournament for women, currently known as the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup.
The event, renamed from "FIBA World Championship for Women" after its 2014 edition, is currently held in even-numbered non-Summer Olympic years.
There has been some concern about the reach of the sport after one governing body disallowed Muslim women playing in hijabs.

==
Levels of competition ==


===
University ===
Berenson's freshmen played the sophomore class in the first women's collegiate basketball game held on 22 March 1893.
University of California and Miss Head's School, had played the first women's extramural game in 1892.
Also in 1893, Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College, coached by Clara Gregory Baer (the inventor of Newcomb ball) women began playing basketball.
By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the country, including Wellesley, Vassar and Bryn Mawr.
The first intercollegiate women's game was on 4 April 1896.
Stanford women played California, 9-on-9, ending in a 2–1 Stanford victory.
Clara Gregory Baer published the first book of rules for women's basketball in 1895 she first called the game 'Basquette', a name later dropped in her first revision of rules, the Newcomb College Basketball Rules, published in 1908.Despite participating in the first intercollegiate women's basketball game, Stanford's faculty athletic committee banned intercollegiate competition for women, first in team sports like basketball and later extending to all sports, and
Cal (as well as many other prestigious colleges at the time) followed suit.
In many cases, such bans were not lifted until the 1970s and the introduction of Title IX.

While Senda Berenson's desire to limit competition was not realized forever, her larger goals were.
College basketball and other women's college sports impacted the American cultural mindset around women and women's rights at the turn of the century, and colleges played a large role in enabling women to participate in athletics at all levels.
Though in 1900 only 2.8% of American women were enrolled in college, the percentage of total college graduates who were women had increased to 36%, as colleges increased in number, size, and accessibility to larger portions of the population.
The cultural significance of these college graduates exceeded their numbers, as college-educated women comprised the bulk of progressive professionals of their era.
Women who played sports were able to craft a new image of femininity and athleticism, and the association between athletics and college was able to make sports acceptable and a central part of the image of progressive women in the early 1900s.
Women's basketball continued to grow in universities across the country, expanding especially rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s as the Equal Rights Amendment raised awareness of unequal treatment in college athletics and the official position of the Division for Girls and Women in Sport (which later developed into the Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women) was changed to allow and encourage women's intercollegiate competition.
In 1971 the five-player, full court game was adopted, followed by the Women's Sports Foundation, which was formed in 1974.
Women's college basketball remains very popular throughout North America, with the sport being sponsored by all of the major college athletic associations:
the NCAA, the NAIA, the NJCAA, the NCCAA, the CCAA and the CIS.
Division
I of the NCAA is considered the highest level of college competition, with the winner of the annual NCAA Women's Division I
Basketball Championship game declared "national champion."
===
Professional leagues ===
There have been several professional leagues established in several countries including the United States, Europe, Japan, England and Australia.
===
International competitions ===
Though it was originally an American sport, it quickly spread internationally and outstanding players and teams are found today all over the world.
Women's basketball leagues now exist in most areas of the world including Australia, Asia, South America, and Europe.

====
Olympics ====
Women's basketball has been contested in the Summer Olympics since 1976.

====
Additional International Competitions ====
In addition to the Olympics and Women's World Cup, women's basketball is also contested in the Pan American Games and the Central American and Caribbean Games.
Women's basketball made its first appearance at the Commonwealth Games in 2006.
Basketball (for both men and women) is one of the sports that the host nation of the Island Games may select for competition.
Women also compete in wheelchair basketball in the Paralympic Games.

==
Around the world ==


===
Africa ===
AfroBasket Women is the women's basketball continental championship of Africa, played biennially under the auspices of FIBA, the basketball sport governing body, and the African zone thereof.
The tournament also serves to qualify teams for participation in the quadrennial FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup and the Olympic basketball tournament.

===
Americas ===


====
United States ====
One of the major important events in the development of women's basketball in the United States was Title IX.

Title IX was passed in 1972 to end sexual discrimination and stereotyping in admission to colleges and also in academic subjects (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
Therefore, Congress' original goal was eliminating this discrimination in academic and educational processes.
“
Title IX is today generally viewed as having fixed the problem of gender inequality of sports, at least in educational settings” (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 79).
It started out as simply involving education but then shifted in a debate to sports.
Some groups such as the NCAA fought to keep things the way they were in reference to men's sports.
The NCAA had built up the programs and earned financial support and popularity and did not want to throw that down the drain (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
In 1974, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare issued Title IX regulations regarding intercollegiate athletics (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
Title IX implies that if a school has a specific sport's team for boys then they must have a team in that same sport for girls.
This will occur unless the men's sport happens to be a contact sport in which the rule will not necessarily apply (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
In 1978, colleges and universities were forced to apply Title IX's rules and regulations.
Athletic departments had to adhere to one of three requirements which were the proportionality rule, the gender equity rule, or historical progress rule
(McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
Each of these requirements addressed Title IX and its regulations in a fair manner.
To ensure that schools comply with Title IX, they face the consequence of losing federal funding for any violation (Sadker, 2001).

The proportionality rule entails that a school provides opportunities proportional to its enrollment.
As an example, if a school is 55% male and 45% female then the athletic participation should be 55:45 (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
Not only does the proportionality rule apply to athletic participation, but it also addresses scholarships.
“
So if a college is spending $400,000 per year on athletic scholarships and half of the athletic participants are women then half of that amount, $200,000, should be funding athletic scholarships for women (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 299).
The gender equity rule entails that a school must prove that it “meets the interest of the gender that is underrepresented” (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 107) which happens to be women.
The historical progress rule entails that if a school is unable to provide proportional opportunities then they must put forth an effort to create more opportunities for the underrepresented gender (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).Between 1971 and 2000
, Title IX has proven to have had a huge impact on female collegiate sports.
Sports participation among college women has risen from 372 percent over that time, from 32,000 to more than 150,000 women (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 108).
Also now 33.5% of female students participate in sports (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
The issue still remaining is that women's sports beyond college do not benefit from Title IX.
As a whole, they make less income than men in professional sports which Title IX cannot do much about.
However, due to Title IX some women have gotten recognition as a result of the debate. "
Women athletes receive greater respect today but relatively skimpy media attention.
Thank Title IX for…the growing visibility of women's college basketball that has USA Today producing a pullout section for the women’s NCAA March Madness tournament" (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 109).Professional women's basketball has been played in the United States.
There have been several leagues, the most recent of which is the WNBA.
The first attempt was the Women's Pro Basketball League.
The league played three seasons from the fall of 1978 to the spring of 1981.
The league is generally considered to be the first American professional women's basketball league to be founded.
The second women's professional league to be created in the United States was the WBA.
The league played three seasons from the summer of 1993 to the summer of 1995.
The league is considered to be the first American professional women's basketball league to be successful as a summer league, like the WNBA.
The league played three full seasons with plans to play as a 12-team league in 1997 but disbanded before 1997 season.
The WBA played a 15-game schedule and games were broadcast on Liberty Sports of Dallas.
When FOX Sports purchased Liberty Sports and the WBA, they disbanded the league.
In 1996, two professional women's leagues were started in the United States.
They were the American Basketball League and the WNBA.
The American Basketball League was founded in 1996 during an increase in the interest in the sport following the 1996 Summer Olympics.
The league played two full seasons (1996–97 and 1997–98) and started a third (1998–99) before it folded on 22 December 1998.

=====
WNBA =====
The Women's National Basketball Association or WNBA is an organization governing a professional basketball league for women in the United States.
The WNBA was formed in 1996 as the women's counterpart to the National Basketball Association, and league play began in 1997.
The regular WNBA season is June to September (North American Spring and Summer).
Most WNBA teams play at the same venue as their NBA counterparts.
Most team names are also very similar to those of NBA teams in the same market, such as the Washington Wizards and Washington Mystics, the Minnesota Timberwolves and Minnesota Lynx.

Officially approved by the NBA Board of Governors on 24 April 1996, the creation of the WNBA was first announced at a press conference with Rebecca Lobo, Lisa Leslie and Sheryl Swoopes in attendance.
While not the first major women's professional basketball league in the United States (a distinction held by the defunct WBL), the WNBA is the only league to receive full backing of the NBA.

On the heels of a much-publicized gold medal run by the USA women's national team at the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, the WNBA began its first season on 21 June 1997 to much fanfare.
The league began with eight teams.
The first WNBA game featured the New York Liberty facing the Los Angeles Sparks in Los Angeles and was televised in the United States on the NBC television network.
At the start of the 1997 season, the WNBA had television deals in place with NBC, ESPN and Lifetime Television Network.

The league is divided into two conferences, the Eastern Conference and the Western Conference.
Each of the 12 teams plays a 34-game regular season schedule, beginning in June and ending in mid September.
Although the WNBA is divided into conferences for scheduling purposes, it has used a single table for purposes of playoff qualifying since the 2016 season.
The eight teams with the best overall records, regardless of conference affiliation, compete in the WNBA Playoffs during September with the WNBA Finals in early October.

An All-Star Game is typically held in the middle of July, while regular play stops temporarily for it.
In Olympic years, there is no all-star game, but a break of about five weeks in the middle of the WNBA season allows players to participate in the Olympics as members of their national teams.

There have been a total of 18 teams in WNBA history.
A total of five teams have folded: the Charlotte Sting, the Cleveland Rockers, Houston Comets, the Miami Sol and the Portland Fire.
Three other teams have moved, two of them twice and the other once.
The Utah Starzz have moved twice, first after the 2002 season to San Antonio, where they were first known as the Silver Stars and later as the Stars, and then after the 2017 season to Las Vegas as the Aces.
At the same time the Starzz moved to San Antonio, the Orlando Miracle moved to Uncasville, Connecticut, where they now play as the Connecticut Sun.
The Detroit Shock moved after the 2009 season to Tulsa, Oklahoma, where they played as the Tulsa Shock, and then moved to the Dallas–Fort Worth Metroplex after the 2015 season, now playing as the Dallas Wings.
Since 1997 when the league was established there have been 9 teams that have won the WNBA championship.

The Houston Comets were the first team to win the championship and they won it 4 years in a row, 1997, 1998, 1999,2000.
The Los Angeles Sparks have won 3 championships in their time in the league, 2001,2002, 2016.
The Tulsa Shock also won 3 championships when they were still in the league, 2003, 2006, 2008.The Seattle Storm also have 3 championships to their name, 2004, 2010, 2018.
The Sacramento Monarchs were a WNBA team that won 1 championship in 2005.

The Phoenix Mercury Won the WNBA championship 3 times in 2007, 2009, 20014.
The Indiana Fever have one championship to their name and that came in 2012.
The Minnesota Lynx have the most championships of any of the teams currently active in the WNBA with 4 championships that came in 2011, 2013, 2015, 2017.
The Washington Mystics have won the most recent championship in 2019.
===
Asia ===
The Women's Chinese Basketball Association (WCBA) is a professional women's basketball league established in 2002.The Women's Hong Kong Basketball Association is the highest women's professional club basketball competition in Hong Kong.
The Indian National Basketball Championship for Women is a professional basketball tournament in India for women
The Women's Japan Basketball League is a premier women's basketball league in Japan.
The Lebanese Basketball League or FLB League is the top-tier professional basketball league in Lebanon.

The Women's Philippine Basketball League was a women's basketball league in the PhilippinesThe Women's Korean Basketball League (WKBL) is the premier women's basketball league in South KoreaThe
Women's Super Basketball League is the highest women's professional club basketball competition in Republic of China


===
Europe ===
The Russian Women's Basketball Premier League is the dominant league in Europe (largely because it is the main attraction of the WNBA players during the off-season).
Other notable leagues are the Italian Serie A1, the Spanish Liga Femenina and the Turkish Women's Basketball League.

====
England ====
Professional basketball exists in England.
Women's English Basketball League is major professional competition.
The league has grown steadily over recent years, and has now reached a level of thirty national league sides.
The league is split into two levels.
Division 1 is as close to professional as women's sport gets in the United Kingdom, with teams such as Rhondda Rebels and Sheffield Hatters bringing in players from the US and Europe.
The Nottingham Wildcats make up the trio of clubs that helped establish the women's league and remain amongst the top three or four places.
The gap between these top teams and the rest of the league has remained, but gradually as the women's game has developed, the gulf in results has been reduced, and each year there have been more competitive games.
Promotion from Division 2 has always reinforced the gap between the two leagues, as the winner of the Division 2 promotion play-offs has found the step-up difficult.
The Division 2 play-offs take the top four teams from the North and South of the Second Divisions, with the top playing the bottom of the other pool.
This year (2006/7) saw several new teams join the second division, showing the continual growth of the women's game.
These included the SevenOaks Suns, Enfield Phoenix, Taunton Tigers and Bristol Storm.

===
Oceania ===


====
Australia ====
Professional women's basketball exists in Australia in the form of the Women's National Basketball League.
The league was founded in 1981 as a way for the best women's basketball teams in the various Australian States to compete against each other on a regular basis.
Today the WNBL is the premier women's basketball league in Australia.

==
Women's basketball in film ==


===
Documentaries ===
Off the Rez — A 2011 documentary for TLC about the journey of future WNBA player Shoni Schimmel from the Oregon Indian reservation where she was raised to Portland in high school, and ultimately to the University of Louisville.

She Got Game is based on the high school basketball success of Brigid Touey Humphrey
Training Rules —
A 2009 documentary examining how women's collegiate sports, caught in a web of homophobic practices, collude in the destruction of the lives and dreams of many of its most talented athletes.

===
Theatrical releases ===
Believe in Me
Double Teamed
Love & Basketball
The Heart of the Game
The Mighty Macs
The St. Tammany Miracle
Salaam Dunk
The Winning Season
Woman Basketball Player
No.
5


== See also ==
Timeline of women's basketball
Six-on-six basketball
Women's Basketball Hall of Fame


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
Enos Stanley Kroenke
(; born July 29, 1947)
is an American billionaire businessman.

He is the owner of Kroenke Sports & Entertainment, which is the holding company of English  Association football clubs Arsenal F.C. and Arsenal W.F.C., the Los Angeles Rams of the NFL, Denver Nuggets of the NBA, Colorado Avalanche of the NHL, Colorado Rapids of Major League Soccer, Colorado Mammoth of the National Lacrosse League, the Los Angeles Gladiators of the Overwatch League, and the newly formed Los Angeles Guerrillas of the Call of Duty League.

The Nuggets and Avalanche franchises are held in the name of his wife, Ann Walton Kroenke, to satisfy NFL ownership restrictions that forbid a team owner from having teams in other markets.

Ann is the daughter of Walmart co-founder James "Bud" Walton.
He was estimated to be worth US$10 billion by Forbes in 2020.

Kroenke's holding company for sports teams has been controversial.
In 2016, he relocated the St. Louis Rams to Los Angeles, turning the team into the Los Angeles Rams.
In 2021, Kroenke was involved in an aborted effort to end the traditional European football system by creating a closed European Super League which would have included Arsenal and several other teams.

==
Early life and education ==
Kroenke grew up in Mora, Missouri, an unincorporated community with a population of approximately two dozen, where his father owned Mora Lumber Company.
His first job was sweeping the floor at his father's lumber yard.
By age 10 he was keeping the company's books.
At Cole Camp (Missouri) High School, he played baseball, basketball and ran track.

==
Business career ==


===
Real estate ===
Kroenke married Ann Walton, a Walmart heiress, in 1974.
He founded the Kroenke Group in 1983, a real estate development firm that has built shopping centers and apartment buildings.
He has developed many of his plazas near Walmart stores.
He is also the chairman of THF Realty, an independent real estate development company that specializes in suburban development.
He founded this corporation in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1991.
In 2016, THF's portfolio was valued at more than $2 billion, including more than 100 projects totaling 20 million square feet, primarily in retail shopping centers.

===
Other ventures ===
In 2006, Kroenke, in partnership with the money manager Charles Banks, acquired Screaming Eagle, a winery in Napa Valley.
In April 2009, Banks stated he was no longer personally involved with Screaming Eagle.
Kroenke is a major owner of working ranches, owning a total of 848,631 acres.
The Land Report magazine ranked him as the United States' ninth-largest landowner in 2015.
Among notable purchases is his February 2016 acquisition of the famous Waggoner Ranch in Texas, the largest ranch within one fenceline.
In August 2017, he came under fire for launching a British outdoor sports television channel that will show regular hunting programmes that includes killing elephants, lions, and other vulnerable African species.

==
Professional sports ==


===
Kroenke Sports and Entertainment ===
Founded in 1999, Kroenke Sports & Entertainment owns Ball Arena in Denver, home of the Nuggets and Avalanche, and co-owns Dick's Sporting Goods Park in Commerce City, home of the Rapids.
Both venues were built by his development company.
In 2004, Kroenke launched his own competitor to FSN Rocky Mountain (now known as AT&T SportsNet Rocky Mountain), Altitude, a new regional sports network which became the official broadcaster for both of Kroenke's teams on launch.
Kroenke also established TicketHorse, a ticket company that provides in-house sales for all of his teams.

===
Denver Nuggets and Colorado Avalanche ===
In 2000, Kroenke became full owner of both the National Basketball Association's Denver Nuggets and the National Hockey League's Colorado Avalanche, purchasing the teams from Charlie Lyons's Ascent Entertainment Group.

===
Colorado Crush ===
In 2002, Kroenke partnered with Denver Broncos owner Pat Bowlen and former Bronco quarterback John Elway to become part-owner of the Arena Football League's Colorado Crush.

===
Colorado Mammoth and Colorado Rapids ===
Kroenke continued to grow his sports empire in 2004 when he purchased the National Lacrosse League's Colorado Mammoth and Major League Soccer's Colorado Rapids from Phil Anschutz.

===
St. Louis Rams ===
On April 13, 1995, Stan Kroenke helped Georgia Frontiere move the National Football League's Los Angeles Rams from Anaheim to St. Louis by purchasing a 30% share of the team.
In 2010, Kroenke exercised his right of first refusal to purchase the remaining interest in the Rams from the estate of late owner Georgia Frontiere.
On August 25, 2010, he became full owner of the Rams by unanimous consent of the NFL.
To gain approval from NFL owners, Kroenke agreed to turn over control of the Denver Nuggets and Colorado Avalanche to his son, Josh, by the end of 2010, and he had to give up his majority stake in both teams in December 2014.
The NFL does not allow its owners to hold majority control of major league teams in other NFL markets.
On October 7, 2015, the NFL approved transfer of his ownership stake of the Avalanche and Nuggets to his wife, Ann Walton Kroenke.
====
Stadium issues ====
In April 2010, as he was trying to gain full ownership of the team, and knowing of an escape clause in the Rams lease at the Edward Jones Dome, Stan Kroenke said: "I'm going to attempt to do everything that I can to keep the Rams in St. Louis.
"In
February 2013, the Rams and the City of St. Louis went to arbitration over a clause in the Rams' lease that stated the Rams current stadium must be in the top tier of NFL stadiums.
The arbitrators agreed with the Rams, giving the Rams the ability to break their original lease and assume a year-to-year lease agreement.
Saying that he was willing to work with Missouri officials and to give the governor a "complete understanding" of the stadium situation, on November 30, 2015, Stan Kroenke met with Missouri Governor Jay Nixon at Rams Park in Earth City, Missouri.

===
Los Angeles Rams ===


====
St. Louis Rams relocation to Los Angeles ====
On January 5, 2015, it was announced that the Kroenke Group was teaming up with Stockbridge Capital Group to build a 70,000-seat NFL stadium and venue in Inglewood, California, a suburb of Los Angeles, threatening the Rams' future in St. Louis.
In response, St. Louis countered with National Car Rental Field, a proposed open-air stadium in the north riverfront in downtown St. Louis with the hope of the Rams staying in St. Louis.
At the NFL relocation presentation, Kroenke stated that St. Louis was no longer a viable market for the NFL, and was best served by only two teams.

Kroenke also questioned the financial future of the team.
NFL commissioner Roger Goodell also stated that St. Louis funding did not meet the criteria set by the NFL.
St. Louis officials countered that Kroenke was misrepresenting the city and defended that St. Louis was being misrepresented at the owners' meetings.
The Oakland Raiders and San Diego Chargers had also been unhappy with their old stadiums (Oakland Coliseum in Oakland and Qualcomm Stadium in San Diego, respectively) lacking updated amenities, and had been proposing a stadium in Carson, California (another suburb of Los Angeles) in competition with Kroenke's Inglewood proposal.

On January 4, 2016, all three teams applied for relocation to Los Angeles for the 2016 NFL season.
The following day, the Rams and Stan Kroenke released their proposal for relocation.
Some of the Rams' conclusions were disputed by the Mayor of St. Louis Francis Slay (in a letter to Roger Goodell), the St. Louis Regional Chamber, and Forbes.
However, some say that staying in St. Louis was ultimately a bad deal for the city and the city is better off with them leaving.
On January 12, 2016, the NFL approved the Rams' application to relocate from St. Louis back to Los Angeles with a 30–2 vote and
Kroenke was praised by other NFL owners afterwards.
In 2017, the Chargers announced that they would move to Los Angeles for the 2017 season, with the intention of initially playing games in Carson, but then moving into Kroenke's Inglewood Stadium, pending completion.
The Raiders subsequently announced a move to Las Vegas, Nevada.

On April 12, 2017 it was reported that the City of St. Louis, St. Louis County, and the Regional Convention and Sports Complex Authority filed a 52-page lawsuit against the NFL and all 32 NFL clubs as defendants (including Stan Kroenke) and seeks damages and restitution of profits.
On July 12, 2017, the Los Angeles Rams filed three motions seek to: dismiss the case for failure to state a claim, dismiss the case for lack of personal jurisdiction, and appeal to have the case determined through arbitration rather than in front of a St. Louis based jury.
The motions in the case will be decided upon by Judge Christopher McGraugh.
On April 20, 2020, the Supreme Court denied Kroenke and the NFL's appeal of the lawsuit.

===
Arsenal ===
Kroenke is the owner of Arsenal Holdings plc which owns association football clubs Arsenal F.C. of the Premier League and Arsenal W.F.C. of the WSL.
Arsenal already had a technical link-up with Kroenke's Colorado Rapids when in April 2007 Granada Ventures, a subsidiary of ITV plc, sold its 9.9% stake in Arsenal Holdings plc to Kroenke's KSE UK inc.
Kroenke went on to buy further shares in the club, taking his total stake up to 12.19%.
The club's board initially expressed skepticism that a bid would be in its best interests, but gradually warmed to him as part of counteracting Alisher Usmanov's rival bid for the club.

By June 2008, the board had prepared to let Kroenke take over, and on September 19, 2008, it was officially announced that Kroenke had joined the board of directors.
Kroenke had a beneficial interest in, and controlled voting rights, over 18,594 shares, representing 29.9% of the issued shares.
Nearing the maximum 29.99% threshold, beyond which an offer for all remaining shares would be forced to be made.
On April 10, 2011, it was reported that Kroenke was in advanced talks to complete the takeover.
The following day, it was announced that he increased his shareholding to 62.89% by purchasing the stakes of Danny Fiszman and Lady Nina Bracewell-Smith, and agreed to make an offer for the rest of the club at £11,750 per share, valuing the club at £731M.
In August 2018, he made an offer that was accepted of around £600m valuing the total shareholding at £1.8bn, to Alisher Usmanov, to bring his ownership of shares beyond 90% and forcing the compulsory purchase of the remaining shares.
In April 2021, Arsenal were announced as a founding member of the European Super League, which would have effectively ended the pyramid system of European football and placed Liverpool in a closed league without prospects for meritocratic relegation and promotion.
Arsenal and the five other English clubs involved backed out within two days after a strong backlash.
After the aborted attempt to end the European football system, Arsenal protested and called for the Kroenke family to sell the club.
The Kroenke family released a statement saying they would not sell the club.

===
Los Angeles Gladiators ===
In late 2017, Kroenke Sports and Entertainment developed a new esports team franchise named the Los Angeles Gladiators in the newly founded Overwatch League; their inaugural season began on December 6.

===
Los Angeles Guerrillas ===
In 2019, Kroenke Sports and Entertainment developed their second esports team.

They founded the Los Angeles Guerrillas of the Call of Duty League.
They, along with the Los Angeles Gladiators of the Overwatch League, are based out of Hollywood Park nextdoor to where Kroenke's Rams will be playing.

==
Personal life ==
On a ski trip to Aspen, Colorado, Kroenke met his future wife, Ann Walton, a Walmart heiress.
They married in 1974.
Already wealthy from real estate, he became even wealthier when he and Ann inherited a stake in Walmart upon the 1995 death of her father, James "Bud" Walton.
As of September 2015, that stake was worth $4.8 billion.
He is of German descent and was raised Lutheran.
Kroenke is a somewhat reclusive man who prefers to avoid the spotlight.
He is popularly known as "Silent Stan" because he almost never gives interviews to the press.
He rarely interferes in his teams' day-to-day operations.

During the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign, he donated $100,000 to the Hillary Victory Fund.
He subsequently donated $1 million to Donald Trump's inaugural committee.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Forbes profile
Stan Kroenke at IMDb
The men's national basketball team of the United States won the gold medal at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
They automatically qualified for the Olympics by winning the FIBA Basketball World Cup in 2014.
The team was coached by Mike Krzyzewski of Duke University, with assistant coaches Jim Boeheim (Syracuse), Tom Thibodeau (Minnesota Timberwolves), and Monty Williams (Oklahoma City Thunder).

==
Timeline ==
August 6, 2015:
34-man roster announced
January 18, 2016:
30-man roster announced
July 17: Start of training camp
July 22 – August 1:
Exhibition games
August 6–21:
2016
Summer Olympics


==
Roster ==
The 2016 team consisted of just two returning players from the  2012 Olympic gold-medal winning team, Kevin Durant and the new team captain, Carmelo Anthony.
The following is the United States roster in the men's basketball tournament of the 2016 Summer Olympics.

The following were also candidates to make the team:
== 2015 Basketball Showcase ==
On August 12, 2015, USA Basketball announced 19 NBA players to participate in the following day's 2015 USA Basketball Showcase in Las Vegas, where they will be divided into two squads, USA Blue, and USA White, where USA Blue Team will be coached by USA National Team assistant coach Monty Williams (Oklahoma City Thunder) while USA White Team will be coached by USA National Team assistant coach Tom Thibodeau (Minnesota Timberwolves).The Blue Team included starters Harrison Barnes (Golden State Warriors), Bradley Beal (Washington Wizards), DeMar DeRozan (Toronto Raptors), and Andre Drummond (Detroit Pistons), with reserve players Kenneth Faried (Denver Nuggets), Rudy Gay (Sacramento Kings), Amir Johnson (Boston Celtics), Victor Oladipo (Orlando Magic), and Elfrid Payton (Orlando Magic).

The White Team included starters Kawhi Leonard (San Antonio Spurs), Blake Griffin (Los Angeles Clippers), DeMarcus Cousins (Sacramento Kings), Klay Thompson (Golden State Warriors), and Michael Carter-Williams (Milwaukee Bucks), with reserve players Mason Plumlee (Portland Trail Blazers), Terrence Jones (Houston Rockets), Arron Afflalo (New York Knicks), and Draymond Green (Golden State Warriors).
C. J. Watson (Orlando Magic) was included in the roster announcement but did not play.

==
Exhibition games ==
The United States' 12-man roster began its exhibition schedule against 2004 Olympic champion Argentina.
They also faced 2015 FIBA Asia gold medalist China and 2015 FIBA Americas champion Venezuela.
The schedule concluded with 2015 FIBA Africa champion Nigeria in Houston.
The United States Olympic Committee used Houston as a departure point for many Olympic teams, providing them with credentials and provisions on their way out to Brazil.

==
Olympic play ==


===
Preliminary round ===


====
China ====


====
Venezuela ====


====
Australia ====


====
Serbia ====


====
France ====


===
Knockout round ===
====
Quarterfinal – Argentina ====


====
Semifinal – Spain ====


====
Final – Serbia ====


===
Statistics ===


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Games of the XXXIth Olympiad -- 2016 at usab.com
DoubleClick Inc. developed and provided Internet ad serving services.
It was acquired by Google in March 2008.
DoubleClick offered technology products and services that were sold primarily to advertising agencies and mass media that served businesses including Microsoft, General Motors, Coca-Cola, Motorola, L'Oréal, Palm, Inc., Apple Inc., Visa Inc., Nike, Inc., and Carlsberg Group.
The company's main product line was known as DART, which was intended to increase the purchasing efficiency of advertisers and to minimize unsold inventory for publishers.
DoubleClick was founded in 1995 by Kevin O'Connor and Dwight Merriman and had headquarters in New York City, United States.
It was acquired by private equity firms Hellman & Friedman and JMI Equity in July 2005.
On March 11, 2008, Google acquired DoubleClick for $3.1 billion.
In June 2018, Google announced plans to rebrand its ads platforms, and DoubleClick was merged into the new Google Marketing Platform brand.
DoubleClick Bid Manager became Display and Video 360, DoubleClick Search became Search Ads 360, and DoubleClick for Publishers (DFP) became Google Ad Manager 360.
==
History ==


===
Early years ===
In 1995, Kevin O'Connor and Dwight Merriman developed the concept for DoubleClick in O'Connor's basement.
They created a system to display banner ads across a network of websites and track their performance to better target internet users.
The product caught the attention of entrepreneur Kevin Ryan, who later joined as the company's CFO and later became its CEO.Later that year, O'Connor and Merriman met Fergus O'Daily, the CEO of Poppe Tyson.
Poppe Tyson had created an Interactive Sales division, but lacked the technology to deliver online ads across its network of client's sites.
O'Connor, Merriman, and O'Daily decided to merge the two companies.
The merger caused some issues at Poppe Tyson, however, because it meant that Poppe's sales force would compete against the internal sales teams of the websites it served.
To remedy the situation, in November 1995 they spun off DoubleClick as an independent, wholly owned subsidiary.
DoubleClick was founded as one of the earliest known Application Service Provider (ASP) for internet "ad-serving"—primarily banner ads.
In February 1998, during the dot-com bubble, the company became a public company via an initial public offering.
Shares rose 75% on the first day of trading.
In June 1999, DoubleClick acquired Abacus Direct, which marketed consumer-purchasing data to catalog firms.
In July 1999, DoubleClick acquired NetGravity and rebranded NetGravity AdServer as DART Enterprise.
Privacy groups complained that DoubleClick's plan to combine its online profiling information with offline information gathered by Abacus Direct would violate privacy rules, as it would allow the company to match a person's identity with their online habits, which it tracks through cookies.
In February 2000, The FTC announced it had launched an investigation into the matter.
The investigation was concluded in January 2001, with the FTC stating that it found no evidence that DoubleClick used or disclosed consumers personal identifying information.
In 2004, DoubleClick acquired Performics, which offered affiliate marketing, search engine optimization, and search engine marketing products.
These products were integrated into the core DART system and rebranded DART search.
DoubleClick Advertising Exchange connected both media buyers and sellers on an advertising exchange much like a traditional stock exchange.
Google sold Performics in 2008 to Publicis.
In April 2005, Hellman & Friedman, a San Francisco-based private equity firm, agreed to acquire the company for $1.1 billion.

===
Acquisition by Google, Inc. ===
On April 13, 2007, Google agreed to acquire DoubleClick for US$3.1 billion in cash.
The deal raised concerns surrounding competition with both the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and the European Union.
In May 2007, the FTC requested additional information about the deal after it was urged by competitors, including Microsoft, which believed it would give Google too much control over online advertising.
On December 20, 2007, the FTC approved Google's purchase of DoubleClick from its owners Hellman & Friedman and JMI Equity.
European Union regulators granted approval on March 11, 2008, and Google completed the acquisition later that day.
On April 2, 2008, Google announced it would cut 300 jobs at DoubleClick due to organizational redundancies.
Selected employees would be matched within the Google organization as per position and experience.
In November 2007, shortly after the announcement of the acquisition, it was reported that DoubleClick had been serving ads designed to trick users into buying malware.
This occurred after a malicious website tricked several name-brand websites into serving the ads.
In June 2010, Google confirmed its acquisition of Invite Media, a demand-side platform which it later renamed DoubleClick Bid Manager.

==
References ==
Derek Ryan Smith (born March 10, 1987), known professionally as Mod Sun (stylized as MOD SUN or MODSUN) is an American rapper, singer, and songwriter from Bloomington, Minnesota.

==
Early life ==
Derek Ryan Smith was born on March 10, 1987, in Bloomington, Minnesota.
Later his father left for California and his parents divorced, after which Smith spent some time living with his father in Long Beach, California.
From age five to ten, he moved frequently due to his mother having to relocate for various jobs.
He spent much of his time growing up on a farm in Corcoran, Minnesota.
Smith's father lived next door to Bud Gaugh, drummer of Sublime, who influenced him to become involved in music.
In his teens, Smith began attending concerts in his local pop punk scene.
He became an increasingly prominent figure in the scene through his mother encouraging him to attend concerts and ask the touring band members whether they wanted to stay the night at their house.
In the follow years, Smith and other local bands and musicians in the scene became increasingly interested in fashion and influence by New Jersey and
Drive-Thru Records emo bands, leading them becoming members of the scene subculture.
In eighth grade, he designed merchandise for bands.

==
Music career ==
=== 2004–2010:
Career Beginnings ===
Smith began playing drums for local pop punk band the Semester in his sophomore year of high school.
He spent the following four years in the band, before being kicked out three months after his graduation.
In 2004, he became a member of the post-hardcore band Four Letter Lie.
In 2009, he was kicked out of the band and spent a period of time selling drugs as well as being a drum tech for Scary Kids Scaring Kids.
He was eventually asked to be the drummer for Scary Kids Scaring Kids, which he accepted under the condition that he could be open for the band on tour as a solo artists.

=== 2011–2019
: Solo career and Look Up, Movie and BB ===
Mod Sun has released five mixtapes and three EPs throughout his solo career.
His style of music has been described as "hippy hop".
Mod Sun's debut album, Look Up, was released on March 10, 2015, through Rostrum Records.
It peaked at #1 on the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart.
On March 10, 2017, his second studio album, Movie, was released, also through Rostrum Records.
It peaked at #16 on the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart.
His third studio album BB was released on November 10, 2017 and spawned the single "#noshirton".
=== 2020–present
: Internet Killed the Rockstar ===
In early 2020, Mod Sun announced he started working on his upcoming fourth studio album.

Its lead single "Karma" was released on October 30, 2020.
The accompanying music video was released three weeks later on November 16, 2020 and was directed by Machine Gun Kelly.
The song "Bones" was released as the album's second single on November 27, 2020.
The music video for "Bones" was released on December 21, 2020 via Mod Sun's official YouTube channel and was directed by Charlie Zwick.
The album's third single, "Flames", was a collaboration with Avril Lavigne.
On January 18, 2021, Downfalls High, a film Smith co-directed with Machine Gun Kelly was released.
On 25 January, 2021
Mod Sun officially announced announced the album title, Internet Killed the Rockstar, and its release date, February 12, 2021.

On March 12, 2021, he released the single "Heavy" featuring Blackbear.

==
Personal life ==
Around 2016, Smith was in a relationship with internet personality Hanna Beth.
Beginning in October 2018, he was in a polyamorous relationship with internet personality Tana Mongeau and actress Bella Thorne.
After the throuple's breakup, he began a monogamous relationship with Thorne.
Smith and Thorne became engaged, got married and then subsequently divorced within fifteen months.
In early 2020, he began a monogamous relationship with Mongeau, and broke by the end of the year.
He is currently in a relationship with Canadian musician Avril Lavigne.

==
Discography
==
===
Studio albums ===


===
Extended plays ===
=== Mixtapes ===
2009
: I'll Buy Myself 
2009: Let Ya Teeth Show
2009: How to Make a MOD SUN
2011:
Health, Wealth, Success, & Happiness
2011:
Blazed by the Bell
2012:
First Take


===
Singles ===


===
Featured singles ===
2011
: "Good Times" by Swimming With Dolphins
2012: "
I Think It's Hot" by Def Gone Graphic
2012: "Catch Me Smilin" by Joe B.
2013: "Right Now" by Goody
2013: "Get Loco" by T.T.
2013: "
The Tortoise and the Hare" by The Weekend Hustler
2013: "Let It Bang" by Jbre & Dougie Kent
2014: "All I Need Is Sunshine" by The Gooneez & Sidereal
2014: "Raw Cypher" by Dizzy Wright, Like, and Sir Michael Rocks
2015: "
me you & the moon" by Call Me Karizma
2016: "Sublime" by Machine Gun Kelly
2018: ":)" by LIL PHAG and
Dr. Woke
== Books ==


===
Non-fiction books ===
2012:
Did I Ever Wake Up?
===
Poetry books ===
2015:
My Dear Pink
2018: So Long Los Angeles


===
Journals ===
2015
: "Happy to be here"
2016: "Happy to be here pt.
2
"
2019
: “Happy to be here pt.
3”


==
Filmography ==
2021:
Downfalls High


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
The dot-com bubble (also known as the dot-com boom, the tech bubble, and the Internet bubble) was a stock market bubble caused by excessive speculation of Internet-related companies in the late 1990s, a period of massive growth in the use and adoption of the Internet.
Between 1995 and its peak in March 2000, the Nasdaq Composite stock market index rose 400%, only to fall 78% from its peak by October 2002, giving up all its gains during the bubble.
During the crash, many online shopping companies, such as Pets.com, Webvan, and Boo.com, as well as several communication companies, such as Worldcom, NorthPoint Communications, and Global Crossing, failed and shut down.
Some companies, such as Cisco, whose stock declined by 86%, Amazon.com, and Qualcomm, lost a large portion of their market capitalization but survived.

==
Prelude to the bubble ==
The 1993 release of Mosaic and subsequent web browsers during the following years gave computer users access to the World Wide Web, popularizing use of the Internet.
Internet use increased as a result of the reduction of the "digital divide" and advances in connectivity, uses of the Internet, and computer education.
Between 1990 and 1997, the percentage of households in the United States owning computers increased from 15% to 35% as computer ownership progressed from a luxury to a necessity.
This marked the shift to the Information Age, an economy based on information technology, and many new companies were founded.

At the same time, a decline in interest rates increased the availability of capital.
The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, which lowered the top marginal capital gains tax in the United States, also made people more willing to make more speculative investments.
Alan Greenspan, then-Chair of the Federal Reserve, allegedly fueled investments in the stock market by putting a positive spin on stock valuations.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 was expected to result in many new technologies from which many people wanted to profit.

==
The bubble ==
As a result of these factors, many investors were eager to invest, at any valuation, in any dot-com company, especially if it had one of the Internet-related prefixes or a ".com
" suffix in its name.
Venture capital was easy to raise.
Investment banks, which profited significantly from initial public offerings (IPO), fueled speculation and encouraged investment in technology.
A combination of rapidly increasing stock prices in the quaternary sector of the economy and confidence that the companies would turn future profits created an environment in which many investors were willing to overlook traditional metrics, such as the price–earnings ratio, and base confidence on technological advancements, leading to a stock market bubble.
Between 1995 and 2000, the Nasdaq Composite stock market index rose 400%.
It reached a price–earnings ratio of 200, dwarfing the peak price–earnings ratio of 80 for the Japanese Nikkei 225 during the Japanese asset price bubble of 1991.
In 1999, shares of Qualcomm rose in value by 2,619%, 12 other large-cap stocks each rose over 1,000% in value, and seven additional large-cap stocks each rose over 900% in value.
Even though the Nasdaq Composite rose 85.6% and the S&P 500 rose 19.5% in 1999, more stocks fell in value than rose in value as investors sold stocks in slower growing companies to invest in Internet stocks.
An unprecedented amount of personal investing occurred during the boom and stories of people quitting their jobs to trade on the financial market were common.
The news media took advantage of the public's desire to invest in the stock market; an article in The Wall Street Journal suggested that investors "re-think" the "quaint idea" of profits, and CNBC reported on the stock market with the same level of suspense as many networks provided to the broadcasting of sports events.
At the height of the boom, it was possible for a promising dot-com company to become a public company via an IPO and raise a substantial amount of money even if it had never made a profit—or, in some cases, realized any material revenue.
People who received employee stock options became instant paper millionaires when their companies executed IPOs; however, most employees were barred from selling shares immediately due to lock-up periods.
The most successful entrepreneurs, such as Mark Cuban, sold their shares or entered into hedges to protect their gains.
Sir John Templeton successfully shorted stocks at the peak of the bubble during what he called "temporary insanity" and a "once-in-a-lifetime opportunity", shorting stocks just before the expiration of lockup periods ending 6 months after initial public offerings.

===
Spending tendencies of dot-com companies ===
Most dot-com companies incurred net operating losses as they spent heavily on advertising and promotions to harness network effects to build market share or mind share as fast as possible, using the mottos "get big fast" and "get large or get lost".
These companies offered their services or products for free or at a discount with the expectation that they could build enough brand awareness to charge profitable rates for their services in the future.
The "growth over profits" mentality and the aura of "new economy" invincibility led some companies to engage in lavish spending on elaborate business facilities and luxury vacations for employees.
Upon the launch of a new product or website, a company would organize an expensive event called a dot com party.

=== Bubble in telecom ===
The bubble in telecom was called "the biggest and fastest rise and fall in business
history".
Partially a result of greed and excessive optimism, especially about the growth of data traffic fueled by the rise of the Internet, in the five years after the Telecommunications Act of 1996 went into effect, telecommunications equipment companies invested more than $500 billion, mostly financed with debt, into laying fiber optic cable, adding new switches, and building wireless networks.
In many areas, such as the Dulles Technology Corridor in Virginia, governments funded technology infrastructure and created favorable business and tax law to encourage companies to expand.
The growth in capacity vastly outstripped the growth in demand.
Spectrum auctions for 3G in the United Kingdom in April 2000, led by Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown, raised £22.5 billion.
In Germany, in August 2000, the auctions raised £30 billion.
A 3G spectrum auction in the United States in 1999 had to be re-run when the winners defaulted on their bids of $4 billion.
The re-auction netted 10% of the original sales prices.
When financing became hard to find as the bubble burst, the high debt ratios of these companies led to bankruptcy.
Bond investors recovered just over 20% of their investments.
However, several telecom executives sold stock before the crash including Philip Anschutz, who reaped $1.9 billion, Joseph Nacchio, who reaped $248 million, and Gary Winnick, who sold $748 million worth of shares.

==
Bursting of the bubble ==
On January 31, 1999, two dot-com companies had purchased ad spots for Super Bowl XXXIII; that number increased to 17 the next year.

Around the turn of the millennium, spending on technology was volatile as companies prepared for the Year 2000 problem.
There were concerns that computer systems would have trouble changing their clock and calendar systems from 1999 to 2000 which might trigger wider social or economic problems, but there was virtually no impact or disruption due to adequate preparation.

On January 10, 2000, America Online, led by Steve Case and Ted Leonsis, announced a merger with Time Warner, led by Gerald M. Levin.
The merger was the largest to date and was questioned by many analysts.
On January 30, 2000, almost 20 percent [12 ads] of the 61 ads for Super Bowl XXXIV were purchased by dot-coms (however this estimate ranges from 12 to 19 companies depending on the source and the context in which the term "dot-com" company implies).
At that time, the cost for a 30-second commercial cost between $1.9 million and $2.2 million.
In February 2000, with the Year 2000 problem no longer a worry, Alan Greenspan announced plans to aggressively raise interest rates, which led to significant stock market volatility as analysts disagreed as to whether or not technology companies would be affected by higher borrowing costs.

On Friday March 10, 2000, the NASDAQ Composite stock market index peaked at 5,048.62.On March 13, 2000, news that Japan had once again entered a recession triggered a global sell off that disproportionately affected technology stocks.
On March 15, 2000, Yahoo!
and eBay ended merger talks and the Nasdaq fell 2.6%, but
the S&P 500 rose 2.4% as investors shifted from strong performing technology stocks to poor performing established stocks.
On March 20, 2000, Barron's featured a cover article titled "Burning Up; Warning:
Internet companies are running out of cash—fast", which predicted the imminent bankruptcy of many Internet companies.
This led many people to rethink their investments.
That same day, MicroStrategy announced a revenue restatement due to aggressive accounting practices.
Its stock price, which had risen from $7 per share to as high as $333 per share in a year, fell $140 per share, or 62%, in a day.
The next day, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates, leading to an inverted yield curve, although stocks rallied temporarily.
On April 3, 2000, judge Thomas Penfield Jackson issued his conclusions of law in the case of United States v.
Microsoft Corp. (2001) and ruled that Microsoft was guilty of monopolization and tying in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
This led to a one-day 15% decline in the value of shares in Microsoft and a 350-point, or 8%, drop in the value of the Nasdaq.
Many people saw the legal actions as bad for technology in general.
That same day, Bloomberg News published a widely read article that stated: "It's time, at last, to pay attention to the numbers".
On Friday, April 14, 2000, the Nasdaq Composite index fell 9%, ending a week in which it fell 25%.
Investors were forced to sell stocks ahead of Tax Day, the due date to pay taxes on gains realized in the previous year.
By June 2000, dot-com companies were forced to re-evaluate their spending on advertising campaigns.
On November 9, 2000, Pets.com, a much-hyped company that had backing from Amazon.com, went out of business only nine months after completing its IPO.
By that time, most Internet stocks had declined in value by 75% from their highs, wiping out $1.755 trillion in value.
In January 2001, just three dot-com companies bought advertising spots during Super Bowl XXXV.
The September 11 attacks accelerated the stock-market drop later that year.
Investor confidence was further eroded by several accounting scandals and the resulting bankruptcies, including the Enron scandal in October 2001, the WorldCom scandal in June 2002, and the Adelphia Communications Corporation scandal in July 2002.By
the end of the stock market downturn of 2002, stocks had lost $5 trillion in market capitalization since the peak.
At its trough on October 9, 2002, the NASDAQ-100 had dropped to 1,114, down 78% from its peak.

==
Aftermath ==
After venture capital was no longer available, the operational mentality of executives and investors completely changed.
A dot-com company's lifespan was measured by its burn rate, the rate at which it spent its existing capital.
Many dot-com companies ran out of capital and went through liquidation.
Supporting industries, such as advertising and shipping, scaled back their operations as demand for services fell.
However, many companies were able to endure the crash; 48% of dot-com companies survived through 2004, albeit at lower valuations.
Several companies and their executives, including Bernard Ebbers, Jeffrey Skilling, and Kenneth Lay, were accused or convicted of fraud for misusing shareholders' money, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission levied large fines against investment firms including Citigroup and Merrill Lynch for misleading investors.

After suffering losses, retail investors transitioned their investment portfolios to more cautious positions.
Popular Internet forums that focused on high tech stocks, such as Silicon Investor, RagingBull.com, Yahoo!
Finance, and The Motley Fool declined in use significantly.
===
Job market and office equipment glut ===
Layoffs of programmers resulted in a general glut in the job market.
University enrollment for computer-related degrees dropped noticeably.
Anecdotes of unemployed programmers going back to school to become accountants or lawyers were common.

Aeron chairs, which retailed for $1,100 each and were the symbol of the opulent office furniture of dot-com companies, were liquidated en masse.

===
Legacy ===
As growth in the technology sector stabilized, companies consolidated; some, such as Amazon.com, eBay, and Google gained market share and came to dominate their respective fields.
The most valuable public companies are now generally in the technology sector.

In a 2015 book, venture capitalist Fred Wilson, who funded many dot-com companies and lost 90% of his net worth when the bubble burst, said about the dot-com bubble:
A friend of mine has a great line.
He says "Nothing important has ever been built without irrational exuberance."
Meaning that you need some of this mania to cause investors to open up their pocketbooks and finance the building of the railroads or the automobile or aerospace industry or whatever.
And in this case, much of the capital invested was lost, but also much of it was invested in a very high throughput backbone for the Internet, and lots of software that works, and databases and server structure.
All that stuff has allowed what we have today, which has changed all our lives... that's what all this speculative mania built.

==
Notable companies ==
A Dot-com company is a for-profit company that does most of its business through the Internet, and that usually uses a .com TLD.
Below are some Dot-com companies founded with venture capital during the bubble, spun off by larger companies as Dot-com companies, or whose success or failure was determined by the bubble.

3Com:
Shares soared after announcing the corporate spin-off of Palm,
Inc.
360networks:
A fiber optic company that had a market capitalization of over $13 billion but filed for bankruptcy a few months later.

AboveNet: Its stock rose 32% on the day it announced a stock split.

Actua Corporation (formerly Internet Capital Group): A company that invested in B2B e-commerce companies, it reached a market capitalization of almost $60 billion at the height of the bubble, making Ken Fox, Walter Buckley, and Pete Musser billionaires on paper.

Airspan Networks: A wireless firm
; in July 2000, its stock price doubled on its first day of trading as investors focused on telecommunications companies instead of dot-com companies.

Akamai Technologies
: Its stock price rose over 400% on its first day of trading in October 1999.

AltaVista: A Web search engine established in 1995.
It became one of the most-used early search engines, but lost ground to Google and was purchased by Yahoo!
in 2003.

Alteon WebSystems:
Its shares soared 294% on its first day of trading.

Blucora (then InfoSpace):
Founded by Naveen Jain, at its peak its market cap was $31 billion and was the largest Internet business in the American Northwest.
In March 2000, its stock reached a price $1,305 per share, but by 2002 the price had declined to $2 a share.

Blue Coat Systems (formerly CacheFlow):
Its stock price rose over 400% on its first day of trading in November 1999.

Boo.com:
An online clothing retailer, it spent $188 million in just six months.
It filed for bankruptcy in May 2000.

Books-A-Million: A book retailer whose stock price soared from around $3 per share on November 25, 1998, to $38.94 on November 27, 1998, and an intra-day high of $47.00 on November 30, 1998 after it announced an updated website.
Two weeks later, the share price was back down to $10.
By 2000, the share price had returned to $3.

Broadband Sports: A network of sports-content websites that raised over $60 million before going bust in February 2001.

Broadcast.com: A streaming media website that was acquired by Yahoo!
for $5.9 billion in stock, making Mark Cuban and Todd Wagner multi-billionaires.
The site is now defunct.

CDNow:
Founded by Jason Olim and his brother, it was an online retailer of compact discs and music-related products that reached a valuation of over $1 billion in April 1998.
In 2000, it was acquired by Bertelsmann Music Group for $117 million and was later shut down.

Chemdex.com:
A company founded by David Perry that operated an online marketplace for businesses, it reached a market capitalization of over $7 billion despite minimal revenues.

Cobalt Networks:
Its stock price rose over 400% on its first day of trading; acquired by Sun Microsystems for $2 billion in December 2000.

Commerce One: A business-to-business software company that reached a valuation of $21 billion despite minimal revenue.

Covad: Shares rose fivefold within months of its IPO.

Cyberian Outpost:
One of the first successful online shopping websites, it reached a peak market capitalization of $1 billion.
It used controversial marketing campaigns including a Super Bowl ad in which fake gerbils were shot out of a cannon.
It was acquired by Fry's Electronics in 2001 for $21 million, including the assumption of $13 million in debt.

CyberRebate:
Promised customers a 100% rebate after purchasing products priced at as much as 10 times the retail cost.
It went bankrupt in 2001 and stopped paying rebates.

Digex: one of the first Internet service providers in the United States, its stock price rose to $184 per share; the company was acquired for $1 per share a few years later.

Digital Insight:
Its shares soared 114% on its first day of trading.

Divine: Founded by Andrew Filipowski, it was modeled after CMGI.
It went public as the bubble burst and filed for bankruptcy after executives were accused of looting a subsidiary.

DoubleClick:
An online advertising company that soared after its IPO, it was acquired by Google in 2007.

eGain:
Its stock price doubled shortly after its 1999 IPO.

Egghead Software:
An online software retailer, its shares surged in 1998 as investors bought up shares of Internet companies; by 2001, the company was bankrupt.

eToys.com:
An online toy retailer whose stock price hit a high of $84.35 per share in October 1999.
In February 2001, it filed for bankruptcy with $247 million in debt.
It was acquired by KB Toys, which later also filed for bankruptcy.

Excite: A web portal founded by Joe Kraus and others that merged with Internet service provider @Home Network in 1999 to become Excite@Home, promising to be the "AOL of broadband".
After trying unsuccessfully to sell the Excite portal during a sharp downturn in online advertising, the company filed for bankruptcy in September 2001.
It was acquired by Ask.com in March 2004.

Flooz.com:
A digital currency founded by Robert Levitan
; it folded in 2001 due to lack of consumer acceptance.
It was famous for having Whoopi Goldberg as its spokesperson.

Forcepoint (formerly Websense)
: It held an IPO at the peak of the bubble.

Freei: Filed for bankruptcy in October 2000, soon after canceling its IPO.
At the time, it was the 5th largest Internet service provider in the United States, with 3.2 million users.
Famous for its mascot, Baby Bob, the company lost $19 million in 1999 on revenues of less than $1 million.

Gadzoox: A storage area network company, its shares tripled on its first day of trading giving it a market capitalization of $1.97 billion; the company was sold 4 years later for $5.3 million.

Geeknet (formerly VA Linux):
A provider of built-to-order Intel personal computer systems based on Linux and other open source projects, it set the record for largest first-day price gain upon its IPO on December 9, 1999; after the stock priced at $30/share, it ended the first day of trading at $239.25/share, a 698% gain, making founder Larry Augustin a billionaire on paper.

GeoCities:
Founded by David Bohnett, it was acquired by Yahoo!
for $3.57 billion in January 1999 and was shut down in 2009.

Global Crossing: A telecommunications company founded in 1997
; it reached a market capitalization of $47 billion in February 2000 before filing bankruptcy in January 2002.

theGlobe.com: A social networking service that launched in April 1995 and made headlines when its November 1998 IPO resulted in the largest first day gain of any IPO to date.
CEO Stephan Paternot became a visible symbol of the excesses of dot-com millionaires and is famous for saying "Got the girl.
Got the money.
Now I'm ready to live a disgusting, frivolous life".

govWorks:
Founded by fraudster Kaleil Isaza Tuzman; it was featured in the documentary film Startup.com.

Handspring:
A PDA maker that was defunct by 2003, when it was purchased by
Palm Inc.
Healtheon: Founded by James H. Clark, merged with WebMD in 1999 with a stock swap valued at $7.9 billion but eventually shut down.

HomeGrocer: A public online grocer that merged with Webvan.

Infoseek:
Founded by Steve Kirsch, it was acquired by Disney in 1999; it was valued at $7 billion but eventually shut down.

inktomi: Founded by Eric Brewer, it reached a valuation of $25 billion in March 2000; acquired by Yahoo!
in 2003 for $241 million.

Interactive Intelligence: A telecommunications software company whose stock doubled on its first day of trading.

Internet America:
Its stock price doubled in a day in December 1999 despite no specific news about the company.

iVillage
: On its first day of trading in March 1999, its stock rose 255% to $84 per share.
It was acquired by NBC for $8.50 per share in 2006 and shut down.

iWon:
Backed by CBS, it gave away $1 million to a lucky contestant each month and $10 million in April 2000 on a half-hour special program that was broadcast on CBS.

Kozmo.com: Founded by Joseph Park
, it offered one-hour local delivery of several items with no delivery fees from March 1998 until it went bust in April 2001.

Lastminute.com: Founded by Martha Lane Fox and Brent Hoberman, its IPO in the United Kingdom on March 14, 2000,
coincided with the bursting of the bubble.
Shares placed initially at 380p
sharply rose to 511p, but had collapsed to below 190p by the first week of April 2000.

The Learning Company (formerly SoftKey): Owned by Kevin O'Leary, it was acquired by Mattel in 1999 for $3.5 billion and sold a year later for $27.3 million.

Liquid Audio: Despite its stock doubling in value on its first day of trading in July 1999, its technology was obsolete by 2004.

LookSmart:
Founded by Evan Thornley, its value rose from $23 million to $5 billion within months, but it lost 99% of its value as the bubble burst.

Lycos: Founded by Michael Loren Mauldin, under the leadership of Bob Davis, it was acquired by Terra Networks for $12.5 billion in May 2000.
It was sold in 2004 to Seoul, South Korea-based Daum Communications Corporation for $95.4 million.

MarchFirst:
A web development company formed on March 1, 2000, by the merger of USWeb and CKS Group, it filed forbankruptcy and liquidation just over a year after it was formed.

MicroStrategy:
After rising from $7 to as high as $333 in a year, its shares lost $140, or 62%, on March 20, 2000, following the announcement of a financial restatement for the previous two years by founder Michael J. Saylor.

Net2Phone:
A VoIP provider founded by Howard Jonas whose stock price soared after its 1999 IPO.

NetBank:
A direct bank, its stock price per share fluctuated between $3.50 and $83 in 1999.

Netscape: After a popular IPO, it was acquired by AOL in 1999 for $4.2 billion in stock.

Network Solutions:
A domain name registrar led by Jim Rutt, it was acquired by Verisign for $21 billion in March 2000, at the peak of the bubble.

NorthPoint Communications:
Agreed to a significant investment by Verizon and a merger of DSL businesses in September 2000; however, Verizon backed out 2 months later after NorthPoint was forced to restate its financial statements, including a 20% reduction in revenue, after its customers failed to pay as the bubble burst.
NorthPoint then filed for bankruptcy.
After lawsuits from both parties, Verizon and NorthPoint settled out of court.

Palm, Inc.
: Spun off from 3Com at the peak of the bubble, its shares plunged as the bubble burst.

Pets.com:
Led by Julie Wainwright, it sold pet supplies to retail customers before filing for bankruptcy in 2000.

PFSweb:
A B2B company whose stock price doubled after its IPO.

Pixelon: Streaming video company that hosted a $16 million dot com party in October 1999 in Las Vegas with celebrities including Chely Wright, LeAnn Rimes, Faith Hill, Dixie Chicks, Sugar Ray, Natalie Cole, KISS, Tony Bennett, The Brian Setzer Orchestra, and a reunion of The Who.
The company failed less than a year later when it became apparent that its technologies were fraudulent or misrepresented.
Its founder had been a convicted felon who changed his name.

PLX Technology
: Shares rose fivefold within months of its IPO.

Prodigy: An ISP whose stock price doubled on its first day of trading.

Pseudo.com:
One of the first live streaming video websites, it produced its own content in a studio in SoHo, Manhattan and streamed up to seven hours of live programming a day on its website.

Radvision: A videotelephony company, its stock price rose 150% on its first day of trading.

Razorfish: An Internet advertising consultancy, its stock doubled on its first day of trading in April 1999.

Redback Networks: A telecommunications equipment company
, its stock soared 266% in its first day of trading, giving it a market capitalization of $1.77 billion.

Register.com:
A domain name registrar, its stock soared after its IPO in March 2000, at the peak of the bubble.

Ritmoteca.com:
One of the first online music stores selling music on a pay-per-download basis and an early predecessor to the iTunes business model.
It pioneered digital distribution deals as one of the first companies to sign agreements with major music publishers.

Steel Connect (formerly CMGI Inc.): a company that invested in many Internet startups; between 1995 and 1999,
its stock appreciated 4,921%, but declined 99% when the bubble burst.

Savvis: A fiber optic company.

Terra Networks: A web portal and Internet access provider in the US, Spain and Ibero-America.
After its November 1999 IPO, its shares skyrocketed from an initial price of €11 to €158 in just three months.
The price then sunk under €3 in a matter of weeks.
In February 2005, the company was acquired by Telefónica.

Think Tools: One of the most extreme symptoms of the bubble in Europe, this company reached a market valuation of CHF2.5 billion in March 2000 despite no prospects of having a product.

TIBCO Software:
Its stock price rose tenfold shortly after its 1999 IPO.

Tradex Technologies: A B2B e-commerce company, it was sold for $5.6 billion at the height of the bubble, making Daniel Aegerter a billionaire on paper.

Transmeta: A semiconductor designer that attempted to challenge Intel, its IPO in November 2000 was the last successful technology IPO until the IPO of Google in 2004.
The company shut down in 2009 after failing to execute.

uBid:
An online auction site founded in 1997 as a subsidiary of PCM, Inc. that went public in December 1998 at $15 per share before its stock price soared to $186 per share, a market value of $1.5 billion.

United Online:
An ISP formed by the merger of NetZero and Juno Online Services as the bubble burst.

Usinternetworking Inc:
Its stock price rose 174% on its first day of trading.

UUNET:
One of the largest Internet service providers, its stock price soared after its 1995 IPO; it was acquired in 1996.

Verio:
A web hosting provider, it was acquired for $5 billion at the peak of the bubble.

VerticalNet:
A host of 43 business-to-business (B2B) procurement portals that was valued at $1.6 billion after its IPO, despite having only $3.6 million in quarterly revenue.

Vignette Corporation
: Its stock rose 1,500% within months after its IPO.

WebChat
Broadcasting System: the largest and most popular online chat, interactive and event network with around 3 million registered users, it was purchased by Infoseek in April 1998 for approximately $6.7 million; Go.com acquired Infoseek later in 1998, and closed WebChat in September 1999.

Webvan:
An online grocer that promised delivery within 30 minutes
; it went bankrupt in 2001 after $396 million of venture capital funding and an IPO that raised $375 million and was folded into Amazon.com.

World Online
: a Netherlands-based Internet service provider, it became a public company on March 17, 2000 at a €12 billion valuation, the largest IPO on the Euronext Amsterdam, and the largest European Internet company IPO.

Yahoo!:
A company that, under the leadership of Timothy Koogle, Jerry Yang, and David Filo acquired several companies for billions of dollars in stock, only to shut them down a few years later.

== See also ==
Internet portal
 Economics portal
1990s portal


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Abramson, Bruce (2005).
Digital Phoenix
; Why the Information Economy Collapsed and How it Will Rise Again.
MIT Press.
ISBN 978-0-262-51196-4.

Aharon, David Y.; Gavious, Ilanit; Yosef, Rami (2010). "
Stock market bubble effects on mergers and acquisitions".
The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance.
50 (4): 456–70.
doi:10.1016/j.qref.2010.05.002.

Cassidy, John (2009).
Dot.con:
How America Lost Its Mind and Its Money in the Internet Era.
Harper Collins.
ISBN 9780061841781.

Cellan-Jones, Rory (2001).
Dot.
Bomb:
The Rise and Fall of Dot.com Britain.
Aurum.
ISBN 978-1854107909.

Daisey, Mike (2014).
Twenty-one Dog Years:
Doing Time at Amazon.com.
Free Press.
ISBN 978-0-7432-2580-9.

Goldfarb, Brent D.; Kirsch, David; Miller, David A. (
April 24, 2006).
"
Was There Too Little Entry During the Dot Com Era?".
Robert H. Smith School Research Paper (RHS 06-029).
SSRN 899100.

Kindleberger, Charles P. (2005).
Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.
John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 9780230365353.

Kuo, David (2001).
dot.bomb:
My Days and Nights at an Internet Goliath.
ISBN 978-0-316-60005-7.

Lowenstein, Roger (2004).
Origins of the Crash: The Great Bubble and Its Undoing.
Penguin Books.
ISBN 978-1-59420-003-8.

Wolff, Michael (1999).
Burn Rate:
How I Survived the Gold Rush Years on the Internet.
Orion Publishing Group.
ISBN 9780752826066.
Burn Rate at Google Books.
Ryan Benjamin Rowland-Smith (born 26 January 1983) is an Australian former professional baseball pitcher.
He previously played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Seattle Mariners and Arizona Diamondbacks.
Rowland-Smith also represented Australia in the World Baseball Classic three times and in the 2004 Summer Olympics.

Born in Sydney, Rowland-Smith grew up watching MLB games on videocassette.
Signed out of high school by the Seattle Mariners, he spent the next several years pitching for their minor league teams.
Promoted to Seattle for the first time in July 2007, he struck out the first batter he faced, former Mariners' star Ken Griffey
, Jr.. Rowland-Smith began 2008 as a relief pitcher for the Mariners but was sent to the minor leagues briefly in July to work on becoming a starting pitcher.
He rejoined the team in August and remained in their starting rotation the rest of the year.
In 2009, he made one start for the Mariners at the beginning of the year before going on the disabled list with triceps tendinitis.
Rejoining the team in July, he completed the eighth inning in three of his remaining starts for Seattle.
In 2010, he made a career-high 20 starts for the Mariners but posted a 1–10 record and a 6.75 earned run average (ERA).
Seattle allowed him to become a free agent after the year.

Over the next three seasons, Rowland-Smith pitched in the minor leagues for several teams.
In 2014, he began the season with the Arizona Diamondbacks, much to his excitement as the Diamondbacks were opening the 2014 season in Australia.
His time with the Diamondbacks did not last long, as the team designated him for assignment on 18 April.
Rowland-Smith pitched for some minor league teams the remainder of the year, then joined the EDA Rhinos of the Chinese Professional Baseball League in 2015.
He pitched for the Brisbane Bandits of the Australian Baseball League in January 2017, then retired after the 2017 World Baseball Classic.

==
Early life ==
Rowland-Smith was born 26 January 1983, in Sydney, Australia.
His father is Australian celebrity trainer Rob Rowland-Smith, known as "The Sandhill Warrior," and his mother Julie is a retired high school physical education teacher.
Ryan was their second child, after his older sister, Rhiannon.
Rob and Julie divorced when Ryan was three, and Rowland-Smith grew up with his mother and sister in Newcastle, New South Wales.
He was a baseball fan from childhood, though he had to watch games on video cassettes because Major League Baseball was not televised in Australia at the time.
The videos he had were of the 1992 World Series and the 1993 World Series.
Rowland-Smith started playing baseball himself at the age of 12.
He graduated from Newcastle High School in Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia, in December 2000.
The Seattle Mariners, one of the only Major League Baseball (MLB) teams that scouted Australia at the time, signed Rowland-Smith as a non-drafted free agent on 19 November 2000.
"
I signed it before the ink dried," Rowland-Smith said of his contract.
"
It was the only opportunity I was going to get."
==
Career ==


===
2001–04 seasons ===
Rowland-Smith began his pro career in 2001 with the Rookie level Arizona League Mariners.
In 17 relief appearances, he allowed just one home run in 33+1⁄3 innings pitched.
He split the 2002 season between the Single-A Wisconsin Timber Rattlers and the Single-A short-season Everett AquaSox.
With Wisconsin to begin the season, he appeared in 12 games (eight starts), posting a 1–2 record and a 6.75 earned run average (ERA).
In the middle of the season, he was demoted to Everett.
He appeared in 18 games (six starts) with Everett, posting a 4–1 record, a 2.77 ERA, 58 strikeouts, and 58 hits allowed in 61+2⁄3 innings pitched.
In 2003, Rowland-Smith pitched for Wisconsin again, appearing in 13 games.
He had a 3–0 record, a 1.11 ERA, and 37 strikeouts in 32+1⁄3 innings.
During the year, he also pitched for the Single-A advanced Inland Empire 66ers.
In 15 games with the 66ers, he lost one game, posted a 3.20 ERA, struck out 15, and allowed 12 hits over 19+2⁄3 innings pitched.
He had a 1.90 ERA and 52 strikeouts combined between Wisconsin and Inland Empire.
Rowland-Smith played the entire 2004 season with Inland Empire, appearing in 29 games.
He split the season between the bullpen and the starting rotation, going 5–3 with a 3.79 ERA as a starter.
He struck out 119 batters in 992⁄3 innings and held opponents to a .276 batting average.
===
2005 season ===
The Minnesota Twins selected Rowland-Smith in the Major League portion of the 2004 Rule 5 draft.
On 4 March, the Twins signed him to a one-year contract.
He spent most of 2005 spring training with the Twins.
Ultimately, Minnesota decided not to keep him on the roster all season, and he was returned to Seattle on 25 March.
He spent the season with the Double-A San Antonio Missions, setting a career high with 122 innings pitched.
In 33 games (17 starts), he had a 6–7 record, a 4.35 ERA, 102 strikeouts, and 133 hits allowed.

===
2006 season ==
=
Rowland-Smith split the 2006 season with Inland Empire and San Antonio.
With the 66ers, he gave up seven runs (four earned) in 6
+
1⁄3 innings pitched over seven games.
He spent a greater portion of the season with the Missions.
On 25 August, he struck out a season-high seven batters in 4+1⁄3 innings.
In 23 games (one start) for the Missions, he had a 1–3 record, a 2.83 ERA, 48 strikeouts, and 38 hits allowed in 41+1⁄3 innings.
Following the regular season, he played with the Peoria Javelinas in the Arizona Fall League.

=== 2007 season ===
For the first time in 2007, Rowland-Smith pitched for the Triple-A Tacoma Rainiers of the Pacific Coast League (PCL).
He made 25 relief appearances for the team, posting a 3–4 record, a 3.67 ERA, 50 strikeouts, and 35 hits allowed in 41+2⁄3 innings before getting promoted to the Mariners in June.
Rowland-Smith made his major league debut for the Mariners on 22 June, against the Cincinnati Reds in a game notable for being the return of longtime Mariners star Ken Griffey, Jr., to Safeco Field.
Griffey wound up being the first batter Rowland-Smith faced; he struck him out, proceeding to pitch 11⁄3 scoreless innings in a 16–1 Mariners loss.
He did not allow a run in 10+2⁄3 consecutive innings spanning five games from 22 to 31 August.
In the first game of that stretch, he struck out six batters in four scoreless innings of relief in an 8–4 loss to the Twins.
He earned his first career win 13 September against the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, pitching 2+1⁄3
scoreless innings in a game the Mariners trailed 7–1 but rallied to win 8–7.
In his rookie year with Seattle, he struck out 42 batters in 381⁄3 innings, posting a 1–0 record and limiting opposing batters to 39 hits.
After the season, he pitched for Lara in the Venezuelan Winter League.
Rowland-Smith said about his offseason:
I'd like to get four or five starts [in Venezuela], go back to Australia and try to get in shape for next season.
I don't know what's going to happen after that, but they told me they want me down there, starting.
I just wanted to get up here and show I could throw strikes at this level.
Now that I've been here for a while, I've got so much more confidence.

===
2008 season ===
Rowland-Smith began the season exclusively as a reliever, making 32 relief appearances before making two starts prior to the All-Star break.
He collected his first save April 8 against the Tampa Bay Rays in Seattle's 6–5 win, tossing 1+2⁄3 innings and retiring all five batters he faced while protecting one-run lead.
His first Major League start came 1 July against the Toronto Blue Jays; Rowland-Smith threw three scoreless innings before getting replaced by Roy Corcoran with two outs in the fourth inning after allowing three runs that inning.
The Mariners rallied to win 7–6.
He made three more relief appearances before being optioned to Tacoma on 20 July to be converted to a starting pitcher.
He went 2–0 with a 2.89 ERA in three starts for the Rainiers, holding opponents to a .185 batting average before joining Seattle's rotation on 9 August.
From 21 August until the end of the season, he posted a 2.56 ERA.
Against the Oakland Athletics on 21 August, he took the loss but held the team to four hits in seven innings, keeping Oakland scoreless except for a solo home run by Emil Brown.
He faced Oakland again in his final start of the year on 27 September, allowing three runs in 6+2⁄3 innings this time but picking up the win in a 7–3 victory.
In 47 games (12 starts) with the Mariners in 2008, he had a 5–3 record, a 3.42 ERA, 77 strikeouts, and 114 hits allowed in 118+1⁄3 innings.

===
2009 season ===
In a 2009 spring training game against the Colorado Rockies, Rowland-Smith recorded two singles in two at bats.
This was his first time batting against a live pitcher since he was 17 years old.
He used teammate Jeff Clement's bat.
At the beginning of the season, he started one game before being placed on the disabled list with triceps tendinitis.
He was sent to Tacoma for rehab starts, but a dismal outing on 5 June in which he allowed 12 runs in 4+2⁄3 innings prompted the Mariners to option him to Tacoma.
In July, he was promoted and added to the starting rotation after going 5–3 with a 4.31 ERA in 10 starts for Tacoma.
He lasted seven innings in his first start back on 24 July, allowing four runs and taking the loss in a 9–0 defeat to the Cleveland Indians.
Five days later, he limited the Toronto Blue Jays to two runs over seven innings and picked up his first win of the year in the Mariners' 3–2 victory.
Three times in 2009, he threw a season-high eight innings, including a game on 16 September when he limited the Chicago White Sox to one run in a 4–1 victory.
Rowland-Smith made his last start of the year for the Mariners on 3 October, holding the Texas Rangers to one run over 6+2⁄3 innings in a 2–1 victory.
Rowland-Smith finished the season with a 5–4 record, a 3.74 ERA, 52 strikeouts, and 87 hits allowed in 96+1⁄3 innings over 15 games (
all starts).

===
2010 season ===
Rowland-Smith's game against the White Sox on 16 September 2009, left Christian Caple of MLB.com excited about his chances for next season:
Ryan Rowland-Smith is turning into a can't-miss starter for the Mariners...
there's no reason why he can't head into [2010 spring training] as the team's No.
2 starter.

In fact, Rowland-Smith started the 2010 season as the third starter in the Mariners' rotation, behind Felix Hernandez and Ian Snell.
He struggled to begin the season, posting a 7.62 ERA in his first eight starts while losing all four of his decisions.
After the shortest start of his career on 18 May, in which he gave up seven runs in 2+2⁄3 innings, the Mariners moved him to the bullpen.
Rowland-Smith returned to the rotation on 5 June, when Doug Fister had to miss a start because of shoulder fatigue.
The Mariners lost to the Angels 11–2, but Rowland-Smith limited Los Angeles to one run in five innings.
After that, he continued to be used as a starter.
He held the Cincinnati Reds scoreless for six innings on 20 June, earning his first win of the year in a 1–0 victory.
The win, however, would be his only victory of the year.
On 27 July, he gave up 11 runs over five innings in an 11–0 loss to the White Sox.
The Mariners left him in the game that long because they wanted to preserve their bullpen.
After the game, he was placed on the disabled list with a lower back strain, which Rob Neyer of ESPN speculated was a "phantom injury" designed to get him off the roster, since the Mariners could not send him to the minor leagues without exposing him to waivers.
Sent to rehab in Tacoma, he rejoined the team in September when rosters expanded.
Upon his activation from the disabled list, Rowland-Smith was mainly used out of the bullpen except for the last game of the season, 3 October, in which he gave up two runs in five innings and had a no-decision in a 4–3 loss to the Athletics.
20 of Rowland-Smith's 27 appearances in 2010 were starts (a career-high), but only one of those was a win, as opposed to ten losses.
He had a 6.75 ERA and gave up 141 hits in 109+1⁄3 innings.
However, Rowland-Smith was the Mariners' nominee for the Roberto Clemente Award, given annually to the MLB player who "best represents the game through extraordinary character, community involvement, philanthropy and positive contributions, both on and off the field."
Seattle made him their candidate because of his work in hosting the Mariners Care Cystic Fibrosis Foundation golf tournament.
In November 2010, the Sydney Blue Sox named Rowland-Smith as one of the players on their 35-man roster for the inaugural Australian Baseball League season, but he never pitched for them.
On 2 December 2010, the Mariners decided not to offer him a new contract, making him a free agent.

===
2011–2013 seasons ===
On 9 December 2010, the Houston Astros signed Rowland-Smith to a one-year contract.
He spent most of the season with the PCL's Oklahoma City RedHawks.
In 22 games (19 starts), he had a 2–10 record, a 6.19 ERA, 87 strikeouts, and 131 hits allowed in 104+2⁄3 innings.
After the season, he became a free agent.
During the offseason, he played winter ball for the Leones de Ponce of the Puerto Rican Winter League, losing three of his five starts.
The Chicago Cubs signed Rowland-Smith to a minor league deal on 2 February 2012.
He spent the whole season with the Iowa Cubs of the PCL, where he was used more as a reliever (22 games) than a starter (eight games).
He had a 3–6 record, a 3.94 ERA, 62 strikeouts, and 75 hits allowed in 77+2⁄3 innings pitched.
After the season, he became a free agent.
On 24 February 2013, the Boston Red Sox signed Rowland-Smith to a minor league deal.
In 37 games in relief for the Pawtucket Red Sox, their Triple-A team, he had a 7–0 record and a 1.55 ERA.
However, he never got to pitch for Boston because of an illness.

===
2014 season ===
Rowland-Smith signed a minor league contract with the Arizona Diamondbacks prior to the 2014 season.
He was excited about joining Arizona because they were opening their season with two regular-season games in March against the Los Angeles Dodgers at the Sydney Cricket Ground in Australia.

To play Major League Baseball in Australia is such a special thing...
For me to be able to play MLB in my own backyard is bizarre to be honest with you.
To be able to put my American life and Australian life together will be pretty special.

While he did not pitch in the Australian series, Rowland-Smith was on the Diamondbacks roster at the beginning of the 2014 season, his first time on a major league roster since 2010 with the Mariners.
He made what would be his last appearance in the major leagues on 14 April, giving up two runs (one earned) in the final two innings of a 7–3 loss to the New York Mets.
Designated for assignment on 18 April, he cleared waivers and elected to become a free agent on 21 April.
In six games with the Diamondbacks, he posted a 4.91 ERA, allowing five runs (four earned) in 7+1⁄3 innings of work.
On 25 April, Rowland-Smith signed a minor league deal with the Toronto Blue Jays.
He pitched for the Triple-A Buffalo Bisons of the International League, allowing 8 runs in just 14 innings before drawing his release on 11 June.
On 28 June, he signed a minor league deal with the Cincinnati Reds.
He made one start for the Louisville Bats of the International League but was mostly used out of the bullpen, posting a 4.20 ERA in 12 games with no wins or losses.
On 2 August, the Reds released him.

===
Last years ===
For 2015, Rowland-Smith left the United States, signing with the EDA Rhinos of the Chinese Professional Baseball League, located in Taiwan.
He appeared in nine games with the team, posting a 1–4 record and a 4.70 ERA in 46 innings.
For winter 2015–16, Rowland-Smith pitched in one game for Gigantes del Cibao of the Dominican Winter League.
After not pitching in 2016, Rowland-Smith signed with the Brisbane Bandits of the Australian Baseball League in January 2017.
In four starts with the team, he won one game but had a 6.35 ERA.
However, he was part of a Brisbane club which won its second consecutive ABLchampionship.
Rowland-Smith planned to retire after the season once he had finished playing for Australia in the World Baseball Classic.

==
International play ==
Rowland-Smith represented his native Australia in multiple international tournaments throughout his career.
He played for Australia in the 2004 Summer Olympic games, making four relief appearances, going 2–0 with a 1.23 ERA allowing only six hits and five walks while striking out 5.
He helped the team to a silver medal.
They made it to the championship game before falling to Cuba, 6–2.
Rowland-Smith's teammates on the Inland Empire 66ers paid close attention to the gold medal game, cheering on their teammate.
At the start of the 2006 season, Rowland-Smith was added to the Australia national baseball team for the 2006 World Baseball Classic.
However, he was unable to pitch in the Classic because of a sore elbow.
Rowland-Smith once again represented Australia in the 2013 World Baseball Classic.
The team was eliminated after losing all three of its games in the first round.
Before he retired, Rowland-Smith represented Australia one last time at the 2017 World Baseball Classic.
First, he pitched with the team in the 2017 World Baseball Classic – Qualifier 1 from 11 to 14 February 2016.
In Australia's second game of the qualifier (the first against South Africa), Rowland-Smith pitched three scoreless innings in relief of Warwick Saupold, allowing two hits and striking out three.
Australia defeated the Philippines and South Africa twice to advance in the tournament.
"
On paper, as far as rosters go, we have the best roster, we have the most depth," he said of the team during the qualifier.
It was Australia's fourth-straight World Baseball Classic qualified for, but they failed to advance past the first round, going 1–2 with a win over China and losses to Japan and Cuba.

==
Post-playing career ==
Rowland-Smith became a baseball television analyst for Root Sports Northwest, appearing on the pre-
and post-game shows for Seattle Mariners broadcasts starting in 2017.
He is also a baseball radio analyst for ESPN710 Seattle, appearing on Mariners post-game shows.
Rowland-Smith said that baseball and talking were the two things he enjoyed doing the most; thus, being a commentator was the perfect occupation for him.
He and fellow Australian ballplayer Trent Oeltjen co-founded NxtGen Baseball, a training camp for young baseball players.

==
Personal life ==
Rowland-Smith's grandfather was a former New South Wales minister for sport and recreation.
His older sister, Rhiannon, is a competitive surfer.
While surfing is not his profession, Rowland-Smith avidly pursues it as a hobby.
Rowland-Smith was married in 2013 to American actress Amanda Aardsma, the sister of his former teammate David Aardsma.
He became friends with Griffey, Jr., victim of his first major league strikeout, who attended Rowland-Smith's wedding in 2013.Rowland-Smith is the first player with a hyphenated last name ever to appear in a major league game.
During his career, he maintained his own blog to keep up with fans.
He was also, in 2009, the only Mariner known to maintain a Twitter account.
Rowland-Smith helped the Mariners host a forum on the use of social media in 2009.In June 2019, Rowland-Smith appeared on the television show
American Ninja Warrior in the Seattle Qualifying Round.
He said of the opportunity, "I know the minute I step out to the steps, if I don’t finish it, I’ll say, ‘OK, I want another shot at this until I do finish it.’
But at the very least, I want to enjoy it and embrace it.
I’ve gotten messages from people in that ninja community
and it’s so awesome.
…
I want to get the most of that experience."
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Career statistics and player information from MLB, or ESPN, or Baseball-Reference, or Fangraphs, or Baseball-Reference (Minors), or CPBL, or Retrosheet, or Pelota Binaria (Venezuelan Winter League), or Ryan Rowland-Smith's Blog
The men's national basketball team of the United States won the gold medal at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia.
Led by Basketball Hall of Fame head coach Lenny Wilkens, the team won gold for the second straight Olympics.
Nicknamed Dream Team III, the team included five players who were Olympic teammates on the original "Dream Team", from the 1992 Olympic basketball tournament:
Charles Barkley, Karl Malone, Scottie Pippen, John Stockton, and David Robinson.

Gary Payton was a late replacement for the injured Glenn Robinson


==
Roster ==


==
Staff ==
Head coach: Lenny Wilkens (Atlanta Hawks)
Assistant coaches: Jerry Sloan (Utah Jazz), Bobby Cremins (Georgia Tech), and Clem Haskins (University of Minnesota)
Team physicians: Steve Haas (Washington Bullets), John A. Hefferon (Chicago Bulls), and Bruce Moseley (Houston Rockets)
Athletic trainers:
Steven Brace (Creighton University) and Ron Culp (Miami Heat)


== 1996
USA results ==
United States beat  Argentina, 96–68
United States beat  Angola, 87–54
 United States beat  Lithuania, 104–82
 United States beat  China, 133–70
 United States beat  Croatia, 102–71
 United States beat  Brazil,
98–75
(Quarterfinals)
United States beat  Australia, 101–73
(Semifinals)
United States beat  FR Yugoslavia,
95–69
(Gold medal game)
== 1996 Olympic standings ==
1.

United States (8–0)
2.

FR Yugoslavia (7–1)
3.

Lithuania (5–3)
4.

Australia (5–3)
5.

Greece (5–3)
6.

Brazil (3–5)
7.

Croatia (4–4)
8.

China (2–6)
9.

Argentina (3–4)
10.

Puerto Rico (2–5)
11.

Angola (1–6)
12.

South Korea (0–7)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
USA Basketball, official site
A superteam in the National Basketball Association (NBA) is a franchise whose roster typically has three or more Hall of Fame caliber players that are in their prime.
A more conservative form would be 'All-Star' or All-NBA level players who have recently or are currently still chosen to represent the best of the Eastern and Western conferences as All-Star players or were voted in as part of the All-NBA team at the end of every season.
The first Superteam was ushered in when LeBron James decided to join his fellow draft-class players, Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh, at the Miami Heat at the end of the 2009–10 season.
The three were named "the Big 3" and would establish their dominance by making it to the NBA Finals for all of the four years that they were together, winning back-to-back titles in the 2012 NBA Finals and the 2013 NBA Finals.
James had joined the Heat as a back-to-back MVP winner and equal six-time All-Star with Dwyane Wade, whilst Chris Bosh had been a four-time All-Star.
Due to this, many other Superteams have been formed/drafted since then in order to secure a championship.
The second superteam that was formed was again led by LeBron James when he returned to the Cleveland Cavaliers to play with Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love from 2014 to 2017.
The most prominent superteam since Miami Heat's formation was the Golden State Warriors team from 2016 to 2019.
This team included four perennial All-Stars in Stephen Curry (also 2-time MVP, and first unanimous MVP winner), Klay Thompson, Draymond Green and Kevin Durant.
At the start of the 2018–19 season, the Warriors then signed All-Star DeMarcus Cousins from the New Orleans Pelicans in free agency and was the first NBA franchise in 42 years (since the 1975–76 Boston Celtics) to start five players that had been All-Stars the previous season.
Although Superteams are mostly thought of as a fairly new concept, some have tried to apply the term to teams of the past, prior to the 2000's, due to the multiple players considered "superstars" or "stars" at the time, that were on the team.
However, some refute this by claiming that the stars on these teams were past their prime and teamed up as a last ditched effort to try to win a championship, such as the 2007–2012 Celtics.
Teams that feature multiple stars that were drafted by the team they play on, do not meet the "super team" criteria in many people's eyes.

==
Superteams of the NBA ==


=== 1956–1969:
Bill Russell's Celtics ===
After winning 11 championships in 13 years, the Boston Celtics of the late 50s and 60s were regarded as an NBA super team, serving as a guidepost for potential future dynasties.
Led by 5-time MVP Bill Russell, these Celtics won an NBA record 8 consecutive championships.

Prior to the 1976 settlement of Robertson v. National Basketball Association, free agency did not exist in the NBA.
As a result, Russell and his teammates were acquired through NBA drafts and trades.
John Havlicek was drafted by the Celtics in 1962, Tom Heinsohn was drafted by the Celtics in 1956, and Sam Jones was drafted by the Celtics in 1957.
Bob Cousy was not acquired by the Celtics in the 1950 NBA draft, but was instead taken in the Chicago Stags dispersal draft.
Others, like Bill Sharman and Bailey Howell, were traded for by the Celtics.
Even Russell himself was acquired in a draft-day trade.

=== 2010:
LeBron James and Chris Bosh join Miami Heat, create first modern superteam ===
After the 2009–10 season had concluded, LeBron James was in free agency and had free choice to choose which team he would play for next.
He had just come off one of his highest-accumulating statistic production of his career, had been voted an All-Star six times and had won back-to-back MVP awards at the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Although there was much speculation and hype surrounding James and his choice, it was kept hidden for many weeks until he announced his plans on a live television broadcast via ESPN that would be called "The Decision".
He had chosen to join the Miami Heat where his fellow draft-class member and good friend, Dwyane Wade, was currently playing.

Dwyane Wade had already had proven himself a superstar at the Miami Heat where he had won the NBA Championship in the 2005–06 season as well as winning the Finals MVP.
Other achievements also include being a 6-time
All-Star, 5-time All-NBA and the NBA Scoring Champion in the previous season before LeBron James joined the Miami Heat.
Chris Bosh, another member of the same draft-class, would also come to join James and Wade where he had just been a 4-time All-Star and the franchise's all-time leader in points, rebounds, blocks and minutes played when he had left the Toronto Raptors.
The three would join together and make 4-straight NBA Finals appearances, with the first one coming the very season that they banded together.
They lost the 2011 NBA Finals to the Dallas Mavericks before winning two straight over the Oklahoma City Thunder and the San Antonio Spurs, respectively, and becoming the first Eastern Conference team to win back-to-back titles since the Chicago Bulls of the late 90s.
During this time, they had dominated much of the NBA and the Eastern Conference only to have a rematch with the San Antonio Spurs in the 2014 Finals which they had lost.

Following their loss, LeBron James was once again in free agency and had left the Miami Heat to return to his hometown team, the Cleveland Cavaliers and thus ending the run of the Miami "Big 3".
During their time together, James had won back-to-back MVP and Finals MVP (2012 and 2013) as well as all 3 members being voted as an All-Star for every season that they were together.
The 'Three' would also make NBA history with such feats as accumulating 27 straight victories between February 1 to March 27 of the 2012–13 season, the second-longest regular season winning streak in NBA history, as well as being only the second time that three teammates had each scored 30 points and grabbed 10 rebounds in a regulation match, which was last set over 50 years prior.
Many other players and franchises would follow in the footprints of LeBron James and join other Superstar-caliber players to form their own Superteam in a quest to win an NBA Championship and challenge the Miami Heat Superteam.
However, it would be LeBron James who would disband it and form the next 'Big 3' in the league.

===
2014–2018: Cavaliers vs. Warriors ===
After the 2014 Finals loss, Lebron James went back into free agency, ending his stint with the Miami Heat, as he decided to head back to his hometown team (the Cleveland Cavaliers) to once again form another 'Big 3' to compete for the title.
Cleveland had already had Kyrie Irving on their roster who was drafted by the Cavaliers in 2011 (taken 1st overall).
Before James joined the Cavaliers, Irving had already won Rookie-of-the-Year in 2012, was a two-time All-Star (and All-Star MVP in 2014) as well as being the youngest player in NBA history to score at least 40 points at Madison Square Garden.
Joining them via trade would be Kevin Love from the Minnesota Timberwolves to complete the new LeBron James' '
Big 3'.
Love had finished the previous season with his best production since joining the league with career high-averages in points and assists as well as making the All-Star game in 2012.
In his 6-year stint with the Wolves, he had also recorded the longest streak of 'Double-Doubles' (double figure in two of either points,
rebounds, assists, blocks or steals) at 52 in a row as well as the first player since Moses Malone in 1982 to record a 30 points and 30 rebounds night in a regulation game.
With the Boston Celtics and San Antonio Spurs respective Big 3's nearing retirement, Lebron James sought to secure a string of easy championships with the Cleveland Cavaliers just as he attempted to do with the Miami Heat.
With Cleveland's acquisition of Kevin Love, who was considered one of the best power forwards in the league, Kyrie Irving,
a perennial All-Star and 'future superstar', LeBron James had formed the second 'Big 3' in NBA history that had instantly made the Cleveland Cavaliers a title favorite.
During the same season that James had returned to the Cavaliers, the Golden State Warriors had an emerging team, as well, that would later become the dynasty that would dominate the league and establish itself as another Super team with the addition of Kevin Durant.
Although James' team was built through trades and Free Agency, the Warriors would build their team through the draft and development to obtain the core that would come to challenge the Cavaliers for the best team in the league and the Championship.
This "homegrown" method of team building "from the ground up", essentially, is said to disqualify the Golden State Warriors from the "super team" criteria.
The Warriors had drafted Stephen Curry as the No.
7 pick in 2009, Klay Thompson as the No.
11 pick in 2011 and Draymond Green as the No.
35 pick in 2012 to form the nucleus of this team while adding Andrew Bogut (former No.
1 draft pick in 2005) and Andre Iguodala (2-time Defensive Player of the Year) to their roster to complete the core players that would ultimately challenge for the title in the 2014–15 season.
Although the Warriors would eventually be noted as a Super team, during this season, their core players had yet to make an All-Star or All-NBA team except for Stephen Curry (All-NBA and All-Star in 2013) and Andre Iguodala (All-Star in 2012).
The Warriors finally broke through during the 2014–15 campaign when they completed the regular season with the No.
1 seed with 67 wins out of 82 games and would make it through as the winners of the Western Conference to face LeBron James's Cavaliers (the Eastern Conference champions) in the NBA Finals.

The young Warriors team would win the Finals over the Cavaliers in six games and bring home the NBA Championship to Oakland for the first time in 40 years (last won in 1975).
This would firmly establish the Warriors as a great team as their core players won a multitude of awards in their breakthrough season, along with competing for multiple others:
Stephen Curry (MVP, All-Star selection, All-NBA First team), Klay Thompson (All-Star Selection, All-NBA team, tenth in MVP voting), Draymond Green (All-Defensive team selection, the runner up for the Defensive Player of the Year award) and Andre Iguodala (2015 Finals MVP).
Cleveland's 'Big 3' had won accolades, as well, that further bolstered their claim as a legitimate Super team despite losing the Finals: Kyrie Irving (All-Star Selection, All-NBA Third team) and LeBron James (All-Star Selection, All-NBA First team).
Following the 2015 Finals, these two teams would dominate their respective conferences the next year and have a rematch in the finals.

The Warriors had started the 2015–16 season by breaking the opening number of wins (at 24, before losing on December 12 to the Milwaukee Bucks) as well as a number of other NBA records by the end of the season.
These include the most road wins in a season (at 34), most consecutive number of home wins (at 54) and most important of all, the best regular season record at 73–9, which slightly edged the record held by the Michael Jordan led Bulls when they had a 72–10 regular season record.
The Cleveland Cavaliers had topped the Eastern Conference and would again make it to the NBA Finals after defeating the Detroit Pistons, the Atlanta Hawks and the Toronto Raptors.
The Warriors would also make it to the Finals, but en-route they would face some problems in the Western Conference Finals where they found themselves down 3–1 in the series against the Oklahoma City Thunder after having beat the Houston Rockets and the Portland Trail Blazers in the previous rounds.
The Warriors would go onto win the series and once again face the Cavs for the NBA title which would ultimately end with the Eastern team coming back from a 3–1 deficit and become the first team to win the title from that position.
Again, a number of accolades were awarded to players of both teams and further enhancing their status as superstars.
Both teams' key players were selected into the All-Star match.
Stephen Curry became the first-ever unanimous MVP, LeBron James won Finals MVP in the series and
Draymond Green joined both LeBron and Curry as part of the All-NBA teams.
That following off-season (before the 2016–17 campaign), the Warriors made a move to re-assert their spot as the most dominant franchise in the league by acquiring Kevin Durant when he became a free agent.
Durant had been a member of the Oklahoma City Thunder and was part of the team that had the edge over the Warriors (3–1 lead) in the Western Conference Finals but unfortunately lost their lead and missed out on returning to the NBA Finals for the first time since 2012.
Durant joined the Warriors highly decorated and arguably as one of the best players in the league with a resume that consisted of an MVP (in 2014), five-time NBA Scoring Champion, seven-time All-Star and six-time All-NBA which was said to have had put a highly talented Warriors team into a league of their own.
The Warriors were now heavy favorites among some to win the NBA Championship in the 2016–17 season and take back the title from their Superteam rivals, the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Some in the media, however, such as Shannon Sharpe and Nick Wright, still strongly believed that the Warriors - even with the addition of Kevin Durant - were no match for the Cavaliers.
Much like the past two seasons, the Warriors and the Cavaliers made it through their respective conferences and met again in the Finals.

On the way to reaching the playoffs, the Warriors had matched or broken several NBA records.
With the addition of Kevin Durant to a rather successful Warriors team, they would again reclaiming top seed overall with a 67 win regular season along with breaking the most games won by a 40-point margin or higher, and extending their run of most games without back-to-back losses in the regular season to 146 (stretching from 9 April 2015 to 2 March 2017).
When the postseason came around, again the Warriors showed their Superteam strength by breaking the record for best start to the postseason (at 15–0), longest win streak in the playoffs (15) and best ever postseason record (16–1), whilst the Cavaliers made a strong run of their own by entering the Finals with only one loss from all of their series (entered the Finals at 12–1) before eventually relinquishing the title to the Warriors in a 4–1 series loss.
The season ended with more accolades spread between the two teams including the Warriors having four players elected into the All-Star match (Stephen Curry, Kevin Durant, Draymond Green and Klay Thompson) which tied an NBA record, as well as the Cavs having their "Big 3" also included (LeBron James, Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love).
All-NBA selections were also given to Stephen Curry, Draymond Green, LeBron James and Kevin Durant who also won the Finals MVP thus further supporting the claim that of the two teams, Kevin Durant had tipped the balance in favor of the Warriors.

Although both the Warriors and the Cavaliers would remain favorites in their respective conferences, there was another shift in the Superteams when starting point-guard and member of the Cleveland's 'Big 3',The Cavaliers traded Irving to the Boston Celtics in August for Boston Celtics' own starting point-guard, Isaiah Thomas, who was injured at the time of the trade.
Although Thomas had won an All-NBA selection the previous season, he was not seen as the same caliber of player as Kyrie Irving nor was there as much hype for the new 'Big 3' where eventually Thomas would struggle to come back from his injury and would be subsequently traded.
This left the Cavaliers to still be led by LeBron James who had still managed to help his team make it through the Eastern Conference to the Finals albeit with a more troubled path than usual with near loses in series to the Indiana Pacers (4–3 series win) in the First Round and the Boston Celtics (4–3 series win) in the Eastern Conference Finals and only finishing fourth in the Eastern Conference standings.
The Warriors also did not finish atop of the Western Conference (2nd in the West) and also had difficulty winning the Western Conference Finals over the Houston Rockets with only a slim 4–3 series win.
Despite this, the Warriors finished the regular season with 58 wins and had cemented themselves as the team with the most regular season victories over a three-year span and would continue to write themselves into NBA records when they swept the Finals' series over the Cleveland Cavaliers (4–0) to take a second-straight title and win three of the four finals matches with their essential 'Super team' counterpart.
Kevin Durant would again win the Finals MVP and make the All-NBA team, alongside LeBron James and Stephen Curry.
While the two teams had battled for the previous 4-straight Finals (an NBA first), it would mark the end of their rivalry when James joined the LA Lakers on a four-year deal after he became a free agent.
Note: the starting players of the Golden State Warriors (Stephen Curry, Kevin Durant, Draymond Green, Andre Iguodala and Klay Thompson) were also known as the "Hampton 5" or the "Death Lineup".
===
2018-19 season
: Warriors form an 'All-Star' team ===
As in 2016 when the Warriors signed Kevin Durant in free agency, the Warriors had reaffirmed their place as a "super team" cast when they signed Demarcus Cousins as a free agent from the New Orleans Pelicans in the 2018 off-season.
Although he was injured when he joined the Warriors, he was still considered a dominant 'big man' with great skill and defensive tenacity which won him two All-NBA selections and been a four-time All-Star representative prior to the signing.
He had joined a super team cast and the Golden State Warriors would be the first franchise in 42 years to be able to start five All-Star representatives (having all been All-Stars the previous year), one in each of the traditional basketball positions.
It would be almost a year after his injury when Cousins would finally take the floor when the Warriors faced the Los Angeles Clippers on January 19, 2019, that the Warriors would be able to start all five perennial All-Stars in a game.

===
Other franchises look to create their own 'Big 3' ===
During the 2017 off-season, a year after Kevin Durant left for the Warriors, the Oklahoma City Thunder had moved to acquire Paul George, from the Indiana Pacers, and Carmelo Anthony, from the New York Knicks, to join Russel Westbrook in their bid to form their own 'Big 3' against the established Superteams: the Golden State Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Anthony joined the Thunder as an aging star but had boasted 10 All-Star Appearances and 6 All-NBA selections whereas George was arriving at the prime of his career which had 4 All-Star appearances and 3 All-NBA selections as well.
However, that would all come to an end the following season after a less-than-impressive showing by Carmelo that saw him traded to the Houston Rockets in their attempt to form a 'Big 3' along with James Harden and Chris Paul at the beginning of the 2018–19 season.
Harden had been a part of the Houston organisation since he was traded from the OKC Thunder in 2012.
He would have five All-Star appearances and four All-NBA selections by the time that Anthony joined his team.
Paul joined the rockets from the LA Clippers at the start of the 2017–18 season and had arrived with 5 All-Star appearances and 4 All-NBA selections.
This would also fail when after a few weeks into the season, the Rockets decided to trade Carmelo Anthony to the Chicago Bulls who would eventually waive him and thus ending the Houston 'Big 3'.

During the 2018 off-season, the Toronto Raptors traded DeMar DeRozan to the San Antonio Spurs for four-time All-Star and two-time Defensive Player of the Year Kawhi Leonard.
They began the 2018–19 NBA season 12–1, and finished the season with a 58–24 record.
With Pascal Siakam winning the NBA Most Improved Player Award with averages of 16.9 points, 6.9 rebounds and 3.5 assists, the Raptors formed a 'Big 3' of Leonard, Siakam and 6-time All-Star Kyle Lowry.
In the playoffs, the Raptors continued their successes, by beating the Orlando Magic in five games and the Philadelphia 76ers in seven games, capped by Leonard's historic buzzer-beater.
They went on the beat
the
60–22
Milwaukee Bucks with MVP Giannis Antetokounmpo in six games.
Finally, they defeated the injury-plagued Warriors in six games in the NBA Finals to win their first NBA championship.
Unfortunately, Kawhi decided to not return to the Raptors next season, and he ended up going to the Los Angeles Clippers.

On November 13, 2018, the Philadelphia 76ers made a mid-season trade for Jimmy Butler from the Minnesota Timberwolves to have him join up with their emerging superstars, Joel Embiid and Ben Simmons.
Butler joined the team as a veteran with 4 All-Star, 2 All-NBA and 4 All-Defensive team selections to add to Embiid's growing talent (accumulating an All-Star, All-NBA and All-Defensive team selection) and Simmon's budding-superstar potential that would see him earn an All-Star appearance later that season.
The 76ers would also move for Tobias Harris (had one of his best productive seasons averaging 20.9 points, 7.9 rebounds and 2.7 assists), from the Clippers, on deadline day to add another 'star' to the Philadelphia starting lineup to create their own version of a 'Big 4'.
Near the start of the 2020-2021 season, on January 13, 2021 the Brooklyn Nets traded for James Harden in a blockbuster 4-team trade, that reunited Harden with his Oklahoma City Thunder teammate Kevin Durant, and put him alongside All-Star Kyrie Irving to form a new super team in the East.
Later they managed to sign former All-Star players LaMarcus Aldridge and Blake Griffin on waivers.

== Pre-modern NBA:
Great teams ==
Since superteams did not exist in the NBA before 2010, many have tried to retroactively apply the term to teams of the past, however.
Multiple teams of the past had at least three Hall-of-Famers or other star players that joined forces to dominate the league and become a strong force that won an NBA Championship.
Some - notably
Lebron James fans - consider the Boston Celtics between 2007-08 and 2010-11 as the first modern "super team" after they traded for Kevin Garnett (a nine-time All-NBA and All-Star), and Ray Allen (seven-time All-Star and two-time All-NBA) from the Minnesota Timberwolves and the Seattle SuperSonics respectively, to join Paul Pierce (five-time All-Star and two-time All-NBA).
However, many others saw the move as a last-ditch effort by old players to win a championship.
This was evident when the newly formed Big 3 did not even enter the 2007-2008 season as the title favorites.
As the season went on, however, the Big 3 played extremely well together and would finish the regular season with a 66-16 record.
They won their ring in the 2007–08 season, but with injures to their defending Defensive Player of the Year award winner, Kevin Garnett missing the playoffs, they would lose the Eastern Conference Semi-Finals in 7 games to the Orlando Magic, who would go on to lose the championship 1-4 to the Los Angeles Lakers.
With Garnett coming off an injury, they would go to the Finals in the 2009–10 season, for a second time in three seasons, only to lose to the Los Angeles Lakers being led by Kobe Bryant, who won his second straight Finals Most Valuable Player award.

In the 1980s, the Los Angeles Lakers had a formidable team in the "Showtime" Lakers that had a roster that boasted multiple stars that included the trio of Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (six-time MVP, nine-time All-Star and All-NBA) with Magic Johnson and James Worthy who each would go onto win multiple All-Star and All-NBA selections including a Finals MVP for Johnson in his rookie year.
In a decade of this team together, they had won 5 NBA Championships and developed a culture of 'Hollywood-glamour' and entertaining basketball.
During this time, they had a 'rival dynasty' in the Boston Celtics who would challenge the 'Showtime' Lakers for NBA Championship Rings where they had won three during their reign.
Although their core players were all young and had yet to make their mark, they would go onto win a number of accolades during the 80s that cemented their place as one of the most dominant teams of the decade, let alone the league.
Throughout the 1980s, these accolades included for Larry Bird (nine All-Stars, three MVPs, 10 All-NBA and two Finals MVP), Robert Parish (seven All-Stars, two All-NBA), Kevin McHale (five All-Star, two All-NBA), and Dennis Johnson (five All-Star, two All-NBA and one Finals MVP), making them the dynasty of the East to their counterpart Lakers in the West.
Note:
All "All-NBA" and "All-Star" stats were at the time of the team being formed.
Does not show total appearances in their career.

Included the teams that have won an NBA Championship


==
Controversies ==
There have been some controversies about the new 'Superteam' era that has been brought into the NBA.
Claims persists that superstar players are no longer looking to make the game competitive but rather finding an easier way to attain an NBA Championship Ring and nullifying other contenders by joining with other superstars.
From James' decision to the Miami Heat and Durant joining the all-time winning-est team in NBA history in the Golden State Warriors, there was derision from the media and fans in their choice to take an 'easy way' to the Finals and unbalance the NBA.
However, there have been cases for both sides as others argue that the NBA still has its highest TV grossing revenue and that it was all done under the rules of the Salary Cap and that it's rather some entertainment in sports that should be enjoyed.

==
References ==
Joseph Steven Lacob (born January 10, 1956) is an American business executive who is a partner at Kleiner Perkins and the majority owner of the Golden State Warriors of the National Basketball Association (NBA).

==
Early life ==
Lacob grew up in a Jewish family in New Bedford, Massachusetts.
The Lacob family relocated to Anaheim, California and Joe switched his allegiance to the Los Angeles Lakers and the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim.
Lacob earned a bachelor's degree in biological sciences from University of California, Irvine in 1978, master's degree in public health (epidemiology) from University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and an MBA from the Stanford Graduate School of Business.
==
Professional career ==
Lacob has been a partner at Kleiner Perkins, a Venture capital investing firm, since 1987.
His investments have centered around firms involved in life sciences, medical technology, Internet and energy, and such enterprises as AutoTrader.com, Align Technology and NuVasive.
Before he joined Kleiner Perkins, Lacob held executive positions with Cetus Corporation (now Chiron), FHP International (a health maintenance organization) and the management-consulting firm of Booz, Allen & Hamilton.

In interviews, he has credited his epidemiology degree for giving him a background in statistics that has fed the statistical side of his longstanding sports interest.
He was a primary investor in the American Basketball League, a professional women's basketball league that eventually folded from failure to compete successfully with its rival, the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA).
In January 2006 he became part-owner of the Celtics, where he became a co-investor with H. Irving Grousbeck, an entrepreneur and a professor at the Stanford Graduate School of Business.

On July 15, 2010, Lacob and the group of investors he headed agreed to buy the Golden State Warriors of the NBA from Chris Cohan for $450 million, requiring him to sell his minority interest in the Celtics.
The Lacob - Peter Guber group won out over a dozen other bidders for the Warriors, including Oracle chief executive officer Larry Ellison, 24-Hour Fitness founder Mark Mastrov and Texas billionaire financier David Bonderman.

He had been a Warriors' season-ticket-holder for about a decade.
He already had extensive experience operating an NBA team as part-owner of the Boston Celtics, and also points to his friendships with two major league baseball team general managers, Billy Beane of the Oakland Athletics and Jeff Moorad of the San Diego Padres, who have both proven that winning records are not solely related to the size of the team payroll.

Lacob approved the acquisitions of David Lee and undrafted rookie guard Jeremy Lin, a hometown favorite.
He also fired coach Don Nelson and replaced him with assistant coach Keith Smart.
The sale was unanimously approved by the NBA league's board of governors on November 12, 2010.

Lacob and Peter Guber are the chief owners, but Lacob is in charge of day-to-day operations.
Before the 2014-15 NBA season, Lacob fired coach Mark Jackson who had just led the Warriors to the playoffs in consecutive seasons.
Lacob explained the decision at a conference of fellow venture capitalists: "Part of it was, he couldn't get along with anybody else in the organization.
And, look, he did a great job -- and I'll always compliment him in many respects --
but you can't have 200 other people in the organization not like you.
"
Lacob generated some controversy by calling his team "light years" ahead of everybody else in the NBA during the 2015-16 NBA season.

The Warriors won championships in the 2014-15 NBA season, 2016-17 NBA season, and the 2017-18 NBA season.
During his tenure with the Warriors, the team has attained the NBA records for the best regular season with 73–9 and most wins in a season (regular season and postseason combined) with 88 in 2015–16, as well as best postseason with 16–1 (.941 winning percentage) in 2016–17.

==
Personal life ==
Lacob is divorced  from his first wife Laurie (née Kraus) with whom he has two sons and two daughters.
He is currently married to Nicole Curran.

==
References ==
Organized basketball is a game played by five players per team.
Historically, these players have been assigned to positions defined by the role they play on the court, from a strategic point of view.

Broadly speaking, the three main positions are guard, forward, and center, with the standard team featuring two guards, two forwards, and a center.

Over time, as more specialized roles developed, each of the guards and forwards came to be differentiated, and today each of the five positions are known by unique names, each of which has also been assigned a number: point guard (PG) or 1, the shooting guard (SG) or 2, the small forward (SF) or 3, the power forward (PF) or 4, and the center (C) or 5.

The point guard is the "leader" of the team on the court.
This position requires substantial ball-handling skills and the ability to facilitate the team during a play.
The shooting guard, as the name implies, is often the best shooter, as well as being capable of shooting accurately from longer distances.
The small forward often has an aggressive approach to the basket when handling the ball.
The small forward is also known to make cuts to the basket in efforts to get open for shots.
The power forward and the center make up the frontcourt, often acting as their team's primary rebounders or shot blockers, or receiving passes to take inside shots.
The center is typically the larger of the two.

Besides the five basic positions, some teams use non-standard or hybrid positions, such as the point forward, a hybrid small forward/point guard; the swingman, a hybrid small forward/shooting guard; the big, a hybrid power forward/center; and the stretch four, a power forward with the shooting range of typical shooting guards.

In the early days of the sport, there was a "running guard" who brought the ball up the court and passed or attacked the basket, like a point or combo guard.
There was also a "stationary guard" who made long shots and hung back on defense before there was the rule of backcourt violations.

==
Guards ==


===
Point Guard ===
The point guard (PG), also known as the one, is typically the team's shortest player and best ball handler and passer.
They usually are very fast and are good at driving and short-range.
Therefore, they often lead their team in assists and are able to create shots for themselves and their teammates.
They are quick and are able to hit shots either outside the key but a majority are inside the 3 point line or layups, largely depending on the player's skill level.
Point guards are looked upon as the "floor general" or the "coach on the floor, and the heart of the team .
"
They should study the game and game film to be able to recognize the weaknesses of the defense, and the strengths of their own offense.
They are responsible for directing plays, making the position equivalent to that of quarterback in American football, playmaker in association football (soccer), center in ice hockey, or setter in volleyball.
Good point guards increase team efficiency and generally have a high number of assists.
They are often referred to as dribblers or play-makers.
In the NBA, point guards are mostly between 5 feet 10 inches (1.78 m) and 6 feet 4 inches (1.93 m) with shoes.
Point guards are required to do many things in the game of basketball that are very different from the other four positions on the court.
While the other 4 positions are mainly focused on putting the ball in the hoop, the point guard must have a different, more team focused mentality.

===
Shooting guard ===
The shooting guard (SG) is also known as the two or the off guard.
Along with the small forward, a shooting guard is often referred to as a wing because of its use in common positioning tactics.
As the name suggests, most shooting guards are prolific from the three-point range and long mid range.
Some key aspects to being a shooting guard is having the ability to patiently and methodically circulate the three point line linear with that of the ball.
This allows the ability to correctly get in open space for other positions handling the ball.
Just like all positions in basketball, the ability to communicate efficiently with teammates is key.
If a player's teammates do not know where/when a player will be open, they won't be able to deliver the ball when an efficient opportunity presents itself.

Besides being able to shoot the ball, shooting guards tend to be proficient at being able to move without the ball to create open looks for themselves, often creating their own shots off the dribble.
A versatile shooting guard will have good passing skills that allow them to assume point guard responsibilities and function as combo guards.
Bigger shooting guards also tend to play as small forwards.
In the NBA, shooting guards usually range from 6 feet 1 inches (1.85 m) to 6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m) with shoes.

==
Forwards ==


===
Small forward ===
The small forward (SF), also known as the three, is considered to be the most versatile of the main five basketball positions.
Versatility is key for small forwards because of the nature of their role, which resembles that of a shooting guard more often than that of a power forward.
This is why the small forward and shooting guard positions are often interchangeable and referred to as wings.

Small forwards have a variety of assets, such as quickness and strength inside.
A common thread among all kinds of small forwards is an ability to "get to the line" and draw fouls by aggressively attempting (post-up) plays, lay-ups, or slam dunks.
As such, accurate foul shooting is a common skill for small forwards, many of whom record a large portion of their points from the foul line.
Besides being able to drive to the basket, they are also good shooters from long range.
They are the second-best 3-point shooters on the court along with the shooting guard and usually when stationary, sit just inside the 3-point line.
Some small forwards have good passing skills, allowing them to assume point guard responsibilities as point forwards.
Small forwards should be able to do a little bit of everything on the court, typically playing roles such as swing men and defensive specialists.
A smaller small forward under 6 feet 5 inches (1.96 m) might play the shooting guard position some of the time and
a bigger small forward taller than 6 feet
7 inches (2.01 m) might play power forward sometimes.
In the NBA, small forwards usually range from 6 feet 4 inches (1.92 m) to 6 feet 9 inches (2.04 m) with shoes.

===
Power forward ===
The power forward (PF), also known as the four, often plays a role similar to that of the center, down in the "post" or "low blocks".
The power forward is often the team's most powerful and dependent scorer, being able to score close to the basket while also being able to shoot mid-range jump shots from 10 – 15 feet from the basket.
Some power forwards have become known as stretch fours, since extending their shooting range to three-pointers.
On defense, they are required to have the strength to guard bigger players close to the basket and to have the athleticism to guard quick players away from the basket.
Most power forwards tend to be more versatile than centers since they can be part of plays and are not always in the low block.
A tall power forward over 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m) can be a forward-center, playing PF and C.
A smaller power forward
6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m) can play combo forward, playing SF part-time.
In the NBA, power forwards usually range from 6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m) to 7 feet 0 inches (2.13 m) with shoes.

== Center ==
The center (C), also known as the five, pivot or big man, usually plays near the baseline or close to the basket (the "low post").
They are usually the tallest players on the floor.
The center usually scores "down low", or "in the paint" (near the basket, in the key), but some can be good perimeter shooters.
They are typically skilled at gathering rebounds, contesting shots and setting screens on players.

The range of players used in the position has transitioned from relatively slower but much taller "back to the basket" players to players who would normally be classified as power forwards but can dominate the position with their defensive skills, or mismatch ability to shoot from the high post.
This has been due to the scarcity of players possessing the combination of great skill, ideal height, and durability.
This has been matched by the development of more fast-paced and athletic basketball play, which calls for less traditional center play and a more up-and-down the court play style.
In the NBA, they are usually over 6 feet 8 inches (2.03 m) tall with shoes.
The presence of a center who can score in the low post (the area closest to the basket) helps create balance within an offense.
If it becomes too easy to score from the low post, the center will get double teamed.
This creates opportunity for open shots for perimeter players as the center will “kick it out” to an open perimeter or “wing” player.
As perimeter players shoot better from long range, this creates easier opportunity for a center to score, since defenses will play out closer to the perimeter shooters.

== See also ==
Starting lineup


==
References ==


==
External links ==
"Basketball players" at BBC Sport Academy
John William Henry II
(born September 13, 1949) is an American businessman and investor and the founder of John W. Henry & Company, an investment management firm.
He is the principal owner of Liverpool Football Club, the Boston Red Sox, The Boston Globe, and co-owner of Roush Fenway Racing.
In March 2006, Boston estimated Henry's net worth at $1.1 billion but noted that his company had recently experienced difficulties.
In November 2012, the company announced that it would stop managing clients' money by the end of the year, and Henry confirmed that total assets under the firm's management had fallen from $2.5 billion in 2006 to less than $100 million as of late 2012.
As of February 2021, Forbes estimated his net worth to be $2.8 billion.

==
Early life ==
John William Henry II was born on September 13, 1949 in Quincy, Illinois.

His parents were soybean farmers, and he split his time growing up between Illinois and Arkansas.
His asthmatic condition at the age of 15 prompted his family to move to Apple Valley, California.
After his graduation from Victor Valley High School in Victorville, he attended Victor Valley College, then the University of California (at Riverside, Irvine, and Los Angeles), where he majored in philosophy but did not graduate —
partly the result of performing on the road in two bands, Elysian Fields and Hillary.
Henry started trading corn and soybean futures to learn the basics of hedging the price risk of holding an inventory of these commodities, whether in storage or out in the field.
In 1976, a commodities broker at Reynolds Securities asked him to advise other farmers, but he declined.
After spending a summer in Norway with his first wife, Mai, Henry developed a mechanical trend following method for managing a futures trading account.
He tested his trend-reversal method—which was never out of the market but always held a position (either long or short) in every one of the markets in the account's "basket" of commodities—"using his own money" (in the words of his marketing literature of 1983).
When that test proved successful, he founded John W. Henry & Company in 1981, opened a small office across the street from the airport in Irvine, California, and began marketing his management to the largest commodity brokerage firms in America.
That proved so successful by 1983 that he moved to considerably larger quarters at Fashion Island in Newport Beach.
In 1989, Henry moved to Westport, Connecticut.
Two years later, Henry established a second office in Boca Raton.

==
John W. Henry & Company, Inc. ==
JWH was established in 1981 and began taking retail clients in 1982.

The firm's management methods make mechanical, non-discretionary trading decisions in response to systematic determinations of reversals in each market's direction, with the explicit intention of precluding not only human emotion, but also any subjective evaluation of factors outside of price behavior (such as the so-called fundamentals), to trigger each decision to be long or short each market, or not.
On November 9, 2012, John W. Henry & Co., the financial trading firm owned by the Red Sox owner, informed clients it would stop managing their assets on December 31, 2012.

==
Sports ownership ==
John W. Henry grew up a fan of the St. Louis Cardinals, especially their star Stan Musial.
After acquiring his fortune, his first foray into professional sports was in purchasing a Minor League Baseball team, the Tucson Toros of the Pacific Coast League, in 1989.
He was also one of the founders of the Senior Professional Baseball Association, a winter league in Florida composed of retired major league players.
Henry co-owned the winning team in the 1989–90 season, the West Palm Beach Tropics, managed by former Boston Red Sox "Impossible Dream" (1967) manager, Dick Williams.
Henry sold his interest in 1990, and the league went out of business the following year.
In 1990, Henry negotiated to purchase the Orlando Magic NBA team, for a short time was the lead general for an expansion team which became the Colorado Rockies, and headed a group attempting to land an NHL expansion bid in Florida, which would eventually be given to Phil and Tony Esposito, who created the Tampa Bay Lightning.
Subsequently, Henry negotiated to buy the Miami Heat and later the New Jersey Nets.

Henry entered Major League Baseball with his purchase of a small interest in the New York Yankees in 1991.
Henry became the sole owner of the Florida Marlins in 1999, purchasing the club from Wayne Huizenga for a reported $158 million.
In January 2002, Henry sold the Marlins in a multi-franchise deal to Jeffrey Loria, then owner of the Montreal Expos (now the Washington Nationals).
===
Boston Red Sox ===
Following his sale of the Marlins, Henry led a purchase of the Boston Red Sox with partners Tom Werner and the New York Times Company from the Yawkey Trust headed by John Harrington.
Henry, as principal owner and Werner, as chairman, assembled a front office team headed up by Larry Lucchino with the express goal of "breaking the Curse of the Bambino."
He also hired baseball sabermetrics pioneer Bill James, whose work became widely known following the publication of Moneyball in 2003.
Henry accomplished his championship goal in the 2004 World Series, against his former childhood favorite Cardinals, and beat the Cardinals again in 2013.
The team also won the 2007 World Series against a franchise with which Henry had pre-expansion involvement, the Rockies, and the 2018 World Series against the Dodgers.
Henry is also responsible for saving Fenway Park from the wrecking ball.

The previous Red Sox owners had planned on building a new Fenway Park next door, but Henry chose to keep and renovate (including new seats over the Green Monster)
the current Fenway Park, which celebrated its centennial in 2012.

Henry was in the news in August 2017, when he said the team would lead a campaign to change the name of Yawkey Way, where Fenway Park is located.
The Red Sox had been the last team in Major League Baseball to integrate, and Henry said, "I am still haunted by what went on here a long time before we arrived."
The change was approved by the City of Boston in April 2018, and the name reverted to Jersey Street in May 2018.Henry also enjoys playing baseball simulations, including Out of the Park Baseball.

==
Fenway Sports Group ==
Henry and Werner established New England Sports Ventures in 2001.
The company owns the Boston Red Sox, 80% of the New England Sports Network (which also carries the NHL's Boston Bruins), Fenway Park, Fenway Sports Management (a sports marketing and management firm), various real estate properties surrounding Fenway Park, and as of 2010, Liverpool Football Club.

In 2009, the company made its first foray into European sports with an unsuccessful bid for the French Ligue 1 club Olympique de Marseille.
In 2010, New England Sports Ventures changed its name to Fenway Sports Group.
===
Liverpool Football Club ===
In October 2010 the Fenway Sports Group took over Liverpool F.C.
The UEFA Financial Fair Play Regulations may have been a factor in the decision.
The previous owners, Tom Hicks and George N. Gillett, Jr., had become extremely unpopular among Liverpool fans for their failure to deliver on the promise of a new stadium or on the promise that no debt would be placed onto the club, as well as disrespectful treatment of its manager and front office and for their allegedly misleading statements about planned and past investment in players.
Having lost around £154 million on the pressured sale of their debt-ridden club, Hicks and Gillett announced that they would sue co-owners and creditors for at least $1.6 billion for the "extraordinary swindle" they suffered.
In January 2013, Hicks and Gillett had lost a Court of Appeal case and agreed to drop the suit.
On February 26, 2012 Liverpool won the 2012 Football League Cup Final at Wembley Stadium, beating Cardiff City 3–2 on penalties after the game finished 1–1 after 90 minutes and 2–2 after extra time.
This was Liverpool's first trophy since the 2006 FA Cup Final win over West Ham United on May 13, 2006 at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff.
In May 2012 he made a controversial decision by firing manager and club icon Kenny Dalglish citing the club's poor league results.
This was regarded as a poor decision by some football pundits such as Dalglish's friend Alan Hansen, given Dalglish's success in lifting the club from four points above the relegation zone to a cup win.
In July 2012, after successfully persuading Brendan Rodgers to become the new manager, John Henry stated the reason behind parting company with Dalglish had not been due to failing to win the FA Cup, nor the Suarez case (as assumed by Manchester United manager, Sir Alex Ferguson), but due to the club's poor league performance in the second half of the 2011–12 season.
Rodgers almost took Liverpool to their first Premier League title in over 20 years during the 2013–14 season; however, poor performances in the subsequent season and a bad start to the 2015–16 season saw Henry sack Brendan Rodgers as Liverpool manager on October 4, 2015.
On October 8, 2015, Henry appointed Jürgen Klopp as the new manager of
Liverpool F.C. The move was praised by Liverpool supporters and seen as a show of Henry's ambition for the club.
Klopp led Liverpool to two finals during the 2015-16 season.
In 2018 Liverpool reached the Champions League final for the first time in 11 years.
In 2019 Liverpool reached the Champions League Final for the second consecutive year and won it, beating fellow English club Tottenham Hotspur, 2–0.
Liverpool went on to win the Premier League title in the 2019-20 season;
Liverpool's first league title in 30 years, and their first since the Premier League was formed.

In April 2021, Liverpool were announced as a founding member of the European Super League, which would have effectively ended the pyramid system of European football and placed Liverpool in a closed league without prospects for meritocratic relegation and promotion.
Liverpool and the five other English clubs involved backed out within two days after a strong backlash.
This prompted Henry to issue an official apology to Liverpool fans, taking responsibility for the events that had occurred.

==
NASCAR ==
In 2007, Henry's Fenway Sports Group bought a 50% stake in Jack Roush's Roush Fenway Racing stock car racing team.
Driver Matt Kenseth won the Auto Club 500 at the California Speedway in February 2007 marking Henry's first win as an owner.
In February 2009 the team won their first Daytona 500 with Matt Kenseth.
Henry is currently listed as the owner of the #17 Ford driven by NASCAR Cup Series driver Chris Buescher.

==
iRacing.com Motorsport Simulations ==
In September 2004 Henry and David Kaemmer founded iRacing.com Motorsport Simulations for developing a racing simulation service aimed at both real-world racers and racing simulator enthusiasts.
The service was launched in August 2008.

==
Newspaper ownership ==
In the predawn hours of August 3, 2013, both The Boston Globe and The New York Times carried stories on their web sites reporting that Henry had agreed to purchase the former along with the Telegram & Gazette newspaper of Worcester, Massachusetts and related New England media properties for $70 million in cash from The New York Times Company, which had paid $1.1 billion for The Globe in 1993.
The Globe's story described Henry as "a personally shy businessman with a history of bold bets.
"
The Times story quoted Times spokesperson Eileen Murphy as confirming the sale deal.
The stories noted that Henry had initially been among a group of partners who had joined in bidding on The Globe properties, but ended up agreeing to acquire them individually.
However, The Times story reported him saying: "In coming days there will be announcements concerning those joining me in this community commitment and effort.
"After
the announcement, the ownership of The San Diego Union-Tribune (then known as "U-T San Diego") alleged that it had outbid Henry for The Globe but that the management of The Times Company had not fairly handled the process, to the detriment of Times Company shareholders.
In 2014, Henry sold the Worcester Telegram & Gazette to Halifax Media Group, which had previously purchased 16 former New York Times Company newspapers in 2011.

==
In popular culture ==
Henry was briefly portrayed by Arliss Howard in the 2011 film Moneyball, which follows Oakland Athletics general manager Billy Beane and his quest to build a winning team in 2002.
Towards the end of the film, Beane travels to Boston's Fenway Park where he meets with Henry, who wants Beane to become the new GM of the Red Sox.
The film notes that Beane turned down a five-year, $12.5 million contract with Boston and returned to Oakland, but adds that the Red Sox, despite failing to hire Beane, did implement many of his "Moneyball" ideas and would go on to win the 2004 World Series, marking the first Red Sox championship in 86 years.

==
Awards and honors ==
Four-time World Series champion (as principal owner of the Boston Red Sox)
2012 EFL Cup champion (as principal owner of Liverpool F.C.)
2019 UEFA Champions League winner (as principal owner of Liverpool F.C.)
2019 UEFA Super Cup winner (as principal owner of Liverpool F.C.)
2019 FIFA Club World Cup winner (as principal owner of Liverpool F.C.)
2019-20 Premier League winner (as principal owner of Liverpool F.C.)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
John W. Henry on Twitter
John W. Henry & Company Inc.
Street Stories profile
This article contains two charts: The first chart is a list of the top 50 all-time scorers in the history of the National Basketball Association (NBA).
(
The list includes only points scored in regular season games.)
The second chart is a progressive list of the leading all-time NBA scorers.
The all-time leading scorer in NBA history is Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, who scored a total of 38,387 career points.

==
Scoring leaders ==
The following is a list of National Basketball Association players by total career regular season points scored.

Statistics accurate as of April 28th, 2021.
==
Progressive list of scoring leaders ==
This is a progressive list of scoring leaders showing how the record increased through the years.

Statistics accurate as of April 17, 2021.

== See also ==
Sports portal
List of National Basketball Association annual scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career 3-point scoring leaders
List of National Basketball League (United States)
career scoring leaders


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Basketball-Reference.com enumeration of NBA career leaders in points scored
National Basketball Association official website enumeration of NBA career leaders in points scored
The USA Basketball Men's National Team, commonly known as the United States men's national basketball team, is the most successful team in international competition, winning medals in all eighteen Olympic tournaments it has entered, including fifteen golds.
In the professional era, the team won the Olympic gold medal in 1992, 1996, 2000, 2008, 2012, and 2016.
Two of its gold medal-winning teams were inducted to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in August 2010: the 1960 team, which featured six Hall of Famers (4 players, 2 coaches), and the 1992 "Dream Team", featuring 14 Hall of Famers (11 players, 3 coaches).
The team is currently ranked first in the FIBA World Rankings.

Traditionally composed of amateur players, the U.S. dominated the first decades of international basketball, winning a record seven consecutive Olympic gold medals.
However, by the end of the 1980s, American amateurs were no longer competitive against seasoned professionals from the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia.
In 1989, FIBA modified its rules and allowed USA Basketball to field teams with National Basketball Association players.
The first such team, known as the "Dream Team", won the gold medal at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, being superior in all matches.
With the introduction of NBA players, the team was able to spark a second run of dominance in the 1990s.

Facing increased competition, the U.S. failed to win a medal at the 2002 FIBA World Championship, finishing sixth.
The 2004 Olympic team, being depleted by a number of withdrawals, lost three games on its way to a bronze medal, a record that represented more losses in a single year than the country's Olympic teams had suffered in all previous Olympiads combined.

Determined to put an end to these failures, USA Basketball initiated a long-term project aimed at creating better, more cohesive teams.
The U.S. won its first seven games at the 2006 FIBA World Championship in Japan before losing against Greece in the semi-finals; ending the competition with the bronze medal.
The team won gold two years later—at the 2008 Summer Olympics—in a dominant fashion.
This success was followed up at the 2010 FIBA World Championship, where despite fielding a roster featuring no players from the 2008 Olympic team, the U.S. did not lose a single game en route to defeating host Turkey for the gold medal.

The Americans continued this streak of dominance in the 2010s by going undefeated and capturing gold at the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2014 FIBA World Cup.
At the 2016 Summer Olympics, the team, led by Mike Krzyzewski for a record third time, won its 15th gold medal, making him the most decorated coach in USA Basketball history.
After Krzyzewski stepped down in 2016, team USA lost to France in the quarter-finals of the 2019 FIBA World Cup, finishing seventh overall.

==
History ==


===
1936–1968 ===
The US men were dominant from the first Olympic tournament to hold basketball, held in Berlin in 1936, going 5–0 to win the gold, and joined by continental neighbors Canada and Mexico on the medal platform.
Through the next six tournaments, the United States went undefeated, collecting gold while not losing a single contest in the games held in London, Helsinki, Melbourne, Rome, Tokyo, and Mexico City.
Participation in these tournaments were limited to amateurs, but the US teams during this period featured players who would later go on to become superstars in professional basketball, including all-time greats Bill Russell, Oscar Robertson, Jerry West, and Jerry Lucas; the latter three competed on the 1960 Rome team often credited as the best U.S. roster until the formation of the 1992 Dream Team.
Alex Groza and Ralph Beard, both briefly NBA stars, made the 1948 squad as Kentucky Wildcats, with 3-time Oklahoma State
All-American and 6-time AAU All-American, and Hall of Famer Bob Kurland leading the way.
The 1952 team included big man Clyde Lovellette of the University of Kansas, a future Hall of Famer and NBA star.
Kurland once again led the team to victory.

The 1956 team was led by San Francisco Dons teammates Bill Russell and K. C. Jones, and defeated its opponents by an unsurpassed average margin of 53.5 points per game.

The 1960 team included nine future NBA players, including not just Robertson (1961 NBA Rookie of the Year), Lucas (1964 NBA Rookie of the Year) and West, but also Darrall Imhoff (1967 NBA All Star), Bob Boozer (1968 NBA All Star), Adrian Smith (1966 NBA All Star game MVP), Jay Arnette, Terry Dischinger (1963 NBA Rookie of the Year), and another Basketball Hall of Famer in Walt Bellamy  (1962 NBA Rookie of the Year).

They defeated their opponents by an average margin of 42.4 points per game.

=== 1972–1988 ===
The 1972 Olympic men's basketball gold medal game, marking the first ever loss for the US in Olympic play, is arguably the most controversial in Olympic history.
The United States rode their seven consecutive gold medals and 63–0 Olympic record to Munich for the 1972 Summer Olympics.
The team won its first eight games in convincing fashion, setting up a final against the Soviet Union, holding a 6–0 advantage over the Soviets in Olympic play.
With three seconds left in the gold medal game, American forward Doug Collins sank two free throws after being hit hard by a Soviet player to put the Americans up 50–49.
Immediately following Collins' free throws, the Soviets inbounded the ball and failed to score.
Soviet coaches claimed that they had requested a timeout before Collins' foul shots.
The referees ordered the clock reset to three seconds and the game's final seconds replayed.
The horn sounded as a length-of-the-court Soviet pass was being released from the inbounding player, the pass missed its mark, and the American players began celebrating.

Nevertheless, the final three seconds were replayed for a third time.
This time, the Soviets' Alexander Belov and the USA's Kevin Joyce and Jim Forbes went up for the pass, and Belov caught the long pass from Ivan Edeshko near the American basket.
Belov then laid the ball in for the winning points as the buzzer sounded.
The US players voted unanimously to refuse their silver medals, and at least one team member, Kenny Davis, has directed in his will that his heirs are never to accept the medals, even posthumously.
It was later revealed that game officials might have been bribed by the Communist party.
After the controversial loss in Munich, 1976 saw Dean Smith coach the US to a 7–0 record and its eighth Olympic gold medal in Montreal.
The success at this tournament pushed the USA's all-time Olympic record to an impressive 78–1.

The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan prompted the United States and 66 other countries to boycott the 1980 Olympics in Moscow.
The 1980 U.S. team, which featured a number of future NBA players, was the youngest American national team ever assembled.
This team featured: Mark Aguirre, Rolando Blackman, Sam Bowie, Michael Brooks, Bill Hanzlik, Alton Lister, Rodney McCray, Isiah Thomas, Darnell Valentine, Danny Vranes, Buck Williams and Al Wood.
Unable to compete in the Olympics due to the boycott, it instead participated in the "Gold Medal Series", a series of games against NBA all-star teams in various U.S. cities, recording a 5–1 record.
It was coached by Dave Gavitt.

Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing, and Chris Mullin, future members of the '92 Dream Team, made their Olympic debuts in 1984.
Jordan led the team with 17.1 points per game, and Bob Knight coached the team to an 8–0 record and another Olympic gold.

The 1988 U.S. team had a roster of collegians aged 20-23 that included future NBA all-stars David Robinson, Danny Manning, and Mitch Richmond.
The team came up short, winning the bronze medal.
The American team lost to the gold medal winner Soviet Union in the semifinals, but then regrouped and went on to beat Australia 78–49 in the bronze medal game.
Dan Majerle led the team in scoring, averaging 14.1 points per game.
This was the last time the American Olympic Team consisted of amateur college players.

=== 1992–2000 ===
The decade started with a semifinal loss to Yugoslavia in the 1990 FIBA World Championship, followed by another semifinal defeat to Puerto Rico in the 1991 Pan American Games in Havana.
The 1990 championship marked the last time that the U.S. was represented by college players at a major international tournament (World Championship & Olympics).

The decades-long use of "shamateurs" by the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and other international teams prompted FIBA to modify its rules and allow NBA players in the 1992 Olympics and beyond.
The team assembled by USA Basketball for the tournament in Barcelona in 1992 was one of the most illustrious collections of talent assembled in the history of international sport.
Of the twelve players on the team, ten were named in 1996 among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History, the NBA's official list of the 50 greatest players of the league's first 50 years.
Magic Johnson and Larry Bird served as co-captains.
Because of this star line-up, the team's games usually featured opposing teams asking for pregame photos and autographs with their U.S. opponents.
The USA team was so much better than the competition
that head coach Chuck Daly did not call a single timeout during the tournament.
The 1992 Dream Team won by an average of 43.8 points (second most, behind the 1956 US team) and the closest a team came to challenging the U.S. was Croatia, which was beaten by 32.
Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen became the first players to win both NBA championship and Olympic gold medal in the same year, having played for the Chicago Bulls.

Regarding drug-testing the athletes, according to USA Basketball spokesman Craig Miller, "Since 1990, all of our teams have been tested in competition.
I believe since around 1988 we have also been subject to out-of-competition testing.
We have been 100 percent fully compliant with USADA and WADA."The
United States fielded another team composed of NBA players in the 1994 World Championship, held in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
This was an entirely new roster, as USA Basketball elected to showcase stars who were not present at the 1992 Olympics.
Composed primarily of younger NBA players, the team lacked the widespread appeal of its predecessor but nevertheless continued its dominance.
Those players were Derrick Coleman, Joe Dumars, Kevin Johnson, Larry Johnson, Shawn Kemp, Dan Majerle, Reggie Miller, Alonzo Mourning, Shaquille O'Neal, Mark Price, Steve Smith and Dominique Wilkins.
Coached by Don Nelson of the Golden State Warriors, this team easily captured the gold medal in tournament play.
The team was referred to as the "Dream Team II".
The third team composed of NBA players participated in the 1996 Summer Olympics held in Atlanta.
The star quality of the team was impressive as it featured five members of the original Dream Team (Barkley, Malone, Pippen, Robinson, and Stockton), plus two other members of the NBA 50 Greatest Players list, Hakeem Olajuwon and Shaquille O'Neal.
Lenny Wilkens coached the team.

The Americans won another gold medal with an average margin of victory of 31.8 points per game.
They captured the gold medal after defeating Yugoslavia 95–69.
With Atlanta being home to the Hawks, these games were the first Olympics to take place in a city with an NBA team since the league started allowing its players to compete in the Olympics.

The team was commonly referred to as the "Dream Team III".
The 1998 World Championship in Athens, Greece was different from the previous teams, as none of its players were current members of NBA teams.
Because of a labor dispute that led to a lockout, no active NBA players were permitted to compete in the tournament.
The 12 NBA players picked before the lockout were Tim Duncan, Tim Hardaway, Vin Baker, Gary Payton, Terrell Brandon, Kevin Garnett, Tom Gugliotta, Grant Hill, Allan Houston, Christian Laettner, Glen Rice, and Chris Webber.
The replacement team was composed largely of players from American colleges, the minor-league Continental Basketball Association, or European pro leagues.
The unheralded roster captured a bronze medal, considered a solid achievement given its lack of top-notch talent.
The team was nicknamed the "Dirty Dozen" for its work ethic and teamwork.
Undrafted free agent Brad Miller became a two-time NBA All-Star.
Some of the other team members—including Trajan Langdon, Kiwane Garris, David Wood and Michael Hawkins—had brief spells in the NBA.
All went on to have careers in Europe, with Langdon being named to the Euroleague's All-Decade Team for the 2000s.

During the late 1990s, international basketball began to gather attention as more and more foreign players became stars in the NBA.
Therefore, the 2000 U.S. team had the enormous task of proving that American basketball could remain the best in the world.
The new team that was assembled again featured NBA players, but this time few of them were considered to be true superstars, as several elite players elected not to participate.

The U.S. team participated in the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, Australia and was coached by Rudy Tomjanovich.
It won its first two games by lopsided margins, but faced more difficult competition thereafter.
In a preliminary game against Lithuania, the U.S. team won 85–76, marking the first time a team of professional American players failed to win by double digits.
Two games later, in a 106–94 victory over France, Vince Carter pulled off one of the most famous dunks in basketball history, jumping over the 7 ft 2 in (2.18 m) French center Frédéric Weis on his way to the basket.
(
The French media would dub Carter's feat le dunk de la mort—"the dunk of death".)

A shock came in the semifinals when the United States defeated Lithuania by the close score of 85–83.
Lithuanian star (and future NBA player, first with the Indiana Pacers and later with the Golden State Warriors)
Šarūnas Jasikevičius failed to get a potential game-winning 3-point shot off in time.

The closeness of the semifinal game was so shocking that NBC took the unusual step of showing the gold medal game live rather than on tape delay.
(
The game started around 2 p.m. Sydney time on Sunday, October 1, which is late Saturday evening in the USA.
NBC originally planned to show the game almost 24 hours later during its Sunday prime time broadcast.)
The USA won the gold medal against France in a close game, 85–75.
Though the US went undefeated on its way to the gold medal, the team began to lose its aura of invincibility for the first time.

=== 2002–2004 ===
The 2002 team competed in the World Championship in Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
Coached by George Karl, the team finished a surprisingly disappointing sixth in the competition.
During the tournament, Argentina defeated the US in the second preliminary round group stage, thus becoming the first team ever to defeat a USA team composed of NBA players.
Yugoslavia knocked out the US in the quarterfinals, becoming the first team ever to defeat USA team of NBA players in knockout stage.
Then Spain repeated the outcome in the 5th place playoff.
To a greater degree than in 2000, a number of top NBA players declined to participate, forcing USA Basketball to resort to picking mostly second-tier players.

George Karl had a dispute with Paul Pierce, one of the few superstars on the team, which led to Karl benching Pierce, the team's leading scorer, in Team USA's final game.
The group has been considered as one of sport's greatest flops, as they failed to produce as previous teams had.
The United States lost 3 games in the tournament to countries with current or future NBA stars, like Argentina (led by Manu Ginóbili), Yugoslavia (led by Peja Stojaković and Vlade Divac) and Spain (led by Pau Gasol).

Two NBA superstars, Ray Allen and Jason Kidd, accepted roles to play on the World Championship team, but were unable to play on that team due to injuries.
Many other superstars, including Kobe Bryant, Shaquille O'Neal, and Kevin Garnett, turned down invitations to play in that tournament.

The close outcome of 2000 and the humiliating results of 2002 prompted a number of NBA superstars to agree to join the team for the FIBA Americas Championship 2003, dubbed as the  Dream Team IV,  which the squad was required to participate in to qualify for the 2004 Summer Olympics.
The team easily cruised to a first-place finish, earning it a spot in Athens, Greece, the following summer.

However, the dominant team that competed in 2003 could not be kept together.
Nine of its 12 players elected not to participate in Athens.
The new team consisted of some young NBA stars early in their careers, such as Dwyane Wade, LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony.
Only Richard Jefferson, Tim Duncan and Allen Iverson were part of the 2003 FIBA Americas San Juan gold medal team.
The team was coached by Larry Brown.

After struggles in several exhibition matches, the vulnerability of the 2004 team was confirmed when Puerto Rico defeated them 92–73, from which they earned the nickname "Nightmare team" (as mock opposed to the Dream Team concept), in the first game of the Olympic tournament in Athens.
The 19 point defeat was the most lopsided loss for the US in the history of international competition.
After the game, Larry Brown had strong comments about his coaching performance: "I'm humiliated, not for the loss -- I can always deal with wins and losses --
but I'm disappointed because I had a job to do as a coach, to get us to understand how we're supposed to play as a team and act as a team, and I don't think we did that".
After winning close games against Greece and Australia, The USA fell to Lithuania, dropping to 2–2 in the Olympic tournament.
Even after an 89–53 win over Angola, the Americans entered the knockout rounds in fourth place due to goal average, the lowest seed of their group.
The Americans faced undefeated Spain in their quarterfinal game, winning 102–94.

However, the semifinal match saw the team defeated by Argentina 89–81, ending the United States' hold on the gold medal.
The USA did rebound to capture the bronze medal by defeating Lithuania.

Still, it marked only the third time that an American team failed to win gold (excluding the 1980 Moscow Olympics boycott), and the first time for an American team composed of NBA players.

=== 2006–2016 ===
Following the disappointments in 2002 and 2004, USA Basketball appointed Jerry Colangelo to be solely responsible for selecting the team.
Colangelo made it clear that he would ask players for a three-year commitment—the 2006 FIBA World Championship and the 2008 Summer Olympics.
In the 2006 Worlds, the team was eliminated by Greece in the semifinal, losing the game 101–95.
The head coach was Duke University's Mike Krzyzewski, with assistants Jim Boeheim, Mike D'Antoni, and Nate McMillan.
While some prominent players, such as Tim Duncan and Kevin Garnett, stated that they did not plan to play for the team, superstars Dwyane Wade, Kobe Bryant and LeBron James publicly announced their commitment for the 2006 Worlds and the ensuing 2008 Olympics.
Wade, James and Carmelo Anthony were named captains of the 2006 USA World Championship Team.

The United States Team, dubbed Dream Team V or the Redeem Team, dominated Group B in pool play, defeating China, Angola, Greece, world champion Spain, and Germany by an average of 32.2 points.
After finishing first in their group, the USA earned the right to play the fourth-place finishers in Group A, Australia.
The United States soundly defeated Australia 116–85 in the quarterfinal.
Next up for the Americans in the semifinals was the 2004 Olympic gold medalist Argentina, led by Manu Ginóbili – the team that had beaten them in the semifinals four years prior.
However, Ginóbili was hobbled by an ankle injury and only played sparing minutes in the first half.
Behind Carmelo Anthony's 21 points, the USA defeated Argentina 101–81 to reach the gold medal game.
On August 24, the United States defeated Spain 118–107 to capture the Olympic gold medal with the electrifying spark by team U.S.A. leading scorer Dwyane Wade adding 27 points with 4 3's and 100% shooting inside the line.
The victory ended an eight-year drought at major international competitions (Olympics & World Championships) with the first win since 2000.

Due to winning gold at the 2008 Olympics, the USA automatically qualified for the World Championships.
The USA had not won the FIBA World Championship since 1994.
It was initially believed that there would be only 2–3 spots available with most players returning from the 2008 Olympic team.
However, by early July 2010, all ten invited players declined to participate, due to injury, free agency, rest, or personal commitments.
Due to the roster being filled with 12 new players and the lack of star power, the team was dubbed the "B Team".
Also, the coaches were criticized for selecting too many guards and inexperienced players, and not enough tall players.

However, the team won all five of its preliminary games, four of those by double digits (the exception being the win against Brazil by 2 points).
The success continued in the knockout stage with victories by 55, 10 and 15.
In the 2010 FIBA World Championship Final, the USA beat host nation Turkey by 17 points and won the gold medal.
Tournament MVP Kevin Durant broke several Team USA scoring records (most points in a tournament-205, most points in a single game-38, and average points per game-22.8).
In addition, Lamar Odom became the first player to win the NBA and FIBA World championships in the same year.

Team USA executive director Jerry Colangelo has said he's open to anyone from the 2010 team to play in future tournaments.

The US team clinched a berth in the 2012 Olympics in London by winning the 2010 World Championship.
The Olympic team lost some players to injuries who might have made the team and appeared to be short on big men.
Their roster featured five players returning from the 2008 Olympic team and five others from the 2010 World Championship team.

The US went undefeated but appeared vulnerable at times in winning five exhibition games.
They finished the tournament with a perfect 8–0 record, defeating opponents by an average of 32 points while trailing in the fourth quarter only once.
The Americans often played with a small lineup that emphasized speed, quickness, and outside shooting.
The team set an Olympic single-game record with 156 points scored against Nigeria in the preliminary round.
In a rematch of the 2008 finals, Team USA again narrowly defeated Spain to capture the gold.

This was announced as the final Olympic Games for Kobe Bryant.
By winning the gold medal, the USA automatically qualified for the 2014 FIBA World Cup.

The United States had automatically qualified for the World Cup by virtue of the gold medal won by their 2012 Olympic team.
The Americans were considered favorites to win the World Cup.
The roster was filled with two players returning from the 2012 Olympic team, three from the 2010 FIBA Championship Team, while seven other NBA players made their senior international debuts.
The 2014 roster featured four players 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m) or larger, the most of any USA team since Mike Krzyzewski began coaching the team in 2006.
The team was also the youngest American team since 1992 when NBA players were first allowed on the team; the average player was 24.08 years old, roughly a half-year younger than their 2010 team.

The team advanced to the knockout phase after starting the tournament 5–0 during the group stage.
They went undefeated 9–0 in the tournament, winning by an average margin of 33.0 points.
The United States was just the third country in World Cup history to repeat as champions.
Combined with their 2010 World Championship along with gold by their 2008 and 2012 Olympic teams, they also became the first country in FIBA basketball history to win four consecutive major titles.
The United States defeated Serbia in the World Cup Final by 37 points and clinched a berth for the 2016 Summer Olympics.

Multiple withdrawals (largely triggered by a freak injury to Paul George in a pre-2014 World Cup scrimmage) left the 2016 U.S. team with just two players with prior Olympic experience (Durant and Anthony).
The Americans seemed vulnerable in the preliminary round, narrowly defeating Australia, Serbia, and France by a combined 16 points.
However, the team gained momentum in the quarterfinal match against Argentina, winning 105–78.
The U.S. team then defeated Spain in the semifinals setting up a rematch versus Serbia in the gold medal game.
The Americans proved their superiority, easily defeating their rival by 30 points.
The team averaged 100.9 points (with an average margin of victory at 22.5 points) a game with Anthony (he won a record third straight Olympic gold medal) and Durant as top scorers.
Krzyzewski stepped down as the most decorated coach in USA Basketball history, winning three Olympic gold medals and two FIBA World Cups.

==
Honors ==
Olympic Games
Gold medalists (15): 1936, 1948, 1952, 1956, 1960, 1964, 1968, 1976, 1984, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2008, 2012, 2016
Silver medalists (1): 1972
Bronze medalists (2): 1988, 2004FIBA World Cup
Champions (5): 1954, 1986, 1994, 2010, 2014
Runners-up (3): 1950, 1959, 1982
Third place (4): 1974, 1990, 1998,
2006FIBA AmeriCup

Champions (7): 1992, 1993, 1997, 1999, 2003, 2007, 2017
Runners-up (1):
1989


===
Other awards ===
Pan American Games
Gold medalists (8): 1951, 1955, 1959, 1963, 1967, 1975, 1979, 1983
Silver medalists: (3): 1987, 1995, 1999
Bronze medalists (3): 1991, 2011, 2015, 2019Goodwill Games
Gold medalists (3): 1986, 1998, 2001
Silver medalists (1): 1990
Bronze medalists (1):
1994World University Games
Gold medalists (14): 1965, 1967, 1973, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1989, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2005, 2015, 2019
Silver medalists (4): 1970, 1985, 1987, 2017
Bronze medalists (3): 1983, 2001,
2009


==
Competitions ==


===
Olympic Games ===
The U.S. team has achieved unparalleled success in the Olympic games.
While always being at a disadvantage to the Eastern Bloc countries that had used their best and most experienced professional players listed as soldiers or workers in a profession to subvert the amateur rules, the U.S. team (typically composed of AAU or collegiate players) did surprisingly well, winning nine out of eleven Olympic tournaments they had entered before the introduction of NBA players.
The U.S. is the only Western country that achieved success in a team sport during the Eastern Bloc dominance.
Canada's results in ice hockey and Western European football teams' results in soccer significantly deteriorated after the introduction of the Eastern Bloc countries and their quasi-professional players in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
In 1992, the U.S. team was represented by the NBA players for the first time and defeated its opponents by an average of 44 points en route to the gold medal against Croatia.
The Americans have continued to dominate the Olympic tournaments ever since, excluding underachieving performance at the 2004 Summer Olympics.

===
FIBA World Cup ===
Prior to the introduction of the NBA players, the United States was usually represented by military, industrial or collegiate players.
European and South American countries, meanwhile, were allowed to use their best players.
In 1950 and 1954, AAU teams Denver Chevrolets (in 1950) and Peoria Caterpillars (1954) were the U.S. representatives,; in 1959, the United States sent an Air Force team; in 1963 and 1967, the team was composed of AAU, armed forces and college ranks; in 1970 and 1974 (with the 1974 team being the youngest and least experienced team in history), the U.S. fielded exclusively collegians; in 1978, an Athletes In Action (AIA) team was the American representative; in 1982, 1986, and 1990, the team was again made up of collegiate players.
Starting with 1994 and with the exception of 1998, when the U.S. used players from the European leagues and college players, the team was made up of NBA players.

===
FIBA AmeriCup ===
Prior to the implementation of a new FIBA competition system in 2017, the U.S. team used different players depending on the circumstances.
In 1992, 1999, 2003 and 2007, the Americans sent in NBA players as they needed to qualify for the Olympics.
In 1989 and 2005, the U.S. also used the tournament for qualification purposes but sent in either college players (in 1989 NBA players weren't allowed) or NBA Development League, CBA and European leagues players (in 2005 the U.S. team didn't need to win gold in order to qualify for the World Championship).
In 1993, 1997 and 2001, the U.S. team entered the tournament without any specific purpose and was represented by CBA players in 1993 and 1997, and by junior players in 2001.
In 1980, 1984, 1988, 1995, 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2015, the American team didn't enter the tournament.
In 2017, the U.S. participated for the first time in ten years with a squad of NBA G League players and American professionals playing in European leagues.
==
Team ==


===
Current roster ===


===
Medal leaders ===


====
Olympic ====
Until 1992, there were few players who got the opportunity to compete in multiple Olympics.
Unlike their seasoned and veteran counterparts from Europe, U.S. players usually participated in a single Olympics (with Bob Kurland, Bill Hougland, and Burdette Haldorson being lone exceptions) and after winning a medal turned pro.
Consequently, prior to 1992, U.S. teams were assembled from scratch every four years.
After the introduction of NBA players, U.S. teams became more cohesive, and players often chose to compete in more than one Olympic tournament.

====
World Cup ====


===
Past rosters ===


==
See also ==
United States
men's national under-19 basketball team
United States
men's national under-17 basketball team
United States
men's national 3x3 team
United States women's national basketball team
United States
women's national under-19 basketball team
United States women's national under-17 basketball team
United States women's national 3x3 team
USA Basketball
Basketball in the United States


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
FIBA Profile
U.S. Olympic Basketball Team Rosters and Stats
Basketball is the second most popular sport in the United States (counting amateur levels), after American football.
In terms of revenue, the National Basketball Association (NBA) is the third most popular sports league in the United States, after the National Football League (NFL) and Major League Baseball (MLB).
According to the National Sporting Goods Association, over 26 million Americans play basketball regularly, more than any other team sport.

Basketball was invented in 1891 by Canadian physical education teacher James Naismith in Springfield, Massachusetts.

==
NBA ==
The National Basketball Association (NBA) is the world's premier men's professional basketball league and one of the major professional sports leagues of North America.
It contains 30 teams (29 teams in the U.S. and 1 in Canada) that play an 82-game season from October to June.
After the regular season, eight teams from each conference compete in the playoffs for the Larry O'Brien Championship Trophy.
The NBA get high ratings on television.

==
Race and ethnicity ==
The composition of race and ethnicity in the National Basketball Association (NBA) has changed throughout the league's history.
By 2020, 81.1% of players in the NBA are black (if mixed are also counted as black), 17.9% white, 12.5% mixed race (mostly half-black half-white), and 1.1% of other races.
The league has the highest percentage of black players of any major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada.
As of 2020, the NBA's viewership appears to be predominantly black and Hispanic.

==
National teams ==
Since the 1992 Summer Olympics, NBA players have represented the United States in international competition and won numerous important tournaments.
The Dream Team was the unofficial nickname of the United States men's basketball team that won the gold medal at the 1992 Olympics.
The Women's national team has won eight gold medals at the Olympics.

==
High school Basketball ==
High school Basketball is a popular activity.
The National Federation of State High School Associations featured 541,479 boys and 429,504 girls in basketball teams as of the 2014–15 season.
Many high school basketball teams have intense local followings, especially in the Midwest and Upper South.
Indiana has 10 of the 12 largest high school gyms in the United States, and is famous for its basketball passion, known as Hoosier Hysteria.

==
College Basketball ==
College basketball is quite popular and draws TV high ratings.
Every March, a 68-team, six-round, single-elimination tournament (commonly called March Madness) determines the national champions of NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship men's college basketball.

==
Women's Basketball ==
The Women's National Basketball Association or WNBA is an organization governing a professional basketball league for women in the United States.
The WNBA was formed in 1996 as the women's counterpart to the National Basketball Association, and league play began in 1997.
The regular WNBA season is June to September (North American Spring and Summer).
Most WNBA teams play at the same venue as their NBA counterparts.
The top tier professional Basketball league for women is the WNBA.
Women's NCAA Basketball is also popular, although less so than men's basketball.
The women's national team has won eight Olympic gold medals and ten FIBA World Cups.

==
References ==
Jonathan Scott Lavine (born May 9, 1966) is an American business executive, co-managing partner of Bain Capital, and philanthroplist.
He also serves as chief investment officer of Bain Capital Credit, which he founded in 1997 as Sankaty Advisors, a division of Bain Capital.
Lavine is a philanthropist who donated to several U.S. organizations.

==
Early life, education and family ==
Jonathan Lavine was born in Providence, Rhode Island and graduated from Classical High School in 1984.
Lavine then attended Columbia College, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and earned a BA magna cum laude in 1988.In 1992, Lavine earned an MBA from Harvard Business School.
Lavine married Jeannie Diane Bachelor in June 1992 at Temple B’nai Abraham in Livingston, New Jersey.

They have two children, Allie and Emily and reside in Lexington, Massachusetts.

==
Career ==
Lavine began his career as an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert upon his graduation in 1988.
From 1991-1993, he worked as a consultant for McKinsey & Company until moving on to Bain Capital.
In 1997, Lavine founded Sankaty Advisors, LLC as the credit affiliate of Bain Capital and served as managing partner and chief investment officer of the firm.
Sankaty was renamed Bain Capital Credit in 2016.In 2016, Bain Capital named Lavine co-managing partner of the firm.
Lavine continued to lead Bain Capital Credit after becoming co-managing partner of Bain Capital.
In 2008, Lavine also became a member of the Boston Celtics ownership group, Boston Basketball Partners LLC.

==
Philanthropy ==
Lavine has served on the board of over ten organizations and educational institutions, including City Year, Boston Children's Hospital, the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Columbia University, Horizons for Homeless Children, and Opportunity Nation.
In 2007, the Lavines formed the Crimson Lion Foundation, a private family foundation through which they have concentrated their philanthropic activities.
Lavine has donated to a number of organizations and institutions, including  City Year, Harvard University, Harvard Business School, LIFT Communities, Equal Justice Initiative, and public radio station WBUR,  and the U.S. Holocaust Museum.

His two largest donations were $10M to City Year in 2012, and $12.5M to Harvard Business School in 2017.

==
References ==
The USA women's national under-19 basketball team is the women's basketball team, administered by USA Basketball, that represents the United States in international under-19 and under-18 (under age 19 and under age 18) women's basketball competitions, consisting mainly of the FIBA Americas Under-18 Championship for Women and FIBA Under-19 World Championship for Women.
The events were originally referred to as the FIBA Americas Junior World Championship Qualifying Tournament and the FIBA Junior World Championship.
The usual sequence is for the U18 team to play in a regional championship in one year, with the top four qualifying teams being invited to the FIBA Under-19 World Championship in the following year, as the U19 team.
The first Junior World Championship was held in 1985, without a qualifying tournament in the prior year.
Starting in 1988, the events were on a four-year cycle, with the FIBA Americas Junior World Championship Qualifying Tournament in 1988, followed by the FIBA Junior World Championship in 1989.
This continued until the format was changed in 2006.
Now, the U18 team plays in the U18 Americas event every other year, and the U19 World event in subsequent years.
The U18 team becomes the U19 team, with largely the same players and coaches, although changes can occur.
For example, while Debbie Ryan served as head coach for the 1988 U18 team, and again as head coach for the 1989 U19 team, the head coach for the 1992 U18 team was Nancy Wilson, but changed to Jim Foster for the 1993 U19 team.
There are also changes in the playing roster, although many of the players on the U18 team go on to play on the U19 team.

==
Record ==


== 1993 ==
Jim Foster served as the head coach, with Rene Portland serving as an assistant coach at the FIBA Junior World Championship.
The event was held in Seoul, South Korea August 1–8, 1993.
The USA improved their record from the 1985 and 1989 events to 5–2, but that finish placed the team seventh overall.

== 1997 ==
In 1997, Portland became the head coach, with Marianna Freeman and Jim Lewis assistant coaches of the USA team competing in the Junior World Championship (now the U19 World Championship).
That event was held in Natal, Brazil July 5–13, 1997.
After beating Japan in the opening game, the USA played defending champion Australia in the second round.
Despite having a 13-point lead at one time, the USA let the lead slip away and lost 80–74.
However, the USA team then went on to win a four-point game against Cuba, and won easily against Russia and Spain to move to the medal rounds.
In the semi-final the USA team faced Slovakia, and won 90–77 to move the team into their first ever finals for a FIBA Junior World team.
The final was against Australia who had beaten the US in the second game.
The USA team had a three-point lead with three seconds to go, but Australia hit a three-pointer to send the game to overtime.
Australia scored first, the USA out scored the Australians 7–2 to take a small lead.
The lead was down to two points with 30 seconds left in the game, but the USA hit free throws to win 78–74, notching the first ever gold medal for a Junior World Championship team from the USA.

== 2001 ==
Geno Auriemma was named as head coach, with Sherri Coale and Willette White assistant coaches of the USA team which would compete at the Junior World Championship in Brno, Czech Republic during July 2001.
The team won their first five games, including a record setting win against Mali.
The 97–27 final score represented the largest margin of victory by a USA team in Junior World Championship history.
The preliminary round results qualified the team for the medal rounds, where they faced the host team, the Czech Republic.
With a home crowd cheering them on, the Czech team held a nine-point lead with just over six minutes to go.
The USA team cut the lead down to three points with seconds to go, and good defense gave the ball back to the USA.
However, the USA was called for an offensive foul, and lost possession.
The Czech Republic team won 92–88, and went on to beat Russia 82–80 to win the gold medal.
The USA team beat Australia 77–72 to win the bronze medal.
Diana Taurasi was the leading scorer for the US with 19.3 points per game, while Alana Beard was close behind with 18.0 points per game.
Nicole Powell was the leading rebounder for the US, with seven rebounds per game.

== 2005 ==
Gail Goestenkors served as the head coach of the team representing the US at the 2005 FIBA Americas U19 Championship for Women in Tunis, Tunisia.
Carol Ross and Felisha Legette-Jack served as assistant coaches.
The USA team won all eight of their games, including the championship game against Serbia & Montenegro.
Crystal Langhorne hit 77.5% of her field goal attempts, to lead the USA scorers with over 16 points per game.
Candice Wiggins was close behind with almost 16 points per game.
The USA team was dominant, winning every game by more than 20 points.

== 2006 U18 ==
The 2006, U18 competition was held in Colorado Springs, Colorado in June.
The head coach was Doug Bruno, who was assisted by Jennifer Rizzotti and Carol Owens.
The team emphasize defense, holding their opponent's to an average of about 51 points a game.
The team won all four games, earning the gold-medal and a qualification for the 2007 U19 world championship.
In the game against Paraguay, Tina Charles hit eight of her 10 field-goal attempts to set a tournament record while Khadijah Rushdan's nine assists in the game against Brazil was also a tournament record.

== 2007 U19 ==
The 2007, U19 competition was held in Bratislava, Slovakia in August.
The head coach was Doug Bruno, who was assisted by Cynthia Cooper-Dyke and Carol Owens.

The USA team was dominant, winning all nine games at the event to earn the gold-medal.
The margin of victory averaged almost 35 points, with only an eight-point victory in the first game against Spain in single digits.
The USA reached the semi-finals unbeaten and faced Spain again, but this time led by 24 points from Maya Moore, the USA defeated Spain 69–46.
The set up a match-up between the US and Sweden the only remaining undefeated teams.
Five players for the USA scored double figures in the USA won the championship game
99–57.

== 2008 U18 ==
The U18 Americas Championship was held in July 2008.
Players were eligible for the U18 and U19 teams in those years if they were born on January 1, 1990 or later.
The USA won the gold, winning all five games.
The result qualified the U19 team for the World Championships in July/August 2009 in Thailand, where the USA lost their opening game against Spain, but went on to win every subsequent game, including the gold medal rematch against Spain.

== 2009 USA U19 results ==
The 2009 competition was held in Bangkok, Thailand in August.
The head coach was Carol Owens, who was assisted by Amanda Butler and Bill Fennelly.

In preparation for the tournament, the USA team played an exhibition game against France, and played a scrimmage with Australia.
In the exhibition game, the USA team defeated France 86–46.
In the opening game of the tournament, Spain defeated USA 90–86.
After playing evenly for the first eight minutes, Spain pulled out to a 17-point lead in the first half, which the USA could only cut to 14 at halftime.
In the second half the USA team tied the game at 58 all, then pulled to a 66–61 lead, but Spain tied the game again at 66, as part of a 21–1 run to take a commanding lead.
The USA would fight back, but could not close the gap, losing by 4.In the second game, USA defeated China 88–53, led by Nnemkadi Ogwumike with 18 points, and Kelsey Bone with 16.
Kelsey Bone and Nnemkadi Ogwumike combined to score the first ten USA points, to help the USA jump out to a 10–2 lead.
The game was never close again, with the USA winning
88–53.
Skylar Diggins would score 13 points to join Bone and Ogwumike as double digit scorers.
The USA would out rebound China 54–26 and held the Chinese team to under 30% shooting from the field.
USA plays Mali July 25, 2009.
In the following game, USA defeated Mali, 100–38, led by Kelly Faris with 13 points.
Four other players had double digit scoring.
Every available player scored, and the USA team held Mali to just over 20% shooting from the field.
The USA team will have a day off Sunday, after the completion of the preliminary round and will return to action in the next round July 27, 2009.After the day off, the USA defeated Canada 64–50.
USA used an 11–0 run to take a commanding lead.
Prahalis and Bone tied for the scoring lead with 14 points apiece; Ogwumike added a double-double with 11 points and 12 rebounds.
In the following game, the USA team faced the undefeated team from Russia.
The USA team led by six at the end of the first quarter, but, in the third quarter, Russia came back to retake the lead at 45–44.
However, USA held Russia to 26% shooting from the field, and outrebounded 50–34 to earn the win.
Russia had only 4 assists on 20 baskets, compared to eleven assists on 29 baskets for the Americans.
The USA team won 75–56.Then, the USA team defeated Japan 109–68, behind 15 points from Taber Spani, one of six players with double-digit scoring.
The USA team shot 53% from beyond the three-point arc.
Every player scored, every player played at least ten minutes and every player had at least one rebound.
The USA used a 12–0 run early in the game to put themselves well ahead, and were never threatened again.
The USA team had beaten France in an unofficial exhibition game by 40 points eleven days earlier, but this game proved to be much different.
France had a lead in much of the first half, as much as eight points at one time.
The USA pulled ahead to a 14-point lead early in the second half, but France would pull to within two points early in the final period.
The USA team then went on a 15–3 run to put the game out of reach, and won 88–75.
Skyler Diggins and Nnemkadi Ogwumike each scored 16 points for the USA team.
In the semi-final game, USA played Canada, after Canada beat Australia to reach the semi-final.
The USA team held Canada to just over 30% shooting from the field, and won easily, 82–51.
This win set up a replay with Spain, who beat the USA team in the opening match.
In the final game, a rematch with Spain, the USA team won 87–71 to win the gold.
The USA team hit its first twelve shots, and were 15 for 18 in the first quarter, to open up a commanding lead.
The USA would hit less than a third (19 of 59) of their field goals in the remainder of the game, but the opening quarter lead would prove sufficient.
The USA held Spain to under 34% shooting for the game.
The loss would be the first of the event for Spain.

==
2010
USA U18 results ==
The U18 competition was among teams in the Americas, and would determine which teams would be invited to the 2011 World Championships.
Before the formal games started, the USA team played Canada in an exhibition game, winning 58–39.
After starting out sluggishly, leading only 19–15 at the half, the team came together to outscore the Canadian team by 14 points in the second half.
Chiney Ogwumike was the leading scorer with 155 points, and Bria Hartley had ten points, three assists and four steals.
In the first official game, the USA was matched up against Argentina.
The USA team turned the ball over on each of their first three possessions, but then settled down and beat Argentina convincingly, 91–32.
All USA players scored, while Bria Hartley, Kayla McBride, Chiney Ogwumike and Stephanie Dolson were all double-digit scorers.
Head Coach Jennifer Rizzotti was pleased with the overall effort, other than the first minute of play.
In the second game, the USA played the team from Brazil.
Ogwumike again was the leading scorer with 15 points, all in the first half.
Bria Hartley added 14 points, while Alexis Jones and Kayla McBride were also double-digit scorers.
The USA team started out strong, with Hartley scoring eight points as part of a 13–2 run.
The team was 15 of 17 from the free throw line, setting a USA FIBA Americas U18 Championship for Women record.
The next game was against Puerto Rico.
The USA team was losing briefly, 3–2, before scoring 19 consecutive points to set the tone for the game.
Diamond DeShields was the top scorer with 14 points, but seven other players were double-digit scorers.
The team had 22 assists on their 35 baskets, as the team beat Puerto Rico 108–44.
This win propelled the USA team into the semi-final match up against Chile. "
The Beast of Twain" Ogwumike would again lead all scorers with 17, while Theresa Plaisance had 11 and Kayla McBride had 10.
Reshanda Gray was the leading rebounder with 8.
The game wasn't close after the opening minutes, with the USA team winning 98–28.
This win set up the gold medal game, with a rematch against Brazil.

The USA team won the rematch with Brazil solidly, 81–38.
Malina Howard, at sixteen years of age, was the second youngest on the team (only Diamond DeShields was younger), but led the entire tournament in field goal percentage, hitting 62.% of her attempts.
Chiney Ogwumike led the USA team in scoring with 13.2 points per game, followed by Bria Hartley, with 10.6 per game.
The head coach of the team was Jennifer Rizzotti of the University of Hartford.

== 2011
USA U19 results ==
After winning the gold in 2010, the USA team was one of the teams selected to play in the 2011 World's Championships.
Prior to the formal start of the tournament, the USA team played an exhibition game against Brazil on June 5, 2011, winning the game
49–37.
The team was finalized following the game, with twelve players identified to compete in the World Championships in Puerto Montt and Puerto Varas, Chile in July.
The USA selection committee chose the team members to represent the USA.
The twelve players selected were:

Jordan Adams (
Mater Dei H.S. / Irvine, Calif.)
Cierra Burdick (Butler H.S. / Matthews, N.C.)
Diamond DeShields (Norcross H.S. / Norcross, Ga.)
Stefanie Dolson (Connecticut / Port Jervis, N.Y.)
Bria Hartley (Connecticut / North Babylon, N.Y.)
Alexis Jones (Irving MacArthur H.S. / Irving, Texas)
Ariel Massengale (Bolingbrook H.S. /
Bolingbrook, Ill.)
Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis
(Mater Dei H.S. / Anaheim, Calif.)
Imani Stafford (Winward H.S. / Los Angeles, Calif.)
Breanna Stewart (Cicero-North Syracuse H.S. / North Syracuse, N.Y.)
Morgan Tuck (Bolingbrook H.S. / Bolingbrook, Ill.)
Elizabeth Williams (Princess Anne H.S. / Virginia Beach, Va.)The opening game for the USA team was against Japan, who started out with a very early lead, 5–2.
The USA team played with what head coach Jennifer Rizzotti called.
"
a lot of intensity".
USA's Bria Hartley tied the game with a three-pointer, and the USA team went on a 20–2 run to take a large lead 22–7.
However, Japan came back, and cut the lead to 27–22 in the second quarter.
The lead was up to 17 points at halftime, but Japan took advantage of a "defensive lapse" in the second half, and cut the lead to eight points.
The margin was still within single digits in the fourth quarter, when the USA team concentrated on defense, and went on a 10–3 run, leading to a final score of 85–63.
Bria Hartley was the leading scorer with 18 points.
Breanna Stewart had a double-double, with 13 points and 13 rebounds.
Ariel Massengale was the assists leader, with five.
The USA team shot 54% from the field, and held the Japanese team to a 28% shooting percentage.
In the next game against Russia, the USA team never trailed, playing with better defensive intensity, according to Coach Rizzotti.
The scoring started slowly, with the score tied at six apiece more than six minutes into the game.
The USA team then went on a 12–1 run, and never relinquished the lead, finishing with a 76–53 win.
Diamond DeShields was the top scorer for the USA team, with 16 points.
The USA team held the Russian team to 26% shooting.
The third game typically determines which teams make it to the medal round, but that wasn't the case in this game.
The Argentine team had been mathematically eliminated, and the USA team was certain to move on, win or lose.
However, both teams played to win, and Argentina took an early lead 7–3.
However, a balanced offense proved too much for the Argentine team.
With eleven of the twelve USA players scoring between five and twelve points, led by Breanna Stewart on 3–3 shooting from the field, the USA team had too much offense and defense.
The USA team held the opposition to under 30% shooting for the third consecutive game, allowing the Argentine team only a 27% shooting percentage.
The USA team won the game 83–49, advancing them to the second round.
The USA team faced its toughest test to date in their match-up against China.
The USA squad began the fourth quarter with a 12-point lead, but the team from China went on to score 31 points in the period.
They started the period with a 12–2 run, cutting the lead to two points.
It remained close, and was a tie game at 72 points apiece with 1:26 left to play.
Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis hit a three-pointer, one of five she hit during the game.
After a score by China, Bria Hartley hit the three to extend the lead to four points.
China responded with a three-pointer, cutting the lead back to a single point.
With a half a minute to go in the game, Hartley passed underneath to Stephanie Dolson, who scored the final points of the game.
China tried to tie the score with a three-pointer, but aggressive defense by Elizabeth Williams forced China to take an off-balance shot.
Hartley rebounded the miss, and the USA team finished with an 80–77 win.
Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis led all scorers with 19 points, followed closely by Bria Hartley with 18.
Stephanie Dolson had 12 points and eight rebounds, while Elizabeth Williams had a game-high nine rebounds.
China shot 50% from beyond the arc, hitting 11 of their 22 three-point attempts.

In the next game, against Italy, the USA team started off strong, opening up a 31–13 lead early.
Coach Rizzotti was happy with the team's intensity, that led to a 90–64 win over Italy.
Cierra Burdick shot 5–7 from the field and hit 8 of 9 free throws to lead the team in scoring with 17 points.
Her nine rebounds were a team high.
The USA team shot well overall, hitting 55% of their shots.
The USA team outrebounded their opponents 44–22.
This win set up a match-up between the USA team and Canada, each coming into the game with spotless (5–0) records.
Canada jumped out to an early 6–0 lead.
Although the USA team closed the gap to 8–6, Canada extended the lead to double digits.
The USA team was plagued by poor shooting, hitting only a third of their shots in the game, and ending up only marginally better, at 36%.
Canada started out shooting well, over 60% in the first quarter, but would end up with a lower shooting percentage than the US at 35%.
However, turnovers would be a key measure, as the USA team turned the ball over 24 times, the most of any game they played so far, leading to more shooting opportunities for the team from Canada.
Ariel Massengale was the only USA player to score in double digits with 17 points.
In contrast, Canada had three double-digit scorers, led by 24 points for Michelle Plouffe.
Canada won the game 64–52.
Both teams were still in medal contention.
The following game was against the team from France.
The USA team started out slowly, hitting only one of their first six shots at the basket.
France pulled out to a 14–5 early lead, hitting two-thirds of their shot attempts in the first quarter, and extended the lead to a 13-point margin during the first half.
The USA team came back, but was still down 30–25 at halftime.
The USA team cut into the lead in the third quarter, but with one quarter to go, France led 49–47.
Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis, who would score nine of her thirteen points in the final quarter, helped the USA take the lead, and the USA team pulled out to an eleven-point lead with just over six minutes to play.
However, France hit consecutive three-pointers as part of a 9–0 run to bring the margin down to two points.
With just over a minute to play, the score was even at 64 points apiece.
Bria Hartley passed to Breanna Stewart, who was fouled going for the basket.
She sank both free throws.
After a turnover by France, Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis scored with 23 seconds to go to give the USA a four-point lead.
France did not score again, and the USA won the game 70–64.The USA opponent in the semi-final game was Brazil.
Each team had a single loss, with the USA losing to Canada, and Brazil losing to France.
The teams traded leads early on, then Brazil moved out to a four-point margin 13–9.
Bria Hartley hit back-to-back three-point attempts to put the USA back in a lead.
Hartley ended up scoring 20 points in the first half, helping the team to a thirteen-point halftime lead.
Brazil cut the lead to five points in the second half, but the USA built the lead back to double digits, was never seriously threatened again, and won the game 82–66.
Hartley was the team's leading scorer with her 20 first-half points, while Ariel Massengale led the team with nine assists.
Breanna Stewart and Cierra Burdick had nine rebounds apiece.
The USA team faced Spain in the Gold medal game.
In the opening minutes, the lead changed several times, until the USA team went on a 14–3 run to open up a 25–12 lead just before the end of the first quarter.
The USA team extended the lead to 15 points by halftime.
The USA team did not have great shooting, with under 40% for the game, but defensively held Spain to under 30%.
USA's Stephanie Dolson said "Last year was an experience of a lifetime because that was qualifying for here.
Then winning the world championship gold medal is so surreal.
Getting up there, getting the gold around your neck, it's a moment you'll never forget".
Dolson was one of the three high-scorers for the game, with 15 points, sharing the honors with Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis, and Elizabeth Williams.
The all-tournament team included two members of the USA squad, Ariel Massengale and Breanna Stewart.

== 2012 U18 results ==
The 2012 FIBA Americas U18 Championship was held in Gurabo, Puerto Rico August 15–19, 2012.
The USA squad underwent training at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida between 28 May and June 1, then re-assembled at the U.S. Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado from the fourth through the twelfth of August.
The training schedules overlapped with the U17 team locations and schedules, so they played a scrimmage against each other on May 31, 2012.
The U17 team led the U18 team for most of the game, but Breanna Stewart took over in the fourth quarter, and the U18 team prevailed
73–66.
The team then traveled to Puerto Rico for the Americas Championship.

===
Preliminary round ===
The twelve qualifying teams are separated into two groups, with four teams in each group.

Group A

Argentina
Columbia
Dominican Republic
USAGroup B

Brazil
Canada
Mexico
Puerto RicoThe first five rounds are played as a round-robin, in which each team plays all three of the other teams in their group.
The preliminary rounds were scheduled for 15—17 August.

The first USA opponent was the Dominican Republic.
Although the score was close in the first quarter, with only a two-point margin by the US at the end of the first quarter, the USA team overcame first-game jitters and scored 31 consecutive points in the second quarter to take an insurmountable lead.
Every team player scored at least five points, with game high scoring honors going to Morgan Tuck.
Michaela Mabrey set a U18 record for the US with ten assists.
The final score was 99–26.The USA team faced Argentina in their second game.
The USA team held Argentina to single digit scoring in each of the four-quarters, to keep the point total for their opponents to 28.
Although the USA team shot only 37% for the game, they hit 44% of their three-point shots.
Breanna Stewart, with 17 points, was one of three double digit scorers, along with Morgan Tuck and Michaela Mowbrey.
Lexie Brown had six blocks.
The final score in favor of the USA was 68–28.The USA team faced Columbia in the third and final match of the preliminary round.
Michaela Mabrey hit five of six three-point attempts to tie a USA U18 record for three-point field goal percentage, set by Candice Wiggins in 2004.
The team shooting was better in this game, with the team hitting 55% of their field goal attempts.
The USA team won 87–36, to finish undefeated in preliminary play, and secure the top seed in the next round.
===
Medal round ===
In their semi-final game, the USA team faced Canada.
Although Canada managed an early 4–2 lead, the USA team quickly took over and led 24–8 at the end of the first quarter.
Morgan Tuck hit nine of her 12 field goal attempts, leading to 22 points, while Breanna Stewart hit 8 of her 11 attempts, leading to 20 points.
The USA won easily, 95–46, which puts the USA team in the gold medal game against undefeated Brazil.
The USA team had played 16 quarters leading to the gold medal game, and had not been out scored in any of them.
That would change in the championship game.
The team from Brazil scored the first six points, and held a 186–7 lead at the end of the first quarter.
Brazil would score the opening two-point of the second period, but the USA team regained its bearings and took over the game.
The USA team outscored Brazil 22–8 in the second period and 21–7 in the third to take a commanding lead.
Four USA players scored in double digits, led by Morgan Tuck with 15.
The final score of the championship was 71–47.Breanna
Stewart won the Tournament MVP award, while Morgan Tuck was the tournament's overall scoring leader at 17.8 points per game.
The USA coach Katie Meier had praise for Stewart, Bashaara Graves, and Tuck, "Those three were workhorses down there".

== 2013
U19 results ==
The USA Basketball team invited 34 players to Colorado Springs for tryouts for the U19 team.
Three coaches, Matt Corkery (American University), Bobbie Kelsey (Wisconsin) and Matilda Mossman (Tulsa) were chosen as court coaches to help the players on court at the tryouts and assist in the selection of the final team.
The coaches who will travel with the team also participate in the training process.
The head coach is Katie Meier (Miami), who will be assisted by Nikki Caldwell (Louisiana State University) and Kelly Graves (Gonzaga University).
As a result of the tryout, the USA organization selected twelve players at the U19 World Championship in Klaipėda and Panevėžys, Lithuania as well as the preliminary event the Lanzarote International Invitational Title, held in the Canary Islands.
The twelve players to represent the USA are:
Candice Agee
Nia Coffey
Bashaara Graves
Gabby Green
Linnae Harper
Moriah Jefferson
Alexis Jones
Kelsey Plum
Breanna Stewart
Morgan Tuck
Brianna Turner
A'ja
Wilson


===
Lanzarote International Invitational Title ===
The opening game of the preliminary event was against Australia.
The Aussies held a four-point lead at halftime 33–29, and extended the lead to seven points 40–33 part way through the third period.
Morgan Tuck, who has scored only two points in the first half scored 11 of the USA's first 13 points in the second half to help cut into the lead, but at the beginning of the fourth quarter, the USA was still four points behind the Aussies.
After swapping baskets, the USA scored twice to tie the game.
Tuck scored a basket to give the USA the lead at 56–55, as part of an 8–2 run by the USA team.
They extended the lead to seven points, and held on for the close 71–66 win.
In the second game, the USA team squared off against the host team, Spain.
Unlike the previous game, the USA pulled out to an early lead and never relinquished it.
Linnae Harper led all scorers with 15 points, en route to a 78–49 win by the USA.
In the final game of the preliminary event, held July 14, the USA team opened up an early lead and held on to win 69–49 to capture the Lanzarote International Invitational title.

===
Lithuania preliminary rounds ===
The teams traveled from the Canary Islands to Lithuania for the remainder of the U19 championship.
The USA team took on Lithuania in the first game of pool play in Group D.
The other teams in Group D are China, with a 2–1 record in the preliminary round, and Mali who were 0–3 in the preliminary round.
Lithuania was 1–2 in the preliminary round.

Four USA players scored in double digits in the game against Lithuania, including Nia Coffey with ten points, Bashaara Graves with 13 points and a tie for a team-high seven rebounds, Morgan Tuck with 18 points and a team high six assists.
The leading scorer was Breanna Stewart, who played 20 minutes but scored 26 points.
Stewart did not miss any of the six field goal attempts she took in the first quarter, and went on to score 19 points in the quarter.
She ended 8 for 8 from the free throw line.
The game was never close, with the USA up by 66 points at the end of the game, with a score of 112–47.The USA team then faced China.
The lead changed several times in the opening quarter, and the quarter ended with a five-point lead by the USA.
China hit a three-pointer to open the second quarter, but then the USA team went on a 12–0 run to open up a larger lead.
The USA held a 44–27 lead at the half.
In the second half the USA put together a string of 17 consecutive points to give the USA a commanding lead.
Six USA players scored in double digits, with Breanna Stewart scoring 20.
A'ja
Wilson had a double-double with 16 points and 10 rebounds, earning praise from head coach Katie Meier, who said, "A double-double in your second international game.
That's very poised, very composed."
The USA won the game 103–56.
In the next game, the USA faced Mali.
Although Mali held a very early 3–2 lead after the first minute, the game result was never in doubt, as the USA team scored 23 consecutive points and led 30–5 early.
The team would go on win 103–26.
The USA had advantages in experience as well as height, with a USA team averaging over six feet per player, while Mail averaged only five feet eight inches per player.
Stewart again was the leading scorer with 17 points.
The USA entered the second round of preliminary play with a game against the Netherlands.
The USA opened with a three-pointer, and never lost the lead.
The team had two runs, one 8–0 and one 16–0 to open up large leads.
The USA won, 102–42.
The leading scorer was the youngest member of the team, Wilson, who had 20 points along with eight rebounds.
Tuck, Jones, Graves and Stewart also scored in double digits.
The next game for the USA team was against Canada.
The team from Canada scored first, and tied the game at three points apiece, but the USA opened up a lead they would never relinquish.
In the second half, the USA opened up a 15-point lead, but Canada cut it back to ten, prompting a timeout.
Shortly after, the USA team out together
an 8–0 run to close the third quarter.
The run continued in the fourth quarter when Stewart scored three consecutive goals, contributing to a run that extended to 19 points.
Alexis Jones was the team's leading scorer, with 17 points.
The USA faced one of the other two remaining unbeaten teams, France, in their next match.
France held a 15–11 lead late in the first quarter, when the USA scored the next eight points to take the lead.
The USA extended the lead several times, but France fought back and kept the game close.
The USA held a six-point lead at halftime.
The third quarter was close, with the USA managing to outscore France by only two points in the period.
Late in the game, the USA was up by twelve points, but France went on a 12–2 run, including six straight points to bring the margin back to two points with under a minute to play.
Then Alexis Jones, who had missed all four of her three-point attempts, took another one and hit to give the USA five-point lead.
France tried to respond with a three-point attempt of their own, but Jones blocked it to seal the win, and preserve the undefeated status of the USA.
The USA team won 69–63 to advance to the quarterfinals.

===
Medal rounds ===
The USA played Japan in the quarterfinals.
The USA had a height advantage, with USA's A'ja Wilson four inches taller than her counterpart.
She took advantage of the mismatch, scoring a team high 19 points.
The game was reasonable close in the opening minutes, with the USA leading 12–9, but the USA gradually extended the lead.
At halftime, the score was 51–32.
The USA used their height advantage on the boards, out-rebounding
Japan 70–32,
setting a new record for rebounds by a USA U19 team.
The prior record of 68 was held by the 2007 squad.
The final score was 108–67.The semi-final match was against Australia, a team they had played in the Canary Islands as part of the Lanzarote International Invitational Title.
The USA had won the game, but it was close up until the end of the game.
In the semi-final game, the Aussies started strong.
The score was tied on several occasions early, and the Australian team led the low-scoring game 20–17 with six minutes to go in the half.
Then Breanna Stewart took over, scoring nine consecutive points herself to start a 21–0 run to end the half.
At that time, the USA had pushed to a 28–20 lead.
The Aussies did not quit, and played close to even in the third period, but they did not make up any ground.
The final period was also close, with the USA team slightly outscoring the Aussies, but by the end of the game, the lead was 13 points and the USA won
77–54.The championship game was a rematch against France, a team the USA had played in the preliminary round, winning by just six points.
France scored first, and a few minutes into the game, the score was tied at six points each.
However, the USA then went on an 11–2 run to open up a double-digit lead.
The game was roughly even from then until the end of the half, with France cutting into the lead slightly.
The USA led at halftime 27–20.
Earlier in the day, Spain held a 14-point halftime lead over Australia in the Bronze medal game, but could not hold on to the lead, so no one was thinking that a seven-point lead was safe.
The second half was all USA.
The USA started on a 10–0 run, and would end up surrendering only eight points in the second half.
France ended up shooting under 22% from the field, and the USA would go on to win the game and the gold medal by a score of 61–28.
Stewart was the high scorer for the team with 16 points, and also set a U19 all-time record for scoring with 152 points, which put her ahead of Maya Moore, who scored 147 in 2007.
Alexis Jones had 29 assists during the tournament, tying an all-time U18 record established by Ariel Massengale.
Stewart was named the MVP of the tournament and named to the all-tournament team.

== 2014
U18 results ==
The 2014 FIBA Americas U18 Championship was held in Colorado Springs, Colorado from August 6–10.

The USA team's opening game was against Mexico.
The USA team started strong and had an early 14–2 lead.
Mexico scored the next five points, but late in the first period, the USA started an 18–0 run that continued into the second period.
All USA players scored in a 104–55 win.
The second game was against El Salvador.
The team from El Salvador held an early lead, 5–2, but from then on the USA was the dominant team.
Eight of the USA team players recorded double-digit points, while the team hit 68% of their field goal attempts.
The USA went on to win easily, 118–50.
Game 3 was against undefeated Canada.
The team from Canada pulled out to a narrow 23–21 lead at the end of the first quarter.
The USA team took the lead in the second quarter and gradually extended the lead, finishing the game with a score of 107–76 Napheesa Collier was the leading scorer, recording a double-double with 22 points and 10 rebounds.
Briana Turner scored 21
points and set a U18 record, hitting nine of eleven free throw attempts.
The win secured a spot in the semi-final game against Argentina.
The semi-final match was against Argentina.
The game was never close.
The USA team held Argentina to 8 points in the first and second periods, while scoring 30 and 26 respectively.
While Argentina out scored the US in the third quarter, the game was largely decided by that point.
The USA finished with a win, 97–51, to advance to the gold medal game.
The gold medal game was a re-match with Canada.
Although Canada scored first and stayed close for a few minutes, with a score at 10–8 halfway through the first period, the USA went on a 12–0 run to take command.
Canada got the margin back to eleven at one point, but the USA team extended the lead to 18 points by halftime.
The USA won the game and the gold medal by a score of 104–75.
A'ja
Wilson was the leading scorer with 25 points, and led all rebounders with 11.

== 2015 U19 results ==
The 2015 FIBA Under-19 World Championship for Women was held in Chekhov, Russia from July 8 to 26, 2015.In
the opening game of the preliminary rounds the USA faced Spain.
Both Napheesa Collier and A'ja Wilson recorded double doubles, with Collier scoring 13 points and a game-high 14 rebounds, while Wilson recorded a game-high 18 points along with 10 rebounds.
Their performances help the team when the opening game 72–57.
The following day, the USA play China.
Wilson again recorded a double double with 17 points and 10 rebounds.
Collier also scored 17 points, while Azurá Stevens and Shakayla Thomas contributed 16 points and 11 points respectively.
The USA won the game
88–62.
While there is one game remaining in preliminary play, the USA has already locked up the number one seed in group B.
After a day off, the USA faced Egypt in the final game of the preliminary rounds.
The USA started out slowly and were down 7–6 early in the game.
The USA got untracked in the second quarter outscoring Egypt 38–9, to take a commanding lead.
They went on to win easily 104 – 41.
Every player on the USA's squad scored, with double digit results for Moore, Thomas, Wilson, Cox and Stevens.
In the round of 16 the USA faced Argentina.
The game was never close.
The USA had a 28–4 lead at the end of the first quarter, and coasted to win 89–39
when to advance to the quarterfinals.
Wilson was the leading scorer with 18 points while Collier, Moore and Stevens each scored 11 points.
Moore and Gabbi Ortiz share the lead for assist with six piece.
After a day off, the USA played Canada in the quarterfinals.
The USA scored the first 11 points of the game, and led 28–5 at the end of the first quarter.
Every player on the team scored with game-high honors going to Collier and Moore each with 12 points.
Cox led the team in rebounds with 10.
The USA won 93–45 to advance to the semi-final game.
The USA played Spain in the semi-finals, a team they had beaten earlier in preliminary play.
Collier and Wilson each recorded a double double.
Collier scored 24 points on 10 of 13 shooting from the field.
Wilson had 20 points and led the team in rebounds with 16.
The USA team lead throughout the game and ended up with the win 80–65.
The win advanced the team to the finals against the host team Russia.
The gold-medal game matched up undefeated Russia (6–0) versus the US, who were also undefeated (6–0).
The Russians started off strong, and opened up an eight-point lead at 27–19 in the second quarter.
They led through most of the second quarter but late in the second quarter Stevens scored to give the US a lead 35–34
and Wilson had back to back buckets as part of a 9–0 run to take a 39–34 lead at halftime.
In the second half, the USA led most of the way
but Russia kept the game close and was within a basket at 68–65.
The USA then went on a 7–0 run to open up a 10-point lead with under three minutes to go.
Russia scored five quick points to cut the lead but Collier scored and Russia was unable to come back.
The USA won 78–70
to win the gold-medal for the event.
Wilson scored 30 points to set a USA record for a U19 game.
That performance helped her earn the MVP award for the event.
She along with teammate Collier were named to the five player all-tournament squad.

== 2016
U18 results ==
The 2016 FIBA Americas U18 Championship was held in Valdivia, Chile July 13–17, 2016.
In May 2016, the USA Basketball organization selected 30 players to attend Team Trials at the Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado.
After three days of trials, twelve players were selected to represent the US at the Americas championship.
The twelve players representing the USA were:

Jeannie Boehm
Rellah Boothe
Chennedy Carter
Sidney Cooks
Lauren Cox
Dana Evans
Tyasha Harris
Ruthy Hebard
Valerie Higgins
Amber Ramirez
Megan Walker
Evina
WestbrookThe team members returned to the training center in July to continue training for the competition, including scrimmages against the Japan Women's U24 National Team.
The opening game was against Guatemala.
The USA team took advantage of a 7-inch average height differential to overpower the Guatemala team.
The USA team scored the first 14 points of the game and cruised to an easy 117–32 victory.
The second game, against Brazil, was much more competitive especially at the beginning.
USA was down 8–2 in the early minutes.
The game was tied at 13 points apiece when the USA went on a run to take a nine-point lead at the end of the first quarter.
The second half started like the first with Brazil scoring the first six points of the half in cutting the lead to six points before the USA expanded the lead.
While the USA only scored 20 points in the final quarter their defense held Brazil to 16, leading to a final score in favor the US, 80–59.The USA had a relatively easy time in the final preliminary match against Venezuela, more than doubling up the score, and winning 110–52.
That victory place them into the semi-finals against Puerto Rico, and the results were even more lopsided.
The USA one easily 104–36.
That set up the gold-medal game against Canada.
The USA had only a three-point margin at the end of the first quarter extended that
in the second quarter but put the game away in the third quarter when they outscored Canada 33–14.
The final score the championship game was 109–62.Lauren Cox from Flower Mound, Texas was named the tournament MVP.

==
Coaches and results ==
Head coaches, assistant coaches and managers for the U18 and U19 teams, through 2016.
==
Players ==
Players participating on U18 and U19 teams, 1985 through 2016.

== See also ==
USA Basketball
United States women's national basketball team
United States women's national under-17 basketball team
USA Women's Pan American Team
USA Women's World University Games Team
United States
women's national 3x3 team
FIBA Under-19 World Championship for Women
FIBA Americas Under-18 Championship for Women
United States men's national basketball team
United States
men's national under-19 basketball team
United States
men's national under-17 basketball team


==
Notes ==


==
External links ==
Official site
U19
Official site U18
Official site 2009 FIBA U19 World Championship for Women
U19 media Guide
Ryan Smith (born September 7, 1993) is an American football cornerback for the Los Angeles Chargers of the National Football League (NFL).
He was drafted by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in the fourth round of the 2016 NFL Draft.
He played college football for the North Carolina Central Eagles.

==
Early life ==
Ryan Smith was born in Germany on September 7, 1993 to parents Damon and Traci Richardson, and raised in Clinton, Maryland, where he spent the majority of his childhood.
He moved to Upper Marlboro, Maryland in high school, where he attended Dr. Henry A. Wise, Jr. High School.
His younger brother Tre Smith played defense at NCCU with him.
In high school, Smith was a dual athlete playing football and basketball.
He made up in his mind that football was the more logical sport to pursue in order to help his family pay for his college tuition.
In a press conference shortly after he was drafted, Smith stated that if his plans of playing in the NFL hadn't come true, he would have joined the United States Marshals Service.

==
College career ==
Smith attended North Carolina Central University (NCCU) from 2012 to 2015, playing in 45 games and starting 42.
He set multiple team records for solo tackles (168) and kickoff return yard average (28.1).
On top of that among NCCU career leaders, Smith finished sixth in tackles (263) and tied for 11th in passes defended with 31 (7 interceptions, 24 pass break-ups).

In his freshman season, he was redshirted and played in all 11 games, starting 8 of them.
Smith ended his freshman season as NCCU’s second-leading tackler with 65 total takedowns, second with three interceptions and third with eight passes defended (three interceptions, five pass break-ups).
Smith was selected to the College Sports Journal Football Championship Subdivision Freshman All-America team.
Smith started all 12 games in his redshirt sophomore season.
He ranked second on the Eagles and 19th in the MEAC with 88 total tackles (51 solo).
He was also ranked number one on the team and ranked fourth in the MEAC with 3 fumble recoveries.
In his redshirt junior campaign, he started all 12 games making the switch from safety to cornerback in his redshirt junior season.
Smith tallied 58 total tackles and a team second-best 44 solo tackles.
He was voted to the Preseason All-MEAC Third Team.
As a redshirt senior, Smith started in 10 of 11 games as a cornerback, only missing the game against the Bethune-Cookman Wildcats.
He ended the year ranking third in the MEAC with a team-best 11 passes defended (two interceptions and nine pass break-ups), and a total of 52 tackles (ranking second on the team with 38 solo tackles).
Smith led the conference and ranked 10th in the nation with an average of 28.1 yards per kickoff return (14 for 394 yards, 1 touchdown).

==
Professional career ==


===
Tampa Bay Buccaneers ===


====
2016 ====
The Tampa Bay Buccaneers selected Smith in the fourth round with the 108th overall pick in the 2016 NFL Draft.
Smith was the 18th cornerback drafted in 2016.

On May 5, 2016, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers signed Smith to a four-year, $2.93 million contract with a signing bonus of $592,161.The Buccaneers immediately converted Smith to safety.
Throughout training camp, Smith competed for a job as a backup safety against Isaiah Johnson, Kimario McFadden, and Elijah Shumate.
Head coach Dirk Koetter named Smith the backup free safety, behind Bradley McDougald, to begin the regular season.
On September 25, 2016, Smith made his professional regular season debut as the Buccaneers lost 37–32 against the Los Angeles Rams in Week 3.
In Week 9, he recorded his only tackle of the season during a 43–28 loss against the Atlanta Falcons.
He finished his rookie season in 2016 with one tackle in 14 games and zero starts.

==== 2017
====
Following the 2016 season, the Buccaneers announced that Smith would be moved back to cornerback.
During training camp, Smith competed to be the third cornerback on the depth chart against Javien Elliott, Jude Adjei-Barimah, Robert McClain, and Josh Robinson.
Head coach Dirk Koetter named Smith the third cornerback on the depth chart to begin the regular season, behind Brent Grimes and Vernon Hargreaves.
On September 24, 2017, Smith earned his first career start in place of Brent Grimes who was sidelined due to a shoulder injury.
Smith finished the Buccaneers’ 34–17 loss at the Minnesota Vikings with three solo tackles and one pass deflection.
Smith started another two games in place of Grimes (Weeks 8–9) after Grimes re-injured his shoulder.
In Week 9, he collected a season-high nine combined tackles during a 30–10 loss at the New Orleans Saints.
In Week 10, Grimes became a starting cornerback for the remainder of the season after Vernon Hargrove suffered a hamstring injury and was subsequently placed on injured reserve on December 20, 2017.
On November 26, 2017, Smith made a season-high eight solo tackles during a 34–20 loss at the Atlanta Falcons in Week 12.
Smith was inactive for the Buccaneers’ Week 16 loss at the Carolina Panthers due to an ankle injury, but returned for the last game of the season the following week.
He finished the 2017 NFL season with 62 combined tackles (51 solo), five pass deflections, and two forced fumbles in 15 games and ten starts.

==== 2018
====
Smith attempted to retain his role as a starting cornerback during training camp, but saw heavy competition from Vernon Hargreaves and the Buccaneers’ second round picks in the 2018 NFL Draft, M. J. Stewart and Carlton Davis.
Head coach Dirk Koetter named Smith the fourth cornerback on the depth chart to start the regular season, behind Brent Grimes, Vernon Hargreaves, and Carlton Davis.
In Week 2, Smith collected a season-high nine combined tackles and made two pass deflections during a 27–21 victory against the Philadelphia Eagles.
On November 25, 2018, Smith broke up a pass attempt and made his first career interception as the Buccaneers defeated the San Francisco 49ers
27–9
in Week 12.
Smith intercepted a pass by quarterback Nick Mullens, that was initially intended for wide receiver Dante Pettis, during the fourth quarter.
Smith finished the season with 38 combined tackles (31 solo), five pass deflections, and one interception in 16 games and six starts.

==== 2019
====
On July 10, 2019 it was announced Smith had been suspended for the first four games of the 2019 season for violating the NFL performance-enhancing substances policy.
He was reinstated from suspension on September 30, and activated prior to Week 5.
====
2020 ====
On March 30, 2020, Smith was re-signed by the Buccaneers.
Smith played in all four games in the Buccaneers' playoff run that resulted in the team winning Super Bowl LV.
===
Los Angeles Chargers ===
On March 30, 2021, Smith signed with the Los Angeles Chargers.

==
Personal life ==
Smith is a member of Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity.

==
Reference list ==


==
External links ==
NFL Scouting Combine profile
Tampa Bay Buccaneers bio
NCCU Eagles bio
Joshua Winslow Groban (born February 27, 1981) is an American singer, songwriter, musician, actor, and record producer.
His first four solo albums have been certified multi-platinum, and he was charted in 2007 as the number-one best selling artist in the United States, with over 22.3 million records.
As of 2012, he had sold over 25 million records worldwide.
Groban originally studied acting, but moved to singing as his voice developed.
Groban attended the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts, a free public school on the campus of California State University, Los Angeles, where students receive a conservatory-style education.
David Foster called Groban to stand in for an ailing Andrea Bocelli to rehearse a duet, "The Prayer", with Celine Dion at the rehearsal for the 1998 Grammy Awards.
Rosie O'Donnell immediately invited him to appear on her talk show.
Foster asked him to sing at the California Governor's Gray Davis' 1999 inauguration.
He was cast on Ally McBeal by the show's creator, David E. Kelley, performing "You're Still You" for the 2001 season four finale.
In 2016, he made his Broadway debut as Pierre Bezukhov in Natasha, Pierre & The Great Comet of 1812, to critical acclaim and a Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical nomination.
His performance at the 72nd Tony Awards earned him two Primetime Emmy nominations, one for Outstanding Live Variety Special and one for Original Music and Lyrics for the song "
This One's for You".
Groban co-starred as Tony Caruso Jr. in the Netflix original series, The Good Cop.
Groban was also the host of Rising Star, he also appeared in the films, Coffee Town, Muppets Most Wanted, The Hollars and Crazy, Stupid, Love.
He also appeared on TV such as Danny Chase in The Crazy Ones, as well as Walter Bernard Jr in The Office.

==
Early life ==
Groban was born in Los Angeles, California, to Jack Groban, a businessman, and Lindy Groban (née Johnston), a school teacher.
His father is a descendant of Jewish immigrants from Poland and Ukraine, and converted from Judaism to Christianity upon marrying his mother.
His mother's ancestry includes English, German, and Norwegian; one of her own grandfathers had also been Jewish.
His parents are Episcopalians.

Groban first sang in public when he was in the seventh grade.
His music teacher chose him to sing a solo of "S'wonderful" at the school's cabaret night, where he sang alone on stage for the first time.
At this time, he was more focused on acting, playing Tevye in his high school's production of Fiddler on the Roof.
In the summers of 1997 and 1998, he also attended the Interlochen Center for the Arts Camp in Michigan, majoring in musical theater, and began taking vocal lessons.
He went on to attend the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts as a theater major and graduated in 1999.
He was admitted to and briefly attended Carnegie Mellon University, intent on studying musical theater.
Four months into his first semester, Groban was offered a recording contract and left college to pursue a singing career.

==
Music career ==


===
1997–2001:
Debut ===
In late 1997, the 16-year-old Groban was introduced by his vocal coach, Seth Riggs, to Grammy-winning producer and arranger David Foster and future manager Brian Avnet.
At the time, Groban had no recording experience and was preparing for his studies at Carnegie Mellon.
Groban worked for David Foster as a rehearsal singer on a series of high-profile events, including the January 1999 California gubernatorial inauguration of Gray Davis and the 1999 Grammy Awards where—as a stand-in for Andrea Bocelli—he rehearsed Foster's "The Prayer" with Céline Dion.
According to Avnet, Groban was very nervous about standing in for Bocelli and had to be talked into it; his performance prompted the show hostess, Rosie O'Donnell, to ask him to appear on her show the following week, which in turn led to an appearance on Ally McBeal.
Creator David E. Kelley wrote the character Malcolm Wyatt for Groban in the season finale, aired in May 2001.
Groban as Malcolm Wyatt was so popular that the show received upwards of 8,000 emails from viewers; thereafter, Groban was asked to return the next season to reprise his role as Wyatt and to perform "To Where You Are".
Avnet claims this sequence of events effectively got Groban's career off the ground.
Groban was offered a recording contract at Warner Bros. Records through Foster's 143 Records imprint.
Avnet told HitQuarters that Warner Bros. initially proved resistant to the deal because "They were afraid they wouldn't be able to get a voice like that on radio.
"
Explaining his reasons for signing the artist, Foster said: "I love his natural ability in the pop and rock arena, but I love his sense of classics even more.
He's a true musical force to be reckoned with.
"
Under Foster's influence, Groban's first album focused more on classics such as "Gira Con Me Questa Notte" and "Alla Luce Del Sole".

Groban performed "There For Me" with Sarah Brightman on her 2000–01 La Luna World Tour, and was featured on her "La Luna" concert DVD.
He recorded "For Always" with Lara Fabian for the movie soundtrack of A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001).
Groban performed in many benefit shows, including "The Andre Agassi Grand Slam Event For Children," alongside Elton John, Stevie Wonder, Don Henley, and Robin Williams; "Muhammad Ali's Fight Night Foundation" which honored Michael J. Fox and others; "The Family Celebration" (2001), which was co-hosted by President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton, and David E. Kelley and Michelle Pfeiffer; and Michael Milken's CapCure event, which raised funds for cancer research.

His self-titled debut album Josh Groban was released on November 20, 2001.
Over the next year it went from gold to double-platinum.

=== 2002–2005:
Closer ===
On February 24, 2002, Groban performed "The Prayer" with Charlotte Church at the closing ceremonies of the Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, and by November, he had his own PBS special titled "Josh Groban In Concert" (2002).
In December 2002, he performed "To Where You Are" and sang "The Prayer" in a duet with Sissel Kyrkjebø at the Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo, Norway.
He joined The Corrs, Ronan Keating, Sting, Lionel Richie, and others for a Christmas performance at the Vatican.
In 2003, Groban performed at the David Foster concert for World Children's Day, singing "The Prayer" with Celine Dion and the finale song, "Aren't They All Our Children?"
with artists including Yolanda Adams, Nick Carter, Enrique Iglesias, and Celine Dion.

Groban's second album Closer, produced and written by Foster, was released on November 11, 2003.
Groban said he believed that his second album was a better reflection of him, and that his audience would be able to get a better idea of his personality from listening to it.
What most people know about me, they know through my music.
This time, I've tried to open that door as wide as possible.
These songs are a giant step closer to who I really am and what my music is all about.
Hence the title.

Two months after Closer was released, it rose on the Billboard charts from number 11 to number one.
Groban's cover of "You Raise Me Up" became his third most popular song on the adult contemporary charts as of March 2004.
Later that year, he also performed the song "Remember" (with Tanja Tzarovska) on the Troy soundtrack, "Believe" on the soundtrack to the 2004 animated film The Polar Express and a cover of Linkin Park's "My December".

In the summer of 2004, Groban returned to Interlochen, performing and discussing his earlier experiences with local residents and campers.
On November 30, 2004, his second live DVD, Live At The Greek, was released; it was also shown as a Great Performances special on PBS.
That same year, Groban performed "Remember When It Rained", backed by a full orchestra, at the American Music Awards, where he was nominated for Favorite Male Artist in the pop category; he was also nominated for a People's Choice Award.
His recording of "Believe" secured an Academy Award nomination in 2005 for the songwriters Glen Ballard and Alan Silvestri, and earned them a Grammy in the category
Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media at the ceremony held in February 2006.

===
2005–2010:
Awake ===
Groban earned his first Grammy nomination in 2005 for his single
"You Raise Me Up" in the Best Male Pop Vocal Performance category.
During the first week of September 2006, Groban's single entitled "You Are Loved (Don't Give Up)" was released exclusively on AOL's First Listen.
His third studio album
Awake was officially released on November 7, 2006.
Groban performed "You Are Loved (Don't Give Up)" as well as two other tracks from Awake at his recording session for Live from Abbey Road at Abbey Road Studios on 26 October 2006.
On that album, Groban also collaborated on the single "Now or Never" with British musician and songwriter Imogen Heap.
He performed two tracks with the South African group Ladysmith Black Mambazo, "Lullaby" and "Weeping".

Groban's "Awake" world tour visited 71 cities between February and August 2007, and toured Australia and the Philippines with Lani Misalucha as his special guest in October 2007.
He performed a duet with Barbra Streisand ("All I Know of Love") and with Mireille Mathieu ("Over the Rainbow").
As to his future, Groban was open to a plethora of possibilities.
He said, "I am fortunate enough to have had many really big moments in my career.
I think the mistake a lot of people in my position make is to always search for the next big thing.
I am looking forward to playing some small theaters.
I'm looking forward to writing more.
I want to delve further into my acting career and explore some of the film and TV opportunities that I haven't had time for.
My outlook is to expect the unexpected.
And when the next step comes, I'm prepared to take it."

=== 2010–2015
: Illuminations; All That Echoes ===
Groban finished his fifth studio album, entitled Illuminations, and the album was released on November 15, 2010.
Most of the songs on the album are about "specific situations that I've had where love has existed and ultimately failed," Groban told The New York Times, adding: "And other songs are about the quest, and it just not working out."
Groban wrote 11 of the 13 songs on the album.
The first single from the album, "Hidden Away", was made available for free download via Facebook on September 8.
"
For me to sit in a room with a piano in one take with some of Johnny Cash's musicians—that was totally new for me."
Josh added.
"
and I think that excitement is on the record."
On October 12, a second single from the upcoming album, "Você Existe
Em
Mim", was made available on iTunes.
This song is sung in Portuguese and was written by Brazilian artist Carlinhos Brown.
The Washington Post said: "Illuminations" is not a revelation, but it offers a perfectly fine, and often quite lovely, glimpse at a pop-classical crossover artist in the middle of crossing over."
Groban plans on making one more record with Rick Rubin.
Beginning May 12, 2011 and continuing through December of that year, Groban undertook the 81-city Straight to You Tour to promote Illuminations, encompassing appearances in North America, Europe, and South Africa.
Groban's sixth studio album, All That Echoes, was released on February 5, 2013, debuting at number one by selling 141,000 copies.
Groban promoted the album with the All That Echoes World Tour in 2013.
A year later, he embarked on his Summer Symphony Tour.

=== 2015–2017:
Stages and Broadway debut ===
In early March 2015, Josh Groban's Facebook page announced the release of the album Stages, consisting of covers of songs from Broadway musicals.
The album was released on April 28, 2015.Starting October 18, 2016, Groban performed on Broadway as Pierre Bezukhov in Natasha, Pierre & The Great Comet of 1812, an electropop opera by composer Dave Malloy based on War and Peace.
For his performance as Pierre, Groban was nominated for the 2017 Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical.
His final performance as Pierre was on July 2, 2017.
Groban also performed the song "Evermore" during the end credits of the 2017 Disney film Beauty and the Beast.

=== 2018
: Bridges ===
On March 12, 2018, tour dates were announced for Groban's Bridges Tour with special guest Idina Menzel.
The US leg of the tour began on October 18, 2018, in Duluth, Georgia and concluded at Madison Square Garden in New York City on November 18.
The European leg of the tour began on December 12 at the O2 Arena in London and concluded on December 18 in Poland.
On June 26, 2018, Groban announced via social media that his album Bridges would be released on September 21 and would contain a cover of Céline Dion's song "S'il suffisait d'aimer" along with new tracks.
The album debuted at number two in the US and in the top 10 in the UK and Scotland.

===
2020: Harmony ===
On August 17, 2020, Groban's album Harmony was announced to release in November 2020.
Groban will also offer a virtual livestreamed concert series in the fall and winter of 2020.
On October 2, the album was announced to be released on November 20, 2020.

The album is now available in all the platforms from the regular to deluxe edition.

== Performances ==
In June 2007, Groban recorded a Christmas album in London with the London Symphony Orchestra and the Magdalen College Choir, which he discussed on the DVD from "The Making of Noël".
It was released on October 9, 2007, and is titled Noël.
The album has been highly successful in the U.S., breaking numerous records for a Christmas album, as well as becoming the best selling album of 2007 in only its tenth week of release, at sales of 3.6 million.
On July 1, 2007, Groban performed with Sarah Brightman at the Concert for Diana at Wembley Stadium; it was broadcast to over 500 million homes in 140 countries.
On February 10, 2008, Groban performed at the 2008 Grammy Awards with Andrea Bocelli in a tribute to Luciano Pavarotti.

On April 14, 2008, Groban joined Idina Menzel for a PBS Soundstage taping.
The next day, he held his own taping for the same PBS TV series at Lincoln Center's Rose Hall at Jazz in Manhattan.

On May 12 and 13, 2008, at Royal Albert Hall, London,  Groban performed as "The Russian" Anatoly Sergievsky with Broadway stars Idina Menzel and Adam Pascal in "Chess in Concert" a live concert version of the musical Chess composed by Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus of ABBA fame.
This performance has since been made into a DVD and CD recording.
On September 21, 2008, Groban performed a comical medley of well-known TV theme songs at the 60th Annual Primetime Emmy Awards.
In December 2008, Groban appeared on Never Mind the Buzzcocks.
He performed a duet with Only Men Aloud!
at the Royal Variety Show at the London Palladium for the Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall.
On January 18, 2009, Groban performed as part of the Presidential Inauguration ceremonies, performing "My Country 'Tis of Thee" in duet with Heather Headley.
On January 19, 2009, Groban performed with Herbie Hancock as part of Feeding America's Rally Against Hunger in Washington DC.
At the 2010 BCS National Championship Game, he performed the Star Spangled Banner on January 7, 2010 with Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea at the historic Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California.

==
Film and television appearances ==
Groban has appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show six times, as well as on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, Larry King Live, The Rosie O'Donnell Show, Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!,
Comedy Bang!
Bang!
,
The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, 20/20,
Today, Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, Super Bowl XXXVIII, and Jimmy Kimmel Live!.
He has also been a guest co-host on Live with Kelly many times from 2011 to 2016, and was a finalist to permanently replace Regis Philbin.
In a 2012 interview, Groban said: Music is so 100 percent for me that the idea of giving that up in any way, shape, or form would be terrifying to me.
That said, I've had more fun doing it than many things I've done in the past—it was a great time.
So yeah, maybe, you never know.

Groban plays Malcolm Wyatt, one of Reverend Harris' choirboys, on Ally McBeal,
episodes "The Wedding" and "Nine One One" (2001).
He has made two guest appearances on the series Glee as himself.
Groban appeared on BBC Two's hit British music quiz
Never Mind the Buzzcocks, and his first appearance was as a guest on Omid Djalili's team.
On December 21, 2010, he returned to the show, this time as guest host/quiz master and ending the show duetting with Michael Ball in a version of "I Dreamed a Dream" from Les Misérables.

Groban appears in two episodes of The Office as Andy Bernard's brother ("Garden Party" and "The Boat").On
May 24, 2011
, Groban appeared as a mystery guest star on the season 12 finale of Dancing with the Stars to surprise Petra Němcová by singing "You Raise Me Up" to her dance.
When she saw that it was he who was actually singing and not one of the usual performers, she momentarily was too stunned to continue dancing.

In the comedy Crazy, Stupid, Love, a film starring Steve Carell and Ryan Gosling, released on July 29, 2011, Groban played a character named Richard, a caddish and nerdy attorney.
In 2012, he appeared in episode 5 of series 12 of the revived British comedy panel show Room 101.
In October the same year, his cover of "You Raise Me Up" was used in the Halloween-based teen comedy film, Fun Size, in which Peng turns on the car stereo in Roosevelt's car and while he and Roosevelt are fighting over it, the knob breaks and the stereo blares the song at full volume, thus making Roosevelt, Wren, Peng and April uncool as they roll onto a night-cruising street.
In February 2013, Groban appeared in CSI:
NY's "Blood Actually" (season 9, episode 16), performing his new song "Happy
In My Heartache", and guest anchored on Canada AM.Also in 2013, he played one of the lead characters named Sam in the independent comedy film Coffee Town, produced by CollegeHumor and co-starring with longtime friend and actor Glenn Howerton.

Groban appeared on the cable television comedy series
It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia in episode
"The Gang Saves the Day",
the 100th of the series, also co-starring Howerton.
He shows up in the character Dee's fantasy sequence.
On November 7, 2013, he made the first of several appearances in the CBS comedy
The Crazy Ones alongside Robin Williams and Sarah Michelle Gellar.
Groban appeared in the 2014 film Muppets Most Wanted as an unnamed prisoner in a maximum security prison in Siberia.
Groban's character is first only heard, as he is in a large metal box with a small slot at around eye level.
The actor is revealed in the musical number "Together Again" later at the end of the film.
He appeared in cameo roles in the seventh season of Parks and Recreation (2015) and in Crazy Ex-Girlfriend (as himself); in the latter, he sang the original song "
The End of the Movie".

In September 2018 Netflix premiered an original murder-mystery, The Good Cop, starring Groban.
In the series, created by Monk creator-writer Andy Breckman, Groban portrays NYPD homicide detective Tony Caruso Jr., opposite Tony Danza, who plays his father, Tony Sr.,
a disgraced former detective.
The first season of ten episodes launched on September 21, 2018.
==
Voice ==
Various music critics have described Groban's voice in different ways, with some referring to him as a tenor and others as a baritone.
In performance, Groban's music goes as low as G2 (as in the songs "To Where You Are", "Higher Window", and "The World We Knew (Over and Over)") and extends up to at least B4 (as heard in "The Duel" from Natasha, Pierre & The Great Comet of 1812).
This places his voice lower than the usual tenor range on the low end
(although still within the vocal fry register of a tenor), and just short of tenor C, and therefore above the baritone range, on the high end.
There is no authoritative system of voice classification in non-classical music.
The problem lies in the fact that classical terms are used to describe not merely various vocal ranges, but specific vocal timbres each unique to those respective ranges, and produced by the classical training techniques with which most popular singers are not intimately familiar and which are not universally employed by the few that are.
In a 2002 New York Times article, Groban described himself as a "tenor in training".
He mentioned during his appearance on Late Show with David Letterman in December 2013 that he is a high lyric baritone.
On Twitter, in March 2012, he had also mentioned that he is a baritone "with some high notes up my sleeve."
==
Philanthropy ==
Under the guidance of his mentor David Foster, Groban performed for many charity events that included VH1 Save the Music Foundation (2005),
Tsunami Aid:
A Concert of Hope (2005), Fifth Annual Adopt-A-Minefield concert (2005), 2nd Annual Grammy Jam (2005)
, Live 8 (2005),
The Heart Foundation Gala (2005), and David Foster and Friends Charity Gala (2006).
He also sang a solo on the recording of We
Are The World 25 for Haiti (2010).
Inspired by a visit with Nelson Mandela during a 2004 trip to South Africa, he established the Josh Groban Foundation to help children in need through education, healthcare and the arts.
Mandela appointed Groban as an Official Ambassador for Mandela's Project 46664, a campaign to help raise Global awareness of HIV/AIDS in Africa.
On April 25, 2007, Groban performed with the African Children's Choir on American Idol's "Idol Gives Back" episode.
Also on September 2, 2007, Groban donated $150,000 to Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools to fund music education.
On February 28, 2008, he appeared in One Night Live at the Air Canada Centre in Toronto, Canada with Bryan Adams, Sarah McLachlan, Jann Arden and RyanDan in aid of the Sunnybrook Hospital Women and Babies Program.
In honor of his 27th birthday, his fans set out to raise $27,000 in a project called "Raise 27".
They ended up raising a total of $44,227 for the Josh Groban Foundation, to benefit the Noah's Ark children's orphanage called Siyawela in South Africa.
Groban has since referred to this donation as "the best birthday present ever".
Groban performed at The Angel Ball on October 21, 2010 to benefit the Gabrielles Angel Foundation for cancer research.
In April 2013 and the previous year, Groban took part in Global Poverty Project's "Live Below the Line" campaign, which consists in living on $1.50 a day to raise awareness of extreme poverty around the world.
He also wrote a song inspired by the campaign.
On October 30, 2013, Groban met with Little Kids Rock students in Newark, New Jersey before his concert at the Prudential Center.
His Find
Your Light Foundation also made a donation to Little Kids Rock to support their mission of keeping music education in our public schools.
An active arts education philanthropist and advocate, Groban is a member of Americans for the Arts Artists Committee.
On January 17, 2021 three days before the Inauguration of Joe Biden Groban performed at a "indoguration" for Joe Biden's Major organized by the Delaware Humane Association more than 7,400 people attended via Zoom
and the event also raised $200,000 in donations for the association.

==
Impact ==
Some of Groban's musical influences have been Radiohead, Steve Perry, Paul Simon, Sting, Peter Gabriel, Freddie Mercury and Björk.
He cites as vocal influences "anyone who told a story with their songs," including Mandy Patinkin, Klaus Nomi, George Hearn, and Luciano Pavarotti.
He was named the Best Selling Artist of All Time on Barnes & Noble in 2007.
Groban has sold more than 20 million albums in less than ten years.
In 2002, Groban was listed as "100 Sexiest Newcomer" and in 2008, he became one of People's "100 Most Beautiful People".

==
Discography ==
Studio albumsJosh
Groban (2001)
Closer (2003)
Awake (
2006)
Noël (2007)
Illuminations (2010)
All That Echoes (2013)
Stages (2015)
Bridges (2018)
Harmony (2020)


==
Concert tours ==
Headlining
Closer Tour (2004–05)
Awake Tour (2007)
Straight to You Tour (2011)
All That Echoes World Tour (2013)
Josh Groban on Stage
(2015–16)
Bridges
Tour (2018)Symphonic
All That Echoes Symphony Tour (2013)
Summer Symphony Tour (2014)Promotional
Before We Begin (2010)


==
Personal life ==
Groban dated actress January Jones from 2003 to 2006 and Kat Dennings from 2014 to 2016.
Groban has been dating actress and writer Schuyler Helford since 2017.

==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


===
Theatre ===


==
Awards and nominations ==


===
Music ===


===
Television ===


===
Theatre ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Josh Groban at AllMusic
Josh Groban at IMDb
Josh Groban at the Internet Broadway Database
Josh Groban discography at Discogs
The 1992 United States men's Olympic basketball team, nicknamed the "Dream Team", was the first American Olympic team to feature active professional players from the National Basketball Association (NBA).
The team has been described by journalists around the world as the greatest sports team ever assembled.
At the 1992 Summer Olympics held in Barcelona, the team defeated its opponents by an average of 44 points en route to the gold medal against Croatia.
The team was collectively inducted into the U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame in 2009, the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2010, and the FIBA Hall of Fame in 2017.
The Naismith Hall calls the team "the greatest collection of basketball talent on the planet".

In addition to the team induction, 11 players and three coaches have also been inducted individually into the Naismith Memorial Hall of Fame.

==
Forming the team ==


===
Background ===
Prior to the 1992 Olympics, FIBA rules specifically prevented NBA players from participating in Olympic tournaments, and only amateurs were eligible for the U.S. Olympic teams, which were composed of collegiate and, at times (especially in the 1950s), AAU players.
Other countries used their best players from their domestic professional leagues.
In the 1988 Summer Olympics, the Americans lost to the USSR and settled for bronze, their worst finish in the history of the tournament.
In 1989, FIBA voted to change the rule and allow NBA players to participate.
The vote was 56–13 in favor of the change; Amateur Basketball Association of the United States of America (ABAUSA, renamed USA Basketball after the vote) voted against it due to "colleges and high schools that make up most of its [ABAUSA's] constituency [opposing] it."
The Soviet proposal to limit the national teams to only two NBA players for the first few years was then unanimously rejected.

===
Selections ===
USA Basketball asked the NBA to supply players for its 1992 roster.
The league was initially unenthusiastic, not foreseeing the cultural phenomenon that the team would become.
In early 1991, Sports Illustrated labeled the forthcoming American roster as the "Dream Team" on the cover of its February 18 issue.

The first ten players for the team were selected on September 21, 1991:
Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen of the Chicago Bulls, John Stockton and Karl Malone of the Utah Jazz, Magic Johnson of the Los Angeles Lakers, Larry Bird of the Boston Celtics, Patrick Ewing of the New York Knicks, Chris Mullin of the Golden State Warriors, David Robinson of the San Antonio Spurs, and Charles Barkley of the Philadelphia 76ers.
Most of the players were at or near the peaks of their NBA careers.
Bird had back trouble, but was selected due to the team's historic nature.
Robinson had played with the 1988 Olympic team, and was eager to earn a gold medal at Barcelona.
Johnson had retired from the Lakers in November 1991 after testing positive for HIV.
His teammates expected Johnson to die from the disease, and he later described his selection for the Olympics as "almost like a life saver," evidence that he could still overcome the illness and live a productive life.
The Australian Olympic delegation prominently threatened to boycott the games in protest of Johnson's presence, fearing that he might infect other athletes.
Their threats backfired, however, as Johnson received even more public support.
Ewing, Jordan, and Mullin had won gold at the 1984 games but Malone, for instance, had not made the team and had seen his non-selection in 1984 as a challenge.
On May 12, 1992, Clyde Drexler of the Portland Trail Blazers was chosen over Isiah Thomas of the Detroit Pistons for the final professional roster spot.
As an acknowledgment to the previous amateur system, the U.S. basketball committee decided to include one collegiate player on the team.
Christian Laettner of Duke University was added on May 12, 1992, chosen over Louisiana State University's Shaquille O'Neal.
Jordan declined Daly's suggestion that he serve as the public face of the team, and Bird and Johnson were selected as co-captains.

At the time of the 1992 Olympics, these three superstars over the previous 13 seasons combined for 10 NBA championships, seven NBA Finals MVP awards, and nine regular-season MVP awards.

==== Isiah Thomas left off team ====
There was speculation that Thomas was not part of the team because Jordan would participate only if Thomas was not on the roster.
At the time, it was widely believed that Jordan did not like Thomas because he was seen as the "ring leader" of the Detroit Pistons teams of the late 1980s and early 1990s, known as the "Bad Boys", who employed overtly physical tactics against Jordan in the NBA Playoffs.
In his 2012 book Dream Team, author Jack McCallum quotes Jordan as saying to Team USA selection committee member Rod Thorn: "Rod, I don’t want to play if Isiah Thomas is on the team".
In 2020, Thorn and Jordan denied directly mentioning Thomas's name in discussions.
According to Jordan in The Last Dance, he asked Thorn, "Who’s all playing?"
Thorn responded, "The guy you’re thinking about is not going to be playing.
"After
the selection of the first ten members of the team, Johnson released an official statement in support of Thomas, but years later it was discovered that his support was less than enthusiastic.
In the book When the Game Was Ours, Johnson said, "Isiah killed his own chances when it came to the Olympics.
Nobody on that team wanted to play with him.
"Longtime
NBA analyst Jan Hubbard claims that when John Stockton got injured at the 1992 Tournament of the Americas, his potential replacement would have been Thomas' teammate Joe Dumars.

====
Laettner selection over O'Neal ====
The selection committee considered several college players including Harold Miner, Jimmy Jackson, and Alonzo Mourning in addition to Shaquille O'Neal and Christian Laettner.
O'Neal was the number-one pick in the 1992 NBA draft, but Laettner's Duke Blue Devils teams won consecutive National Championships 1991 and 1992.
Laettner was the Naismith College Player of the Year, and hit the game-winning shot in the 1992 NCAA Eastern Regional final.
Although O'Neal was a two-time Consensus NCAA First Team All-American in 1991 and 1992, his team lost in the second round of the 1992 NCAA Men's Tournament.
Laettner's college success ultimately secured his position on the team.

==
Success on the court ==


===
Early scrimmages ===
To help the team prepare for the Olympics, a squad of the best NCAA college players was formed to scrimmage them.
USA Basketball selected players whose style of play, it hoped, would resemble that of the Europeans the Dream Team would face.
Members included the penetrating guard Bobby Hurley, all-around players Grant Hill and Penny Hardaway, outside shooter Allan Houston, and the tough Chris Webber and Eric Montross.
Hill and Hardaway would play for the 1996 national team, and Houston on the 2000 team.
In late June, the Dream Team first met together in La Jolla, California, astounding and intimidating the collegians who watched them practice.
However, on June 24, the Dream Team lost to the NCAA team, 62–54, after underestimating the opposition.
Daly intentionally limited Jordan's playing time and made non-optimal substitutions; assistant coach Mike Krzyzewski later said that the head coach "threw the game" to teach the NBA players that they could be beaten.
The teams played again the following day, with the Olympians winning decisively in the rematch.
Some of the college players visited Jordan's hotel room afterward and asked their hero for his personal items as souvenirs.

===
Tournament of the Americas ===
The Dream Team made its international debut on June 28 at the Tournament of the Americas, an Olympic qualifying event in Portland, Oregon.
The team defeated Cuba 136–57, prompting Cuban coach Miguel Calderón Gómez to say, "You can't cover the sun with your finger."
Marv Albert, who announced the game, recalled that "it was as if [the Americans] were playing a high school team, or grade school team.
They were so overwhelming ... a blowout after blowout."
The Cubans were the first of many opponents who were more interested in taking photos with the Americans than playing them.
The next five games were also easy victories for Team USA, which ended the tournament on July 5 with a 127–80 victory over Venezuela in the championship game to win the tournament and be one of four Americas squads to qualify for the Olympics.

===
Olympics ===
The team trained for the Olympics in Monaco for six days, practicing two hours a day and playing exhibition games against other national teams.
During their time away from the court, the squad spent time enjoying the nude beaches, Monte Carlo's casinos, and dining with royalty.
There was no curfew; as Daly stated, "I'm not putting in a curfew because I'd have to adhere to it, and Jimmy'z [a noted Monte Carlo nightclub] doesn't open until midnight.
"For
one scrimmage, the group divided into two teams: Blue (led by Johnson, with Barkley, Robinson, Mullin, and Laettner) and White (led by Jordan, with Malone, Ewing, Pippen, and Bird).
Drexler and Stockton did not play because of injuries.
Daly told the teams to play "All you got now.
All you got.
"
White won, 40 to 36, in what Jordan recalled as "the best game I was ever in" and Sports Illustrated later called "the Greatest Game
Nobody Ever Saw".
Because of the team's unique celebrity, the Dream Team did not stay in the Olympic Village due to security concerns.
The Olympic Village had only four guards at the gate when the team arrived to pick up their credentials; one of the guards, upon seeing the Dream Team, grabbed his camera and his child while the team members were mobbed by other Olympic athletes.
Coach Chuck Daly also stated that the beds in the Village were a problem, as two of his athletes were over seven feet tall
and he considered comfort a priority to keep the team rested.
As a result, the team stayed at Barcelona's Hotel Ambassador, where USA Basketball occupied 80 of the hotel's 98 rooms.
Fans were not allowed to enter the lobby, but did gather outside the hotel, hoping to see their favorite players.
"
It was like Elvis and the Beatles put together," Daly said.
Opposing basketball players and athletes from other sports often asked to have photographs taken with the players.
In an interview years later, Charles Barkley recounted that "we got death threats".
Despite that assertion, Barkley walked around the city alone.
When asked where his bodyguards were, he held up his fists and answered, "This is my security."

Jordan was the only player who studied the opposition, carefully watching game tapes.
He and the other Americans enjoyed the opportunity to get to know each other in a casual setting, often playing cards all night and, for Jordan, playing several rounds of golf daily with little rest.
Opposing teams were nonetheless overwhelmed by the talent of the American roster, losing by an average of 43.8 points per game.

This was the second largest Olympic Games point differential, surpassed only by the 53.5 point per game margin achieved by the 1956 US Men's Basketball Team.
The Dream Team was the first to score more than 100 points in every game.
Its 117.3 average was more than 15 points more than the 1960 US team.
Johnson later recalled, "I look to my right, there's Michael Jordan ...
I look to my left, there's Charles Barkley or Larry Bird ...
I didn't know who to throw the ball to!"In
a press conference before the team's first Olympic game against Angola
, Barkley famously quipped "I don't know anything about Angola.
But Angola's in trouble."
Herlander Coimbra of Angola recalled that "those guys were on another level—a galaxy far, far away".
During the game, Barkley elbowed Coimbra in the chest and was unapologetic after the game, claiming he was hit first.
Barkley was called for an intentional foul on the play.
Coimbra's resulting free throw was the only point scored by Angola during a 46–1 run by the US.Although
this incident had no bearing on the final result (a 116–48 USA win), at the time there was a concern about the image of America to the rest of the world.
After the game, Jordan said, "There just wasn't any place for it.
We were dominating the game.
It created mixed feelings, it caused a mixed reaction about the U.S.
There's already some negative feelings about us.
"
Even though this was the only incident of the game, it changed the narrative; instead of the Americans being viewed as a highly skilled team beating an underdog, some viewed them as bullies.
Daly started Jordan in every game, and Johnson started in five of the six games he played, missing two games because of knee problems.
Pippen, Bird, Mullin, Robinson, Ewing, Malone, and Barkley rotated in the other starting spots.
Barkley was the Dream Team's leading scorer during the Olympics, averaging 18.0 points per game, although the player selection committee had been unsure of his inclusion, worried that he would not represent the United States well.
The closest of the eight matches was Team USA's 117–85 victory over Croatia in the gold medal game.
Croatia, participating as an independent nation in the Olympics for the first time since its separation from the former Yugoslavia, briefly led the Dream Team by a score of 25–23 in the first half.
By the end of the game, Team USA had pulled away and Stockton agreed to a Croatian player's plea not to shoot.
Pippen and Jordan aggressively sought the opportunity to guard Toni Kukoč of Croatia.
He had just signed a contract with the Bulls for more money than Pippen, who believed that the team's negotiation with the Croatian had delayed his own contract.
Tired of hearing about Kukoč's talent, Pippen and Jordan agreed to, as Jordan later said, "not ... let this guy do anything against us."
McCallum described the two Bulls as "rabid dogs" against Kukoč.

Croatia had lost to the Dream Team 103–70 in their first game.

The only team besides Croatia to hold the margin under 40 points was Puerto Rico, which lost 115–77 in the quarterfinals.

==
Legacy ==
Sports Illustrated later stated that the Dream Team was "arguably the most dominant squad ever assembled in any sport" and compared it to "Johnny Cash at Folsom Prison, the Allman Brothers at the Fillmore East, Santana at Woodstock.
"
In 2009, the team was elected to the U.S. Olympic & Paralympic Hall of Fame.
The following year, the team was elected to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.
Barkley later said, "I don't think there's anything better to representing your country.
I don't think anything in my life can come close to that.
"
Bird called the medal ceremony and the playing of "The Star-Spangled Banner" "the ultimate experience."
Johnson said, "The 92 Dream Team was the greatest moment of my life in terms of basketball, bar none."
Jordan said that the biggest benefit for him from the Olympics was that he learned more about his teammates' weaknesses.
He later defeated Barkley, Malone, and Stockton in three NBA finals.
As of 2014, 11 of the 12 players on the roster (all except Laettner) and three of the four coaches (all except Carlesimo) have been elected to the Hall of Fame as individuals.

Global interest in basketball soared due to the Dream Team.
In one game, an opposing player guarding Magic Johnson was seen frantically waving to a camera-wielding teammate on the bench, signaling to make sure he got a picture of them together.
Head coach Chuck Daly said of the opposing teams "They'll go home and for the rest of their lives be able to tell their kids, '
I played against Michael Jordan and Magic Johnson and Larry Bird.'
And the more they play against our best players, the more confident they're going to get".
International Olympic Committee head Juan Antonio Samaranch stated that "the most important aspect of the [Barcelona] Games has been the resounding success of the basketball tournament, as we've witnessed the best basketball in the world."
Subsequently, the number of international players in the NBA rose.
On opening day of the 1991–92 season, NBA rosters included 23 international players from 18 countries.
At the start of the 2011–12 season, there were 74 players from 35 countries.
Many international players credited the Dream Team as their inspiration to take up basketball.
Kobe Bryant and LeBron James said they believed their 2012 Olympic team would win against the Dream Team.
Bryant said, "[T]hey were a lot older, at kind of the end of their careers.
We have just a bunch of young racehorses, guys that are eager to compete."
Barkley said that he "just started laughing" upon hearing Bryant's comment and that the Dream Team would win by double digits.
Jordan added, "For [Bryant] to compare those two teams is not one of the smarter things he ever could have done...
Remember now, they learned from us.
We didn't learn from them."
Bird joked, "They probably could.
I haven't played in 20 years and we're all old now.
"The
team was elected to the FIBA Hall of Fame in 2017.

==
Roster ==


==
Tournament of the Americas results ==
The team was undefeated, with their closest margin of victory being 38 points over Puerto Rico.
===
Tournament statistics ===


==
Olympics results ==
The team was again undefeated, with their closest outing being the 32-point victory over Croatia for the gold medal.

===
Olympic statistics ===


==
See also ==
United States men's national basketball team
Basketball at the 1992 Summer Olympics
Team USA Basketball (video game)


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Olympics statistics at FIBA.com
1992 Dream Team:
Classic Photos
Antony P. Ressler (born October 12, 1960) is an American billionaire private equity tycoon, based in Beverly Hills.
He co-founded the private equity firms Apollo Global Management in 1990, and Ares Management in 1997.
The key founder of both firms is Ressler's brother-in-law, Leon Black.
Ressler is the majority and controlling owner of the Atlanta Hawks.
His group purchased the team in June 2015 for an estimated $730 million - $850 million.

==
Biography ==
Born in 1960 to a Jewish family, Ressler was one of five children of Dorothy and Ira Ressler.
His father was an attorney and World War II veteran.
Ressler earned a BSFS from Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service.
After university, he worked at Drexel Burnham Lambert eventually reaching senior vice president in the high yield bond department with responsibility for the new issue/syndicate desk.
In 1990, on the heels of the collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert, he co-founded the private equity firm Apollo Global Management with Leon Black, Drexel's managing director, head of the Mergers & Acquisitions Group, and co-head of the Corporate Finance Department; John Hannan, Drexel's former co-director of international finance; Craig Cogut, a lawyer who worked with Drexel's high-yield division in Los Angeles; Arthur Bilger, the former head of the Drexel's corporate finance department; and Marc Rowan, Josh Harris and Michael Gross, all of whom worked under Black in the mergers and acquisitions department.
In 1997, he co-founded Ares Management with former Apollo Global Management co-worker John H. Kissick and Bennett Rosenthal, who joined the group from the global leveraged finance group at Merrill Lynch.
In 2005, he belonged to an investment group that made a successful bid led by Mark Attanasio to purchase Major League Baseball's Milwaukee Brewers.
In 2015, Ressler formed a group that includes former NBA player Grant Hill, Sara Blakely, Jesse Itzler, Steven Price, and Rick Schnall, to purchase the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association.

==
Philanthropy ==
Ressler serves as a member of the Executive Committee of the Board of Directors of the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center;
as Finance Chair and member of the Executive Committee of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art; as a board member of Campbell Hall Episcopal School in Studio City, California; is one of the founding members of the board and Finance Chair of the Painted Turtle Camp, an organization that takes children with chronic and life-threatening illnesses on camping trips.
Ressler is also a strong supporter of military veterans through the work of The Greatest Generations Foundation.

==
Personal life ==
On June 16, 1989, he married actress Jami Gertz.
They have three sons: Oliver Jordan Ressler (born 1992), Nicholas Simon Ressler (born 1995), and Theo Ressler (born 1998).
Gertz-Ressler High Academy, a member of The Alliance for College-Ready Public Schools, is named after the couple.
They are members of the Wilshire Boulevard Temple.
His sister, Broadway producer Debra Ressler, is married to Apollo co-founder Leon Black.
His brother, Richard Ressler,  is a principal and founder of CIM Investment management.

==
References ==
This article is a list of principal owners of National Basketball Association teams:


==
See also ==
List of National Basketball Association head coaches
List of National Basketball Association team presidents
List of National Basketball Association general managersList of professional sports team owners
List of NHL franchise owners
List of NFL franchise owners
List of Major League Baseball principal owners
List of MLS team owners


==
References ==
General"NBA Owners".
HoopsHype.com.
USA Today.
Retrieved April 25, 2013.Specific
Kuroko's Basketball (Japanese: 黒子のバスケ, Hepburn: Kuroko no Basuke, The Basketball Which Kuroko Plays in Japan) is a Japanese sports manga series written and illustrated by Tadatoshi Fujimaki.
It was serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump from December 2008 to September 2014, with the individual chapters collected into 30 tankōbon volumes by Shueisha.
It tells the story of a high school basketball team trying to make it to the national tournament.

It was adapted into an anime television series by Production I.G, which aired for three seasons from April 2012 to June 2015.
A sequel manga by Fujimaki titled Kuroko's Basketball:
Extra Game was serialized in Jump Next!
from December 2014 to March 2016.
An anime film adaptation of the Kuroko's Basketball:
Extra Game manga premiered in Japan in March 2017.
A stage play adaptation opened in April 2016 followed by more stage adaptations.

The manga has been licensed for English-language release by Viz Media in North America.
As of November 2020, Kuroko's Basketball had over 31 million copies in circulation.

==
Plot ==
The Teiko Junior High basketball team rose to distinction by demolishing basketball teams within Japan, winning the junior high Nationals for three consecutive years.
The all-star players of the team became known as the Generation of Miracles.
After graduating from middle school, the five star players went to different high schools with top basketball teams.
However, a fact known to few is that there was another player in the "Generation of Miracles": a phantom sixth man.
This mysterious player is now a freshman at Seirin High, a new school with a powerful, if little-known, team.
Now, Tetsuya Kuroko – the sixth member of the "Generation of Miracles", and Taiga Kagami – a naturally talented player who spent most of middle school in the US, aim to bring Seirin to the top of Japan and begin taking on Kuroko's former teammates one by one.
The series chronicles Seirin's rise to become Japan's number one high school team.
The Generation of Miracles include Ryota Kise, Shintaro Midorima, Daiki Aomine, Atsushi Murasakibara, and Seijuro Akashi.

Seirin High team fought Ryota Kise's team first in a practice match.
Although Kise was capable of copying all of Kagami skills with added strength and speed, Kuroko's abilities helped narrow the distance and eventually, Seirin won this game.
They then met Shintaro Midorima in the preliminaries of Interhigh.
The game was much more difficult, not only because Midorima and the last three members of "Generation of Miracles" are considerably stronger than Ryota Kise, but also Kuroko's ability of misdirection was completely shut down by Takao's Hawk Eyes.
They managed to defeat team Shutoku
but their winning streak ended after they lost badly to Touhou Academy, whose basketball team contained the Ace of the "Generation of Miracles" - Daiki Aomine.
After this game, they lost their remaining two matches against Senshinkan and Meisei and were eliminated from the Interhigh.
However, a new player arrives to join Seirin - Kiyoshi Teppei, the man who formed the Seirin Basketball team.
They spent the entire summer training for the Winter Cup, even coincidentally meeting Shutoku while training.

In the preliminaries, they met team Shutoku again.
This match ended into a tie, so Seirin needed to defeat team Kirisaki Daichi.
Kirisaki Daichi's captain was Makoto Hanamiya, a member of the Uncrowned Kings well-known for his underhanded methods to win a match.
However, they won and gained a ticket to the Winter Cup.

==
Media ==
===
Manga ===
Written and illustrated by Tadatoshi Fujimaki, Kuroko's Basketball was serialized in the manga anthology Weekly Shōnen Jump from December 8, 2008 to September 1, 2014.
The chapters were collected and published into 30 tankōbon volumes by Shueisha, the first on April 3, 2009 and the last on December 4, 2014.
A crossover chapter between the series and Kawada's Hinomaru Sumo, with a script written by Ichirō Takahashi, was published in the magazine on November 9, 2015.
Kawada was formerly an assistant to Fujimaki on Kuroko's Basketball.
Fujimaki began a sequel titled Kuroko's Basketball: Extra Game (黒子のバスケ EXTRA GAME) in Jump Next!
on December 29, 2014.
On December 27, 2015, Tadashi announced that he will end Kuroko's Basketball:
Extra Game manga in the next issue in early March 2016.
At their New York Comic Con panel, North American publisher Viz Media announced their license to the manga.
They began releasing the series in 2-in-1 editions in 2016.
===
Anime ===
An anime adaptation based on the manga was produced by
Production I.G. The series premiered on April 7, 2012 and ended on September 22, 2012.
On April 5, 2012, Crunchyroll announced that they would simulcast the anime as part of their spring lineup of anime titles.
As of September 22, 2012, the anime ended with a total of 25 episodes.
The second season premiered on October 6, 2013 and ended on March 29, 2014, also with 25 episodes.
The DVD and Blu-ray version of the second season was released on June 20, 2014, along with an episode which was designed around a specific chapter in the manga by Tadatoshi Fujimaki by working on chapter 124, and a bonus CD with an audio drama starring Satsuki Momoi.
The third season premiered on January 10, 2015 and ended on June 30, 2015, with a total of 25 episodes.
Three compilation films that compiled the anime series' Winter Cup arc opened in Japan in 2016.
The first compilation film opened on September 3, 2016, titled Winter Cup Compilation ~Shadow
and Light~, the second compilation film opened on October 8, 2016, titled Winter Cup Compilation ~Beyond
the Tears~,
and the third compilation film opened on December 3, 2016, titled Winter Cup Compilation ~Crossing
the Door~.An animated film adaptation was announced at the KuroBas Cup 2015 event on September 20, 2015.
The film, titled Kuroko's Basketball
The Movie: Last Game, will adapt the Kuroko's Basketball:
Extra Game manga.
It was released in Japanese theaters on March 18, 2017.
The staff and cast from the previous seasons returned to reprise their roles in the film.
On October 19 2020, the SAG-AFTRA listed and approved an English dub for the series under the "Netflix Dubbing Agreement".
The English-dubbed first season debuted on Netflix on January 15, 2021, with its dubbed second season to follow on May 15.

===
Light novels ===
Five series of light novels have been written by Sawako Hirabayashi called Kuroko's Basketball:
Replace and illustrated by Fujimaki.
Each light novel focuses on the members of the Generation of Miracles.
The first light novel Replace was released on March 4, 2011.
A manga adaptation of the novel series illustrated by Ichirō Takahashi began on Shōnen Jump+ in January 2015.

===
Audio CDs ===
The music for the Kuroko's Basketball anime series were directed by four different composers.
Ryosuke Nakanishi, R・O・N, and Alpha Eastman (21-25) were in charge of the first season while Yoshihiro Ike was in charge of the second season.

===
Video games ===
Three video games based on Kuroko's Basketball have been released.
The first game Kuroko's Basketball:
Kiseki no Game (黒子のバスケ キセキの試合, Kuroko
no Basuke Kiseki no Gēmu, Kuroko's Basketball: Miracle Game) was released on August 9, 2012 for PlayStation Portable.
A second game Kuroko's Basketball:
Shōri e no Kiseki (
黒子のバスケ -勝利へのキセキ-, Kuroko's Basketball:
The Path to Victory) was released on February 20, 2014 for the Nintendo 3DS.
Shōri e no Kiseki sold 45,681 copies in its first four days on sale.
A third game Kuroko's Basketball:
Mirai e no Kizuna (黒子のバスケ 未来へのキズナ, Kuroko's Basketball:
Bonds for the Future) was released on March 26, 2015 for the Nintendo 3DS.
Kuroko also appears as a support character in the Jump crossover fighting game J-Stars Victory VS.

===
Stage plays ===
A series of 2.5D musical stage plays began in 2016.
Kensho Ono reprised his role as Kuroko from the anime series.
Additions to the main cast included Yuuya Asato as Taiga and Shota Onume as Aomine.
The plays were directed by Norihito Nakayashiki, who also directed Hyper Projection Engeki Haikyu!!.

== Reception ==
The Kuroko's Basketball manga series sold nine million units in Japan by September 2012.
As of 2013, the manga had over 23 million copies in circulation, a number that grew to 27 million by April 2014.
As of November 2020, the series has over 31 million copies in circulation.
Individual volumes frequently appeared on Oricon's weekly lists of the best-selling manga in Japan, and many of them were some of the best-selling manga in the year 2012.
Kuroko's Basketball was the third best-selling manga series of 2013, with 8,761,081 copies sold in a year.
DVD sales of the anime series have also been featured on Oricon's weekly Japanese anime DVD rankings various times.

Due to this popularity, it became a pop culture icon in Japan.

Kuroko's Basketball is often compared to Weekly Shōnen Jump's earlier basketball-themed manga Slam Dunk.
But Azusa Takahashi of Real Sound pointed out whereas Slam Dunk was very realistic
, the newer series is more focused on entertainment, and is strongly based in fiction with each character having a "special move," which makes Kuroko no Basket not an accurate representation of basketball in real life.

===
Controversies ===
After the anime began airing in 2012, the series became popular with dōjinshi circles, particularly for yaoi dōjinshi, though there is no yaoi in the series itself.
Several events at which dōjinshi of the series were to be sold, as well as several other locations linked to the series and the author Tadatoshi Fujimaki, including a television station airing the anime, a convenience store chain selling items of the series, and Fujimaki's alma mater Sophia University, received threatening letters containing a powder or liquid substance.
It is still unknown if it is one individual behind all the threatening letters, nor is the reason for the threats known.
Multiple doujinshi events, including Comiket, banned content related to the series, barring creators from selling Kuroko's Basketball-themed doujinshi at their events.
The suspect, who was later revealed to be a 36-year-old man named Hirofumi Watanabe, was eventually caught and was arrested on December 15, 2013.
Due to the loss of Kuroko's Basketball dōjinshi because of the threats, there was a special event that specifically focused on dōjinshi related to the series affectionately named Kuroket, organized by the Comic Market Preparatory Committee, held during the Comiket Special 6 – Otaku Summit 2015 on March 29, 2015.
The event hosted approx.
2400 dōjinshi circles.

==
See also ==
Robot × LaserBeam –
Golf manga from same author


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website (in Japanese)
Official Anime Website (in Japanese)
Official Stage Play Website (in Japanese)
Kuroko's Basketball on Netflix
Kuroko's Basketball (manga) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Kuroko's Basketball at IMDb
J Ryan "Ryan" Smith (born November 28, 1970) is an American sports anchor for ESPN’s SportsCenter and Outside the Lines.
He also serves as a legal analyst and correspondent for ESPN and ABC News.

He frequently appears across multiple ESPN platforms, and ABC News programming such as Good Morning America, 20/20, World News
Tonight, Nightline and This Week.

==
Early life and education ==
Ryan Smith grew up in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

He graduated from Central High School in Philadelphia, and received a B.A. degree in political science from Syracuse University.
He received a J.D. from Columbia Law School.

==
Legal practice ==
Smith started his legal career as Director of Football Administration and Counsel for the NFL's Jacksonville Jaguars.

He next practiced law in New York, New York, at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP, and later at Frankfurt Kurnit Klein & Selz.

He started his own firm, J Ryan and Associates, and eventually became a partner at Zuber Lawler.

==
Television career ==
Prior to turning to television full-time, Smith hosted "Underdog to Wonderdog", a reality-based television program about the rescue of abused and abandoned dogs.
In September 2010, he began hosting “In Session”, formerly Court TV, on the TruTV Network.
In 2011, Smith added the role of news contributor for Morning Express with Robin Meade to his duties.
In 2012, Smith began hosting Evening Express, a nightly news program for HLN, and later co-hosting HLN’s primetime show, HLN After Dark, covering courtroom trials across the country with an expert panel and an in-studio “jury” of trial watchers.

While at HLN, Smith reported on a variety of major news stories, including the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, and the criminal trials of Casey Anthony, George Zimmerman, Jodi Arias, Warren Jeffs, and Conrad Murray, involving the death of Michael Jackson.
In January 2014, Smith began working as a correspondent and legal analyst for ABC News and ESPN.

At ABC, he reported on several stories including the scandal surrounding former L.A. Clippers owner Donald Sterling, Colin Kaepernick, and the movement of players kneeling during the national anthem.

Smith has also reported on scores of criminal cases for ABC’s 20/20, including the death of Cecil the Lion's in Zimbabwe, earning him a Genesis Award in 2016, and the exoneration of Mario Casciaro.

In 2017, Smith began work as a fill-in anchor on Outside the Lines and E:60 at ESPN.
He won a Sports Emmy as part of E:60 in 2018.Smith has done profiles on several athletes including Myles Garrett and Steve McNair.

==
Personal life ==
Smith lives in Connecticut with his wife, Dafina, and their twin sons.

==
References ==
Gino Pozzo (born 1965) is an Italian businessman and managing director and legal owner of Watford Football Club, who owns a sports investment group focused on the football sector.
He is son of Italian businessman Giampaolo Pozzo and a member of the prominent Italian business-owning Pozzo family.

Gino Pozzo is married to Carla Pozzo and they have two daughters and a son together.
They have been living outside London since they left Spain.
Pozzo got his start in football as soon as he left university in his early 20s and has built his career around talent scouting and development of high-potential players.
Pozzo resides in Watford in Hertfordshire (about 15 miles northwest of central London) and is reportedly heavily involved in the day-to-day running of the football club, as well as negotiating transfers between his father's football club Udinese Calcio in Italy.
Over the past decade, Pozzo and his family have become notable for their multi-club ownership strategies, including transferring players between Watford F.C., Udinese Calcio, and Granada CF (with Granada CF sold to Chinese businessman Jiang Lizhang in June 2016).Pozzo runs an international scouting team of 25 to 30 people who seek players through attending every significant competition around the world, especially in developing markets like South America, Africa, and Eastern Europe.
Pozzo is reported to have a pattern of investing small sums of money into high-risk players.
His larger clubs’ network has helped his business to minimize player acquisition costs while maximizing the profit from surging transfer fees as players are transferred and loaned among ‘sister clubs’ and later sold at a premium achieving high returns.
Pozzo's career experience and business model has led to identifying talent at his three clubs and has been consistently applied to Udinese Calcio for over 25 years, leading some to call it the "talent factory".
Granada CF and Watford achieved promotion to LaLiga and Premier League, respectively, through Pozzo's network and transformation from distressed situations.
Pozzo's success includes the development of the clubs' own stadiums.

== Watford F.C. ==
In June 2012, he and his father acquired Watford Football Club from previous owner Laurence Bassini.
Pozzo became the sole owner in 2014.Pozzo is often found at Watford's training grounds and has been known to monitor all players through GPS devices that track the players’ performance data while in training.
He is known to have minimal contact with players and addresses them as little as once per year, yet observes his teams locally on a weekly basis.
All major decisions regarding the trading of players are made between Gino Pozzo, Scott Duxbury (chief executive of Watford Football Club), and Filippo Giraldi (technical director of WFC).
They have been known to acquire many players from South America, citing lower wage costs however still being highly skilled athletes.
Watford was recently promoted from the Football League Championship to the Premier League on 25 April 2015.
Since 2015, Watford Football Club's annual revenues have increased by more than £100m.
In 2019, Watford made it to the FA Cup Final but were beaten by Manchester City.
In 2020, Watford finished in 19th place in the Premier League and were relegated to the EFL Championship


==
References ==
College basketball in the United States is governed by collegiate athletic bodies including National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), the United States Collegiate Athletic Association (USCAA), the National Junior College Athletic Association (NJCAA), and the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA).
Each of these various organizations are subdivided into from one to three divisions based on the number and level of scholarships that may be provided to the athletes.

Each organization has different conferences to divide up the teams into groups.
Teams are selected into these conferences depending on the location of the schools.
These conferences are put in due to the regional play of the teams and to have a structural schedule for each to team to play for the upcoming year.
During conference play the teams are ranked not only through the entire NCAA, but the conference as well in which they have tournament play leading into the NCAA tournament.

==
History ==
The history of basketball can be traced back to a YMCA International Training School, known today as Springfield College, located in Springfield, Massachusetts.
The sport was created by a physical education teacher named James Naismith, who in the winter of 1891 was given the task of creating a game that would keep track athletes in shape and that would prevent them from getting hurt.
The date of the first formal basketball game played at the Springfield YMCA Training School under Naismith's rules is generally given as December 21, 1891.
Basketball began to be played at some college campuses by 1893.

===
Collegiate firsts ===
The first known college to field a basketball team against an outside opponent was Vanderbilt University, which played against the local YMCA in Nashville, Tennessee, on February 7, 1893, which Vanderbilt won 9–6.
The second recorded instance of an organized college basketball game was Geneva College's game against New Brighton YMCA on April 8, 1893, in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, which Geneva won 3–0.The first recorded game between two college teams occurred on November 22, 1894, when the Drexel Institute of Art, Science and Industry (now known as Drexel University) faced Temple College (now known as Temple University).
Drexel won the game, which was played under rules allowing nine players per side, among many other variations from modern basketball, 26–1.
The first intercollegiate match using the modern rule of five players per side is often credited as a game between the University of Chicago and the University of Iowa, in Iowa City, Iowa, on January 18, 1896.
The Chicago team won the game 15-12, under the coaching of Amos Alonzo Stagg, who had learned the game from James Naismith at Springfield YMCA.
However, some sources state the first "true" five-on-five intercollegiate match was a game in 1897 between Yale and Penn, because although the Iowa team that played Chicago in 1896 was composed of University of Iowa students, it reportedly did not officially represent the university, rather it was organized through a YMCA.
By 1900, the game of basketball had spread to colleges across the country.

===
Tournaments ===
The Amateur Athletic Union's annual U.S. national championship tournament (first played in 1898) often featured collegiate teams playing against non-college teams.
Four colleges won the AAU tournament championship: Utah (1916), NYU (1920), Butler (1924) and Washburn (1925).
College teams were also runners-up in 1915, 1917, 1920, 1921, 1932 and 1934.

The first known tournament featuring exclusively college teams was the 1904 Summer Olympics, where basketball was a demonstration sport, and
a collegiate championship tournament was held.
The Olympic title was won by Hiram College.
In March 1908, a two-game "championship series" was organized between the University of Chicago and Penn, with games played in Philadelphia and Bartlett, Illinois.
Chicago swept both games to win the series.
In March 1922, the 1922 National Intercollegiate Basketball Tournament was held in Indianapolis – the first stand-alone post-season tournament exclusively for college teams.
The champions of six major conferences participated: Pacific Coast Conference, Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association, Western Pennsylvania League, Illinois Intercollegiate Athletic Conference, Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association and Indiana Intercollegiate Athletic Association.
The Western Conference and Eastern Intercollegiate League declined invitations to participate.
Wabash College won the 1922 tournament.

The first organization to tout a regularly occurring national collegiate championship was the NAIA in 1937, although it was quickly surpassed in prestige by the National Invitation Tournament, or NIT, which brought six teams to New York's Madison Square Garden in the spring of 1938.
Temple defeated Colorado in the first NIT tournament championship game, 60–36.
====
NCAA tournament ====
In 1939, another national tournament was implemented by the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA).
The location of the NCAA Tournament varied from year to year, and it soon used multiple locations each year, so more fans could see games without traveling to New York.
Although the NIT was created earlier and was more prestigious than the NCAA for many years, it ultimately lost popularity and status to the NCAA Tournament.
In 1950, following a double win by the 1949–50 CCNY
Beavers men's basketball team (when the NIT comprised 12 and the NCAA 8 teams), the NCAA ruled that no team could compete in both tournaments, and effectively indicated that a team eligible for the NCAA tournament should play in it.
Not long afterward, assisted by the 1951 scandals based in New York City, the NCAA tournament had become more prestigious than before, with conference champions and the majority of top-ranked teams competing there.
The NCAA tournament eventually overtook the NIT by 1960.
Through the 1960s and 1970s, with UCLA leading the way as winner of ten NCAA Tournament championships, a shift in power to teams from the west amplified the shift of attention away from the New York City-based NIT.
When the NCAA tournament expanded its field of teams from 25 to 32 in 1975, to 48 in 1980, to 64 in 1985, and to 68 teams in 2011, interest in the NCAA tournament increased again and again, as it comprised more and more teams, soon including all of the strongest ones.
(
Expansion also improved the distribution of playing locations, which number roughly one-third the number of teams in the field.)

In 2011, the NCAA field expanded to 68 teams and the last 8 teams playing for four spots making the field into 64, which is called the first round and so on.
The former first round is called the second round, the second round is called the third round, and the Sweet Sixteen is the same, but it is technically the fourth round in the current format, etc.
In 2016, the field did not expand, but the round numbers changed again.
The first four games containing the last 8 teams is now referred to as the first four.
Consequently, the first round does not start until the first four games are out of the way and the field is narrowed to 64 teams.
So after the first four games the first round starts instead of that being the second round.
The Second is now when there are 32 teams left, the sweet sixteen is the third round, and so on.
In 2020, for the first time in the NCAA's history, the tournament had to be canceled due to fears of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This move was done largely out of fear of the virus spreading to players and watchers, with prior attempts to limit the spread without canceling by first choosing to limit attendees, and then canceling the tournament in its entirety.

===
Racial integration ===
Racial integration of all-white collegiate sports teams was high on the regional agenda in the 1950s and 1960s.
Involved were issues of equality, racism, and the alumni demand for the top players needed to win high-profile games.
The Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) took the lead.
First they started to schedule integrated teams from the North.
The wake-up call came in 1966 when Don Haskins's Texas Western College team with five black starters upset the all-white University of Kentucky team to win the NCAA national basketball championship.
That happened at a time when there were no black varsity basketball players in either the Southeastern Conference or the Southwest Conference.
Finally ACC schools—typically under pressure from boosters and civil rights groups—integrated their teams.
With an alumni base that dominated local and state politics, society and business, the ACC flagship schools were successful in their endeavor—as Pamela Grundy argues, they had learned how to win:
The widespread admiration that athletic ability inspired would help transform athletic fields from grounds of symbolic play to forces for social change, places where a wide range of citizens could publicly and at times effectively challenge the assumptions that cast them as unworthy of full participation in U.S. society.
While athletic successes would not rid society of prejudice or stereotype—black athletes would continue to confront racial slurs...
[minority star players demonstrated] the discipline, intelligence, and poise to contend for position or influence in every arena of national life.

===
Original rules ===
The original rules for basketball were very different from today's modern rules of the sport, including the use of 8 players per side.
In the beginning James Naismith established 13 original rules:
The ball may be thrown in any direction with one or both hands.

The ball may be batted in any direction with one or both hands, but never with the fist.

A player cannot run with the ball.
The player must throw it from the spot on which he catches it, with allowance to be made for a man who catches the ball when running at a good speed.

The ball must be held by the hands.
The arms or body must not be used for holding it.

No shouldering, holding, pushing, striking, or tripping in any way of an opponent is allowed.
The first infringement of this rule by any person shall count as a foul; the second shall disqualify him until the next goal is made or, if there was evident intent to injure the person, for the whole of the game.
No substitution shall be allowed.

A foul will be called when a player is seen striking at the ball with the fist, or when violations of rules 3 and 4 and such as described in rule 5 have been made.

If either side makes three consecutive fouls it shall count as a goal for the opponents ("consecutive" means without the opponents in the meantime making a foul).

A goal shall be made when the ball is thrown or batted from the grounds into the basket and stays there, providing those defending the goal do not touch or disturb the goal.
If the ball rests on the edges, and the opponent moves the basket, it shall count as a goal.

When the ball goes out of bounds, it shall be thrown into the field and played by the first person touching it.
In case of dispute the umpire shall throw it straight into the field.
The thrower-in is allowed five seconds.
If he holds it longer, it shall go to the opponent.
If any side persists in delaying the game, the umpire shall call a foul on them.

The umpire shall be the judge of the men and shall note the fouls and notify the referee when three consecutive fouls have been made.
He shall have power to disqualify men according to rule 5.

The referee shall be judge of the ball and shall decide when the ball is in play, in bounds, to which side it belongs, and shall keep the time.
He shall decide when a goal has been made and keep account of the goals, with any other duties that are usually performed by a referee.

The time shall be two fifteen-minute halves, with five minutes rest between.

The side making the most goals in that time shall be declared the winner.

===
History of NCAA Basketball Rule Changes ===
The following is a list of some of the major NCAA Basketball rule changes with the year they went into effect.

===
One-and-Done Rule ===
The One-and-Done rule has been a part of the Collegiate Basketball since 2006, the first NBA draft it affected.
The rule was created by NBA Commissioner, David Stern, which changed the draft age from 18 years old to 19 years old.
This change meant players could not be drafted into the NBA straight out of high school.
Instead, however, they usually went to a college to play only one season before entering the following NBA draft when they are eligible, hence the name
One-and-Done.
The first player to be drafted during this "one-and-done era" was Tyrus Thomas, a forward out of Louisiana State, who was drafted fourth overall in 2006.

==
Conferences ==


===
NCAA Division I ===
In 2020–2021, a total of 357 schools played men's basketball in 32 Division I basketball conferences.
All of these schools also sponsor women's basketball except The Citadel and VMI, two military colleges that were all-male until the 1990s and remain overwhelmingly male today.

The conferences for 2020–21 are:

In the early decades of college basketball, and well into the 1970s, many schools played as independents, with no conference membership.
However, the rise of televised college sports in the 1980s led to the formation of many new conferences and the expansion of previously existing conferences.
The last Division I school to play as an independent in basketball was NJIT, which was forced to go independent in 2013 after the collapse of its former all-sports league, the Great West Conference.
NJIT joined the Atlantic Sun Conference in 2015, leaving no Division I basketball independents.

===
NCAA Division II ===
As of the upcoming 2020–21 college basketball season, there are 23 Division II basketball conferences:

There are expected to be 5 independent Division II schools without conference affiliations for the 2020–21 season.

The most recent change in the list of Division II conferences is the demise of the Heartland Conference, which disbanded at the end of the 2018–19 school year.
In 2017, eight of its nine members announced a mass exodus to the Lone Star Conference (LSC) effective in 2019.
The remaining member would soon announce that it would become a de facto member of the Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association (MIAA), and one of the original eight schools to announce a move to the LSC later changed course and chose to become a de facto MIAA member as well.
The two schools that moved to the MIAA are technically associate members because they do not sponsor football, a mandatory sport for full conference members.

===
NCAA Division III ===
Since its introduction in 1973, Division III has always had the lowest share of Black coaches.
As of 2015, less than 10% of the coaches in Division III were black (compared to around 20% in Division II and 25% in Division III).

Notes
The most recent change to the roster of D-III conferences came in 2020, when the American Collegiate Athletic Association merged into the Capital Athletic Conference.

===
NAIA ===
From 1992 to 2020, the NAIA operated separate Division
I and Division II men's and women's basketball championships
; the distinction between the two divisions was
that D-
I schools awarded basketball scholarships while D-II schools chose not to.
Basketball divisions were abolished after the 2019–20 season, and from 2020 to 2021 single men's and women's championships will be held.

===
National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA)
Divisions
I and II ===
===
National Junior College Athletic Association (NJCAA)
Divisions
I, II, and III ===
===
California Community College Athletic Association (CCCAA) ===


===
United States Collegiate Athletic Association (USCAA) ===
Eastern Metro Athletic Conference
Hudson Valley Intercollegiate Athletic Conference
Northeastern Intercollegiate Athletics Conference
Penn State University Athletic Conference
Yankee Small College Conference


===
Northwest Athletic Conference (NWAC) ===


===
Association of Christian College Athletics (ACCA) ===
Midwest Christian College Conference


===
Independent conferences ===


==
Relationship to professional basketball ==
In past decades, the NBA held to tradition and drafted players who had graduated from college.
This was a mutually beneficial relationship for the NBA and colleges—the colleges held onto players who would otherwise go professional, and the NBA did not have to fund a minor league.
As the college game became commercialized, though, it became increasingly difficult for "student athletes" to be students.
A growing number of poor and under-educated, but highly talented, teenage basketball players found the system exploitative—they brought in funds to schools where they learned little and played without income.

The American Basketball Association began to employ players who had not yet graduated from college.
After a season of junior college, a season at the University of Detroit, and an Olympic gold medal, Spencer Haywood played the 1969–70 season with the ABA's Denver Rockets.
He signed with the NBA's Seattle SuperSonics in 1970, before his college class graduation, defying NBA rules.
Haywood pleaded that, as his family's sole wage earner, he should be allowed to earn a living in the NBA or else his family would face destitution.
The ensuing legal battle went to the U.S. Supreme Court which ruled in 1971 that the NBA does not have the same antitrust exemption enjoyed by Major League Baseball.
Thereafter, collegiate players demonstrating economic hardship were allowed early entry into the NBA draft.
The hardship requirement was eliminated in 1976.

In 1974, Moses Malone joined the Utah Stars of the American Basketball Association (which became part of the NBA after the ABA
–NBA merger in 1976) straight out of high school and went on to a Hall of Fame career.
The past 30 years have seen a remarkable change in the college game.
The best international players routinely skip college entirely, many American stars skip college (Kevin Garnett, Kobe Bryant, Tracy McGrady, Dwight Howard, Amar'e Stoudemire, and LeBron James) or only play one year
(Carmelo Anthony, Chris Bosh, Kevin Durant, and John Wall), and only a dozen or so college graduates are now among the 60 players selected in the annual NBA draft.
Fewer high schoolers have progressed directly to the NBA without at least one year of college basketball beginning in 2006; citing maturity concerns after several incidents involving young players, the labor agreement between players and owners now specifies that players must turn 19 years of age during the calendar year of the draft to be eligible.
Additionally, U.S. players must be at least one year removed from their high school graduation.
The pervasiveness of college basketball throughout the nation, the large population of graduates from "major conference" universities, and the NCAA's marketing of "March Madness" (officially the NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Championship), have kept the college game alive and well.
Some commentators have argued that the higher turnover of players has increased the importance of good coaches.
Many teams have been highly successful, for instance, by emphasizing personality in their recruiting efforts, with the goal of creating a cohesive group that, while lacking stars, plays together for all 4 years and thus develops a higher level of sophistication than less stable teams could achieve.

College basketball remains more popular than the NBA in some regions of the United States, such as in North Carolina and the Midwest (where traditionally strong programs at Louisville, Kentucky, and Indiana are found).
==
Distinctions with NBA and WNBA play ==
The NCAA Men's Basketball Rules Committee, consisting of coaches from all three divisions of the NCAA, sets the rules for college men's basketball play.
A parallel committee sets rules for college women's play.
Although many of the NBA and WNBA rules apply in NCAA play, there are differences that make NCAA play unique.
As of the most recent 2019–20 season, NCAA men's games are divided into two halves, each 20 minutes long; NBA games are played in four quarters of 12 minutes each; and WNBA and NCAA women's games are played in 10-minute quarters.
The NCAA shot clock gives teams of both sexes 30 seconds to shoot, while the shot clock used in both the NBA and WNBA gives teams 24 seconds.
Also, NCAA teams are allowed 10 seconds to move the ball past the halfcourt line (with this rule only having been added to the women's college game in the 2013–14 season), while NBA and WNBA rules allow only 8 seconds.
However, like the NBA and WNBA (and high school basketball), during the last minute of each period, the game clock keeps time remaining in the period measured in tenths of a second, rather than full seconds.

Prior to the 2015–16 season, NCAA men's basketball used a 35-second shot clock, while NCAA women's basketball was played with the same 20-minute halves as the men's game.

Though the height of the basket, the foul line's distance from the backboard, and the court dimensions are the same, the distance between the three-point line and the backboard is different.
The NBA three-point line measures 23 feet 9 inches (7.24 m) at the top of the circle, or 22 feet (6.7 m) in the corners or baseline.
On the NCAA court, the three-point line had been a constant 19 feet 9 inches (6.02 m), but the NCAA Rules Committee voted in May 2007 to extend it a foot more to 20 feet 9 inches (6.32 m), which became effective beginning the 2008–09 season for men and the 2011–12 season for women.
Effective in 2019–20, the NCAA adopted the current FIBA three-point arc of 6.75 m (22 ft 1 1⁄2 in) at the top of the circle and 6.6 m (21 ft 8 in) at the corners and baseline for Division I men's play, with
Divisions II and III to follow in 2020–21.
The previous college men's arc will remain in use for women's play for the time being, but the FIBA arc was to be used on an experimental basis in the 2020 Women's National Invitation Tournament and Women's Basketball Invitational (which ultimately were not held).
The WNBA's three-point line was 6.25 m (20 ft 6 in), which FIBA used before it extended its three-point arc to 6.75 m (22 ft 1 1⁄2 in) at the top of the circle and 6.6 m (21 ft 8 in) at the corners and baseline.
The NCAA lane measures 12 feet (3.7 m) in width, while the NBA and WNBA lane is 16 feet (4.9 m); the FIBA lane is marginally wider than the NBA/WNBA lane at exactly 4.9 m (16 ft 1 in).

NCAA players are allowed five personal fouls before fouling out, as opposed to their NBA counterparts, who are allowed six.
This maintains the same ratio of minutes of play per foul allowed, eight.
However, the WNBA allows players six personal fouls despite playing the same number of minutes as the NCAA.
The number of team fouls allotted is also different.
In all three competitions, team fouls can be categorized as shooting or non-shooting.
A shooting foul occurs when a player gets fouled in the act of shooting (while airborne), giving him the chance to shoot free throws.
A common foul (non-shooting foul) consists of all other fouls, including making contact with the opposing player while "reaching in" to steal the ball.

A team may make a certain number of non-shooting fouls per period before the opposing team is awarded free throws.
In the NBA, WNBA, and (since 2015–16)
NCAA women's basketball, the fifth team foul in a quarter places the team in penalty.
For every foul starting with the fifth, whether shooting or non-shooting, the opposing team receives two free throws.
In addition, if an NBA or WNBA team has not entered the penalty in the last two minutes of a period, its team foul count is reset; the second team foul in the last two minutes triggers the penalty.
In the NCAA men's game, the penalty begins with the seventh team foul in a half.
However, the fouled player must make the first free throw in order to get the second.
This is called a "one-and-one" or "one and the bonus" situation.
On the tenth team foul, the "double bonus" situation comes into play, meaning that every subsequent team foul results in two free throws for the opposing team.
No free throws are shot at either level for a player control foul, which is an offensive foul (usually a charge).
Unlike NBA/WNBA rules, the team foul count does not reset in the last two minutes of a half (men's) or quarter (women's).
Overtime periods are considered an extension of the second half under NCAA men's rules and the fourth quarter under NCAA women's rules, but not under NBA/WNBA rules; in those leagues, the fourth team foul in any overtime period, or the second in the last two minutes, triggers the penalty.

When a dispute over ball possession arises, the jump ball is used in the NBA and WNBA.
In the NCAA, once the first possession has been established from the opening tip, no further jump balls occur except to begin an overtime period.
Since 1981, a possession arrow on the scorer's table has dictated which team should possess the ball, with the arrow switching directions after each use.

NCAA teams can call a timeout after they made a basket
(Indiana scores a 3-point field goal and calls a timeout); in the NBA and WNBA, only the opposing team can call a timeout after a basket is made.
From the 2015–16 season through 2018–19, NCAA men's coaches were banned from calling timeouts from the bench while the ball is live at any time in the game; from 2019 to 2020, they are again allowed to call such timeouts, but only during the last 2 minutes of any period (half or overtime).
Players have not been subject to this restriction.

In addition, the NBA limits what types of defense a team can play, primarily in an effort to prevent coaches from slowing down the pace of the game by using zone defenses.
Zone defense is permitted in the NBA and WNBA; however, players cannot stand in the lane for more than three seconds if they are not guarding anyone.
In NCAA basketball, no such restriction exists, and coaches are free to design a variety of defensive techniques.

In college basketball, it is required by rule that the home team wears their white or light-colored jerseys while the visiting team wears their darker jersey color.
The NBA, like most other professional sports leagues, lets the home team decide which uniform to wear, but with a few exceptions the home team has continued the tradition of the college game and wears white (or in the case of the Los Angeles Lakers for non-Sunday home games, gold) at home.
Since the 2017–18 season, the NBA only requires that road teams wear colors that contrast sufficiently with the home team's choice, meaning that "color on color" games are now possible.
This is for regular season play only; home teams always wear white during the playoffs.
The WNBA, however, follows the college rule for all games.

The NBA introduced a new dress code rule in 2005.
Now players are required to wear business casual attire whenever they are engaged in team or league business.
This includes a long or short-sleeved dress shirt (collared or turtleneck), and/or a sweater; dress slacks, khaki pants, or dress jeans, and appropriate shoes and socks, including dress shoes, dress boots, or other presentable shoes, but not including sneakers, sandals, flip-flops, or work boots.
The WNBA has a similar dress code, adjusted for standard women's attire.
NCAA rules have no set dress code rule, leaving it up to individual teams or conferences.

The organizations also have different rules for jersey numbers.
While the NBA and WNBA allow players to wear any number from 0 to 99, including 00, so long as it is available, the NCAA disallows any jersey number with a 6, 7, 8, or 9 in it.
This is done to allow the referee to report fouls using hand signals with one hand, as each hand has only five fingers.
High school basketball, whose rules are set by the National Federation of State High School Associations, also follows the NCAA's convention on jersey numbering.

==
Other divisions ==
While less commercialized than Division I, Division II and Division III are both highly successful college basketball organizations.
Women's Division
I is often televised, but to smaller audiences than Men's Division I.
Generally, small colleges join Division II,
while colleges of all sizes that choose not to offer athletic scholarships join Division III.
Games other than NCAA D-I are rarely televised by national media, although CBS televises the Championship Final of NCAA Division II, while CBS College Sports Network televises the semifinals as well as the Division III Final.

The NAIA also sponsors men and women's college-level basketball.
The NAIA Men's Basketball National Championship has been held annually since 1937 (with the exception of 1944 and 2020), when it was established by James Naismith to crown a national champion for smaller colleges and universities.
Unlike the NCAA Tournament, the NAIA Tournament features only 32 teams, and the entire tournament is contested in one week instead of three weekends.
Since 2002 the NAIA National Tournament has been played in Municipal Auditorium in Kansas City, Missouri.
(
in 1994–2001 it was held in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and 1937–1999
it was held at Municipal then Kemper Arena in Kansas City).
Media coverage has sporadically been provided by CBS, the Victory Sports Network, and various lesser-known media.

From 1992 to 2020, the NAIA sponsored a Division II championship, similar to the NCAA Division I and II.
There is also an NAIA Women's Basketball Championship, which was also split into Divisions I and II through the 2019–20 season.
From 2020 to 2021, the NAIA will adopt a single-division format for basketball, with the men's and women's tournaments featuring 64 teams each.
In both tournaments, the first two rounds will be held at 16 regional sites, with only the winner at each site advancing to the final tournament site.
The only school to have won national titles in both the NAIA and NCAA Division
I is Louisville; the Cardinals have also won the NIT title.
Southern Illinois has won NAIA and NIT titles.
Central Missouri and Fort Hays State have won NAIA and NCAA Division II national titles.
Indiana State has won an NAIA title and finished as the National Runner-Up in the NAIA (twice), in NCAA Division II (once) and NCAA Division
I (once).
==
National Invitation Tournament (NIT) ==


==
Awards ==
Men's college basketball awards
Women's college basketball awards
National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame
Sporting News College Basketball Athlete of
the Decade (2000–09)


== Records and lists
==


==
=
Men's ===
List of teams with the most victories in NCAA Division
I men's college basketball
List of college men's basketball coaches with 600 wins
NCAA Division
I
Men's Final Four appearances by school
List of NCAA Division
I
Men's Final Four appearances by coach
NCAA Division
I
Men's Final Four appearances by school
NCAA Men's Division I
Basketball Tournament all-time team records
NCAA Division
I Men's Basketball Tournament bids by school
NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament bids by school and conference
NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament records
NAIA Men's Basketball Championships
NIT all-time team records
NIT bids by school and conference
NIT championships and semifinal appearances
NCAA Division
I Men's basketball statistical leaders
List of current NCAA Division
I men's basketball coaches 


===
Women's ===
NCAA Division
I
Women's Tournament bids by school
NAIA Women's Basketball Championships
AIAW Women's Basketball Champions
List of NCAA Division
I women's basketball career scoring leaders


==
See also ==
NCAA Men's Division I basketball alignment history
Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women (AIAW)
AIAW Women's Basketball Tournament
National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA)
NAIA Men's Basketball Championships
NAIA Women's Basketball Championships
Black participation in college basketball
Women's basketball#University
College athletics
College football
College rugby
College baseball
College ice hockey
College soccer
College
lacrosse
College rivalries
U Sports
Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association (CCAA)
College basketball in the Philippines


==
References ==
Father Dowling Mysteries (also known as Father Dowling Investigates in the United Kingdom) is an American mystery television series that aired from January 20, 1989 to May 2, 1991.
Prior to the series, a TV movie aired on November 30, 1987.
For its first season, the show was on NBC; it moved to ABC for its last two seasons.

==
History ==
The show features a Catholic priest, Father Dowling, who solves murders, abductions and other mysteries in his Chicago parish, assisted by a young streetwise nun, Sister Stephanie, in spite of hindrance from the Bishop's representative, Father Prestwick.

The show is based upon characters created by Ralph McInerny in a series of mystery novels; but neither the pilot TV movie nor the subsequent regular season episodes are actual adaptations of any of McInerny's stories.
The show was also heavily influenced by G.K. Chesterton's Father Brown novels.
Many consider the series to be an Americanized version of Father Brown rather than an adaptation of McInerny's works.
When asked, few are aware that the series is not based on the Father Brown books, but on McInerny's stories.
The series was developed for television by Dean Hargrove and Joel Steiger, and produced by The Fred Silverman Company and Dean Hargrove Productions in association with Viacom Productions.

== Synopsis ==
Father Francis ("Frank")
Dowling is a Catholic priest who continually stumbles upon murders, abductions and other crimes in his parish (the fictional Parish of St Michael's) in Chicago, Illinois.
Because of the Chicago connection, many of the cases are mob-related.
His legal first name of Francis is revealed in the episode The Movie Mystery, when he's talking to the detective in charge of the case.

Fr.
Frank is assisted by Sister Stephanie ("Steve")
Oskowski, a nun assigned to the parish to minister to its members.
It is Sr.
Steve who does much of the legwork in the investigations.
She's a streetwise nun with a Polish surname who grew up in a rough housing project in the diocese.
She can hotwire a car, and pick any lock, among other things.
Because she knows the "language of the streets
" she uses this to her advantage (not just when investigating a mystery, but also in her ministry).
Although she is much younger than Father Frank, the two work smoothly together as a team.
He is not just a mentor to her, it's obvious she looks up to him as the father she never had.

Father Dowling has an identical twin brother, Blaine (also played by Tom Bosley).
A thief and con artist, who isn't above framing his brother for his crimes, Blaine appears three times: in The Face in the Mirror Mystery, The Woman Scorned Mystery, and The Fugitive Priest Mystery.

Father Philip Prestwick, who provides comic relief, is a social-climbing assistant to the Archbishop.
Father Phil just happens to drop in before every meal.

Mrs Marie Gillespie is both the parish secretary and the housekeeper of the Rectory (in which the parish priest lives).

The show's format in effect creates a pseudo-family:
Father Dowling and his elderly housekeeper, Marie, behave like an old married couple, with Father Dowling acting like the regular father in a conventional family (somewhat aided by his identification in the minds of the audience with Mr Cunningham, the character he played on the tv series Happy Days).
Both of them treat Sister Stephanie as though she's their daughter.
The humour largely emerges from the intrusions into this "family circle" by Father Phil, who, like an unwanted relation, disrupts the cosy informality of the household.
The humour develops from the fact that Phil, in his innocence, never realises that his presence is largely an irritant to the others.

A further recurring character is a female Chicago police officer, Detective Sergeant Clancy (Regina Krueger), who is Father Dowling's friend and principal police contact in the first two seasons.
In season 3 Dick O'Neill replaces her, as Lieutenant Foster, an old friend of Frank's in the police, and a devout Catholic, who Frank browbeats into doing him occasional favours during the investigations.

The mysteries usually begin with a mysterious visitor to St Michael's church, or to the parish Rectory next door where Father Dowling lives.
In the first season, Sister Steve lives in a convent with the other nuns in her Order ("The Pretty Baby Mystery"); but in the second season she takes her meals at the Rectory, and when her brother is accused of murder (in the episode "The Sanctuary Mystery") he's shown sheltering in her bedroom at the Rectory.
Throughout all three seasons she's also a chauffeur for Father Dowling, who doesn't drive.
Because she's a car enthusiast, and reformed car thief, she handles the parish station wagon like a professional stuntman.

Between attending to parish secretarial and housekeeping duties, Marie takes phone messages for the duo while they're out travelling all over the city investigating their latest case.
Meanwhile, Fr.
Phil pops in and out of the Rectory, almost always at mealtimes.
Marie and Father Phil provide light relief together, with a comic double-act, forever squabbling over Father Dowling's involvement in police matters, or about parish duties.
However, Marie always emerges victorious.

Phil's devotion to never missing a meal at the Rectory is gradually developed into a running gag.
In addition, Phil's attempts at keeping on the Bishop's good side (another running gag) are a further source of comic relief.

In the episode
The Legacy Mystery (aired April 4th, 1990), Tom Bosley is reunited with his Happy Days co-star, Marion Ross, who plays the mother of a wealthy businessman accused of stealing valuable artwork.

===
Pilot ===
The pilot was a two-hour TV movie titled Fatal Confession, which originally aired on NBC on November 30, 1987.

There were few similarities to the books written by McInerny, with the principal character even changing his name (in the novels, he was Roger Dowling), while the setting was changed from a rural parish in the small town of Fox River to the city of Chicago – a setting which was borrowed from another series of novels by McInerny, concerning a Chicago nun.
For TV, the nun changed her name, became streetwise, lost many years of age, and metamorphosed into Father Dowling's youthful assistant.
Father Prestwick did not appear in the 1987 pilot.
In the first episode of the series, "The Missing Body Mystery", he is brought in by the Bishop to evaluate Father Dowling's parish, and Prestwick is initially appointed to replace him.
At the end of the second episode, Prestwick is reassigned to a parish in Alaska: hence he does not appear again until the final Season 1 episode, "The Pretty Baby Mystery" (when it's said he had offended the Bishop in Anchorage, Alaska, and been kicked out there).
From the start of Season 2
he becomes one of the regular cast.

===
Regular series ===
The show was due to begin in 1988, but because of a writers' strike it did not begin to air weekly until January 1989.

For the first season, on NBC, the episodes were principally written by Supervising Producer Robert Hamilton, who contributed five of the scripts, but Hamilton was dropped when NBC cancelled the show after just eight episodes.

When ABC picked up the show for the second and third seasons (initially as a mid-season replacement), the show's executive producer, Dean Hargrove, together with Joyce Burditt, became the backbone of the writing team, frequently writing episodes jointly
(Hargrove had begun his career as a scriptwriter, on the TV series The Man From U.N.C.L.E.).
And Gerry Conway, whose career began as a well-regarded writer at Marvel Comics, was now appointed as a script consultant, initially acting as script editor on the series before being promoted to co-producer for the third season, also writing many of the episodes.

For the third and longest season (the show's only full season), Brian Clemens, who had been producer and executive producer on The Avengers and had written many of its best regarded episodes, was added as a script consultant, and wrote or co-wrote many third-season episodes—a number of them in collaboration with co-producer Gerry Conway.

Although the show was set in Chicago, the first season was actually filmed in Denver, Colorado, where the filming locations used included the Church of the Annunciation, at 3621 Humboldt Street, which stood in for St Michael's parish church.
At the time the show was being made, Bosley's co-star Tracy Nelson ("Sister Steve") was married to actor William R Moses, the featured guest star who plays her ex-boyfriend in Season One ("The Man Who Came to Dinner Mystery").

The theme music for the regular series was composed by Dick De Benedictis.

The regular series episodes ran approximately 46 minutes 30 seconds.

===
Cancellation ===
The show courted controversy with viewers in its third season, which led to a second, and final, cancellation.
Executive producer Dean Hargrove wrote several episodes which did not sit well with viewers of a religious disposition, nor with the network, moving the show away from being a murder mystery series and straying into theological areas, including appearances by the Devil and by angels, presenting them as real characters within the storylines.

== Cast ==
Tom Bosley as Father Frank Dowling / Blaine Dowling
Tracy Nelson as Sister Stephanie "Steve" Oskowski
James Stephens as Father Philip Prestwick
Mary Wickes as MarieThe program featured many notable guest stars, some before they had achieved fame, including: John Astin, Jack Bannon, Roscoe Lee Browne, Steven Culp, Stacy Edwards, Fionnula Flanagan, Michelle Forbes, Kurt Fuller, Annie Golden, Grant Heslov, Laurie Holden, Stanley Kamel, Andreas Katsulas, Yaphet Kotto, Diane Ladd, Anthony LaPaglia, Scott Marlowe, David McCallum, Colm Meaney, William R. Moses, Craig Richard Nelson, Leslie Nielsen, Ethan Phillips, John Slattery, Brenda Strong, Robin Thomas, Sada Thompson, Tony Todd, John Vernon, Kate Vernon, Robert Walden and David Warner.

==
Episodes ==
After its first season, NBC cancelled the show.
It was picked up by ABC and aired for two more seasons.
In total, Father Dowling Mysteries comprises a 2-hour TV movie plus 43 one-hour episodes.

===
Production credits ===
Executive Producers Fred Silverman and Dean Hargrove
Executive in Charge of Production
Mike Moder
Supervising Producer Robert Hamilton (season 1)
Supervising Producer Robert Schlitt (season 2)
Produced by Barry Steinberg (season 1,2)
Co-Producer David Solomon (season 1,2)


===
Home media ===
CBS DVD (distributed by Paramount) has released all three seasons on DVD in Region 1.On June 6, 2017, CBS DVD released Father Dowling Mysteries:
The Complete Series on DVD in Region 1.In Region 2, Acorn Media released the first season on DVD in the UK on June 18, 2012.

However, it was released under the title Father Dowling Investigates.

In Region 4, Madman Entertainment released the first season on DVD in Australia on November 2, 2011.

There was also a VHS released in region 1 on the 24 of January 2000 of the "Fatal Confession" TV movie.

==
References ==
Lovece, Frank, The Television Yearbook:
Complete, Detailed Listings for the 1990-1991 Season (Putnam / Perigee, 1991) ISBN 0-399-51702-2


==
External links ==
‹The
template TV.com show is being considered for deletion.›
Father Dowling Mysteries at TV.com
Father Dowling Mysteries at IMDb
Father Dowling Mysteries at epguides.com
This is a list of the current owners of English football clubs, as well as (in some cases)
their estimated net worth and source of wealth.
Only shareholders with a significant interest (above 10%) are listed.

==
Premier League ==


==
EFL Championship ==


==
League One ==


==
League Two ==


== Notes ==


==
See also ==
List of NRL club owners
List of Super League rugby league club owners
List of professional sports team owners


==
References ==
The NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament, also known and branded as NCAA March Madness, is a single-elimination tournament played each spring in the United States, currently featuring 68 college basketball teams from the Division I level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), to determine the national championship.
The tournament was created in 1939 by the National Association of Basketball Coaches, and was the idea of Ohio State coach Harold Olsen.
Played mostly during March, it has become one of the most famous annual sporting events in the United States.
It has become extremely common in popular culture to predict the outcomes of each game, even among non-sports fans; it is estimated that tens of millions of Americans participate in a bracket pool contest every year.
Mainstream media outlets such as ESPN, CBS Sports and Fox Sports host tournaments online where contestants can enter for free.
Also, there are many sites that cater to corporate marketing and public relations to get in on the excitement such as BigTourney.com.
Employers have also noticed a change in the behavior of employees during this time: they have seen an increase in the number of sick days used, extended lunch breaks and even the rescheduling of conference calls to allow for more tournament watching.
There are also many handicappers and pundits which offer advice for winning their own bracket.
The tournament teams include champions from 32 Division
I conferences (which receive automatic bids), and 36 teams which are awarded at-large berths.
These "at-large" teams are chosen by an NCAA selection committee, then announced in a nationally televised event on the Sunday and dubbed Selection Sunday.
The 68 teams are divided into four regions and organized into a single-elimination "bracket", which pre-determines, when a team wins a game, which team it will face next.
Each team is "seeded", or ranked, within its region from 1 to 16.
After the First Four round, the tournament occurs during the course of three weekends, at pre-selected neutral sites across the United States.
Teams, seeded by rank, proceed through a single-game elimination bracket beginning with the First Four round, a first round consisting of 64 teams playing in 32 games over the course of a week, the "Sweet Sixteen" and "Elite Eight
" rounds the next week and weekend, respectively, and – for the last weekend of the tournament – the "Final Four" round.
The Final Four is usually played during the first weekend of April.
These four teams, one from each region (East, South, Midwest, and West), compete in a preselected location for the national championship.

The tournament has been at least partially televised on network television since 1969.
Currently, the games are broadcast by CBS, TBS, TNT, and truTV under the trade-name NCAA March Madness.

These networks paid the NCAA to broadcast the games in 2011.
The contract was for 14 years and they paid $10.8 billion.
However, in 2018 that contract was extended for another seven years making it valid through the year 2032.
The average payment over the years comes out to be $891 million annually.

Since 2011, all games are available for viewing nationwide and internationally.
As television coverage has grown, so too has the tournament's popularity.
Currently, millions of Americans fill out a bracket, attempting to correctly predict the outcome of 63 games of the tournament (not including the First Four games).

With 11 national titles, UCLA has the record for the most NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championships; John Wooden coached UCLA to 10 of its 11 titles.
The University of Kentucky (UK) is second, with eight national titles.
The University of North Carolina is third, with six national titles, and Duke University and Indiana University are tied for fourth with five national titles.
The University of Connecticut (UConn) is sixth with four national titles.
The University of Kansas (KU) & Villanova University are tied for seventh with three national titles.
The University of Cincinnati, the University of Florida, University of Louisville, Michigan State University, North Carolina State, Oklahoma State, and the University of San Francisco all have two national titles.

The tournament expanded to 64 teams in 1985, 65 in 2001, and 68 in 2011.

Both 2020 men's and women's tournaments were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The 2021 tournament was subsequently played at various venues in Indiana, the first time that a tournament has been hosted in its entirety by one state.

==
Current tournament format ==
The NCAA has changed the tournament format several times since its inception, most often being an increase of the number of teams.
This section describes the tournament as it has operated since 2011.

===
Qualifying ===
A total of 68 teams qualify for the tournament played during March and April.
Thirty-two teams earn automatic bids as their respective conference champions.
All 32 Division
I "all-sports" conferences (defined as those that sponsor men's and women's basketball) currently hold championship tournaments to determine which team receives the automatic qualification.
The Ivy League was the last Division I conference to not conduct a tournament; through the 2015–16 season, it awarded its tournament berth to the regular-season champion.
If two or more Ivies shared a regular-season championship, playoffs were used to decide the tournament participant.
Since 2017, the league conducts their own postseason tournament.
The remaining 36 tournament slots are granted to at-large bids, which are determined by the Selection Committee in a nationally televised event on the Sunday, dubbed Selection Sunday by the media and fans, by a group primarily of conference commissioners and school athletic directors who are appointed into service by the NCAA.
The committee also determines where all sixty-eight teams are seeded and placed in the bracket.

===
Regions ===
The tournament is divided into four regions and each region has at least sixteen teams.
Regions that do not include First Four games have exactly sixteen teams.
The committee is charged with making each of the four regions as close as possible in overall quality of teams from wherever they come from.

The names of the regions vary from year to year, and are broadly geographic (such as "East", "South", "Midwest" & "West").
From 1957 to 1984, the "Mideast", roughly corresponding to the Southeastern region of the United States, designation was used.
From 1985 to 1997, the Mideast region was known as "Southeast" and again changed to "South" starting from 1998.
The selected names roughly correspond to the location of the four cities hosting the regional finals.
From 2004 to 2006, the regions were named after their host cities, e.g. the Phoenix Regional in 2004, the Chicago Regional in 2005, and the Minneapolis Regional in 2006, but reverted to the traditional geographic designations beginning in 2007.
For example, during 2012, the regions were named South (Atlanta, Georgia), East (Boston, Massachusetts), Midwest (St. Louis, Missouri), and West (Phoenix, Arizona).
====
Seeding and bracket ====
The selection committee ranks the whole field of 68 teams from 1 to 68.
(
It did not make this information public until 2012.)
The committee then divides the teams amongst the regions.
The top four teams will be distributed among the four regions, and each will receive a No.
1 seed within that region.
The next four ranked teams will then be distributed among the four regions, each receiving a No.
2 seed in their region, and the process continues down the line, with some exceptions (as is explained below).
Thus, each region seeds from No.
1 to No.
16.
There are four seeds that are "doubled up" and populated by the winners of the First Four games.
As can be seen below, the actual seeding depends on (among other factors) the rankings of the eight teams that the committee selects for the First Four opening round (see the next paragraph and the First Four section below).

The selection committee is also instructed to place teams so that whenever possible, teams from the same conference cannot meet until the regional finals.
Additionally, it is also instructed to avoid any possible rematches of regular-season or previous year's tournament games during the First and Second rounds.
Further restrictions are listed in the Venues section below.
To comply with these other requirements, the selection committee may move one or several teams up or down one seed from their respective original seed line.
Thus, for example, the 40th overall ranked team, originally slated to be a No.
10 seed within a particular region, may instead be moved up to a No.
9 seed or moved down to a No.
11 seed.
In addition, the rankings of the eight teams selected for the First Four round will likewise affect the final seedlings.

The bracket is thus established, and during the semifinals, the champion of the top-ranked number 1 seed's region will play against the champion of the fourth-ranked number 1 seed's region, and the champion of the second-ranked number 1 seed's region will play against the champion of the third-ranked number 1 seed's region.
====
Venues ====
In the men's tournament, all sites are nominally neutral; teams are prohibited from playing tournament games on their home courts prior to the Final Four (though in some cases, a team may be fortunate enough to play in or near its home state or city).
By current NCAA rules, any court on which a team hosts more than three regular-season games (in other words, not including conference tournament games) is considered a "home court".
The exception to this rule is the University of Dayton, which would be allowed to play a game in the First Four round in their home arena as they did in 2015.

However, while a team can be moved to a different region if its home court is being used during any of the first two weeks of the tournament, the Final Four venue is determined years in advance, and cannot be changed regardless of participants.
For this reason a team could potentially play in a Final Four on its home court, though this is unlikely, since the Final Four is staged at venues larger than most college basketball arenas.
(
The most recent team to play the Final Four in its home city was Butler during 2010; its home court then seated only 10,000, as opposed to the 70,000-plus capacity of Lucas Oil Stadium, the Final Four venue.)
===
Rounds ===
The tournament consists of several rounds.
They are currently named, in order of first to last:
The First Four
The First Round (the Round of 64)
The Second Round (the Round of 32)
The Regional Semi-finals (participating teams are known popularly as the "Sweet Sixteen")
The Regional Finals (participating teams are known commonly as the "Elite Eight")
The National Semi-finals (participating teams are referred to officially as the "Final Four")
The National ChampionshipThe tournament is single-elimination, which increases the chance of an underdog and lower-seeded "Cinderella team" advancing to subsequent rounds.
Although these lower-ranked teams are forced to play stronger teams, they need only one win to advance (instead of needing to win a majority of games in a series, as in professional basketball).

====
First Four ====
First held during 2011, the First Four are games between the four lowest-ranked at-large teams and the four lowest-ranked automatic-bid (conference-champion) teams.

First Four At-large seeds
Note:
Each year, the four lowest-ranked automatic-bid teams compete as No.
16 seeds, while the four lowest-ranked at-large teams compete as higher seeds.
From 2011 through 2014, the at-large teams competed in the First Four round as No.
11, 12, 13, or 14 seeds.
The table below shows the years in which at-large teams competed as each of those four seeds.
From 2015 through 2021, the at-large teams competed in the First Four round as No.
11 seeds.

====
First and Second Rounds ====
During the First Round (the Round of 64), the No.
1 seed plays the No.
16 seed in all regions; the No.
2 team plays the No.
15, and so on.
The effect of this seeding structure ensures that the better a team is ranked (and therefore seeded), the worse-ranked (and presumably weaker) their opponents will be.
Sixteen first-round games are played on the Thursday following the First Four round.
The remaining sixteen first-round games are played Friday.
(
In 2021 the First Four was played on a Thursday and the First Round on the following Friday and Saturday.)
At this point the tournament is reduced to 32 teams.

The Second Round (the Round of 32) is played on Saturday and Sunday immediately after the first round.
(
In 2021 the Round of 32 was played on the Sunday and Monday immediately following the First Round.)
The Second Round consists of Thursday's winners playing in eight games on Saturday, followed by Friday's winners playing in the remaining eight Second Round games on Sunday.
Thus, after the first weekend, 16 teams remain, commonly known as the "Sweet Sixteen."

Unlike hockey, teams are not re-seeded in such a manner where the highest remaining seed in each region would always play the lowest-ranked remaining seed.
Instead, the brackets for the first four rounds are arranged so as to match the highest possible remaining seed from each round against the winner of the game involving the lowest possible "highest" seed from the previous round.
Thus, for the second round, the winner of the 1 vs 16 game plays the winner of the 8 vs 9 game, the winner of the 2 vs 15 game plays the winner of the 7 vs 10 game, and so on.
====
Regional semifinals and finals ====
The teams that are still competing after the first weekend advance to the regional semifinals (the Sweet Sixteen) and finals (the Elite Eight), which are played during the second weekend of the tournament (again, the games are split into Thursday/Saturday and Friday/Sunday).
Four regional semi-final games are played Thursday and four are played Friday.
After Friday's games, 8 teams (the Elite Eight) remain.
Saturday features two regional final games matching Thursday's winners and Sunday's two final games match Friday's winners.
After the second weekend of the tournament, the four regional champions are the "Final Four."
====
Final Four ====
The winners of each region advance to the Final Four, where the national semifinals are played on Saturday and the national championship is played on Monday.
As is noted above, which regional champion will play which, and in which semifinal they play, is determined by the overall rankings of the four No.
1 seeds in the original bracket, not on the ranks of the eventual Final Four teams themselves.

==
Winners ==


===
Titles by year ===


===
Titles by school ===
The following is a list of all schools that have won at least one NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament, along with the year(s) in which they won their championship(s).

*
2013 title vacated by NCAA.

==
Tournament history ==


===
Mid-major teams ===
Mid-major teams—which are defined as teams from the America East Conference (America East), Atlantic Sun Conference (ASUN), Atlantic 10 (A10), Big Sky Conference (Big Sky), Big South Conference (Big South), Big West Conference (Big West), Colonial Athletic Conference (CAA), Conference USA (C-USA), Horizon League (Horizon), Ivy League (Ivy), Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference (MAAC), Mid-American Conference (MAC), Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference (MEAC), Missouri Valley Conference (MVC), Mountain West Conference (MW), Northeast Conference (NEC), Ohio Valley Conference (OVC), Patriot League (Patriot), Southern Conference (SoCon), Southland Conference (Southland), Southwestern Athletic Conference (SWAC), Summit League (Summit), Sun Belt Conference (Sun Belt), West Coast Conference (WCC), and the Western Athletic Conference (WAC)—have experienced success in the tournament at various times.
The last time, as of 2021, a mid-major team won the National Championship was 1990 when UNLV won with a 103–73 win over Duke, since UNLV was then a member of the Big West and since 1999 has been a member of the MW; the Big West was not then considered a power conference, nor is the MW today.
However, during the tenure of UNLV's coach at the time, Jerry Tarkanian, the Runnin' Rebels were widely viewed as a major program despite their conference affiliation (a situation similar to that of Gonzaga since the first years of the 21st century).
Additionally, the Big West received three bids in the 1990 tournament.
The last time, as of 2021, an independent mid-major team won the National Championship was 1977 when Marquette won 67–59 over North Carolina.
However, Marquette was not considered a "mid-major" program at that time.
The very term "mid-major" was not coined until 1977, and did not see wide use until the 1990s.
More significantly, Marquette was one of several traditional basketball powers that were still NCAA Division I independents in the late 1970s.
Also, Marquette has been a member of widely acknowledged "major" basketball conferences since 1991, and is currently in the undeniably major Big East Conference.
The last time, as of 2021, a mid-major team from a small media market (defined as a market out of the top 25 television markets in the United States in 2019) won the National Championship was arguably 1962 when Cincinnati, then in the MVC, won 71–59 over Ohio State of the Big Ten, since Cincinnati's TV market is listed 35th in the nation as of 2021.
However, the MVC was generally seen in that day as a major basketball conference.

The last time the Final Four was composed, as of 2021, of at least 75% mid-major teams (3/4), i.e. excluding all present-day major conferences or their predecessors, was 1979, where Indiana State, then as now of the Missouri Valley Conference (which had lost several of its most prominent programs, among them Cincinnati, earlier in the decade); Penn, then as now in the Ivy League; and DePaul, then an independent, participated in the Final Four, only to see Indiana State lose to Michigan State.
The last time, as of 2021, the Final Four has been composed of at least 50% mid-major teams (2/4)
was 2011, when VCU, then of the Colonial Athletic Association, and Butler, then of the Horizon League, participated in the Final Four, only to see Butler lose to Connecticut.
Three of the four most recent Final Fours have involved a single "mid-major" team by the definition used here—the 2017, 2018, and 2021 tournaments, with Gonzaga appearing in both 2017 and 2021 and Loyola–Chicago appearing in 2018 (although by 2017 Gonzaga, which has appeared in every NCAA tournament in the 21st century, was generally considered a major program despite its membership in the mid-major WCC).
To date, as of 2021, no Final Four has been composed of 100% mid-major teams (4/4), therefore guaranteeing a mid-major team winning the National Championship.

Arguably the tournament with the most mid-major success was the 1970 tournament, where the Sweet Sixteen, Elite Eight, Final Four, and National Championship Game had 63% representation of mid-major teams in the Sweet 16 (10/16), 75% representation in the Elite 8 (6/8), 75% representation in the Final 4 (3/4), and 50% representation in the National Championship Game (1/2).
Jacksonville lost to UCLA in the National Championship, with New Mexico State defeating St. Bonaventure for third place.

Below is a table that shows the performance of mid-major teams from the Sweet Sixteen round to the National Championship Game from 1939—the tournament's first year—to the present day.

NotesThe first column is a list of every mid-major conference.
For the conferences that have predecessor names, a footnote (below the table) lists those names and years.
Opposite each conference's name are the schools that have appeared in the tournament from the Sweet Sixteen onwards when the school was a member of the conference or a predecessor conference.

Some of the conferences that are now considered mid-majors were regarded as major conferences in the past.
For example:
The Missouri Valley Conference was considered a major basketball conference until many of its most prominent members left in the mid-1970s (before Indiana State's 1979 run to the title game).

Conference USA was considered a major conference at its formation in 1995.
It arguably became a mid-major in 2005, when several of its more prominent teams left for the Big East Conference, and unquestionably became a mid-major during the early-2010s realignment cycle.

The WAC was considered a major conference until 1999, when 8 of its 16 members left to form the Mountain West Conference.

The MW was considered a major basketball conference until 2011, when two of its most prominent basketball programs (BYU and Utah) left for other conferences (West Coast Conference and Pac-12, respectively).

As alluded to above, certain programs that were members of "mid-major" conferences during deep tournament runs are nonetheless widely viewed as having been major programs at that time.
The same applies to many programs that were independent before the 1980s.
Examples include (but are not limited to)
San Francisco in the 1950s, Marquette in the 1970s, UNLV in the last part of the 20th century, and Gonzaga today.

====
Defunct conferences and independents ====
This table shows teams that saw success in the tournament from now-defunct conferences or were independents.

One conference listed here, the Southwest Conference, was universally considered a major conference throughout its history.
Of its final nine members, six are now in conferences typically considered "major" in basketball—three in the Big 12, two in the SEC, and one in The American.
The Metro Conference, which operated from 1975 to 1995, is not listed here because it was considered a major basketball conference throughout its history.
Most notably, Louisville, which was a member for the league's entire existence, won both of its NCAA-recognized titles (1980, 1986) while in the Metro.
It was one of the two leagues that merged to form today's Conference USA.
The other league involved in the merger, the Great Midwest Conference, was arguably a major conference; it was formed in 1990, with play starting in 1991, when several of the Metro's strongest basketball programs left that league.

===
Tournament appearances streaks ==
=
List of schools with the longest streaks of appearances in the NCAA tournament.
Because no tournament was held in 2020, that year does not count as an interruption.

Bold Indicates an active current streak as of the 2021 tournament.

===
Tournament droughts ==
=
List of schools with the longest time between NCAA tournament appearances (minimum 20-year drought).

Bold Indicates an active current streak as of the 2021 tournament:
As of 2021, four schools that were considered "major college" by the Associated Press when it published its first college basketball rankings in 1948, and have been continuously in the AP's "major" classification, have yet to reach the national tournament.
While the NCAA did not split into divisions until 1956 (university and college), the AP has distinguished "major colleges" from "small colleges" throughout the history of its basketball rankings.

==
Evolution of the tournament ==
The NCAA tournament has changed its format many times over the years, many of which are listed below.
===
Expansion of field ===
The NCAA tournament field has expanded a number of times throughout its history.

After the conclusion of the 2010 tournament, there was speculation about increasing the tournament size to as many as 128 teams.
On April 1, the NCAA announced that it was looking at expanding to 96 teams for 2011.
On April 22, the NCAA announced a new television contract with CBS/Turner that expanded the field to 68 teams.

From 2011 to 2015, the round of 64 was deemed to be the second round; beginning in 2016, the round of 64 was again deemed to be the first round.

===
Seeding history and statistics ===
The process of seeding was first used in 1978 for automatically qualified (Q) and at-large (L) teams respectively, and then for all teams within their respective region in 1979.
Starting in 2004, the NCAA began releasing full seeding numbers making known the overall #1 seed.

====
No.
1 seeds by year and region ===
=
When seeding, the NCAA has used the following names for the four regions with the exception of 2004 to 2006 when they were named after host cities:

East
West
Midwest ("Southwest" in 2011)
South (1998–2010 and 2012–present, "Mideast" 1957–1984, "Southeast" 1985–1999 and 2011)* Vacated.
Bold denotes team also won tournament.†
Overall #1 Seed starting in 2004.To date, only Kentucky and Virginia have had a #1 seed in each of the four regions


===
=
Number of #1 seeds by school ====
Last updated through 2021 tournament.
*
Vacated appearances excluded (see #1 seeds by year and region).
===
Venues ===
For a list of all the cities and arenas that have hosted the Final Four, go to Host cities, below.

Municipal Auditorium in Kansas City, Missouri, hosted the Final Four nine times, followed by the third Madison Square Garden in New York City, which hosted seven times, and Louisville's Freedom Hall, which hosted six times.
Additionally, Indianapolis has hosted the Final Four seven times, across three venues.

====
Stadium size and domes ====
From 1997 to 2013, the NCAA required that all Final Four sessions take place in domed stadiums with a minimum capacity of 40,000, usually having only half of the dome in use.
The Metrodome in Minneapolis, which usually hosted baseball and football, had one of the long ends of the court along the first baseline with temporary stands surrounding the court so that much of the outfield is isolated from the action.
The same was true of football stadiums like the Alamodome in San Antonio and the RCA Dome in Indianapolis.
The last NBA arena to host the Final Four was the Meadowlands Arena, then known as Continental Airlines Arena, in 1996.
As of 2009, the minimum was increased to 70,000, by adding additional seating on the floor of the dome, and raising the court on a platform three feet above the dome's floor, which is usually crowned for football, like the setup at Ford Field in Detroit which hosted the 2009 Final Four.

In September 2012, the NCAA began preliminary discussions on the possibility of returning occasional Final Fours to basketball-specific arenas in major metropolitan areas.
According to ESPN.com writer Andy Katz, when Mark Lewis was hired as NCAA executive vice president for championships during 2012, "he took out a United States map and saw that both coasts are largely left off from hosting the Final Four."
Lewis added in an interview with Katz,

I don't know where this will lead, if anywhere, but the right thing is to sit down and have these conversations and see if we want our championship in more than eight cities or do we like playing exclusively in domes.
None of the cities where we play our championship is named New York, Boston, Los Angeles, Chicago or Miami.
We don't play on a campus.
We play in professional football arenas.

Under then-current criteria, only eleven stadiums, all but two of which are current NFL venues, could be considered as Final Four locations:
AT&T Stadium, Arlington (opened in 2009)
AT&T Stadium, originally known as Cowboys Stadium, holds the world record basketball attendance when 108,713 attended the 2010 NBA All-Star Game.

Allegiant Stadium, Las Vegas (opened in 2020)
The Dome at America's Center, St. Louis (opened in 1995)
Ford Field, Detroit (opened in 2002)
Lucas Oil Stadium, Indianapolis (opened in 2008)
Mercedes-Benz Stadium, Atlanta
(opened in 2017)
replaced the Georgia Dome, operational August 1992 to March 2017
Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans (opened in 1975)
NRG Stadium, Houston (opened in 2002)
State Farm Stadium, Glendale
(opened in 2007)
SoFi Stadium, Inglewood (opened in 2020)
U.S. Bank Stadium, Minneapolis (opened in 2016)
replaced the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome, operational April 1982 to January 2014
Alamodome, San Antonio (opened in 1990)Two domed stadiums that have hosted past Final Fours—the Alamodome (1998, 2004, 2008, 2018) and Tropicana Field in St. Petersburg, Florida (1999)—were considered too small to be eligible to host, despite the Alamodome being a college football stadium and having a permanent seating capacity of 65,000.
The basketball setup at the Alamodome prior to 2018 used only half of the stadium and had a capacity of 39,500.
This was changed for the 2018 Final Four to place a raised court at the center of the stadium as has been done with other football facilities.
The first instance of a domed stadium being used for an NCAA Tournament Final Four was the Houston Astrodome in 1971, but the Final Four would not return to a dome until 1982 when the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans hosted the event for the first time.

On June 12, 2013, Katz reported that the NCAA had changed its policy.
In July 2013, the NCAA had a portal available on its website for venues to make Final Four proposals in the 2017–2020 period, and there were no restrictions on proposals based on venue size.
Also, the NCAA decided that future regionals will no longer be held in domes.
In Katz' report, Lewis indicated that the use of domes for regionals was intended as a dry run for future Final Four venues, but this particular policy was no longer necessary because all of the Final Four sites from 2014 to 2016 had already hosted regionals.
At least one other report indicated that the new policy would still allow a completely new domed stadium, or an existing dome that has never hosted a Final Four (such as State Farm Stadium), to receive a regional if it is awarded a future Final Four.
In November 2014, reflecting the new policy's effect, the NCAA announced that what is now State Farm Stadium would host the Final Four in 2017.

===
Other changes ===


====
Bids per conferences ====
Prior to 1975, only one team per conference could be in the NCAA tournament.
However, after several highly ranked teams in the country were denied entrance into the tournament (e.g., South Carolina, which was 14–0 in ACC regular season play during 1970 but lost in the ACC tournament; Southern Cal, which was ranked #2 in the nation during 1971; and Maryland, which was ranked #3 in the nation in 1974 but lost the ACC tournament championship game to eventual national champion North Carolina State), the NCAA began to place at-large teams in the tournament, instead of just conference champions.
At times during the pre-at-large era, the National Invitational Tournament (NIT) competed for prestige with the NCAA tournament.
However, in the 1950s the NCAA ruled that no team could compete in both tournaments.
But when 8th ranked Marquette declined its invitation in 1970 after coach Al McGuire complained about the Warriors' regional placement and instead went to the NIT (which it won), the NCAA changed the rule to forbid a team that declines an NCAA Tournament bid from participating in any post-season tournament.
Since then, the NCAA tournament has clearly been the major one, with conference champions and the majority of the top-ranked teams participating in it.

====
Consolation games ====
A third-place game was held from 1946 to 1981.
Additionally, when the tournament was first held in 1939 with only two regionals (East and West), the West held a third-place game, but the East did not.
The East began holding its own third-place game in 1941, and from then on every regional held a third-place game through the 1975 tournament.

====
Play-In games ====
Beginning in 2001, the field was expanded from 64 to 65 teams, adding to the tournament what was informally known as the "play-in game.
"
This was in response to the creation of the Mountain West Conference during 1999.
Originally, the winner of the Mountain West's tournament did not receive an automatic bid, and doing so would mean the elimination of one of the at-large bids.
As an alternative to eliminating an at-large bid, the NCAA expanded the tournament to 65 teams.
The #64 and #65 seeds were seeded in a regional bracket as the 16a/16b seeds, and then played the NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Opening Round Game (the "play-in game") on the Tuesday preceding the first weekend of the tournament.
This game was always played at the University of Dayton Arena in Dayton, Ohio.

During 2011, the tournament expanded to 68 teams.
Four "play-in" games are now played, officially known as the First Four".
However, the teams playing in the First Four are not automatically seeded #16; their seeding is determined by the committee on Selection Sunday.
Explaining the reasoning for this format, selection committee chairman Dan Guerrero said, "We felt if we were going to expand the field
it would create better drama for the tournament if the First Four was much more exciting.
They could all be on the 10 line or the 12 line or the 11 line."
====
Play-In round naming ====
From 1985 to 2010, the round consisting of 64 teams and 32 games was called the "first round", while the round consisting of 32 teams and 16 games was called the "second round".
From 2011 to 2015, the First Four became the first round.
The round after the First Four, the round of 64 played on Thursday and Friday, was called the "second round"; the round of 32 was then called the "third round", consisting of games played on Saturday and Sunday.
In 2016, the naming reverted to the round of 64 being the "first round" once again, and the round of 32 being the "second round".

====
Pod system ====
For the 1985 to 2001 tournaments, all teams playing at a first- or second-round site fed into the same regional site.
Since 2002, the tournament has used the "pod system" designed to limit the early-round travel of as many teams as possible.
In the pod system, each of the eight first- and second-round sites is assigned two pods, where each group of four teams play each other.
A host site's pods may be from different regions, and thus the winners of each pod would advance into separate regional tournaments.

The possible pods by seeding are:

Pod #1: 1v16, 8v9
Pod #2: 2v15, 7v10
Pod #3: 3v14, 6v11
Pod #4: 4v13,
5v12


====
National Semifinal seeding ====
Since 2004, the semi-final matches during the first day of the Final Four weekend have been determined by a procedure based upon the original seeding of the full field.
From 1973 through 2003, the pitting of regional champions in the semi-finals was on a rotational basis.
Prior to 1973, one semifinal matched the champions of the eastern regions, and the other matched the champions of the western regions.

===
Other notes ===


====
Home court advantage ====
On several occasions NCAA tournament teams played their games in their home arena.
In 1959, Louisville played at its regular home of Freedom Hall; however, the Cardinals lost to West Virginia in the semifinals.
In 1984, Kentucky defeated Illinois, 54–51 in the Elite Eight on its home court of Rupp Arena.
In 1985, Dayton played its first-round game against Villanova (it lost 51–49) on its home floor.
In 1986 (beating Brown before losing to Navy) and '87 (beating Georgia Southern and Western Kentucky), Syracuse played the first 2 rounds of the NCAA tournament in the Carrier Dome.
Also in 1986, LSU played in Baton Rouge on its home floor for the first 2 rounds despite being an 11th seed (beating Purdue and Memphis State).
In 1987, Arizona lost to UTEP on its home floor in the first round.

In 2015, Dayton played at its regular home of UD Arena, and the Flyers beat Boise State in the First Four.

Since the inception of the modern Final Four in 1952, only once has a team played a Final Four on its actual home court—Louisville in 1959.
But through the 2015 tournament, three other teams have played the Final Four in their home cities, one other team has played in its metropolitan area, and six additional teams have played the Final Four in their home states through the 2015 tournament.
Kentucky (1958 in Louisville), UCLA (1968 and 1972 in Los Angeles, 1975 in San Diego), and North Carolina State (1974 in Greensboro) won the national title; Louisville (1959 at its home arena, Freedom Hall); Purdue (1980 in Indianapolis) lost in the Final Four; and California (1960 in suburban San Francisco), Duke (1994 in Charlotte), Michigan State (2009 in Detroit), and Butler (2010 in Indianapolis) lost in the final.

In 1960, Cal had nearly as large an edge as Louisville had the previous year, only having to cross the San Francisco Bay to play in the Final Four at the Cow Palace in Daly City; the Golden Bears lost in the championship game to Ohio State.
UCLA had a similar advantage in 1968 and 1972 when it advanced to the Final Four at the Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena, not many miles from the Bruins' homecourt of Pauley Pavilion (also UCLA's home arena before the latter venue opened in 1965, and again during the 2011–12 season while Pauley was closed for renovations); unlike Louisville and Cal, the Bruins won the national title on both occasions.
Butler lost the 2010 title 6 miles (9.7 km) from its Indianapolis campus and was regarded as the host school, as it is most times whenever the NCAA holds a tournament in Indianapolis (in the 2013 tournament, Butler's former conference, the Horizon League, was considered the host for the Midwest Regional rather than Butler).

Before the Final Four was established, the East and West regionals were held at separate sites, with the winners advancing to the title game.
During that era, three New York City teams, all from Manhattan, played in the East Regional at Madison Square Garden—frequently used as a "big-game" venue by each team—and advanced at least to the national semifinals.
NYU won the East Regional in 1945 but lost in the title game, also held at the Garden, to
Oklahoma A&M. CCNY played in the East Regional in both 1947 and 1950; the Beavers lost in the 1947 East final to eventual champion Holy Cross but won the 1950 East Regional and national titles at the Garden.

In 1974, North Carolina State won the NCAA tournament without leaving its home state of North Carolina.
The team was put in the East Region, and played its regional games at its home arena Reynolds Coliseum.
NC State played the final four and national championship games at nearby Greensboro Coliseum.

While not its home state, Kansas has played in the championship game in Kansas City, Missouri, only 45 minutes from the campus in Lawrence, Kansas, on four different occasions.
In 1940, 1953, and 1957 the Jayhawks lost the championship game each time at Municipal Auditorium.
In 1988, playing at Kansas City's Kemper Arena, Kansas won the championship, over Big Eight–rival Oklahoma.
Similarly, in 2005, Illinois played in St. Louis, Missouri, where it enjoyed a noticeable homecourt advantage, yet still lost in the championship game to North Carolina.

====
Flag controversy ====
The NCAA had banned the Bon Secours Wellness Arena, originally known as Bi-Lo Center, and Colonial Life Arena, originally Colonial Center, in South Carolina from hosting tournament games, despite their sizes (16,000 and 18,000 seats, respectively) because of an NAACP protest at the Bi-Lo Center during the 2002 first and second round tournament games over that state's refusal to completely remove the Confederate Battle Flag from the state capitol grounds, although it had already been relocated from atop the capitol dome to a less prominent place in 2000.
Following requests by the NAACP and Black Coaches Association, the Bi-Lo Center, and the newly built Colonial Center, which was built for purposes of hosting the tournament, were banned from hosting any future tournament events.
As a result of the removal of the battle flag from the South Carolina State Capitol, the NCAA lifted its ban on South Carolina hosting games in 2015, and it was able to host in 2017 due to House Bill 2 (see next section).

====
House Bill 2 ====
On September 12, 2016, the NCAA stripped the State of North Carolina of hosting rights for seven upcoming college sports tournaments and championships held by the association, including early round games of the 2017 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament scheduled for the Greensboro Coliseum.
The NCAA argued that House Bill 2 made it "challenging to guarantee that host communities can help deliver [an inclusive atmosphere]".
Bon Secours Wellness Arena was able to secure the bid to be the replacement site.

== Rituals and influence ==


===
Cutting down the nets ===
As a tournament ritual, the winning team cuts down the nets at the end of regional championship games as well as the national championship game.
Starting with the seniors, and moving down by classes, players each cut a single strand off of each net; the head coach cuts the last strand connecting the net to the hoop, claiming the net itself.
An exception to the head coach cutting the last strand came in 2013, when Louisville head coach Rick Pitino gave that honor to Kevin Ware, who had suffered a catastrophic leg injury during the tournament.
This tradition is credited to Everett Case, the coach of North Carolina State, who stood on his players' shoulders to accomplish the feat after the Wolfpack won the Southern Conference tournament in 1947.
CBS, since 1987 and yearly to 2015, in the odd-numbered years since 2017, and TBS, since 2016, the even-numbered years, close out the tournament with "One Shining Moment", performed by Luther Vandross.
===
Team awards ===
Just as the Olympics awards gold, silver, and bronze medals for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd place, respectively, the NCAA awards the National Champions a gold-plated Wooden NCAA National Championship trophy.
The loser of the championship game receives a silver-plated National Runner-Up trophy for second place.
Since 2006, all four Final Four teams receive a bronze plated NCAA Regional Championship trophy; prior to 2006, only the teams who did not make the title game received bronze plated trophies for being a semifinalist.

The champions also receive a commemorative gold championship ring, and the other three Final Four teams receive Final Four rings.

The National Association of Basketball Coaches also presents a more elaborate marble/crystal trophy to the winning team.
Ostensibly, this award is given for taking the top position in the NABC's end-of-season poll, but this is invariably the same as the NCAA championship game winner.
In 2005, Siemens AG acquired naming rights to the NABC trophy, which is now called the Siemens Trophy.
Formerly, the NABC trophy was presented right after the standard NCAA championship trophy, but this caused some confusion.
Since 2006, the Siemens/NABC Trophy has been presented separately at a press conference the day after the game.
===
Most Outstanding Player ===
After the championship trophy is awarded, one player is selected and then awarded the Most Outstanding Player award (which almost always comes from the championship team).
It is not intended to be the same as a Most Valuable Player award although it is sometimes informally referred to as such.

===
Influence on the NBA draft ===
Because the National Basketball Association Draft takes place just three months after the NCAA tournament, NBA executives have to decide how players' performances in a maximum of seven games, from the First Four to the championship game, should affect their draft decisions.
A 2012 study for the National Bureau of Economic Research explores how the March tournament affects the way that professional teams behave in the June draft.
The study is based on data from 1997 to 2010 that looks at how college tournament standouts performed at the NBA level.
The researchers determined that a player who outperforms his regular season averages or who is on a team that wins more games than its seed would indicate will be drafted higher than he otherwise would have been.
At the same time, the study indicated that professional teams don't take college tournament performance into consideration as much as they should, as success in the tournament correlates with elite professional accomplishment, particularly top-level success, where a player makes the NBA All-Star Team three or more times.
"
If anything, NBA teams undervalue the signal provided by unexpected performance in the NCAA March Madness tournament as a predictor of future NBA success."
== Television coverage and revenues ==


===
Current television contracts ===
Since 2011, the NCAA has had a joint contract with CBS and Turner Broadcasting.
The coverage of the tournament is split between CBS, TNT, TBS, and truTV.Broadcasters from CBS, TBS, and TNT's sports coverage are shared across all four networks, with CBS' college basketball teams supplemented with Turner's NBA teams, while studio segments take place at the CBS Broadcast Center in New York City and Turner's studios in Atlanta.
In the New York-based studio shows, CBS' Greg Gumbel and Clark Kellogg are joined by Ernie Johnson, Jr., Kenny Smith, and Charles Barkley of TNT's Inside the NBA while Seth Davis of CBS assists with Casey Stern and various NBA TV personalities.
While two of Turner's NBA voices, Kevin Harlan and Ian Eagle, are already employed by CBS in other capacities, they also lend analysts Reggie Miller, Chris Webber, Grant Hill, and Steve Smith and secondary play-by-play man Brian Anderson to CBS.
In turn, CBS announcers Jim Nantz, Brad Nessler, Spero Dedes, Andrew Catalon, and Carter Blackburn appear on Turner network broadcasts along with analysts Jim Spanarkel, Bill Raftery, and Dan Bonner.

The current contract runs through 2024 and, for the first time in history, provides for the nationwide broadcast each year of all games of the tournament.
All First Four games air on truTV.
A featured first- or second-round game in each time "window" is broadcast on CBS, while all other games are shown either on TBS, TNT or truTV.
The regional semifinals, better known as the Sweet Sixteen, are split between CBS and TBS.
CBS had the exclusive rights to the regional finals, also known as the Elite Eight, through 2014.
That exclusivity extended to the entire Final Four as well, but after the 2013 tournament Turner Sports elected to exercise a contractual option for 2014 and 2015 giving TBS broadcast rights to the national semifinal matchups.
CBS kept its national championship game rights.
Since 2015, CBS and TBS split coverage of the Elite Eight.
Since 2016 CBS and TBS alternate coverage of the Final Four and national championship game, with TBS getting the final two rounds in even-numbered years, and CBS getting the games in odd-numbered years.
March Madness
On Demand would remain unchanged, although Turner was allowed to develop their own service.
The CBS broadcast provides the NCAA with over $500 million annually, and makes up over 90% of the NCAA's annual revenue.
The revenues from the multibillion-dollar television contract are divided among the Division I basketball playing schools and conferences as follows:
1/6 of the money goes directly to the schools based on how many sports they play (one "share" for each sport starting with 14, which is the minimum needed for Division I membership).

1/3 of the money goes directly to the schools based on how many scholarships they give out (one share for each of the first 50, two for each of the next 50, ten for each of the next 50, and 20 for each scholarship above 150).

1/2 of the money goes to the conferences based on how well they did in the six previous men's basketball tournaments (counting each year separately, one share for each team getting in, and one share for each win except in the Final Four and, prior to the 2008 tournament, the Play-in game).
In 2007, based on the 2001 through 2006 tournaments, the Big East received over $14.85 million, while the eight conferences that did not win a first-round game in those six years received slightly more than $1 million each.
Most conferences distribute most of the revenue evenly to its member institutions, regardless of performance.
By 2021, the value of the shares or "units" to a conference was worth US$337,141.

===
History of television coverage ===
CBS has been the major partner of the NCAA in televising the tournament since 1982, but there have been many changes in coverage since the tournament was first broadcast in 1969.

====
Early broadcast coverage ====
From 1969 to 1981, the NCAA tournament aired on NBC, but not all games were televised.
The early rounds, in particular, were not always seen on TV.

In 1982, CBS obtained broadcast television rights to the NCAA tournament.

====
ESPN & CBS share coverage ====
In 1980, ESPN began showing the opening rounds of the tournament.
This was the network's first contract signed with the NCAA for a major sport, and helped to establish ESPN's following among college basketball fans.
ESPN showed six first-round games on Thursday and again on Friday, with CBS, from 1982 to 1990, then picking up a seventh game at 11:30 pm ET.
Thus, 14 of 32 first-round games were televised.
ESPN also re-ran games overnight.
At the time, there was only one ESPN network, with no ability to split its signal regionally, so ESPN showed only the most competitive games.
During the 1980s, the tournament's popularity on television soared.

====
CBS takes over ====
However, ESPN became a victim of its own success, as CBS was awarded the rights to cover all games of the NCAA tournament, starting in 1991.
Only with the introduction of the so-called "play-in" game (between the 64 seed and the 65 seed) in the 2000s, did ESPN get back in the game (and actually, the first time this "play-in" game was played in 2001, the game was aired on The National Network, using CBS graphics and announcers, as both CBS and TNN were both owned by Viacom at the time.
Through 2010, CBS broadcast the remaining 63 games of the NCAA tournament proper.
Most areas saw only eight of 32 first-round games, seven of 16 second-round games, and four of eight regional semifinal games (out of the possible 56 games during these rounds; there would be some exceptions to this rule in the 2000s).
Coverage preempted regular programming on the network, except during a 2-hour window from about 5 ET until 7 ET when the local affiliates could show programming.
The CBS format resulted in far fewer hours of first-round coverage than under the old ESPN format but allowed the games to reach a much larger audience than ESPN was able to reach.
During this period of near-exclusivity by CBS, the network provided to its local affiliates three types of feeds from each venue: constant feed, swing feed, and flex feed.
Constant feeds remained primarily on a given game, and were used primarily by stations with a clear local interest in a particular game.
Despite its name, a constant feed occasionally veered away to other games for brief updates (as is typical in most American sports coverage), but coverage generally remained with the initial game.
A swing feed tended to stay on games believed to be of natural interest to the locality, such as teams from local conferences, but may leave that game to go to other games that during their progress become close matches.
On a flex feed, coverage bounced around from one venue to another, depending on action at the various games in progress.
If one game was a blowout, coverage could switch to a more competitive game.
A flex feed was provided when there were no games with a significant natural local interest for the stations carrying them, which allowed the flex game to be the best game in progress.
Station feeds were planned in advance and stations had the option of requesting either constant or flex feed for various games.

====
Viewing options emerge ====
In 1999, DirecTV began broadcasting all games otherwise not shown on local television with its Mega March Madness premium package.
The DirecTV system used the subscriber's ZIP code to black out games which could be seen on broadcast television.
Prior to that, all games were available on C-Band satellite and were picked up by sports bars.

In 2003, CBS struck a deal with Yahoo!
to offer live streaming of the first three rounds of games under its Yahoo!
Platinum service, for $16.95 a month.
In 2004, CBS began selling viewers access to March Madness
On Demand, which provided games not otherwise shown on broadcast television; the service was free for AOL subscribers.
In 2006, March Madness
On Demand was made free, and continued to be so to online users through the 2011 tournament.
For 2012, it once again became a pay service, with a single payment of $3.99 providing access to all 67 tournament games.
In 2013, the service, now renamed March Madness Live, was again made free, but uses Turner's rights and infrastructure for TV Everywhere, which requires sign-in though the password of a customer's cable or satellite provider to watch games, both via PC/Mac and mobile devices.
Those that do not have a cable or satellite service or one not participating in Turner's TV Everywhere are restricted to games carried on the CBS national feed and three hours (originally four) of other games without sign-in, or coverage via Westwood One's radio coverage.
Effective with the 2018 tournament, the national semifinals and final are under TV Everywhere restrictions if they are aired by Turner networks; before then, those particular games were not subject to said restrictions.

In addition, CBS Sports Network (formerly CBS College Sports Network) had broadcast two "late early" games that would not otherwise be broadcast nationally.
These were the second games in the daytime session in the Pacific Time Zone, to avoid starting games before 10 AM.
These games are also available via March Madness Live and on CBS affiliates in the market areas of the team playing.
In other markets, newscasts, local programming or preempted CBS morning programming are aired.
CBSSN is scheduled to continue broadcasting the official pregame and postgame shows and press conferences from the teams involved, along with overnight replays.

====
HDTV coverage ====
The Final Four has been broadcast in HDTV since 1999.
From 2000 to 2004, only one first/second round site and one regional site were designated as HDTV sites.
In 2005, all regional games were broadcast in HDTV, and four first and second round sites were designated for HDTV coverage.
Local stations broadcasting in both digital and analog had the option of airing separate games on their HD and SD channels, to take advantage of the available high definition coverage.
Beginning in 2007, all games in the tournament (including all first and second-round games) were available in high definition, and local stations were required to air the same game on both their analog and digital channels.
However, due to satellite limitations, first round "constant" feeds were only available in standard definition.
Moreover, some digital television stations, such as WRAL-TV in Raleigh, North Carolina, choose to not participate in HDTV broadcasts of the first and second rounds and the regional semifinals, and used their available bandwidth to split their signal into digital subchannels to show all games going on simultaneously.
By 2008, upgrades at the CBS broadcast center allowed all feeds, flex and constant, to be in HD for the tournament.

===
International broadcasts ===
As of 2011, ESPN International holds international broadcast rights to the tournament, distributing coverage to its co-owned networks and other broadcasters.
ESPN produces the world feed for broadcasts of the Final Four and championship game, produced using ESPN College Basketball staff and commentators.

==
Tournament statistics ==


===
Low seeded teams ===


====
Most successful low seeds ====
Best outcomes for low seeds since expansion to 64 teams in 1985:


====
Best performances by No.
16 seeds ====
In 2018, UMBC became the first No.
16 seed to defeat a No.
1 seed in the men's tournament, shocking Virginia 74–54.
Before this breakthrough, five other 16 seeds lost by 4 or fewer points:

While ultimately Murray State lost to Michigan State by 4 points (75–71) in 1990, it was the only No.
16 team to take a game into overtime.

East Tennessee State lost to Oklahoma in 1989 (1 point, 72–71)
Princeton lost to Georgetown in 1989 (1 point, 50–49)
Western Carolina lost to Purdue in 1996 (2 points, 73–71)
Fairleigh Dickinson lost to Michigan in 1985 (4 points, 59–55)


====
Additional low-seed stats ====
Villanova in 1985, a No.
8 seed, was the lowest seeded team to win the tournament.

The lowest-seeded combination in the national championship game is the 2014 pairing of No.
7 seed UConn and No.
8 seed Kentucky.
UConn won, to become the second-lowest-seeded team to win the tournament.

The pairing of No.
8 seed Butler and No.
11 seed VCU in the 2011 National Semifinals game had the lowest seeded combination (No.
8
v. No.
11) to play in a National Semifinals game.

Penn's 1979 Final Four appearance is also notable as they made it as a No.
9 seed—out of 10 teams in their region—making them the lowest seed to make the Final Four in the pre-64-team era.

Butler is the only team to make consecutive Final Fours (let alone Championship Games) while not being a No.
1 or No.
2 seed either time (No.
5 in 2010, No.
8 in 2011).

In 1989, the four 11-seeds swept the first round against their 6-seed opponents.
As of 2021 this is the only time that 11-seeds have achieved this feat, and no lower seed ever has.
Three out of four 12-seeds have advanced five times, in 2002, 2009, 2013, 2014, and 2019.
10-seeds
also swept 7-seeds once, in 1999.

1991, 2013, 2016, and
2021 were the only years where at least one team of every seed (other than the No.
16s) advanced to the Round of 32.

Richmond is the only team to win first-round games ranked as a No.
15, No.
14, No.
13, and No.
12 seed.

2012 was the only tournament to feature two upsets by No.
15 seeds over No.
2 seeds in the round of 64
(there have been eight all-time).

1986, 1995, and 2015 were the only tournaments to feature two upsets by No.
14 seeds over No.
3 seeds in the round of 64.

2014 produced the highest total seed differential in an NCAA Tournament, with 111 across all the rounds of play.
That is, the aggregate seed difference among the 22 games won by lower-seeded teams (e.g., No.
14 Mercer over No.
3 Duke, No.
8 Kentucky over No.
1 Wichita State) was 111.
This total was surpassed by the end of the Sweet 16 in 2021 with 18 games and a 118 aggregate seed difference.
Before the start of the Final Four, the total had increased to 19 games with a 128 seed difference.

2013 was the only tournament to have three teams seeded No.
12 or lower in the Sweet Sixteen:
No.
12
Oregon, No.
13 La Salle, and No.
15 Florida Gulf Coast.

2017
, South Carolina entering as a 7th seed in their region, beat Duke a No.
2 seed, Baylor, a No.
3 seed and Florida, a No.
4 seed to reach the Final Four.

The 2018 South Region was the first region since seeding began in 1979 in which no top-4 seed advanced to the
Sweet Sixteen (No.
5 Kentucky, No.
7
Nevada, No.
9 Kansas State, No.
11
Loyola–Chicago).

Furthermore, the Elite Eight pairing of No.
9 Kansas State and No.
11
Loyola-Chicago was the lowest-seeded pairing to play in a Regional Final.

Georgetown is the only team to lose in five consecutive tournament appearances against a team seeded at least five spots lower:
2008
(Round of 32):
No.
10 Davidson 74, No.
2 Georgetown 70.

2010
(Round of 64):
No.
14 Ohio 97, No.
3 Georgetown 83.

2011
(Round of 64):
No.
11 VCU 74, No.
6 Georgetown 56.

2012
(Round of 32):
No.
11 NC State 66, No.
3 Georgetown 63.

2013
(Round of 64):
No.
15 Florida Gulf Coast 78, No.
2 Georgetown 68.

In 2021, Houston, a 2 seed, was the first team ever to reach the Final Four by defeating only double-digit seeds—in order, Cleveland State (15), Rutgers (10), Syracuse (11), and Oregon State (12).

====
Notable point spread upsets ====
As noted above, despite numerous instances of early-round tournament upsets, only one No.
1 seed has lost in the first round to a No.
16 seed.
However, while seeding is one way of measuring the impact of an upset, prior to the implementation of seeding, point spread was the better determinant of an upset, and a loss by a highly favored team remains for many the definition of "upset".
As the NCAA forbids any association with gambling, and point spreads vary depending on the bookie taking the bets, these are unofficial.

Biggest point-spread upsets since expansion to 64 teams in 1985:
Norfolk State +21.5 over Missouri 86–84 in 2012
UMBC +20.5 over Virginia 74–54 in 2018
Santa Clara
+20 over Arizona 64–61 in 1993.

Coppin State +18.5 over South Carolina 78–65 in 1997
Arkansas–
Little Rock +17.5 over Notre Dame 90–83 in 1986
Hampton +17.5 over Iowa State 58–57 in 2001Biggest point-spread upsets in NCAA Championship Game history:
Connecticut +9.5 over Duke, 77–74, in 1999
Villanova +9 over Georgetown, 66–64, in 1985
Kansas +8 over Oklahoma, 83–79, in 1988
North Carolina State +7.5 over Houston, 54–52 in 1983
Texas Western +6.5 over Kentucky, 72–65 in 1966


===
Highly seeded teams ===


====
All No.
1 seeds in the Final Four ====
It has happened only once that all four No.
1 seeds made it to the Final Four:

2008
– Kansas (champion), North Carolina, UCLA,
Memphis


====
Final Fours without a No.
1 seed ====
Thrice (twice since the field expanded to 64 teams)
the Final Four has been without a No.
1 seed:

1980 –
No.
2 Louisville (champion), No.
5
Iowa, No.
6 Purdue, No.
8 UCLA
2006 – No.
2 UCLA, No.
3
Florida (champion), No.
4
LSU, No.
11
George Mason
2011 – No.
3 Connecticut (champion), No.
4
Kentucky, No.
8 Butler, No.
11 VCUSince 1985, there have been 4 instances of three No.
1 seeds reaching the Final Four; 13 instances of two No.
1 seeds making it; and 14 instances of just one No.
1 seed reaching the Final Four.
====
No.
1 seeds in the Championship Game ====
There have been nine occasions (eight times since the field expanded to 64)
that the championship game has been played between two No.
1 seeds:

1982 –
North Carolina beat Georgetown
1993
– North Carolina beat Michigan
1999
– Connecticut beat Duke
2005 – North Carolina beat Illinois
2007
– Florida beat Ohio State
2008
– Kansas beat Memphis
2015 – Duke beat Wisconsin
2017
– North Carolina beat Gonzaga
2021
– Baylor beat GonzagaSince 1985
there have been 18 instances of one No.
1 seed reaching the Championship Game (No.
1 seeds are 13–5 against other seeds in the title game) and 8 instances where no No.
1 seed made it to the title game.

====
Additional No.
1 seed stats ====
In 1997, Arizona achieved a record when it became the only team to beat three No.
1 seeds in a single tournament.
Arizona (No.
4 seed) beat Kansas in its own Southeast region, then beat North Carolina in the Final Four and
finally Kentucky in the Championship game.
The most No.
1 seeds any team can face in the tournament is three
(provided that the team itself is not a No.
1 seed, in which case it can only face two No.
1 seeds in the tournament).

In 2011, the highest seed to advance to the Final Four was No.
3 seed Connecticut, making the 2011 tournament the only time that neither a No.
1 seed nor a No.
2 seed advanced into the final weekend of play.
In the same tournament, Butler made history as the first program to make consecutive Final Fours while not being seeded No.
1 or No.
2 in either season.

There have been 16 teams that have entered the tournament unbeaten.
Four of those teams were from UCLA, and all those Bruin teams won each of those tournaments.
However, of the other 12 teams entering the tournament unbeaten, just three went on to win the tournament.
For details, see table below.

In 1980, 1981, and 1982, when the tournament was 48 teams, DePaul was seeded No.
1 but was defeated in the first round.

Theoretically, a No.
1 seed's most difficult six-game path to win the tournament is to defeat a No.
16, a No.
8, a No.
4, a No.
2, a No.
1, and a No.
1 – the highest possible opposing seeds in successive rounds.
No No.
1 seed has ever won all six such games, though two teams have won the first five.

In the 2002 tournament, Maryland reached the final after defeating teams seeded 16/8/4/2/1; they won the tournament after defeating No.
5 Indiana in the final.

In the 2015 tournament, Wisconsin reached the final after defeating teams seeded 16/8/4/2/1.
In the final, they faced No.
1 Duke with a chance to complete the full six-game path.
However, Wisconsin lost the final.

====
Teams No.
1 in national polls ====
The following teams entered the tournament ranked No.
1 in at least one of the AP, UPI, or USA Today polls and won the tournament:


====
Performance of undefeated teams ====
The team's record here refers to their record before the first game of the NCAA tournament.

====
Undefeated teams not in the tournament ====
The NCAA tournament has undergone dramatic expansion since 1975, and since the tournament was expanded to 48 teams in 1980, no unbeaten teams have failed to qualify.
As, by definition, a team would have to win its conference tournament, and thus secure an automatic bid to the tournament, to be undefeated in a season, the only way a team could finish undefeated and not reach the tournament is if the team is banned from postseason play.
As of 2021, no team banned from postseason play has finished undefeated since 1980.
Other possibilities for an undefeated team to fail to qualify: the team is independent; the conference does not yet have an automatic bid; or the team is transitioning from a lower NCAA division or the NAIA, during which time it is barred from NCAA-sponsored postseason play (currently, the NCAA Tournament or NIT).
No men's team from a transitional D-I member has been unbeaten after its conference tournament, but one such women's team has been—California Baptist in 2021.
(
CBU was able to play in the women's NIT, which has never been operated by the NCAA.)

Before 1980, there were occasions on which a team achieved perfection in the regular season, yet did not appear in the NCAA tournament.

During 1939, Long Island University finished the regular season 20-0 but decided to accept instead an invitation to the second NIT (which they won) instead of the first and only NABC tournament (later called the NCAA tournament), as the NIT was more prestigious at the time.
It wasn't until the mid-1950s that the NCAA required that its tournament would have "first choice" in determining teams for their field.
Before then, many of the more successful teams during the regular season chose to play in the NIT instead of the NCAA tournament.

During 1940, Seton Hall finished the regular season 19–0, but their record had been built largely against weak teams and thus did not earn them an invitation to the postseason tournament.

During 1941, Milwaukee State finished the regular season 16–0, but their record had been built largely against weak teams and thus did not earn them an invitation to the postseason tournament.

During 1944, Army finished the regular season 15-0 but owing to World War II, the Cadets did not accept an invitation to postseason play.

During 1954, Kentucky finished 25–0 and were invited to the tournament, but declined the invitation.

During 1973 the North Carolina State Wolfpack finished the regular season 27–0 and ranked #2 (behind undefeated and eventual tournament champion UCLA) but were barred from participating in the NCAA tournament while on probation for recruiting violations.

During 1979, the Alcorn State Braves finished the regular season 27–0, but did not receive an invitation to the NCAA Tournament.
The Braves accepted a bid to the NIT, where they lost in the second round to eventual NIT champion Indiana.

====
Champions absent the next year ====
There have been nine times in which the tournament did not include the reigning champion (the previous year's winner):

1978 champion Kentucky went 19–12 in 1979.
The Wildcats accepted an invitation to the National Invitation Tournament, losing their first-round game
68–67
in overtime to Clemson.

Both 1979 champion Michigan State (12–15) and 1979 runner up Indiana State (16–11) failed to qualify for the 1980 NCAA Tournament.
Furthermore, neither was invited to the National Invitation Tournament, and Michigan State is the only team to finish the subsequent season with a losing record.
Following the 1979 NCAA tournament, Indiana State lost Larry Bird to graduation, and Magic Johnson left Michigan State after his sophomore season to enter the NBA draft.

1983
champion North Carolina State went 19–13 in 1984.
The Wolfpack accepted an invitation to the National Invitation Tournament, losing their first-round game 74–71 to Florida State in Reynolds Coliseum.

1986 champion Louisville went 18–14 in 1987.
The team declined an invitation to the postseason National Invitation Tournament.

1988
champion Kansas went 19–12 in 1989.
However, the team was ineligible for participation in the 1989 NCAA Tournament due to NCAA sanctions for recruiting violations.

2007
champion Florida and 2007 runner-up Ohio State both failed to qualify for the NCAA Tournament in 2008.
Both accepted invitations to that year's postseason National Invitation Tournament, and both made it to the semifinals.
Florida fell to Massachusetts in the semifinals, and Ohio State beat UMass in the NIT Championship Game to win the tournament.

2009
champion North Carolina went 20–17 in 2010.
The Tar Heels accepted an invitation to the National Invitation Tournament, and reached the finals, losing to Dayton.

2012
champion Kentucky went 21–11 in 2013 and failed to make that tournament.
The Wildcats were invited to the National Invitation Tournament, where they lost to Robert Morris in the first round of the tournament.

2014 champion UConn went 20–14 in 2015 and failed to make that tournament.
The Huskies were invited to the National Invitation Tournament and lost to Arizona State in the first round.

===
Coaches ===


====
Most national championships ====
10 National ChampionshipsJohn Wooden (1964, 1965, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973, 1975)5
National ChampionshipsMike Krzyzewski (1991, 1992, 2001, 2010, 2015)4
National ChampionshipsAdolph Rupp (1948, 1949, 1951, 1958)3
National ChampionshipsJim Calhoun (1999, 2004, 2011)
Bob Knight (1976, 1981, 1987)
Roy Williams (2005, 2009, 2017)2
National ChampionshipsDenny Crum (1980, 1986)
Billy Donovan (2006, 2007)
Henry Iba (1945, 1946)
Ed Jucker (1961, 1962)
Branch McCracken (1940, 1953)
Dean Smith (1982, 1993)
Phil Woolpert (1955, 1956)
Jay Wright (2016, 2018)1
National Championship


====
National championships among active coaches
====
Coaches in italics are active at levels below NCAA Division I.

5 Mike Krzyzewski (1991, 1992, 2001, 2010, 2015)
3 Jim Calhoun (1999, 2004, 2011)
2 Jay Wright (2016, 2018)
1 Tony Bennett (2019)
1 Jim Boeheim (2003)
1 John Calipari (2012)
1
Scott Drew (2021)
1
Tom Izzo (2000)
1
Rick Pitino (1996)
1
Bill Self (2008)
1
Tubby Smith (1998)


====
Schools winning a national championship under multiple coaches ====
Five coachesKentucky:
Adolph Rupp, Joe B. Hall, Rick Pitino, Tubby Smith, and
John CalipariThree coachesKansas:
Phog Allen, Larry Brown, and Bill Self
North Carolina:
Frank McGuire, Dean Smith, and Roy WilliamsTwo coachesUConn: Jim Calhoun and Kevin Ollie
Indiana: Branch McCracken and Bob Knight
Michigan State:
Jud Heathcote and Tom Izzo
North Carolina State:
Norm Sloan and Jim Valvano
UCLA:
John Wooden and Jim Harrick
Villanova: Rollie Massimino and Jay Wright


====
Most teams from different schools taken to the Final Four ====
Rick Pitino is the only coach to have officially taken three teams to the Final Four: Providence (1987), Kentucky (1993, 1996, 1997) and Louisville (2005).

There are 12 coaches who have officially coached two schools to the Final Four – Roy Williams, Eddie Sutton, Frank McGuire, Lon Kruger, Hugh Durham, Jack Gardner, Lute Olson, Gene Bartow, Forddy Anderson, Lee Rose, Bob Huggins, and Lou Henson.

Larry Brown took UCLA to the Final Four in 1980, but it was vacated due to NCAA violations.
He also took Kansas in 1986 and 1988.

===
Point differentials ===
Point differentials, or margin of victory, can be viewed either by the championship game, or by a team's performance over the whole tournament.

====
Championship victory margins ====
Largest margin of victory in a championship game30 points, by UNLV in 1990 (103–73, over Duke)
Smallest margin of victory in a championship game1 point, on six occasions

Indiana 69, Kansas 68 (1953)
North Carolina 54, Kansas 53/3OT
(1957)
California 71, West Virginia 70 (1959)
North Carolina 63, Georgetown 62 (1982)
Indiana 74, Syracuse 73 (1987)
Michigan 80, Seton Hall
79/OT
(1989)Championship games that went to overtimeEight times the championship game has been tied at the end of regulation.
On one of those occasions (1957) the game went into double and then triple overtime.

North Carolina 54, Kansas 53/3OT
(1957)
Utah 42, Dartmouth 40 (1944)
Cincinnati 65, Ohio St. 60
(1961)
Loyola 60, Cincinnati 58 (1963)
Michigan 80, Seton Hall 79 (1989)
Arizona 84, Kentucky 79 (1997)
Kansas 75, Memphis 68 (2008)
Virginia 85, Texas Tech 77
(2019)
====
Accumulated victory margins ====
Largest point differential accumulated over the entire tournament by championship teamsTeams that played 6 games
+129 Kentucky 1996
+124 Villanova 2016
+121 North Carolina 2009
+112
UNLV 1990
+106
Villanova 2018Teams that played 5 games
+115 Loyola–Chicago 1963
+113 Indiana 1981
+104
Michigan State 1979
+69 San Francisco 1955
+66
Indiana 1976Teams that played 4 games
+95 UCLA 1967
+85
UCLA 1968
+78
Ohio State 1960
+76 UCLA 1969
+72 UCLA 1970
+72 UCLA 1972Teams that played 3 games

+56 Oklahoma A&M 1945
+52 Kentucky 1949
+51
Indiana 1940
+47 Kentucky 1948
+46 Oregon 1939Teams winning the championship and obtaining a margin of 10 points in every game of the tournamentAchieved 13 times by 10 schools
Oregon (1939)
Kentucky (1949)
San Francisco (1956)
Ohio State (1960)
UCLA (1967, 1970 and 1973)
Michigan State (1979 and 2000)
Indiana (1981)
Duke (2001)
North Carolina (2009)
Villanova (2018)


===
Seed pairing results ===
Since the inception of the 64-team tournament in 1985, each seed-pairing has played 144 games in the Round of 64, with the following results:


====
Round of 64 results ====
The No.
1 seed is 143–1 against the No.
16 seed (.993)
The No.
2 seed is 135–9 against the No.
15 seed (.938)
The No.
3 seed is 122–22 against the No.
14 seed (.847)
The No.
4 seed is 113–31 against the No.
13 seed (.785)
The No.
5 seed is 93–51 against the No.
12 seed (.646)
The No.
6 seed is 90–54 against the No.
11 seed (.625)
The No.
7 seed is 87–57 against the No.
10 seed (.604)
The No.
8 seed is 71–73 against the No.
9 seed (.493)


====
Round of 32 results ====
In the 1/16 vs. 8/9 bracket:In the 2/15 vs. 7/10 bracket:In the 3/14 vs. 6/11 bracket:In the 4/13 vs. 5/12 bracket:


====
Round of 16 results ====
In the 1/8/9/16 vs. 4/5/12/13 bracket:In the 2/7/10/15 vs. 3/6/11/14 bracket:


====
Regional finals results ====


==
Host cities ==
This table lists all the cities that have hosted or will host the Final Four, as well as the venues in which the Final Four was or will be played.
For additional information about a particular year's tournament, click on the year to go directly to that year's NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament or go to the main article.

==
Popular culture ==


===
Bracketology and pools ===
There are pools or private gambling-related contests as to who can predict the tournament most correctly.
The filling out of a tournament bracket has been referred to as a "national pastime.
"
Filling out a tournament bracket with predictions is called the practice of "bracketology" and sports programming during the tournament is rife with commentators comparing the accuracy of their predictions.
On The Dan Patrick Show, a wide variety of celebrities from various fields (such as Darius Rucker, Charlie Sheen, Neil Patrick Harris, Ellen DeGeneres, Dave Grohl, and Brooklyn Decker) have posted full brackets with predictions.
Former President Barack Obama's bracket was posted on the White House website.

There are many tournament prediction scoring systems.
Most award points for correctly picking the winning team in a particular match up, with increasingly more points being given for correctly predicting later round winners.
Some provide bonus points for correctly predicting upsets, the amount of the bonus varying based on the degree of upset.
Some just provide points for wins by correctly picked teams in the brackets.

There are 2^63 or 9.2 quintillion possibilities for the possible winners in a 64-team NCAA bracket, making the odds of randomly picking a perfect bracket (i.e. without weighting for seed number) 9.2 quintillion to 1.
With the expansion of the tournament field to 68 teams in 2011, there are now 2^67 or 147.57 quintillion possibilities if one includes the First Four opening round games.

There are numerous awards and prizes given by companies for anyone who can make the perfect bracket.
One of the largest was done by a partnership between Quicken Loans and Berkshire Hathaway, which was backed by Warren Buffett, with a $1 billion prize to any person(s) who could correctly predict the outcome of the 2014 tournament.
No one was able to complete the challenge and win the $1 billion prize.

===
Tournament associated terms ===
As indicated below, none of these phrases are exclusively used in regard to the NCAA tournament.
Nonetheless, they are associated widely with the tournament, sometimes for legal reasons, sometimes just because it's become part of the American sports vernacular.

====
March Madness ====
March Madness is a popular
on-ending basketball tournaments played in March.
March Madness is also a registered trademark currently owned exclusively by the NCAA.

H. V. Porter, an official with the Illinois High School Association (and later a member of the Basketball Hall of Fame), was the first person to use March Madness to describe a basketball tournament.
Porter published an essay named March Madness during 1939, and during 1942, he used the phrase in a poem, Basketball Ides of March.
Through the years the use of March Madness was increased, especially in Illinois, Indiana, and other parts of the Midwest.
During this period the term was used almost exclusively in reference to state high school tournaments.
During 1977, Jim Enright published a book about the Illinois tournament entitled March Madness.
Fans began associating the term with the NCAA tournament during the early 1980s.
Evidence suggests that CBS sportscaster Brent Musburger, who had worked for many years in Chicago before joining CBS, popularized the term during the annual tournament broadcasts.
The NCAA has credited Bob Walsh of the Seattle Organizing Committee for starting the March Madness celebration in 1984.Only during the 1990s did either the IHSA or the NCAA think about trademarking the term, and by that time a small television production company named Intersport had already trademarked it.
IHSA eventually bought the trademark rights from Intersport, and then went to court to establish its primacy.
IHSA sued GTE Vantage, an NCAA licensee that used the name March Madness for a computer game based on the college tournament.
During 1996, in a historic ruling, Illinois High School Association v. GTE Vantage, Inc., the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit created the concept of a "dual-use trademark", granting both the IHSA and NCAA the right to trademark the term for their own purposes.

After the ruling, the NCAA and IHSA joined forces and created the March Madness Athletic Association to coordinate the licensing of the trademark and investigate possible trademark infringement.
One such case involved a company that had obtained the internet domain name marchmadness.com and was using it to post information about the NCAA tournament.
During 2003, by March Madness Athletic Association v. Netfire, Inc., the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit decided that March Madness was not a generic term, and ordered Netfire to relinquish the domain name to the NCAA.Later during the 2000s, the IHSA relinquished its ownership share in the trademark, although it retained the right to use the term in association with high school championships.
During October 2010, the NCAA reached a settlement with Intersport, paying $17.2 million for the latter company's license to use the trademark.

====
Sweet Sixteen ====
This is a popular term for the regional semifinal round of the tournament, consisting of the final 16 teams.
As in the case of "March Madness", this was first used by a high school federation—in this case, the Kentucky High School Athletic Association (KHSAA), which has used the term for decades to describe its own season-ending tournaments.
It officially registered the trademark in 1988.
Unlike the situation with "March Madness", the KHSAA has retained sole ownership of the "Sweet Sixteen" trademark; it licenses the term to the NCAA for use in collegiate tournaments.

====
Final Four ====
The term
Final Four refers to the last four teams remaining in the playoff tournament.
These are the champions of the tournament's four regional brackets, and are the only teams remaining on the tournament's final weekend.
(
While the term "Final Four" was not used during the early decades of the tournament, the term has been applied retroactively to include the last four teams in tournaments from earlier years, even when only two brackets existed.)

Some claim that the phrase Final Four was first used to describe the final games of Indiana's annual high school basketball tournament.
But the NCAA, which has a trademark on the term, says Final Four was originated by a Plain Dealer sportswriter, Ed Chay, in a 1975 article that appeared in the Official Collegiate Basketball Guide.
The article stated that Marquette University "was one of the final four" of the 1974 tournament.
The NCAA started capitalizing the term during 1978 and converting it to a trademark several years later.

During recent years, the term Final Four has been used for other sports besides basketball.
Tournaments which use Final Four include the EuroLeague in basketball, national basketball competitions in several European countries, and the now-defunct European Hockey League.
Together with the name Final Four, these tournaments have adopted an NCAA-style format in which the four surviving teams compete in a single-elimination tournament held in one place, typically, during one weekend.
The derivative term "Frozen Four" is used by the NCAA to refer to the final rounds of the Division
I men's and women's ice hockey tournaments.
Until 1999, it was just a popular nickname for the last two rounds of the hockey tournament; officially, it was also known as the Final Four.

====
Cinderella team ====
Although there is not any official definition of what constitutes a Cinderella team, there does seem to be a consensus that such teams represent small schools, are usually low-seeded in the tournament, and achieves at least one unexpected win in the tournament.
A recent example of this is Florida Gulf Coast University, a relatively new school that held its first classes in 1997 and became Division
I postseason eligible in 2011.
They made their first appearance in the 2013 tournament, winning two games to become the first #15 seed to advance to the Sweet Sixteen.
The term was popularized as a result of City College of New York's successful run in the 1950 tournament.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament at Wikimedia Commons
Official website
News coverage at CBS Sports, ESPN, Fox Sports, NBC Sports, Sporting News, Sports Illustrated
David Robert Filo (born April 20, 1966) is an American billionaire businessman and the co-founder of Yahoo!
with Jerry Yang.
His Filo Server Program, written in the C programming language, was the server-side software used to dynamically serve variable web pages, called Filo Server Pages, on visits to early versions of the Yahoo!
website.

==
Early life ==
Filo was born in Wisconsin.
At age six, he moved to Moss Bluff, a suburb of Lake Charles, Louisiana.

He graduated from Sam Houston High School and then earned a B.S. degree in computer engineering at Tulane University (through the Dean's Honor Scholarship) and an M.S. degree in 1990 at Stanford University.

==
Career ==
In February 1994, he co-created with Jerry Yang an Internet website called "Jerry and David's Guide to the World Wide Web", consisting of a directory of other websites.
It was renamed "Yahoo!"
(
an exclamation).
Yahoo!
became very popular, and Filo and Yang realized the business potential and co-founded Yahoo!
Inc.
Yahoo!
started off as a web portal with a web directory providing an extensive range of products and services for various online activities.
Yahoo was one of the pioneers of the early Internet era in the 1990s.
It is still one of the leading internet brands and, due to partnerships with telecommunications firms, is one of the most visited websites on the internet.

==
Personal life ==
Filo is married to photographer and teacher Angela Buenning.
They have one child, and live in Palo Alto, California.
In 2005 he gave $30 million to his alma mater, Tulane University, for use in its School of Engineering.
As of September 2019, Forbes estimated Filo to be worth $4.3 billion, ranking him the 379th-richest person in the world.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
MetroActive:
A Couple of Yahoos
Michael Moritz interviews David Filo et al.
at TechCrunch40 conference video
The GeForce 900 series is a family of graphics processing units developed by Nvidia, succeeding the GeForce 700 series and serving as the high-end introduction to the Maxwell microarchitecture, named after James Clerk Maxwell.
They are produced with TSMC's 28 nm process.

With Maxwell, the successor to Kepler, Nvidia expected three major outcomes: improved graphics capabilities, simplified programming, and better energy efficiency compared to the GeForce 700 series and GeForce 600 series.
Maxwell was announced in September 2010, with the first Maxwell-based GeForce consumer-class products released in early 2014.

==
Architecture ==


===
First generation Maxwell (GM10x) ===
First generation Maxwell GM107
/GM108 were released as GeForce GTX 745, GTX 750/750 Ti and GTX 850M/860M (GM107) and GT 830M/840M (GM108).
These new chips provide few consumer-facing additional features; Nvidia instead focused on power efficiency.
Nvidia increased the amount of L2 cache from 256 KiB on GK107 to 2 MiB on GM107, reducing the memory bandwidth needed.
Accordingly, Nvidia cut the memory bus from 192 bit on GK106 to 128 bit on GM107, further saving power.
Nvidia also changed the streaming multiprocessor design from that of Kepler (SMX), naming it SMM.
The structure of the warp scheduler is inherited from Kepler, which allows each scheduler to issue up to two instructions that are independent from each other and are in order from the same warp.
The layout of SMM units is partitioned so that each of the 4 warp schedulers in an SMM controls 1 set of 32 FP32 CUDA cores, 1 set of 8 load/store units, and 1 set of 8 special function units.
This is in contrast to Kepler, where each SMX has 4 schedulers that schedule to a shared pool of 6 sets of 32 FP32 CUDA cores, 2 sets of 16 load/store units, and 2 sets of 16 special function units.
These units are connected by a crossbar that uses power to allow the resources to be shared.
This crossbar is removed in Maxwell.
Texture units and FP64 CUDA cores are still shared.
SMM allows for a finer-grain allocation of resources than SMX, saving power when the workload isn't optimal for shared resources.
Nvidia claims a 128 CUDA core SMM has 86% of the performance of a 192 CUDA core SMX.
Also, each Graphics Processing Cluster, or GPC, contains up to 4 SMX units in Kepler, and up to 5 SMM units in first generation Maxwell.
GM107 supports CUDA Compute Capability 5.0 compared to 3.5 on GK110/GK208 GPUs and 3.0 on GK10x GPUs.
Dynamic Parallelism and HyperQ, two features in GK110/GK208 GPUs, are also supported across the entire Maxwell product line.

Maxwell provides native shared memory atomic operations for 32-bit integers and native shared memory 32-bit and 64-bit
compare-and-swap (CAS), which can be used to implement other atomic functions.

While it was once thought that Maxwell used tile-based immediate mode rasterization, Nvidia corrected this at GDC 2017 saying Maxwell instead uses Tile Caching.

====
NVENC ====
Maxwell-based GPUs also contain the NVENC SIP block introduced with Kepler.
Nvidia's video encoder, NVENC, is 1.5 to 2 times faster than on Kepler-based GPUs meaning it can encode video at 6 to 8 times playback speed.

====
PureVideo ====
Nvidia also claims an 8 to 10 times performance increase in PureVideo
Feature Set E video decoding due to the video decoder cache paired with increases in memory efficiency.
However, H.265 is not supported for full hardware decoding, relying on a mix of hardware and software decoding.
When decoding video, a new low power state "GC5" is used on Maxwell GPUs to conserve power.

===
Second generation Maxwell (GM20x) ===
Second generation Maxwell introduced several new technologies: Dynamic Super Resolution, Third Generation Delta Color Compression, Multi-Pixel Programming Sampling, Nvidia VXGI (Real-Time-Voxel-Global Illumination), VR Direct, Multi-Projection Acceleration, and Multi-Frame
Sampled Anti-Aliasing (MFAA)(however support for Coverage-Sampling Anti-Aliasing (CSAA) was removed).
HDMI 2.0 support was also added.
Second generation Maxwell also changed the ROP to memory controller ratio from 8:1 to 16:1.
However, some of the ROPs are generally idle in the GTX 970 because there are not enough enabled SMMs to give them work to do and therefore reduces its maximum fill rate.
Second generation Maxwell also has up to 4 SMM units per GPC, compared to
5 SMM units per GPC.GM204 supports CUDA Compute Capability 5.2 compared to 5.0 on
GM107/GM108 GPUs, 3.5 on GK110/GK208 GPUs and 3.0 on GK10x GPUs.
Maxwell second generation GM20x GPUs have an upgraded NVENC which supports HEVC encoding and adds support for H.264 encoding resolutions at 1440p/60FPS & 4K/60FPS compared to NVENC on Maxwell first generation GM10x GPUs which only supported H.264 1080p/60FPS encoding.
Maxwell GM206 GPU supports full fixed function HEVC hardware decoding.

==
Advertising controversy ==


===
GTX 970 hardware specifications ===
Issues with the GeForce GTX
970's specifications were first brought up by users when they found out that the cards, while featuring 4 GB of memory, rarely accessed memory over the 3.5 GB boundary.
Further testing and investigation eventually led to Nvidia issuing a statement that the card's initially announced specifications had been altered without notice before the card was made commercially available, and that the card took a performance hit once memory over the 3.5 GB limit were put into use.
The card's back-end hardware specifications, initially announced as being identical to those of the GeForce GTX 980, differed in the amount of L2 cache (1.75 MB versus 2 MB in the GeForce GTX 980) and the number of ROPs (56 versus 64 in the 980).
Additionally, it was revealed that the card was designed to access its memory as a 3.5 GB section, plus a 0.5 GB one, access to the latter being 7 times slower than the first one.
The company then went on to promise a specific driver modification in order to alleviate the performance issues produced by the cutbacks suffered by the card.
However, Nvidia later clarified that the promise had been a miscommunication and there would be no specific driver update for the GTX 970.
Nvidia claimed that it would assist customers who wanted refunds in obtaining them.
On February 26, 2015, Nvidia CEO Jen-Hsun Huang went on record in Nvidia's official blog to apologize for the incident.
In February 2015 a class-action lawsuit alleging false advertising was filed against Nvidia and Gigabyte Technology in the U.S. District Court for Northern California.
Nvidia revealed that it is able to disable individual units, each containing 256KB of L2 cache and 8 ROPs, without disabling whole memory controllers.
This comes at the cost of dividing the memory bus into high speed and low speed segments that cannot be accessed at the same time unless one segment is reading while the other segment is writing because the L2/ROP unit managing both of the GDDR5 controllers shares the read return channel and the write data bus between the two GDDR5 controllers and itself.
This is used in the GeForce GTX 970, which therefore can be described as having 3.5 GB in its high speed segment on a 224-bit bus and 0.5 GB in a low speed segment on a 32-bit bus.
On July 27, 2016, Nvidia agreed to a preliminary settlement of the U.S. class action lawsuit, offering a $30 refund on GTX 970 purchases.
The agreed upon refund represents the portion of the cost of the storage and performance capabilities the consumers assumed they were obtaining when they purchased the card.

===
Async compute support ===
While the Maxwell series was marketed as fully DirectX 12 compliant, Oxide Games, developer of Ashes of the Singularity, uncovered that Maxwell-based cards do not perform well when async compute is utilized.
It appears that while this core feature is in fact exposed by the driver, Nvidia partially implemented it through a driver-based shim, coming at a high performance cost.
Unlike AMD's competing GCN-based graphics cards which include a full implementation of hardware-based asynchronous compute, Nvidia planned to rely on the driver to implement a software queue and a software distributor to forward asynchronous tasks to the hardware schedulers, capable of distributing the workload to the correct units.
Asynchronous compute on Maxwell therefore requires that both a game and the GPU driver be specifically coded for asynchronous compute on Maxwell in order to enable this capability.
The 3DMark Time Spy benchmark shows no noticeable performance difference between asynchronous compute being enabled or disabled.
Asynchronous compute is disabled by the driver for Maxwell.
Oxide claims that this led to Nvidia pressuring them not to include the asynchronous compute feature in their benchmark at all, so that the 900 series would not be at a disadvantage against AMD's products which implement asynchronous compute in hardware.
Maxwell requires that the GPU be statically partitioned for asynchronous compute to allow tasks to run concurrently.
Each partition is assigned to a hardware queue.
If any of the queues that are assigned to a partition empty out or are unable to submit work for any reason (e.g. a task in the queue must be delayed until a hazard is resolved), the partition and all of the resources in that partition reserved for that queue will idle.
Asynchronous compute therefore could easily hurt performance on Maxwell if it is not coded to work with Maxwell's static scheduler.
Furthermore, graphics tasks saturate Nvidia GPUs much more easily than they do to AMD's GCN-based GPUs which are much more heavily weighted towards compute, so Nvidia GPUs have fewer scheduling holes that could be filled by asynchronous compute than AMD's.
For these reasons, the driver forces a Maxwell GPU to place all tasks into one queue and execute each task in serial, and give each task the undivided resources of the GPU no matter whether or not each task can saturate the GPU or not.
==
Products ==


===
GeForce 900
(9xx) series ===


===
GeForce 900M (9xxM) series ===
Some implementations may use different specifications.

==
Chipset table ==


==
Discontinued support ==
"
Driver 368.81 is the last driver to support Windows XP/Windows XP 64-bit".

Windows XP 32-bit:
368.81 driver download
Windows XP 64-bit
: 368.81 driver downloadNvidia announced that after Release 390 drivers, it will no longer release 32-bit drivers for 32-bit operating systems.
Notebook GPUs based on the Kepler architecture moved to legacy support in April 2019 and stopped receiving critical security updates after April 2020.
The Nvidia GeForce 910M and 920M from the 9xxM GPU family are affected by this change.

== See also ==
GeForce 400 series
GeForce 500 series
GeForce 600 series
GeForce 700 series
GeForce 800M series
GeForce 10 series
GeForce 20 series
GeForce 30 series
Nvidia Quadro
Nvidia Tesla


==
References ==


==
External links ==
GeForce GTX 980 Whitepaper
The Ultimate GPU,
TITAN X. Available
Now
Introducing The GeForce GTX 980 Ti.
Play The Future
Introducing The Amazing New GeForce GTX 980 & 970
Introducing The $199 GeForce GTX 960:
High-End Performance & High-End Features
On A Mid-Range GPU
Gain The Competitive Edge
With The All-New GeForce GTX 950
GeForce GTX 900M:
The World’s Most Advanced Gaming Notebooks
GeForce GTX TITAN X
GeForce GTX 980 Ti
GeForce GTX 980
GeForce GTX 970
GeForce GTX 960
GeForce GTX 950
GeForce GTX 980M
GeForce GTX 970M
GeForce GTX 965M
GeForce GTX 960
M
GeForce GTX 950M
GeForce 945
M
GeForce 940MX
GeForce 940
M
GeForce 930MX
GeForce 930
M
GeForce 920MX
GeForce 920M
GeForce 910M
Apollo 11 Lunar Landing Demo
Nvidia Nsight
techPowerUp!
GPU Database
The men's national basketball team of the United States competed at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece.
The team was led by future Basketball Hall of Fame head coach Larry Brown.
The team subsequently lost three games in the Olympics against its opponents, which is the most games ever lost by a US men's Olympic basketball team.
The team lost its opening game to Puerto Rico by 19 points, which stands as the largest margin of defeat for the U.S. in the Olympics.
It ended their 24-game Olympic winning streak since 1992, when National Basketball Association (NBA) players were first allowed to compete.
The team also lost games in the Olympics to Lithuania and Argentina.
In addition, the team lost a friendly preparation game prior to the Olympics, against Italy, by a score of 95–78.
This was the second time that Team USA won the bronze medal, having also done so at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul.

==
Roster ==
The following is the United States roster in the men's basketball tournament of the 2004 Summer Olympics.

After the United States finished at a humiliating sixth place in the 2002 FIBA World Championship, the Americans overhauled their roster for the 2003 FIBA Tournament of the Americas in Puerto Rico, where they needed to qualify for the 2004 Summer Olympics.
The team cruised to a first-place finish at the Americas Championship, and earned a spot in Athens, Greece, the following summer.
However most from the 2003 squad opted not to compete in the Olympics with the exception of Tim Duncan, Allen Iverson, and Richard Jefferson.
Newcomers to the team included young players LeBron James, Carmelo Anthony, Dwyane Wade, and Emeka Okafor.
The team featured just one All-NBA selection (Duncan) and two All-Stars (Duncan and Iverson) from the prior NBA season, which are both all-time lows for a U.S. Olympic team since NBA players were first allowed in 1992.
Team USA was coached by Larry Brown, who was coming off a championship in the 2004 NBA Finals.

==
Summary ==
The United States struggled with their outside shooting, finishing the tournament ranked last in three point field goals made (5.5 per game) and 11th in percentage (31.4) out of 12 teams.
They also struggled defensively.
The team's loss to Puerto Rico was just the third in U.S. Olympic men's basketball history.
Their two previous losses were both to the Soviet Union (1972 and 1988), with six having been the largest margin of defeat.

==
Statistical leaders ==


==
Records broken ==
Stephon Marbury scored 31 points and hit a record six three-pointers against Spain.

Team USA shot 12-of-22 (54.5 percent)
3-pointers in that same game.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
USA Basketball, official site
The history of basketball began with its invention in 1891 in Springfield, Massachusetts by Canadian physical education instructor James Naismith as a less injury-prone sport than football.
Naismith was a 31-year old graduate student when he created the indoor sport to keep athletes indoors during the winters.
The game became established fairly quickly and  grew very popular as the 20th century progressed, first in America and then in other parts of the world.
After basketball became established in American colleges, the professional game followed.
The American National Basketball Association (NBA), established in 1946, grew to a multibillion-dollar enterprise by the end of the century, and basketball became an integral part of American culture.

==
Early history ==


===
Invention of the game ===
The game of basketball as it is known today was created by Dr. James Naismith in December 1891 in Springfield, Massachusetts, to condition young athletes during cold months.
Naismith was a physical education instructor at YMCA International Training School (now known as Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts.
Upon the request of his boss, Naismith was tasked to create an indoor sports game to help athletes keep in shape in cold weather.
It consisted of peach baskets and a soccer style ball.
He published 13 rules for the new game.
He divided his class of eighteen into two teams of nine players each and set about to teach them the basics of his new game.
The objective of the game was to throw the basketball into the fruit baskets nailed to the lower railing of the gym balcony.
Every time a point was scored, the game was halted so the janitor could bring out a ladder and retrieve the ball.
After a while, the bottoms of the fruit baskets were removed.

The first public basketball game was played in Springfield, Massachusetts, on March 11, 1892.
===
Naismith's original rules ===
There were only thirteen rules of "basket ball":
The ball may be thrown in any direction with one or both hands.

The ball may be batted in any direction with one or both hands.

A player cannot run with the ball, the player must throw it from the spot on which he catches it, allowance to be made for a man who catches the ball when running at good speed.

The ball must be held in or between the hands, the arms or body must not be used for holding it.

No shouldering, holding, pushing, tripping or striking in any way the person of an opponent shall be allowed.
The first infringement of this rule by any person shall count as a foul, the second shall disqualify him until the next goal is made, or if there was evident intent to injure the person, for the whole of the game, no substitute.

A foul is striking the ball with the fist, violation of rules 3 and 4, and such as described in rule 5.

If either side makes three consecutive fouls it shall count a goal for opponents.

A goal shall be made when the ball is thrown or batted from grounds into the basket and stays there.
If the ball rests on the edge and the opponent moves the basket
it shall count as a goal.

When the ball goes out of bounds it shall be thrown into the field and played by the person first touching it.
In case of a dispute, the umpire shall throw it straight into the field.
The "thrower-in" is allowed five seconds.
If he holds it longer it shall go to the opponent.
If any side persists in delaying the game, the umpire shall call a foul on them.

The umpire shall be the judge of the men and shall note the fouls, and notify the referee when three consecutive fouls have been made.

The referee shall be the judge of the ball and shall decide when the ball is in play, in-bounds, and to which side it belongs, and shall keep the time.
He shall decide when a goal has been made and keep account of the goals with any other duties that are usually performed by a referee.

The time shall be fifteen-minute halves, with five-minute rests between.

The side making the most goals in that time shall be declared the winner.
In the case of a draw, the game may, by agreement of the captains, be continued until another goal is made.

===
The first basketball game ===
On December 21, 1891, Naismith published rules for a new game using five basic ideas and thirteen rules.
That day, he asked his class to play a match in the Armory Street court: 9 versus 9, using a soccer ball and two peach baskets.
Frank Mahan, one of his students, wasn't so happy.
He just said: "Harrumph.
Another new game".
Someone proposed to call it "Naismith Game", but he suggested "We have a ball and a basket
: why don’t we call it basketball?
"
The eighteen players were John G. Thompson, Eugene S. Libby, Edwin P. Ruggles, William R. Chase, T. Duncan Patton, Frank Mahan, Finlay G. MacDonald, William H. Davis and Lyman Archibald, who defeated George Weller, Wilbert Carey, Ernest Hildner, Raymond Kaighn, Genzabaro Ishikawa, Benjamin S. French, Franklin Barnes, George Day and Henry Gelan 1–0.
The goal was scored by Chase.
There were other differences between Naismith's first idea and the game played today.
The peach baskets were closed, and balls had to be retrieved manually, until a small hole was put in the bottom of the peach basket to poke the ball out using a stick.
Only in 1906 were metal hoops, nets and backboards introduced.
Moreover, earlier the soccer ball was replaced by a Spalding ball, similar to the one used today.

==
YMCA,
U.S. Army spread development ==
YMCA had a major role in spreading basketball throughout the United States, Canada, and the world.
In 1893, Mel Rideout arranged the first European match in Paris, in Montmartre.
At the same time, Bob Gailey went to Tientsin, China, Duncan Patton to India, Genzabaro Ishikawa to Japan, and C. Hareek to Persia.
The First World War broke out in 1914, and the U.S. Army started fighting in Europe in 1917.
During World War I, the American Expeditionary Force took basketball wherever it went.
Together with the troops, there were hundreds of physical education teachers who knew basketball.
Naismith also spent two years with YMCA in France in that period.

==
Early professional leagues, teams, and organizations ==
The first professional league was founded in 1898.
Six teams took part in the National Basketball League, and the first champions were the Trenton Nationals, followed by the New York Wanderers, the Bristol Pile Drivers and the Camden Electrics.
The league was abandoned in 1904.
Then, many small championships were organized, but most of them were not as important as some teams who played for money against challengers.

The Original Celtics, for instance, are considered the "fathers of  basketball" and were presented as "World’s Basketball Champions"; the players had to sign a contract to play with them, and Jim Furey organized matches as a circus, moving daily from town to town.
The Celtics became the strongest team, and their successes lasted from 1922 until 1928, when the team disbanded due to ownership problems.
The Original Celtics are sometimes incorrectly thought of as forebears of the current Boston Celtics of the NBA; in reality, they share only a name, as today's Celtics were not founded until 1946, nearly two decades after the demise of the Original Celtics.
In 1922, the first all-African American professional team was founded: the Rens (also known as New York Renaissance or Harlem Renaissance).
The Rens were the Original Celtics’ usual opponent, and for their matches a ticket cost $1.
They took part in some official championships and won the first World Professional Basketball Tournament in 1939.
The team disbanded in 1949.

In the 1920s and 1930s, Eastern Basket Ball League (founded in 1909), Metropolitan Basketball League (founded in 1921) and American Basketball League (founded in 1925) were the most important leagues.

==
Basketball in American colleges ==
The greatest level of early basketball activity outside of YMCAs was seen in American colleges.

The first known U.S. college to field a basketball team against an outside opponent was Vanderbilt University, which played against the local YMCA in Nashville, Tennessee, on February 7, 1893.

The second recorded instance of an organized college basketball game was Geneva College's game against the New Brighton YMCA on April 8, 1893, in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, which Geneva won 3–0.The first recorded game between two college teams occurred on February 9, 1895, when Hamline University faced Minnesota A&M (which later became a part of the University of Minnesota).

Minnesota A&M won the game, which was played under rules allowing nine players per side, 9–3.

The first intercollegiate match using the modern rule of five players per side is often credited as a game between the University of Chicago and the University of Iowa, in Iowa City, Iowa, on January 18, 1896.
The Chicago team, which was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg, who had learned the game from James Naismith at Springfield YMCA, won the game 15–12.

(Some sources state the first "true" five-on-five intercollegiate match was a game in 1897 between Yale and Penn, because the Iowa team, that played Chicago in 1896, was composed of University of Iowa students, but did not officially represent the University of Iowa – rather being organized through a YMCA.)
By 1900 the game of basketball had spread to colleges across the country .

By 1897 the U.S. Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) had taken over oversight of basketball activity from YMCA.
In April 1905, representatives of fifteen colleges separately took over control of the college game, creating the collegiate "Basket Ball Rule Committee."

The Committee was in turn absorbed into the predecessor of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) in 1909.
The extremely popular NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament was started in 1939.

==
First international games ==
After its arrival in Europe, basketball developed very quickly.
In 1909 the first international match was held in Saint Petersburg:
Mayak Saint Petersburg beat a YMCA American team.
The first great European event was held  in 1919 in Joinville-le-Pont, near Paris, during the Inter-Allied Games.
United States, led by future Hall of Fame player Max Friedman, won against Italy and France, and then Italy beat France.

Basketball soon became popular among French and Italians.
The Italian team had a white shirt with the House of Savoy shield and the players were: Arrigo and Marco Muggiani, Baccarini, Giuseppe Sessa, Palestra, Pecollo and Bagnoli.

==
Formation of FIBA ==
World basketball was growing, but it was on June 18, 1932 that a real international organization was formed, to coordinate tournaments and teams: that day, Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Romania and Switzerland founded the International Basketball Federation (Fédération internationale de basketball amateur, FIBA) in Geneva.
Its work was fundamental for the first inclusion of basketball in the Berlin Olympic Games in 1936.
The first Olympic title was won by the U.S. national team: Sam Balter, Ralph Bishop, Joe Fortenberry, Tex Gibbons, Francis Johnson, Carl Knowles, Frank Lubin, Art Mollner, Donald Piper, Jack Ragland, Willard Schmidt, Carl Shy, Duane Swanson, Bill Wheatley and the trainer James Needles.
Canada was runner-up; the games were played on an outdoor clay court.
The first World Championship was held in Argentina in 1950.

==
NBA ==
The Basketball league was founded in New York City on June 6, 1946 as the Basketball Association of America (BAA).
The league adopted the name National Basketball Association  (NBA) in 1949 after merging with the rival National Basketball League (NBL).
As of the early 21st century, the NBA is the most significant professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition.

The NBA's commissioner's name is Adam Sliver and his job
is to oversee the tasks in the organization.

Many rule changes have occurred since the inception of professional basketball that has altered the game to what we now recognize today.
These rule changes did not occur all at once but instead evolved to suit the changing style of play.
Starting with the widening of the free-throw lane in 1951 and a further extension in 1964, this change was made to reduce the dominant impact of Centres who played with their back facing the basket - otherwise known as Post Position.
Then in 1954, the 24-second shot clock was introduced.
This was done to increase the speed of the game, by forcing the team with the basketball to shoot the ball before the 24-second timer is up.
Finally, the NBA introduced the three-point line, in the 1979-1980 season.
This was done to spread out the players, which were predominantly playing underneath the basket at this time as well as add a further degree of difficulty to the game.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the influx of black athletes increased excitement and revitalized the NBA.
By this time, the League was mainly composed of African American players, and most of the top stars were black.
However, in the late 1970s, the popularity of the NBA was once again threatened by the decline in attendance and television ratings.
In 1979, the NBA's TV audience declined by 18%.

In the 1980s, former university superstar Earvin "Magic" Johnson of Los Angeles and Larry Bird of Boston once again gave hope to the league.
They changed the way the game was played.
That's because Johnson and Bird can do a lot of things that little players of the past could do, but they're six foot nine.
They were finally selected as the 50 best players in NBA history.
Just when the NBA needed a new force, Johnson and Bird gave the NBA a new big game to restore its low popularity.
During and after that, some superstars entered the league, including Charles Barkley, Hakeem Olajuwon, David Robinson, and Michael Jordan.

==
American Basketball Association ==
The American Basketball Association (ABA) was founded as an alternative to the NBA in 1967  at a time when the NBA was experiencing a lot of popularity.

The ABA offered an alternative ethos and game style as well as some changes in the rules.

Julius Erving was the leading player in the league, and helped launch a modern style of play that emphasizes leaping and play above the rim.

His playing strength helped legitimize the American Basketball Association.

The league emphasized excitement and liveliness, be it in the color of the ball (red, white and blue), the manner of play, wild promotions, or the three-point shot.
National recognition and earnings were low, leading the league to look for a way out of its problems.

Merger with the more established and very successful NBA was seen as a solution.

The ABA was folded into the NBA in the summer of 1976, its four most successful franchises (the New York Nets, Denver Nuggets, Indiana Pacers, and San Antonio Spurs) being incorporated into the older league.

The aggressive, loose style of play and the three-point shot  were taken up by the NBA.

==
African Americans in basketball
==
With racial segregation affecting all areas of public life in the U.S. including sports, all-black basketball teams (Black Fives) were established in 1904.
Dozens of all-black teams emerged during the Black Fives Era, in New York City, Washington, Chicago, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and other cities.

The Smart Set Athletic Club of Brooklyn and the St. Christopher Club of New York City were established as the first fully organized independent all-black basketball teams in 1906.
These teams were amateur.
In 1907 the amateur, all-black Olympian Athletic League was formed in New York City consisting of the Smart Set Athletic Club, St. Christopher Club, Marathon Athletic Club, Alpha Physical Culture Club, and Jersey City Colored YMCA.
The first inter-city basketball game between two black teams was played in 1907 when the Smart Set Athletic Club of Brooklyn travelled to Washington, DC to play the Crescent Athletic Club.
In 1908 Smart Set Athletic Club of Brooklyn, a member of the Olympian Athletic League, was named the first Colored Basketball World's Champion.
In 1910 Howard University’s first varsity basketball team began.

In 1922 the Commonwealth Five, the first all-black professional team was founded.
The New York Renaissance was founded in 1923.

In 1939 the all-black New York Renaissance beat the all-white Oshkosh All-Stars in the World Pro Basketball Tournament.

From the late 1920s the African American Harlem Globetrotters were a successful touring team, winning the WPBT in 1940.

The all-white National Basketball League began to racially integrate in 1942 with 10 black players joining two teams, the Toledo Jim White Chevrolets, and the Chicago Studebakers.

The NBA integrated in 1950–51 seasons, just two years after its founding, with three black players each achieving a separate milestone in that process.
In the draft held immediately prior to that season, Chuck Cooper became the first black player drafted by an NBA team.
Shortly after the draft, Nat Clifton became the first black player to sign an NBA contract.
Finally, Earl Lloyd became the first black player to appear in an NBA game as his team started its season before either Cooper's or Clifton's.
After the integration of the NBA, the Harlem Globetrotters started to focus on international touring and exhibition performances, including comic routines.
These tours helped to popularize basketball internationally, and gave the Globetrotters the reputation as Basketball's goodwill ambassadors.

==
Modern-day NBA ==
The NBA has helped popularize basketball in other parts of the world.
A large part of this is due to the transcendent stars that have played the game through the years.

It was because of the play of Michael Jordan that basketball started to reach international audiences, especially on the 1992 United States men's Olympic basketball team, known as the Dream Team.
After his final championship and second retirement in 1998, there was a void as in who would be the face of basketball.

Soon after with the help of Shaquille O'Neal, Kobe Bryant would go on to win three straight championships from 2000–2002 with the Los Angeles Lakers, helping make basketball more popular in many places around the world, most noticeably China.
Further championships in 2009 and 2010 helped raise his popularity.
In 2015, he announced the following season would be his last.
He would have played in 20 seasons by then.
Another player who revolutionized the game of basketball was LeBron James.
He was taken as the first overall pick in the 2003 NBA Draft by the Cleveland Cavaliers, and has worked his way to become the face of the NBA and basketball around the world.
He left the Cavaliers in 2010 to join the Miami Heat along with fellow stars Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh in what become known as the controversial decision, winning back-to-back championships in 2012 and 2013 before returning to the Cavaliers in 2014 where he won a third championship in 2016.
He joined the Los Angeles Lakers on July 1, 2018.There have been many international players who helped globalize the game.
The most noticeable would be Yao Ming.
He was the first ever Chinese player to be selected with the number one overall pick in 2002 by the Houston Rockets.
His play and presence in the NBA brought attention to basketball in Asian countries.

The style of basketball has evolved over time as well.
Basketball, especially in the 1990s and 2000s, used to give importance to big men.
Games were slow-paced and very defense-oriented.
Now because of teams like the San Antonio Spurs and the Golden State Warriors, ball movement and team play is more common.
The game has slowly moved away from this type of play.
The game now is up-tempo and teams are starting to involve a lot more three point shooting in their offenses.

== See also ==
Women's basketball
Timeline of women's basketball history
Basketball rules


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
Arceri, Mario; Bianchini, Valerio (2004).
La leggenda del basket.
Milano:
Baldini Castoldi Dalai.
ISBN 9788884906267.

Peterson, Robert W. (2002).
Cages to Jump Shots: Pro Basketball's Early Years.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
ISBN 0-8032-8772-0.

James Naismith, Basketball:
Its Origin and Development, University of Nebraska Press, 1941.
==
External links ==
Transcript of Naismith's original notes on the first basketball game
Dr. James Naismith's Original 13 Rules of Basketball
The Historyscoper
Joshua Harris (born 1965) is a billionaire American private equity investor and philanthropist who co-founded Apollo Global Management, one of the world's largest alternative investment firms.
Harris is the principal owner and managing partner of the New Jersey Devils of the National Hockey League and the Philadelphia 76ers of the National Basketball Association, and is a general partner in Crystal Palace of the English Premier League.

==
Early life and education ==
Harris was born to a Jewish family in 1965 and raised in Chevy Chase, Maryland.
He attended high school in Washington D.C at The Field School.
Harris graduated summa cum laude with a B.S. in economics from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1986, and then received his MBA from the Harvard Business School as a Baker Loeb Scholar.
He wrestled in college.

==
Financial career ==
He began working in the mergers-and-acquisitions department at Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1986 and worked there for 2 years before leaving to get his MBA at Harvard.
After graduating, he initially worked at Blackstone for 2 months before co-founding Apollo Global Management with Leon Black and Marc Rowan in 1990.Harris and Rowan were named Buyout Pros of the Year for 2004 by BuyoutsInsider.com.
In 2008, Harris and his Apollo partners invested $2 billion into LyondellBasell before it filed for bankruptcy in 2009.
When Apollo eventually sold their shares in the company in 2013, they realized a paper profit of $9.6 billion, the biggest profit ever from a private equity investment according to Bloomberg.
He is currently one of three managing partners of Apollo, along with Black and Rowan.
Harris' role includes oversight of the firm's day-to-day operations.
As of July 2020, his estimated net worth was $4.7 billion.
In 2017 Harris met with Trump officials to discuss infrastructure issues.
In November of that year,  Apollo Global Management loaned $184 million to Kushner Companies.

Apollo spokesman Charles V. Zehren stated that Harris was not involved in the decision to loan to Kushner.
As of the end of the third quarter of 2020, Harris and his Apollo partners reported that the firm had $433 billion in assets under management.

==
Sports career ==


===
Philadelphia 76ers ===
Harris and David S. Blitzer of the private equity firm Blackstone Group are the co-founders and managing partners of an investment group, Harris Blitzer Sports & Entertainment that won a $280 million bid for the purchase of the Philadelphia 76ers from Comcast Spectacor in 2011.
The other members of the investment group were  portfolio manager Art Wrubel, a fellow Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania graduate, as well as former NBA agent and Sacramento Kings executive Jason Levien,
former Vail Resorts CEO Adam Aron, Martin J. Geller, David B. Heller, Travis Hennings, James Lassiter, Marc Leder, Michael Rubin, Will Smith & Jada Pinkett Smith, and Indonesian businessmen Handy Soetedjo & Erick Thohir.
Comcast Spectacor and Harris began talks in the summer of 2011.
The deal was announced on July 13, 2011.
The NBA formally approved the deal on October 13, 2011.

===
New Jersey Devils ===
On August 15, 2013, it was announced that HBSE, led by Harris and partner Blitzer purchased a majority stake in the New Jersey Devils of the NHL, which includes the rights to operate Prudential Center in Newark, New Jersey.
The transaction was reportedly for over $320 million.
===
Crystal Palace F.C. ===
Harris and Blitzer were rumored to be interested in purchasing Premier League team Aston Villa, following the announcement by Randy Lerner that the club is up for sale.
Harris was then further linked in acquiring South London club Crystal Palace, currently of the Premier League.
After more than a year of talks, Harris and Blitzer each bought an 18% stake in Crystal Palace in December 2015, matching the stake owned by team chairman Steve Parish and giving the three control of the club.

===
Additional portfolio items ===
Harris and Blitzer, through Harris Blitzer Sports and Entertainment, also own
the NBA G League's Delaware Blue Coats, the AHL's Binghamton Devils, esports team Dignitas of New Meta Entertainment, sports tech venture capital firm HBSE Ventures, and marketing, hospitality, and event ticketing company Elevate Sports Ventures.
Harris has also expressed interest in buying the first NFL team to be based out of London.
In June 2020, Bloomberg reported that Harris & Blitzer acquired a stake of less than 5% in the NFL's Pittsburgh Steelers.
As part of this transaction, the two joined the ownership group as passive investors.
The stake was not part of their holding company, Harris Blitzer Sports & Entertainment.

==
Philanthropy ==
Harris and his wife Marjorie co-founded Harris Philanthropies, formerly known as the Harris Family Charitable Foundation, in 2014.
The foundation’s stated goals are "to uplift communities in need, pioneer solutions and promote education and leadership development.
"Harris has supported After-School All-Stars and America SCORES which help low-income youth to combine their love of athletics with academic success.
In August 2020, Harris and his wife gave a $2 million grant to the Bridgespan Group to launch Leading for Impact, a leadership program to serve Philadelphia area nonprofits.
In February 2019, Harris and his wife gave $10 million  to his alma mater, Penn’s Wharton School, to establish the Joshua J. Harris Alternative Investments Program.
Previously, Harris established the school’s Harris Family Endowed Scholarship.

In July 2018, the family’s foundation also donated $1 million to support Penn’s wrestling program.
In 2015, Harris committed to donate $3.5 million over 5 years to the Philadelphia Police Athletic League, a cause committed to helping Philadelphia children.
This was the largest gift in the organization’s history.

==
Personal life ==
Harris is married to Marjorie Harris (née Rubin), they have five children, and live in New York City.
Harris sits on the board of Mount Sinai Medical Center,  Harvard Business School,  and Wharton’s Board of Overseers.

In 2013, he was honored by the National Wrestling Hall of Fame with the Outstanding American Award.
Harris regularly supports the teams he is involved with by attending games and he trains and runs in marathons.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Harris Philanthropies website
The men's national basketball team of the United States won the gold medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia.
They defeated France by a score of 85–75 in the gold medal game.
Team USA won gold for the twelfth time in fourteen Olympic basketball tournaments.

==
Roster ==
Head Coach:
Rudy Tomjanovich (Houston Rockets)
Assistant Coach:
Larry Brown (Philadelphia 76ers)
Assistant Coach:
Gene Keady (Purdue University, Ind.)
Assistant Coach:
Tubby Smith (University of Kentucky)


===
Withdrawals ===
Kobe Bryant - the 2000 All-NBA Second Team
Tim Duncan - the 2000 All-NBA First Team
Allen Iverson - the 2000 All-NBA Second Team
Karl Malone - the 2000 All-NBA Second Team
Reggie Miller
Shaquille O'Neal - the 2000 All-NBA First Team
David Robinson - the 2000 All-NBA Third Team
John Stockton -
The 50 Greatest Players in National Basketball Association History
Scottie Pippen - the 2000 NBA All-Defensive Second Team
Paul Pierce
Eddie Jones - the 2000 All-NBA Third Team
Steve Francis - the 2000 Co-NBA Rookie of the Year
Chris Webber - the 2000 All-NBA Third Team
Stephon Marbury - the 2000 All-NBA Third Team


== Results ==
United States beat  China, 119–72
 United States beat  Italy, 93–61
United States beat  Lithuania, 85–76
United States beat  New Zealand, 102–56
 United States beat  France
, 106–94
 United States beat  Russia, 85–70
United States beat  Lithuania, 85–83
United States beat  France,
85–75In the Preliminary Round
, Team USA was undefeated (5-0), and qualified for the quarterfinals.
In the knockout rounds, Team USA faced Russia (Quarterfinals), Lithuania (Semifinals), and France (Gold Medal Game).

== 2000 Olympic Games final standings ==
1.

United States (8–0)
2.

France (4–4)
3.

Lithuania (5–3)
4.

Australia (4–4)
5.

Italy (4–3)
6.

FR Yugoslavia (4–3)
7.

Canada (5–2)
8.

Russia (3–4)
9.

Spain (2–4)
10.

China
(2–4)
11.

New Zealand (1–5)
12.

Angola (0–6)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
USA Basketball, official site
The United States women's national soccer team (USWNT) represents the United States in international women's soccer.
The team is the most successful in international women's soccer, winning four Women's World Cup titles (1991, 1999, 2015, and 2019), four Olympic gold medals (1996, 2004, 2008, and 2012), and eight CONCACAF Gold Cups.
It medaled in every World Cup and Olympic tournament in women's soccer from 1991 to 2015, before being knocked out in the quarterfinal of the 2016 Summer Olympics.
The team is governed by United States Soccer Federation and competes in CONCACAF (the Confederation of North, Central American, and Caribbean Association Football).

After mostly being ranked No.
2 from 2003 to 2008 in the FIFA Women's World Rankings, the team was ranked No.
1 continuously from March 2008 to November 2014, the longest consecutive top ranking of any team.
Since FIFA rankings were established in 2003, it has been ranked No.
1 for a total of 13 years; the only other team to be ranked No.
1, Germany, has been there for a total of 4½ years.
The USWNT has never been ranked lower than second.

The team was selected as the U.S. Olympic Committee's Team of the Year in 1997 and 1999, and Sports Illustrated chose the entire team as 1999 Sportswomen of the Year for its usual Sportsman of the Year honor.
On April 5, 2017, U.S. Women's Soccer and U.S. Soccer reached a deal on a new collective bargaining agreement that would, among other things, lead to a pay increase.

==
History ==


===
Origins in the 1980s ===
The passing of Title IX in 1972, which outlawed gender-based discrimination for federally-funded education programs, spurred the creation of college soccer teams across the United States at a time when women's soccer was rising in popularity internationally.
The U.S. Soccer Federation tasked coach Mike Ryan to select a roster of college players to participate in the 1985 Mundialito tournament in Italy, its first foray into women's international soccer.
The team played its first match on August 18, 1985, losing 1–0 to Italy, and finished the tournament in fourth place after failing to win its remaining matches against Denmark and England.
Despite the tournament loss, the first match against Italy is where the United States’ famous “Oosa Oosa Oosa Ah!”
chant was born.
During the match, the style of play and athleticism of the United States ultimately won over the Italian fans.
To the team's surprise, the Italians began cheering for the US, which they pronounced as “oosa.”
Such surprising support from the Italians impressed the United States so much that the team decided to adopt the Italians' endearing mispronunciation as its new chant that it would use to conclude its pre-game huddles.
From then on, the United States has concluded each pre-game huddle with the same chant, “Oosa Oosa Oosa Ah!”
as a call back to where it all began in 1985 that honors the legacy of those who came before.
University of North Carolina coach Anson Dorrance was hired as the team's first full-time manager in 1986 with the goal of fielding a competitive women's team at the next Mundialito and at future tournaments.
In their first Mundialito under Dorrance, the United States defeated China, Brazil, and Japan before finishing as runners-up to Italy.
Dorrance gave national team appearances to teenage players, including future stars Mia Hamm, Julie Foudy, and Kristine Lilly, instead of the college players preferred by the federation.
The United States played in the 1988 FIFA Women's Invitation Tournament in China, a FIFA-sanctioned competition to test the feasibility of a regular women's championship, and lost in the quarterfinals to eventual champions Norway.

=== 1990s ===
Following the 1988 tournament, FIFA announced plans for a new women's tournament, named the 1st FIFA World Championship for Women's Football for the M&M's Cup until it was retroactively given the "World Cup" name.
The United States qualified for the tournament by winning the inaugural CONCACAF Women's Championship, hosted by Haiti in April 1991, outscoring their opponents 49–0 for the sole CONCACAF berth in the tournament.
The team played several exhibition matches abroad against European opponents to prepare for the world championship, while its players quit their regular jobs to train full-time with meager compensation.
Dorrance utilized a 4–3–3 formation that was spearheaded by the "Triple-Edged Sword" of forward Michelle Akers-Stahl and wingers Carin Jennings and April Heinrichs.
At the Women's World Cup, the United States won all three of its group stage matches and outscored its opponents 11–2.
In the opening match against Sweden, the U.S. took a 3–0 lead early in the second half, but conceded two goals to end the match with a narrower 3–2 victory.
The U.S. proceeded to win 5–0 in its second match against Brazil and 3–0 in its third match against Japan in the following days, clinching first place in the group and a quarterfinal berth.
The United States proceeded with a 7–0 victory in the quarterfinals over Chinese Taipei, fueled by a five-goal performance by Akers-Stahl in the first fifty minutes of the match.
In the semifinals against Germany, Carin Jennings scored a hat-trick in the first half as the team clinched a place in the final with a 5–2 victory.
The team's lopsided victories in the earlier rounds had brought attention from American media outlets, but the final match was not televised live in the U.S.
The United States won the inaugural Women's World Cup title by defeating Norway 2–1 in the final, played in front of 65,000 spectators at Tianhe Stadium in Guangzhou, as Akers-Stahl scored twice to create and restore a lead for the Americans.
Akers-Stahl finished as the top goalscorer at the tournament, with ten goals, and Carin Jennings was awarded the Golden Ball as the tournament's best player.
Despite their Women's World Cup victory, the U.S. team remained in relative obscurity and received a small welcome from several U.S. Soccer Federation officials upon arrival at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City.
The team were given fewer resources and little attention from the federation as they focused on improving the men's national team in preparation for the 1994 men's World Cup that would be hosted in the United States.
The women's team was placed on hiatus after the tournament, only playing twice in 1992, but returned the following year to play in several tournaments hosted in Cyprus, Canada, and the United States, including a second CONCACAF Championship title.
The program was still supported better than those of the former Soviet Union, where football was considered a "men's game".
The United States played in several friendly tournaments to prepare for the 1995 FIFA Women's World Cup and its qualification campaign.
The first was the inaugural staging of the Algarve Cup in Portugal, which saw the team win its two group stage matches but lose 1–0 to Norway in the final.
It followed by a victory in the Chiquita Cup, an exhibition tournament hosted in August on the U.S. East Coast against Germany, China, and Norway.
Dorrance resigned from his position as head coach in early August and was replaced by his assistant, Tony DiCicco, a former professional goalkeeper who played in the American Soccer League.
DiCicco led the United States to a berth in the Women's World Cup by winning the 1994 CONCACAF Championship, where the team scored 36 goals and conceded only one.
In February 1995, the U.S. women's program opened a permanent training and treatment facility in Sanford, Florida, and began a series of warm-up friendlies that were paid for by American company Nike.
The team topped their group in the Women's World Cup, despite a 3–3 tie with China in the opening match and losing goalkeeper Brianna Scurry to a red card in their second match.
The United States proceeded to beat Japan 4–0 in the quarterfinals, but lost 1–0 to eventual champions Norway in the semifinals.
The team finished in third place, winning 2–0 in its consolation match against China.

The team won the gold medal in the inaugural Olympic women's soccer tournament in the 1996 Summer Olympics, defeating China 2–1 in the final before a crowd of 76,481 fans.
Julie Foudy, Kristine Lilly, and the rest of the 1999 team started a revolution towards women's team sports in America.
An influential victory came in the 1999 World Cup, when they defeated China 5–4 in a penalty shoot-out following a 0–0 draw after extended time.
With this win they emerged onto the world stage and brought significant media attention to women's soccer and athletics.
On July 10, 1999, over 90,000 people (the largest ever for a women's sporting event and one of the largest attendances in the world for a tournament game final) filled the Rose Bowl to watch the United States play China in the Final.
After a back and forth game, the score was tied 0–0 at full-time, and remained so after extra time, leading to a penalty kick shootout.
With Briana Scurry's save of China's third kick, the score was 4–4 with only Brandi Chastain left to shoot.
She scored and won the game for the United States.
Chastain dropped to her knees and whipped off her shirt, celebrating in her sports bra, which later made the cover of Sports Illustrated and the front pages of newspapers around the country and world.
This win influenced many girls to want to play on a soccer team.

=== 2000s ===
In the 2003 FIFA Women's World Cup, the U.S. defeated Norway 1–0 in the quarterfinals but lost 0–3 to Germany in the semifinals.
The team then defeated Canada 3–1 to claim third place.
Abby Wambach was the team's top scorer with three goals, while Joy Fawcett and Shannon Boxx made the tournament's all-star team.
In the 2004 Olympics, the last major international tournament for Hamm and Foudy, the U.S. earned the gold medal, winning 2–1 over Brazil in the final on an extra time goal by Wambach.
At the 2007 FIFA Women's World Cup, the U.S. defeated England 3–0 in the quarterfinals but then suffered its most lopsided loss in team history when it lost to Brazil 0–4 in the semifinals.
The U.S. recovered to defeat Norway to take third place.
Abby Wambach was the team's leading scorer with 6 goals, and Kristine Lilly was the only American named to the tournament's all-star team.

The team won another gold medal in the 2008 Olympics, but interest in the Women's National Team had diminished since their performance in the 1999 World Cup.
However, the second women's professional league was created in March 2009, Women's Professional Soccer.

=== 2010s ===
In the quarterfinal of the 2011 Women's World Cup in Germany, the U.S. defeated Brazil 5–3 on penalty kicks.
Abby Wambach's goal in the 122nd minute to tie the game 2–2 has been voted the greatest goal in U.S. soccer history and the greatest goal in Women's World Cup history.
The U.S. then beat France 3–1 in the semifinal, but lost to Japan 3–1 on penalty kicks in the Final after drawing 1–1 in regulation and 2–2 in overtime.
Hope Solo was named the tournament's best goalkeeper and Abby Wambach won the silver ball as the tournament's second-best player.

In the 2012 Summer Olympics, the U.S. won the gold medal for the fourth time in five Olympics by defeating Japan 2–1 in front of 80,203 fans at Wembley Stadium, a record for a women's soccer game at the Olympics.
The United States advanced to face Japan for the gold medal by winning the semifinal against Canada, a 4–3 victory at the end of extra time.
The 2012 London Olympics marked the first time the USWNT won every game en route to the gold medal and set an Olympic women's team record of 16 goals scored.

The National Women's Soccer League started in 2013, and provided competitive games as well as opportunities to players on the fringes of the squad.
The U.S. had a 43-game unbeaten streak that spanned two years – the streak began with a 4–0 win over Sweden in the 2012 Algarve Cup, and came to an end after a 1–0 loss against Sweden in the 2014 Algarve Cup.
The U.S. defeated Japan 5–2 in the final of the 2015 World Cup, becoming the first team in history to win three Women's World Cup titles.
In the 16th minute, Carli Lloyd achieved the fastest hat-trick from kick-off in World Cup history, and Abby Wambach was greeted with a standing ovation for her last World Cup match.
Following their 2015 World Cup win, the team was honored with a ticker tape parade in New York City, the first for a women's sports team, and honored by President Barack Obama at the White House.
On December 16, 2015, however, a 0–1 loss to China in Wambach's last game meant the team's first home loss since 2004, ending their 104-game home unbeaten streak.
In the 2016 Summer Olympics, the U.S. drew against Sweden in the quarterfinal; in the following penalty kick phase, Sweden won the game 4–3.
The loss marked the first time that the USWNT did not advance to the gold medal game of the Olympics, and the first time that the USWNT failed to advance to the semifinal round of a major tournament.
After the defeat in the 2016 Olympics, the USWNT underwent a year of experimentation which saw them losing three home games.
If not for a comeback win against Brazil, the USWNT was on the brink of losing four home games in one year, a low never before seen by the USWNT.
2017 saw the USWNT play 12 games against teams ranked in the top-15 in the world.
Throughout 2018, the U.S. would pick up two major tournament wins, winning both the SheBelieves Cup and the Tournament of Nations.
The team would enter qualifying for the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup on a 21-game unbeaten streak and dominated the competition, winning all five of its games and the tournament whilst qualifying for the World Cup as well as scoring 18 goals and conceding none.
On November 8, 2018, the U.S. earned their 500th victory in team history after a 1–0 victory over Portugal.
The start of 2019 saw the U.S. lose an away game to France, 3–1, marking the end of a 28-game unbeaten streak and their first loss since a 1–0 defeat to Australia in July 2017.The
USWNT started off their 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup campaign with a 13–0 victory against Thailand, setting a new Women's World Cup goal record.
Alex Morgan equaled Michelle Akers' record of scoring five goals in a single World Cup match, while four of her teammates scored their first World Cup goals in their debut at the tournament.
The U.S. would win its next match against Chile 3–0 before concluding the group stage with a win of 2–0 over Sweden.
The team emerged as the winners of Group F and would go on to face Spain in the Round of 16, whom they would defeat 2–1 thanks to a pair of Megan Rapinoe penalties.
The team would achieve identical results in their next two games.
With 2–1 victories over France and then England seeing them advance to a record third straight World Cup final, they played against the Netherlands for the title.
They beat the Netherlands 2–0 in the final on July 7, 2019, becoming the first team in history to win four Women's World Cup titles.

On July 30, 2019, Jill Ellis announced that she would step down as head coach following the conclusion of the team's post-World Cup victory tour on October 6, 2019.Vlatko Andonovski was hired as head coach of the USWNT in October 2019, replacing Ellis.

===
2020s ===
The USWNT began the new decade by winning both the 2020 CONCACAF Women's Olympic Qualifying tournament (which qualified the team for the 2020 Summer Olympics) and the 2020 SheBelieves Cup titles.
In early March 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the USSF cancelled previously scheduled USWNT friendlies against Australia and Brazil.
Later that same month, it was announced by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the Tokyo Metropolitan Government that the 2020 Summer Olympics were to be postponed until July 2021.
They later made a comeback on November 27, 2020, where they took on the Netherlands in a friendly match.
Rose Lavelle and Kristie Mewis scored both goals in the match, winning the game 2–0.

==
Team image ==


===
Media coverage ===
U.S. television coverage for the five Women's World Cups from 1995 to 2011 was provided by ESPN/ABC and Univision, while coverage rights for the three Women's World Cups from 2015 to 2023 were awarded to Fox Sports and Telemundo.
In May 2014 a deal was signed to split TV coverage of other USWNT games between ESPN, Fox Sports, and Univision through the end of 2022.
The USWNT games in the 2014 CONCACAF Women's Championship and the 2015 Algarve Cup were broadcast by Fox Sports.
NBC will broadcast the Olympic tournament through 2032.The 1999 World Cup final set the original record for largest U.S. television audience for a women's soccer match, averaging 18 million viewers.
It was the most viewed English-language U.S. broadcast of any soccer match until the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup final between the United States and Japan.
The 2015 Women's World Cup Final between the United States and Japan was the most watched soccer match—men's or women's—in American broadcast history.
It averaged 23 million viewers and higher ratings than the NBA finals and the Stanley Cup finals.
The final was also the most watched US-Spanish language broadcast of a FIFA Women's World Cup match in history.

Overall, there were over 750 million viewers for the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup, making it the most watched Women's World Cup in history.
The FIFA Women's World Cup is now the second-most watched FIFA tournament, with only the men's FIFA World Cup attracting more viewership.

===
In popular culture ===
A narrative nonfiction book covering the entire history of the team from 1985 to 2019 called The National Team:
The Inside Story of the Women Who Changed Soccer was named one of Vanity Fair's best books of 2019 and made NPR's 2019 year-end books list.

A book about the team's 1999 Women's World Cup campaign, Girls of Summer: The U.S. Women's Soccer Team and
How It Changed the World was released in 2001 and in 2020 Netflix announced a film based on the book.
In 2005, HBO released a documentary called Dare to Dream:
The Story of the U.S. Women's Soccer Team.
In 2013, a documentary about the 1999 World Cup-winning team called The 99ers was produced by former player Julie Foudy and ESPN Films.

===
Attendance ===
The 1999 World Cup final, in which the United States defeated China, set a world attendance record for a women's sporting event of 90,185 in a sellout at the Rose Bowl in Southern California.
The record for Olympic women's soccer attendance was set by the 2012 Olympic final between the USWNT and Japan, with 80,023 spectators at Wembley Stadium.
==
Legal issues ==


===
Pay discrimination ===
In recent years, the players of the USWNT have waged an escalating legal fight with the United States Soccer Federation over gender discrimination.
Central to their demands is equal pay.
The players point to their lower paychecks as compared to the U.S. men's national team, despite their higher record of success in recent years.
In April 2016, five players filed a wage-discrimination action against the U.S. Soccer Federation with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
The group consisted of Hope Solo, Carli Lloyd, Alex Morgan, Megan Rapinoe, and Becky Sauerbrunn.

One year later, in April 2017, it was announced that a new collective bargaining agreement (CBA) with U.S soccer had been made.
The agreement stated that the players would have an increased base pay and improved match bonuses.
These changes could increase their previous pay from $200,000 to $300,000.
However, the CBA did not guarantee the U.S national women's team equal pay with the men's team.
The CBA's five-year term through 2021 ensured that the next negotiation would not become an issue for the team in its upcoming competitions.
On top of this CBA, U.S Soccer had agreed to pay the players for two years' worth of unequal per-diem payments.
On March 8, 2019, all 28 members of the U.S. team filed a gender discrimination lawsuit against the U.S. Soccer Federation.
The lawsuit, filed in the U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, accused the Federation of "institutional gender discrimination".
The lawsuit claims that the discrimination affects not only the amount the players are paid but also their playing, training, and travel conditions.
In May 2020, several key parts of the case were dismissed, with federal judge R. Gary Klausner noting that the team had agreed to take higher base compensation and other benefits in their most recent CBA instead of the bonuses received by the men's national team.
On March 8, 2021, the second anniversary of the team's pay discrimination lawsuit, Congresswomen Doris Matsui and Rosa DeLauro introduced the Give Our Athletes Level Salaries (GOALS)
Act to ensure the U.S. women's national soccer team "are paid fair and equitable wages compared to the U.S. Men's team".
The GOALS Act threatens to cut federal funding for the 2026 World Cup if the U.S. Soccer Federation does not comply.

===
Artificial turf ===
Along with their lawsuit for pay-equity, the US Women’s Soccer players have fought FIFA on policies regarding artificial turf.
This battle to eliminate the use of turf in major women’s games heightened around the 2015 FIFA Women’s World Cup, hosted by Canada; during this tournament, the US Women played 8 of their 10 games on artificial turf.
Prior to the 2015 World Cup, Abby Wambach headed a discrimination lawsuit with other global soccer stars including Marta of Brazil and Homare Sawa of Japan.
Due to the tournament’s quick approach
, the suit was dropped as players were denied an expedited hearing.

==
Staff ==
Coaching staff
Technical staff


==
Players ==


===
Current squad ===
The following 23 players were named to the squad for the friendlies against  Sweden and  France on April 10 and 13, 2021, respectively.
Caps and goals are current as of April 13, 2021, after match against  France.

===
Recent call-ups ===
The following players were also named to a squad in the last 12 months.

Notes:

PRE:
Preliminary squad


==
Recent schedule and results ==
The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.

Win
Draw
  Lose
Postponed


===
2020 ===
=== 2021 ===
USWNT Schedule
USWNT Results
USA:
Fixtures and Results –
FIFA.com


==
Competitive record ==
For results in minor tournaments, see the History of the United States women's national football team


===
All-time results ===
As of April 10, 2021Sources


===
Major ===
The two highest-profile tournaments the U.S. team participates in are the quadrennial FIFA Women's World Cup and the quadrennial Olympic Games.

====
World Cup ====
The team has participated in every World Cup through 2019 and won a medal in each.
====
Olympic Games ====
The team has participated in every Olympic tournament through 2016 and reached the gold medal game in each until 2016, when they were eliminated in the quarterfinals on a penalty shootout loss to Sweden.

===
Minor ===


====
CONCACAF Championship and Gold Cup ====
1
The U.S. team directly qualified for the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup as hosts of the event.
Because of this, they did not participate in the 1998 CONCACAF Championship, which was the qualification tournament for the World Cup.

====
Algarve Cup ====
The Algarve Cup is a global invitational tournament for national teams in women's soccer hosted by the Portuguese Football Federation (FPF).
Held annually in the Algarve region of Portugal since 1994, it has been one of the more prestigious women's soccer events other than the Women's World Cup and Olympic tournament, and it has been nicknamed the "Mini FIFA Women's World Cup."
Since 2016, the SheBelieves Cup replaced it on the U.S. team's schedule.

====
SheBelieves Cup ====
The SheBelieves Cup is a global invitational tournament for national teams in women's soccer hosted in the United States.

====
Tournament of Nations ====
The Tournament of Nations is a global invitational tournament for national teams in women's soccer hosted in the United States in non-World Cup and non-Olympic years.

==
Player records ==
As of April 13, 2021.
Active players are shown in Bold.
The women's national team boasts the first six players in the history of the game to have earned 200 caps.
These players have since been joined in the 200-cap club by several players from other national teams, as well as by five more Americans: Kate Markgraf, Abby Wambach, Heather O'Reilly, Carli Lloyd and Hope Solo.
Kristine Lilly and Christie Rampone are the only players to earn more than 300 caps.

In March 2004, Mia Hamm and Michelle Akers were the only two women and the only two Americans named to the FIFA 100, a list of the 125 greatest living soccer players chosen by Pelé as part of FIFA's centenary observances.

The USWNT
All-Time Best XI was chosen In December 2013 by the United States Soccer Federation:
Goalkeeper: Briana Scurry
Defenders: Brandi Chastain, Carla Overbeck, Christie Rampone, Joy Fawcett
Midfielders: Kristine Lilly, Michelle Akers,
Julie Foudy
Forwards:
Mia Hamm, Abby Wambach, Alex Morgan
Source
Source

Source
Sources
Note:
The goal record for most scored in a match by a member of the USWNT is five, which has been accomplished by the eight players above.

==
Head coaches ==
As of April 13,
2021Sources


== Honors ==


==
See also ==
Dare to Dream:
The Story of the U.S. Women's Soccer Team – 2005
HBO documentary
List of United States women's national soccer team
hat-tricks
U.S. Women's National Team Players Association
U.S. women's national soccer team pay discrimination claim
USWNT All-Time Best XI
National Women's Soccer League (NWSL), 2013–present
Soccer in the United States
United States
men's national soccer team


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
FIFA profile
Scorum
Josh Harris (born c. 1960) is an American Internet entrepreneur.
He was the founder of JupiterResearch and Pseudo.com, a live audio and video webcasting website founded in 1993, which filed for bankruptcy following the end of the dot-com bubble in 2000.
He "may have been the first internet millionaire in New York," where "he rode the web 1.0 dotcom boom to a fortune of $85 million," and then lost all his money.

==
Early life ==
Josh Harris was born circa 1960.
He grew up in Ventura, California.
His father worked for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) while his mother was a social worker.
He has three brothers and three sisters.
Harris majored in communications at UC San Diego and later was a graduate student at the University of Southern California's (USC)
Annenberg School for Communication.

==
Career ==
Harris founded the technology market research consulting firm Jupiter Communications, now known as JupiterResearch, in 1986.
An initial public offering in 1999 raised $65.6 million.

===
Pseudo ===
In 1993, Harris founded Pseudo Programs, which started out netcasting 40 radio programs and throwing parties, and grew into an "online television network.
"
In the Soho Pseudo offices at the corner of Houston and Broadway, Harris, sometimes dressed as an ersatz Luvy from Gilligan's Island, would throw parties, often raided by the police and fire department, attracting an array of artists who would come to work for Pseudo, "a paid playland," eventually developing channels dominated by electronic music and hip-hop.
Funded by Intel, the Tribune Company, Prospect Street Ventures, and Prodigy, under Harris' leadership as Chairman Pseudo "burned through $32 million in two years," more than "$2 million in cash a month," and was seen as emblematic of the dot-com excesses as it "fabulously flamed out."

CEO Larry Lux left in 1999 after disagreements with Harris.
Lux raised $20 million during a nine month tenure where he introduced more mainstream content.
Former CNNfn executive, David Bohrman, was brought in as CEO in 2000 to ready the company for an initial public offering.
Bohrman raised $14 million in funding led by LVMH Moet-Hennessey Louis Vuitton's media group, Desfosses International, but "was unable to secure a $40 million round of investments that would have kept Pseudo afloat."
In September 2001 the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
In early 2001 it was bought in bankruptcy court by INTV for $2 million.
Harris owned and operated Livingston Orchards, LLC, a commercial apple farm in Columbia County, New York from 2001–2006.
He was subsequently the CEO of the African Entertainment Network, based in the Sidamo region of Ethiopia.
,
where he lived after leaving New York.

===
We Live in Public ===
Harris' art project Quiet
: We Live in Public, an Orwellian, Big Brother concept with "a neo-fascistic element," developed in the late '90s, placed more than 100 volunteers in a three story loft on Broadway in New York City.
There were 110 surveillance cameras capturing every move, and "every “resident” had their own channel through which to watch each other.
Harris proclaimed, “Everything is free, except your image.
That we own.”
"
Alanna Heiss, then the director of the P.S. 1 Contemporary Art Center in Queens, was among those who moved in, calling it "one of the most extraordinary activities I've ever attended anywhere in the world.
"
The project was forced to shut down on January 1, 2000 by order of the New York Police Department.
A few months later, Harris started weliveinpublic.com, a project that entailed himself and his then girlfriend, Tanya Corrin, living at home under 24-hour internet surveillance viewable by anyone.
After a few months Corrin left Harris and the project citing mental and emotional stress.
Harris continued "living in public" for a few more weeks, finally ending the site due to the mental, personal, and financial losses the project caused him.
On the Swedish TV show Kobra, Harris stated that he had been widely influenced by the 1998 film The Truman Show.
He strongly believes that the technological singularity will be reached and the human being will cease to be an individual, while the machine becomes the new king of the jungle.
In 2001, an episode of director Errol Morris' First Person television series centered on Harris and the weliveinpublic.com project.
Harris was the focus of director Ondi Timoner's documentary film, We Live in Public, an entry at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival that was awarded the Grand Jury Prize award in the US documentary category.
Harris was the CEO of The Wired City, an internet television network which would allow viewers to interact with each other, based in New York City.
In 2011, he ran a Kickstarter crowdfunding campaign to resurrect The Wired City.
In 2011, he made a pitch to run the MIT Media Lab promoting technological singularity.
As of 2016, he believes he is under surveillance by the FBI over his ties to 2001's
The B-Thing, a covert art installation by gelitin, possibly a hoax, of a balcony on the 91st floor of the World Trade Center.
In 2019, Harris was a contributor to the Cam-Life exhibition at the Museum of Sex.

==
Personal life ==
Harris resides in Las Vegas, Nevada.

==
References ==
Basketball contests at the 1996 Olympic Games was the fourteenth appearance of the sport of basketball as an official Olympic medal event.
It held from July 20, 1996 to August 4, 1996.
Games took place in the Morehouse College Gymnasium and in the Georgia Dome.

==
Medalists ==
With the U.S. men's team winning the gold medal, Scottie Pippen would become the first person to win an NBA championship and Olympic gold medal in the same year twice, after having played for the Chicago Bulls in the NBA Finals.
He had previously played with the Bulls in the 1992 and later that year, for the "Dream Team" at the Barcelona Olympics.

==
Qualification ==
An NOC may enter up to one men's team with 12 players and up to one women's team with 12 players.
The reigning world champions and the host country qualify automatically, as do the winners of the five continental championships, plus the runner-up and third place from the Americas, the runner-up from Asia and the second through fourth places from the Europe tournament.
For the women's tournament, the extra teams consisted of the runner-up from the Americas, in addition to the second and third places from Asia and Europe.
===
Men ===


===
Women ===


== Format ==
Twelve teams are split into two preliminary round groups of six teams each.

The top four teams from both groups qualify for the knockout stage.

Fifth and sixth places from each group form an additional bracket to decide 9th–12th places in the final ranking.

In the quarterfinals, the matchups are as follows: A1 vs. B4, A2 vs. B3, A3 vs. B2 and A4 vs. B1.

The four eliminated from the quarterfinals form an additional bracket to decide 5th–8th places in the final ranking.

The winning teams from the quarterfinals meet in the semifinals as follows: A1/B4 vs. A3/B2 and A2/B3 vs. A4/B1.

The winning teams from the semifinals contest the gold medal.
The losing teams contest the bronze.
Tie-breaking criteria:
Head to head results
Goal average (not the goal difference) between the tied teams
Goal average of the tied teams for all teams in its group


==
Men's tournament ==


===
Preliminary round ===
The four best teams from each group advanced to the quarterfinal round.

====
Group A ====


====
Group B ====


===
Knockout stage ===


==
Women's tournament ==


===
Preliminary round ===
The four best teams from each group advanced to the quarterfinal round.

====
Group A ====


====
Group B ====


===
Knockout stage ===


==
Final standings ==


==
References ==
1996 Olympic Games:
Tournament for Men, FIBA Archive.
Accessed June 25, 2011.

1996
Olympic Games:
Tournament for Women, FIBA Archive.
Accessed June 25, 2011.
The WorldCom scandal was a major accounting scandal that came to light in the summer of 2002 at WorldCom, the USA's second largest long-distance telephone company at the time.
From 1999 to 2002, senior executives at WorldCom led by founder and CEO Bernard Ebbers orchestrated a scheme to inflate earnings in order to maintain WorldCom's stock price.

The fraud was uncovered in June 2002 when the company's internal audit unit, led by vice president Cynthia Cooper, discovered over $3.8 billion of fraudulent balance sheet entries.
Eventually, WorldCom was forced to admit that it had overstated its assets by over $11 billion.
At the time, it was the largest accounting fraud in American history.

==
Background ==
In December 2000, WorldCom financial analyst Kim Emigh was told to allocate labor for capital projects in WorldCom's network systems division as an expense rather than book it as a capital project.
By Emigh's estimate, the order would have affected at least $35 million in capital spending.
Believing that he was being asked to commit tax fraud, Emigh pressed his concerns up the chain of command, notifying an assistant to WorldCom chief operating officer Ron Beaumont.
Within 24 hours, it was decided not to implement the directive.
However, Emigh was reprimanded by his immediate superiors, and subsequently laid off in March 2001.Emigh, who was from the MCI half of the 1997 WorldCom/MCI merger, later told Fort Worth Weekly in May 2002 that he had expressed concerns about MCI's spending habits for years.
He believed that things had been reined in somewhat after WorldCom took over, but he was still unnerved by vendors billing WorldCom for exorbitant amounts.
The Fort Worth Weekly article was eventually read by Glyn Smith, an internal audit manager at WorldCom headquarters in Clinton, Mississippi.
After examining it, he suggested to his boss, Cooper, that she should start that year's scheduled capital expenditure audit a few months early.
Cooper agreed, and the audit began in late May.


==
Prepaid capacity ==
During a meeting with the auditors, corporate finance director Sanjeev Sethi explained that differing amounts in two capital spending expenditures related to "prepaid capacity.
"
No one in the room had ever heard that term before.
When pressed for an explanation, Sethi said that he did not know what the term meant, even though his division approved capital spending requests.
He referred the auditors to corporate controller David Myers.
Suspicious, Cooper asked Mark Abide, head of property accounting, about the term.
Abide was not familiar with it either, even though he had made several entries about prepaid capacity in WorldCom's computerized accounting system.
Cooper and Smith asked senior associate Eugene Morse, one of the "techies" on the internal audit team, to peruse the accounting system for any references to prepaid capacity.
Morse was eventually able to find one and trace it through the system.
However, the amounts were bouncing between accounts in an unusual manner, resulting in a large round amount moving from WorldCom's income statement to its balance sheet.
Cooper asked Morse to see if there was another prepaid capacity entry that moved around in similar fashion.
Morse went to work, but pulled so much data that he frequently clogged up the accounting servers.
Eventually, he and the rest of the team began working at night.
Finally, on June 10, Morse found more entries about "prepaid capacity"; large amounts had been transferred from the income statement to the balance sheet from the third quarter of 2001 to the first quarter of 2002.

==
Suspicions mount ==
Soon afterward, chief financial officer Scott Sullivan, Cooper's immediate supervisor, called Cooper in for a meeting about audit projects, and asked the internal audit team to walk him through recently completed audits.
When Smith's turn came, Cooper asked about the prepaid capacity entries.
Sullivan claimed that it referred to costs related to SONET rings and lines that were either not being used at all or were seeing low usage.
He claimed those costs were being capitalized because the costs associated with line leases were fixed even as revenue dropped.
He planned to take a restructuring charge in the second quarter of 2002, after which WorldCom would allocate these costs between restructuring charges and expenses.
He asked Cooper to postpone the capital-expenditure audit until the third quarter, heightening Cooper's suspicions.
That night, Cooper and Smith called Max Bobbitt, a WorldCom board member and the chairman of the Audit Committee, to discuss their concerns.
Bobbitt was concerned enough to tell Cooper to discuss the matter with Farrell Malone of KPMG, WorldCom's external auditor.
KPMG had inherited the WorldCom account when it bought Arthur Andersen's Jackson practice in the wake of Andersen's indictment for its role in the accounting scandal at Enron.
By this time, the internal audit team had found 28 prepaid capacity entries dating back to the second quarter of 2001.
By their calculations, if not for those entries, WorldCom's $130 million profit in the first quarter of 2002 would have become a $395 million loss.
Despite this, Bobbitt thought it was premature to discuss the matter with the Audit Committee at that point.
He did, however, discuss the matter with Sullivan, and assured Cooper that he would have support for those entries by the following Monday.

==
Fraud revealed ==
Cooper decided not to wait to discuss the matter with Sullivan.
She decided to ask the accountants who made those entries to provide support for them herself.
Beforehand, she asked Kenny Avery, who had been Andersen's lead partner on the WorldCom account before KPMG took over, if he knew about prepaid capacity.
Avery had never heard of the term, and knew of nothing in Generally Accepted Accounting Principles that allowed for capitalizing line costs.
Andersen, it turned out, had never tested WorldCom's capital expenditures for it.
Cooper and Smith then questioned Betty Vinson, the accounting director who made the entries.
To their surprise, Vinson admitted she had made the entries without knowing what they were for or seeing support for them.
She had done so at the direction of Myers and general accounting director Buford Yates.
When Cooper and Smith spoke with Yates, he admitted that he did not know what prepaid capacity was.
Yates also claimed that accountants reporting to him booked entries at Myers' direction.
Finally, the internal auditors spoke with Myers.
He admitted that there was no support for the entries.
In fact, they had been booked "based on what we thought the margins should be," and there were no accounting standards that supported them.
He admitted that the entries should have never been made, but it was difficult to stop once they started.
Although he was uncomfortable with the entries, he never thought that he would have to explain them to regulators.
The following day, Farrell met with Sullivan and Myers, and concluded that their rationale for the entries made sense "from a business perspective, but not an accounting perspective.
"
In response, Sullivan, Myers, Yates and Abide scrambled to find amounts that were expensed when they should have been capitalized in hopes of offsetting the prepaid capacity entries.
They believed that the only other alternative was an earnings restatement.
Bobbitt finally called an Audit Committee meeting for June 20.
By this time, Cooper's team had discovered over $3 billion in questionable transfers from line cost expense accounts to assets from 2001 to 2002.
At the meeting, Farrell stated that there was nothing in GAAP that would allow those entries.
Sullivan claimed that WorldCom had invested in expanding the telecom network from 1999 onward, but the anticipated expansion in customer usage never occurred.
He argued that the entries were justified on the basis of the matching principle, which allowed costs to be booked as expenses
so they align with any future benefit accrued from an asset.
He also contended that since capital assets were worth less than what the books said they should be, he reiterated his proposal for a restructuring charge, or an "impairment charge," as he called it, for the second quarter of 2002.
He claimed that Myers could provide support for the entries.
The committee gave him until the following Monday to get support.
Over the weekend, Cooper and her team discovered several more suspicious "prepaid capacity" entries.
All told, the internal audit unit had discovered a total of 49 prepaid capacity entries detailing $3.8 billion in transfers spread out across all of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002.
Several of them were keyed in on explicit directions from Sullivan and Myers under the line "SS entry."
While some of the suspicious entries were made by directors and managers, others were made by lower-level accountants who didn't understand the seriousness of what they were doing.
While meeting with another accounting director, Troy Normand, they learned about more potentially illicit accounting.
According to Normand, management had drawn down the company's cost reserves in portions of 2000 and 2001 to artificially reduce expenses.
At the same time, the Audit Committee asked KPMG to conduct its own review.
KPMG discovered that Sullivan had moved system costs across a number of property accounts, allowing them to be booked as capital expenditures.
The expenses were spread out so they weren't initially obvious.
When KPMG asked Andersen's former WorldCom engagement team about the entries, the Andersen accountants said they would have never approved of the entries had they known about them.
Sullivan was asked to present a written explanation for his actions by Monday.
At an Audit Committee meeting that Monday, Sullivan presented a white paper explaining his reasoning.
The Audit Committee and KPMG were not persuaded.
They concluded that the amounts were transferred with the sole purpose of meeting Wall Street targets, and the only acceptable remedy was to restate corporate earnings for all of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002.
Andersen withdrew its audit opinion for 2001, and the board demanded Sullivan and Myers' resignations.

==
SEC begins investigation ==
On June 25, after the amount of the illicit entries was confirmed, the board accepted Myers' resignation and fired Sullivan when he refused to resign.
On the same day, WorldCom executives briefed the SEC, revealing that it would have to restate its earnings for the next five quarters.
Later that day, WorldCom publicly admitted that it had overstated its cash flow by over $3.8 billion over the previous five quarters.
The disclosure came at a particularly bad time for WorldCom.
Even before the scandal broke, its credit had been reduced to junk status, and its stock had lost over 94 percent of its value.
It had been facing a separate SEC investigation into its accounting that had started earlier in the year, and was laboring under $30 billion in debt.
Amid rumors of bankruptcy, WorldCom said it would lay off 17,000 employees.
The federal government had already begun an informal inquiry earlier in June, when Vinson, Yates, and Normand secretly met with SEC and Justice Department officials.
The SEC filed civil fraud charges against WorldCom on June 26, speculating that WorldCom had engaged in a concerted effort to manipulate its earnings in order to meet Wall Street targets and support its stock price.
Additionally, it claimed that the scheme had been "directed and approved by senior management"–thus hinting that executives higher up on the org chart than Sullivan and Myers had known about the scheme.

==
Trial ==
In 2005 Ebbers was found guilty by a jury for fraud, conspiracy, and filing false documents with regulators.
He was subsequently sentenced to 25 years in prison.
However he was released in December 2019 due to declining health.
Ebbers died February 2, 2020.

==
Aftermath ==
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act is said to have passed due to scandals such as WorldCom and Enron.

WorldCom, by then renamed MCI, was acquired by Verizon Communications in January 2006.

==
References ==
Boston Basketball Partners L.L.C. is an American local private investment group formed to purchase the Boston Celtics of the National Basketball Association (NBA).The executive committee consists of the four members of the managing board, Wyc Grousbeck, H. Irving Grousbeck, Stephen Pagliuca and The Abbey Group, represented by Robert Epstein with the additions of Paul Edgerley, Glenn Hutchins and James Pallotta.
Other new key additions include Matt Levin, managing director, Bain Capital partners.

Boston Basketball Partners’ list of founding investors includes:
Richard H. Aldrich, senior vice president and chief business officer, RA Capital Associates; David Bonderman, managing director, Texas Pacific Group; James Breyer, general partner, Accel Partners; James I. Cash, Jr., professor and senior associate dean, Harvard Business School; Paul Edgerley, managing director, Bain Capital Partners; William P. Egan, general partner, Alta Communications; William Helman, general partner, Greylock Partners; Glenn Hutchins, a founder and managing member of Silver Lake Partners; Stephen R. Lewinstein, president, Stephen R. Lewinstein Associates; Stephen J. Luczo, chairman and CEO, Seagate Technology; Michael Marks, chairman and CEO, Flextronics International; James Pallotta, a managing director of Tudor Investment Corporation and head of Tudor’s U.S. Equity Securities Group; David Roux, founder, Silver Lake Partners; and Mark Wan, partner, Three Arch Partners.
==
Owners ==
Wyc Grousbeck
Stephen Pagliuca
Robert Epstein
Ellie Svenson
David Epstein
Matt Levin
David Bonderman
Jim Breyer
James Pallotta
Glenn Hutchins
Paul Edgerley
Stephen Lewinstein
Jonathan Lavine


=
= References ==
The National Basketball Association (NBA) is a professional basketball league in North America.
The league is composed of 30 teams (29 in the United States and 1 in Canada) and is one of the four major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada.
It is the premier men's professional basketball league in the world.
The league was founded in New York City on June 6, 1946, as the Basketball Association of America (BAA).
It changed its name to the National Basketball Association on August 3, 1949, after merging with the competing National Basketball League (NBL).
The NBA's regular season runs from October to April, with each team playing 82 games.
The league's playoff tournament extends into June.
As of 2020, NBA players are the world's best paid athletes by average annual salary per player.
The NBA is an active member of USA Basketball (USAB), which is recognized by the FIBA (International Basketball Federation) as the national governing body for basketball in the United States.
The league's several international as well as individual team offices are directed out of its head offices in Midtown Manhattan, while its NBA Entertainment and NBA TV studios are directed out of offices located in Secaucus, New Jersey.

In North America, the NBA is the third wealthiest professional sport league after the National Football League (NFL) and Major League Baseball (MLB) by revenue and being among the top four in the world.

==
History ==


===
Creation and BAA–NBL merger (1946–1956) ===
The Basketball Association of America was founded in 1946 by owners of the major ice hockey arenas in the Northeastern and Midwestern United States and Canada.
On November 1, 1946, in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, the Toronto Huskies hosted the New York Knickerbockers at Maple Leaf Gardens, in a game the NBA now refers to as the first game played in NBA history.
The first basket was made by Ossie Schectman of the Knickerbockers.
Although there had been earlier attempts at professional basketball leagues, including the American Basketball League and the NBL, the BAA was the first league to attempt to play primarily in large arenas in major cities.
During its early years, the quality of play in the BAA was not significantly better than in competing leagues or among leading independent clubs such as the Harlem Globetrotters.
For instance, the 1948 ABL finalist Baltimore Bullets moved to the BAA and won that league's 1948 title, and the 1948 NBL champion Minneapolis Lakers won the 1949 BAA title.
Prior to the 1948–49 season, however, NBL teams from Fort Wayne, Indianapolis, Minneapolis, and Rochester jumped to the BAA, which established the BAA as the league of choice for collegians looking to turn professional.
On August 3, 1949, the remaining NBL teams–Syracuse, Anderson, Tri-Cities, Sheboygan, Denver, and Waterloo–merged into the BAA.
In deference to the merger and to avoid possible legal complications, the league name was changed to the present National Basketball Association, even though the merged league retained the BAA's governing body, including Maurice Podoloff as president.
To this day, the NBA claims the BAA's history as its own.
It now reckons the arrival of the NBL teams as an expansion, not a merger, and does not recognize NBL records and statistics.

The new league had seventeen franchises located in a mix of large and small cities, as well as large arenas and smaller gymnasiums and armories.
In 1950, the NBA consolidated to eleven franchises, a process that continued until 1953–54, when the league reached its smallest size of eight franchises: the New York Knicks, Boston Celtics, Philadelphia Warriors, Minneapolis Lakers, Rochester Royals, Fort Wayne Pistons, Tri-Cities Blackhawks, and Syracuse Nationals, all of which remain in the league today.
The process of contraction saw the league's smaller-city franchises move to larger cities.
The Hawks shifted from the Tri-Cities to Milwaukee in 1951, and then to St. Louis in 1955.
The Rochester Royals moved from Rochester, New York, to Cincinnati in 1957 and the Pistons moved from Fort Wayne, Indiana, to Detroit in 1957.

Japanese-American Wataru Misaka broke the NBA color barrier in the 1947–48 season when he played for the New York Knicks.
He remained the only non-white player in league history prior to the first African-American, Harold Hunter, signing with the Washington Capitols in 1950.
Hunter was cut from the team during training camp, but several African-American players did play in the league later that year, including Chuck Cooper with the Celtics, Nathaniel "Sweetwater" Clifton with the Knicks, and Earl Lloyd with the Washington Capitols.
During this period, the Minneapolis Lakers, led by center George Mikan, won five NBA Championships and established themselves as the league's first dynasty.
To encourage shooting and discourage stalling, the league introduced the 24-second shot clock in 1954.
If a team does not attempt to score a field goal (or the ball fails to make contact with the rim) within 24 seconds of obtaining the ball, play is stopped and the ball given to its opponent.

===
Celtics' dominance, league expansion and competition (1956–1979) ===
In 1957, rookie center Bill Russell joined the Boston Celtics, which already featured guard Bob Cousy and coach Red Auerbach, and went on to lead the franchise to eleven NBA titles in thirteen seasons.
Center Wilt Chamberlain entered the league with the Warriors in 1959 and became a dominant individual star of the 1960s, setting new single-game records in scoring (100) and rebounding (55).
Russell's rivalry with Chamberlain became one of the greatest rivalries in the history of American team sports.

The 1960s were dominated by the Celtics.
Led by Russell, Cousy, and Auerbach, Boston won eight straight championships in the NBA from 1959 to 1966.
This championship streak is the longest in NBA history.
They did not win the title in 1966–67, but regained it in the 1967–68 season and repeated in 1969.
The domination totaled nine of the ten championship banners of the 1960s.
Through this period, the NBA continued to evolve with the shift of the Minneapolis Lakers to Los Angeles, the Philadelphia Warriors to San Francisco, the Syracuse Nationals to Philadelphia to become the Philadelphia 76ers, and the St. Louis Hawks moving to Atlanta, as well as the addition of its first expansion franchises.
The Chicago Packers (now Washington Wizards) became the ninth NBA team in 1961.
From 1966 to 1968, the league expanded from 9 to 14 teams, introducing the Chicago Bulls, Seattle SuperSonics (now Oklahoma City Thunder), San Diego Rockets (who moved to Houston four years later), Milwaukee Bucks, and Phoenix Suns.

In 1967, the league faced a new external threat with the formation of the American Basketball Association (ABA).
The leagues engaged in a bidding war.
The NBA landed the most important college star of the era, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (then known as Lew Alcindor).
However, the NBA's leading scorer, Rick Barry, jumped to the ABA, as did four veteran referees—Norm Drucker, Earl Strom, John Vanak, and Joe Gushue.
In 1969, Alan Siegel, who oversaw the design of Jerry Dior's Major League Baseball logo a year prior, created the modern NBA logo inspired by the MLB's.
It incorporates the silhouette of Jerry West, based on a photo by Wen Roberts, although NBA officials denied a particular player as being its influence because, according to Siegel, "They want to institutionalize it rather than individualize it.
It's become such a ubiquitous, classic symbol and focal point of their identity and their licensing program that they don't necessarily want to identify it with one player.
"
The iconic logo debuted in 1971 (with a small change to the typeface on the NBA wordmark in 2017) and would remain a fixture of the NBA brand.
The ABA succeeded in signing a number of major stars in the 1970s, including Julius Erving of the Virginia Squires, in part because it allowed teams to sign college undergraduates.
The NBA expanded rapidly during this period, one purpose being to tie up the most viable cities.
From 1966 to 1974, the NBA grew from nine franchises to 18.
In 1970, the Portland Trail Blazers, Cleveland Cavaliers, and Buffalo Braves (now the Los Angeles Clippers) all made their debuts expanding the league to 17.
The New Orleans Jazz (now in Utah) came aboard in 1974 bringing the total to 18.
Following the 1976 season, the leagues reached a settlement that provided for the addition of four ABA franchises to the NBA, raising the number of franchises in the league at that time to 22.
The franchises added were the San Antonio Spurs, Denver Nuggets, Indiana Pacers, and New York Nets (now the Brooklyn Nets).
Some of the biggest stars of this era were Abdul-Jabbar, Barry, Dave Cowens, Erving, Elvin Hayes, Walt Frazier, Moses Malone, Artis Gilmore, George Gervin, Dan Issel, and Pete Maravich.
The end of the decade, however, saw declining TV ratings, low attendance and drug-related player issues – both perceived and real – that threatened to derail the league.

===
Surging popularity (1979–1998) ===
The league added the ABA's three-point field goal beginning in 1979.
That same year, rookies Larry Bird and Magic Johnson joined the Boston Celtics and Los Angeles Lakers respectively, initiating a period of significant growth in fan interest in the NBA.
The two had faced each other in the 1979 NCAA Division I Basketball Championship Game, and they later played against each other in three NBA Finals (1984, 1985, and 1987).
In the 10 seasons of the 1980s, Johnson led the Lakers to five titles while Bird led the Celtics to three titles.
Also in the early 1980s, the NBA added one more expansion franchise, the Dallas Mavericks, bringing the total to 23 teams.
Later on, Larry Bird won the first three three-point shooting contests.
On February 1, 1984 David Stern became commissioner of the NBA.
Stern has been recognized as playing a major role in the growth of the league during his career.

Michael Jordan entered the league in 1984 with the Chicago Bulls, spurring more interest in the league.
In 1988 and 1989, four cities got their wishes as the Charlotte Hornets, Miami Heat, Orlando Magic, and Minnesota Timberwolves made their NBA debuts, bringing the total to 27 teams.
The Detroit Pistons won the back-to-back NBA Championships in 1989 and 1990, led by coach Chuck Daly and guard Isiah Thomas.
Jordan and Scottie Pippen led the Bulls to two three-peats in eight years during the 1991–1998 seasons.
Hakeem Olajuwon won back-to-back titles with the Houston Rockets in 1994 and 1995.The 1992 Olympic basketball Dream Team, the first to use current NBA stars, featured Michael Jordan as the anchor, along with Bird, Johnson, David Robinson, Patrick Ewing, Scottie Pippen, Clyde Drexler, Karl Malone, John Stockton, Chris Mullin, Charles Barkley, and star NCAA amateur Christian Laettner.
The team was elected to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, and 11 players  and three coaches have been elected to the Hall of Fame as individuals.
In 1995, the NBA expanded to Canada with the addition of the Vancouver Grizzlies and the Toronto Raptors.
In 1996, the NBA created a women's league, the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA).
===
Lakers' and Spurs' dynasties (1998–2014) ===
In 1998, the NBA owners began a lockout that suspended all league business until a new labor agreement could be reached, which led to the season being shortened in half.
The San Antonio Spurs won the championship at the end of the 1998–99 season, becoming the first former ABA team to win the NBA championship.
After the breakup of the Chicago Bulls championship roster in the summer of 1998, the Western Conference has dominated.
The Los Angeles Lakers of coach Phil Jackson and the San Antonio Spurs of Gregg Popovich combined to make 13 Finals in 16 seasons, with 10 titles.
Tim Duncan and David Robinson won the 1999 championship with the Spurs, and Shaquille O'Neal and Kobe Bryant started the 2000s with three consecutive championships for the Lakers.
The Spurs reclaimed the title in 2003 against the Nets.
In 2004, the Lakers returned to the Finals, only to lose in five games to the Detroit Pistons.

The league's image was marred by a violent incident between players and fans in a November 2004 game between the Indiana Pacers and Detroit Pistons.
In response, players were suspended for a total of 146 games with $11 million total lost in salary, and the league tightened security and limited the sale of alcohol.

On May 19, 2005, Commissioner Stern testified before the U.S. House of Representatives' Committee on Government Reform about the NBA's actions to combat the use of steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs.
The NBA started its drug-testing program in 1983 and substantially improved it in 1999.
In the 1999–2000 season, all players were randomly tested during training camp, and all rookies were additionally tested three more times during the regular season.
Of the nearly 4,200 tests for steroids and performance-enhancing drugs conducted over six seasons, only three players were confirmed positive for NBA's drug program, all were immediately suspended, and as of the time of the testimony, none were playing with the NBA.After
the Spurs won the championship again in 2005, the 2006 Finals featured two franchises making their inaugural Finals appearances.
The Miami Heat, led by their star shooting guard, Dwyane Wade, and Shaquille O'Neal, who had been traded from the Lakers during summer 2004, won the series over the Dallas Mavericks.
The Lakers/Spurs dominance continued in 2007 with a four-game sweep by the Spurs over the LeBron James-led Cleveland Cavaliers.
The 2008 Finals saw a rematch of the league's highest profile rivalry, the Boston Celtics and Los Angeles Lakers, with the Celtics winning, for their 17th championship.
The Lakers won back-to-back championships in 2009 and 2010, against the Orlando Magic and the Celtics.
The 2010 NBA All-Star Game was held at Cowboys Stadium in front of the largest crowd ever, 108,713.A referee lockout began on September 1, 2009, when the contract between the NBA and its referees expired.
The first preseason games were played on October 1, 2009, and replacement referees from the WNBA and NBA Development League were used, the first time replacement referees had been used since the beginning of the 1995–96 season.
The NBA and the regular referees reached a deal on October 23, 2009.At the start of the 2010–11 season, free agents LeBron James and Chris Bosh signed with the Miami Heat, joining Dwyane Wade to form the "Big Three.
"
The Heat dominated the league, reaching the Finals for four straight years.
In 2011, they faced a re-match with the Dallas Mavericks but lost to the Dirk Nowitzki-led team.
They won back-to-back titles in 2012 and 2013 against the Oklahoma City Thunder and the Spurs, and lost a re-match to the Spurs in the 2014 Finals.

The 2011–12 season began with another lockout, the league's fourth.
After the first few weeks of the season were canceled, the players and owners ratified a new collective bargaining agreement on December 8, 2011, setting up a shortened 66-game season.
On February 1, 2014, commissioner David Stern retired after 30 years in the position, and was succeeded by his deputy, Adam Silver.

===
Recent years (2014–present) ===
After four seasons with the Miami Heat, LeBron James returned to the Cleveland Cavaliers for the 2014–15 season.
He led the team to their second Finals appearance with the help of Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love.
The Golden State Warriors defeated the Cavaliers in six games, led by the "Splash Brothers" Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson.
The Cavaliers and the Warriors faced each other in the Finals a record four consecutive times.
In the 2015–16 season, the Warriors finished the season 73–9, the best season record in NBA history.
However, the Cavaliers overcame a 3–1 deficit in the Finals to win their first championship that season.
In the 2016–17 season, the Warriors benefited from the recruitment of free agent Kevin Durant.
The Warriors won the 2017 and 2018 Finals against the Cavaliers.

After the departure of James in free agency in 2018, the Cavaliers' streak of playoff and Finals appearances ended.
The Warriors returned for a fifth consecutive Finals appearance in 2019 but lost to the Toronto Raptors, who won their first championship after acquiring Kawhi Leonard in a trade.
The 2019–20 season was suspended indefinitely on March 11, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, after Utah Jazz center Rudy Gobert tested positive for the coronavirus.
On June 4, 2020, the NBA Board of Governors voted to resume the season in a 22-team format with 8 seeding games per team and a regular playoffs format, with all games played in a "bubble" in Walt Disney World without any fans present.
This era also saw the continuous near year-over-year decline in NBA viewership.
Between 2012 and 2019, the league lost 40 to 45 percent of its viewership.
While some of it can be attributed to "cable-cutting", other professional leagues, like the NFL and MLB have retained stable viewership demographics.
The opening game of the 2020 Finals between the Los Angeles Lakers and Miami Heat brought in only 7.41 million viewers to ABC, according to The Hollywood Reporter.
That is reportedly the lowest viewership seen for the Finals since at least 1994 when total viewers began to be regularly recorded and is a 45 percent decline from game one between the Golden State Warriors and Toronto Raptors, which had 13.51 million viewers a year earlier.
Some attribute this decline to the political stances the league and its players are taking, while others consider load management, the uneven talent distribution between the conferences and the cord-cutting of younger viewers as the main reason for the decline.

===
International influence ===
Following pioneers like Vlade Divac (Serbia) and Dražen Petrović (Croatia) who joined the NBA in the late 1980s, an increasing number of international players have moved directly from playing elsewhere in the world to starring in the NBA.
Since 2006, the NBA has faced EuroLeague teams in exhibition matches in the NBA Europe Live Tour, and since 2009, in the EuroLeague American Tour.
The 2013–14 season opened with a record 92 international players on the opening night rosters, representing 39 countries and comprising over 20% of the league.
The beginning of the 2017–18 season saw a record 108 international players representing 42 different countries marking 4 consecutive years of at least 100 international players and each team having at least one international player.
In 2018, the Phoenix Suns hired Serbian coach Igor Kokoškov as their new head coach, replacing Canadian interim coach Jay Triano, making Kokoškov the first European coach to become a head coach for a team in the NBA.
===
Other developments ===
In 2001, an affiliated minor league, the National Basketball Development League, now called the NBA G League, was created.
Two years after the Hornets' move to New Orleans, the NBA returned to North Carolina, as the Charlotte Bobcats were formed as an expansion team in 2004.

The Hornets temporarily moved to Oklahoma City in 2005 for two seasons because of damage caused by Hurricane Katrina.
The team returned to New Orleans in 2007.

A new official game ball was introduced on June 28, 2006, for the 2006–07 season, marking the first change to the ball in over 35 years and only the second ball in 60 seasons.
Manufactured by Spalding, the new ball featured a new design and new synthetic material that Spalding claimed offered a better grip, feel, and consistency than the original ball.
However, many players were vocal in their disdain for the new ball, saying that it was too sticky when dry, and too slippery when wet.

Commissioner Stern announced on December 11, 2006, that beginning January 1, 2007, the NBA would return to the traditional leather basketball in use prior to the 2006–07 season.
The change was influenced by frequent player complaints and confirmed hand injuries (cuts) caused by the microfiber ball.
The Players' Association had filed a suit on behalf of the players against the NBA over the new ball.
As of the 2017–18 season, the NBA team jerseys are manufactured by Nike, replacing the previous supplier, Adidas.
All teams will wear jerseys with the Nike logo except the Charlotte Hornets, whose jerseys will instead have the Jumpman logo associated with longtime Nike endorser Michael Jordan, who owns the Hornets.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) began an investigation on July 19, 2007, over allegations that veteran NBA referee Tim Donaghy bet on basketball games he officiated over the past two seasons and that he made calls affecting the point spread in those games.
On August 15, 2007, Donaghy pleaded guilty to two federal charges related to the investigation.
Donaghy claimed in 2008 that certain referees were friendly with players and "company men" for the NBA, and he alleged that referees influenced the outcome of certain playoff and finals games in 2002 and 2005.
NBA commissioner David Stern denied the allegations and said Donaghy was a convicted felon and a "singing, cooperating witness".
Donaghy served 15 months in prison and was released in November 2009.
According to an independent study by Ronald Beech of Game 6 of the 2002 Western Conference Finals between the Los Angeles Lakers and Sacramento Kings, although the refs increased the Lakers' chances of winning through foul calls during the game, there was no collusion to fix the game.
On alleged "star treatment" during Game 6 by the referees toward certain players, Beech claimed, "there does seem to be issues with different standards and allowances for different players.
"The
NBA Board of Governors approved the request of the Seattle SuperSonics to move to Oklahoma City on April 18, 2008.
The team, however, could not move until it had settled a lawsuit filed by the city of Seattle, which was intended to keep the SuperSonics in Seattle for the remaining two seasons of the team's lease at KeyArena.
Following a court case, the city of Seattle settled with the ownership group of the SuperSonics on July 2, 2008, allowing the team to move to Oklahoma City immediately in exchange for terminating the final two seasons of the team's lease at KeyArena.
The Oklahoma City Thunder began playing in the 2008–09 season.

The first outdoor game in the modern era of the league was played at the Indian Wells Tennis Garden on October 11, 2008, between the Phoenix Suns and the Denver Nuggets.
The first official NBA league games on European ground took place in 2011.
In two matchups, the New Jersey Nets faced the Toronto Raptors at the O2 Arena in London in front of over 20,000 fans.

After the 2012–13 season, the New Orleans Hornets were renamed the Pelicans.
During the 2013–14 season, Stern retired as commissioner after 30 years, and deputy commissioner Adam Silver ascended to the position of commissioner.
During that season's playoffs, the Bobcats officially reclaimed the Hornets name, and by agreement with the league and the Pelicans, also received sole ownership of all history, records, and statistics from the Pelicans' time in Charlotte.
As a result, the Hornets are now officially considered to have been founded in 1988, suspended operations in 2002, and resumed in 2004 as the Bobcats, while the Pelicans are officially treated as a 2002 expansion team.
(
This is somewhat similar to the relationship between the Cleveland Browns and Baltimore Ravens in the NFL.)

Donald Sterling, who was then-owner of the Los Angeles Clippers, received a lifetime ban from the NBA on April 29, 2014 after racist remarks he made became public.
Sterling was also fined US$2.5 million, the maximum allowed under the NBA Constitution.
Becky Hammon was hired by the San Antonio Spurs on August 5, 2014, as an assistant coach, becoming the second female coach in NBA history but the first full-time coach.
This also makes her the first full-time female coach in any of the four major professional sports in North America.
The NBA announced on April 15, 2016, that it would allow all 30 of its teams to sell corporate sponsor advertisement patches on official game uniforms, beginning with the 2017–18 season.
The sponsorship advertisement patches would appear on the left front of jerseys, opposite Nike's logo, marking the first time a manufacturer's logo would appear on NBA jerseys, and would measure approximately 2.5 by 2.5 inches.
The NBA would become the first major North American professional sports league to allow corporate sponsorship logos on official team uniforms, and the last to have a uniform manufacturer logo appear on its team uniforms.
The first team to announce a jersey sponsorship was the Philadelphia 76ers, who agreed to a deal with StubHub.
On July 6, 2017, the NBA unveiled an updated rendition of its logo; it was largely identical to the previous design, except with revised typography and a "richer" color scheme.
The league began to phase in the updated logo across its properties during the 2017 NBA Summer League.
The NBA also officially released new Nike uniforms for all 30 teams beginning with the 2017–18 season.
The league eliminated "home" and "away"
uniform designations.
Instead, each team would have four or six uniforms: the "Association" edition, which is the team's white uniform, the "Icon" edition, which is the team's color uniform, and the "Statement" and "City" uniforms, which most teams use as an alternate uniform.
In 2018, the NBA also released the "Earned" uniform.
==
Teams ==
The NBA originated in 1946 with 11 teams, and through a sequence of team expansions, reductions and relocations currently consists of 30 teams.
The United States is home to 29 teams; another is in Canada.

The current league organization divides 30 teams into two conferences of three divisions with five teams each.
The current divisional alignment was introduced in the 2004–05 season.
Reflecting the population distribution of the United States and Canada as a whole, most teams are in the eastern half of the country: 13 teams are in the Eastern Time Zone, nine in the Central, three in the Mountain, and five in the Pacific.

Notes


==
Regular season ==
Following the summer break, teams begin training camps in late September.
Training camps allow the coaching staff to evaluate players (especially rookies), scout the team's strengths and weaknesses, prepare the players for the rigorous regular season and determine the 12-man active roster (and a 3-man inactive list) with which they will begin the regular season.
Teams have the ability to assign players with less than two years of experience to the NBA G League.
After training camp, a series of preseason exhibition games are held.
Preseason matches are sometimes held in non-NBA cities, both in the United States and overseas.
The NBA regular season begins in the last week of October.

During the regular season, each team plays 82 games, 41 each home and away.
A team faces opponents in its own division four times a year (16 games).
Each team plays six of the teams from the other two divisions in its conference four times (24 games), and the remaining four teams three times (12 games).
Finally, each team plays all the teams in the other conference twice apiece (30 games).
This asymmetrical structure means the strength of schedule will vary between teams (but not as significantly as the NFL or MLB).
Over five seasons, each team will have played 80 games against their division (20 games against each opponent, 10 at home, 10 on the road), 180 games against the rest of their conference (18 games against each opponent, 9 at home, 9 on the road), and 150 games against the other conference (10 games against each team, 5 at home, 5 on the road).

The NBA is one of only two of the four major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada in which teams play every other team during the regular season (the other being the National Hockey League).
Each team hosts and visits every other team at least once every season.
From 2005 to 2008, the NBA had the distinction of being the only one of the four major leagues in which all teams play every other team.

The NBA is also the only league that regularly schedules games on Christmas Day.
The league has been playing games regularly on the holiday since 1947, though the first Christmas Day games were not televised until 1983–84.
Games played on this day have featured some of the best teams and players.
Christmas is also notable for NBA on television, as the holiday is when the first NBA games air on network television each season.
Games played on this day have been some of the highest-rated games during a particular season.

In February, the regular season pauses to celebrate the annual NBA All-Star Game.
Fans vote throughout the United States, Canada, and on the Internet, and the top vote-getters in each conference are named captains.
Fan votes determine the rest of the allstar starters.
Coaches vote to choose the remaining 14 All-Stars.
Then, the top vote-getters in each conference draft their own team from a player pool of allstars.
The top vote-getter in the league earns first pick and so forth.
The player with the best performance during the game is rewarded with a Game MVP award.
Other attractions of the All-Star break include the Rising Stars Challenge (originally Rookie Challenge), where the top rookies and second-year players in the NBA play in a 5-on-5 basketball game, with the current format pitting U.S. players against those from the rest of the world; the Skills Challenge, where players compete to finish an obstacle course consisting of shooting, passing, and dribbling in the fastest time; the Three Point Contest, where players compete to score the highest number of three-point field goals in a given time; and the NBA Slam Dunk Contest, where players compete to dunk the ball in the most entertaining way according to the judges.
These other attractions have varying names which include the names of the various sponsors who have paid for naming rights.

Shortly after the All-Star break is the trade deadline, which is set to fall on the 16th Thursday of the season (usually in February) at 3pm Eastern Time.
After this date, teams are not allowed to exchange players with each other for the remainder of the season, although they may still sign and release players.
Major trades are often completed right before the trading deadline, making that day a hectic time for general managers.

Around the middle of April, the regular season ends.
It is during this time that voting begins for individual awards, as well as the selection of the honorary, league-wide, post-season teams.
The Sixth Man of the Year Award is given to the best player coming off the bench (must have more games coming off the bench than actual games started).
The Rookie of the Year Award is awarded to the most outstanding first-year player.
The Most Improved Player Award is awarded to the player who is deemed to have shown the most improvement from the previous season.
The Defensive Player of the Year Award is awarded to the league's best defender.
The Coach of the Year Award is awarded to the coach that has made the most positive difference to a team.
The Most Valuable Player Award is given to the player deemed the most valuable for (his team) that season.
Additionally, Sporting News awards an unofficial (but widely recognized) Executive of the Year Award to the general manager who is adjudged to have performed the best job for the benefit of his franchise.

The post-season teams are the All-NBA Team, the All-Defensive Team, and the All-Rookie Team; each consists of five players.
There are three All-NBA teams, consisting of the top players at each position, with first-team status being the most desirable.
There are two All-Defensive teams, consisting of the top defenders at each position.
There are also two All-Rookie teams, consisting of the top first-year players regardless of position.

==
Playoffs ==
The NBA playoffs begin in April after the conclusion of the regular season with the top eight teams in each conference, regardless of divisional alignment, competing for the league's championship title, the Larry O'Brien Championship Trophy.
Seeds are awarded in strict order of regular season record (with a tiebreaker system used as needed).

Having a higher seed offers several advantages.
Since the first seed begins the playoffs playing against the eighth seed, the second seed plays the seventh seed, the third seed plays the sixth seed, and the fourth seed plays the fifth seed, having a higher seed means a team faces a weaker team in the first round.
The team in each series with the better record has home-court advantage, including the First Round.
Before the league changed its playoff determination format for the 2006–07 season, this meant that, for example, if the team that received the sixth seed had a better record than the team with the third seed (by virtue of a divisional championship), the sixth seed would have home-court advantage, even though the other team had a higher seed.
Therefore, the team with the best regular season record in the league is guaranteed home-court advantage in every series it plays.
For example, in 2006, the Denver Nuggets won 44 games and captured the Northwest Division and the third seed.
Their opponent was the sixth-seeded Los Angeles Clippers, who won 47 games and finished second in the Pacific Division.
Although Denver won its much weaker division, the Clippers had a home-court advantage and won the series in 5.

The playoffs follow a tournament format.
Each team plays an opponent in a best-of-seven series, with the first team to win four games advancing into the next round, while the other team is eliminated from the playoffs.
In the next round, the successful team plays against another advancing team of the same conference.
All but one team in each conference are eliminated from the playoffs.
Since the NBA does not re-seed teams, the playoff bracket in each conference uses a traditional design, with the winner of the series matching the first- and eighth-seeded teams playing the winner of the series matching the fourth- and fifth-seeded teams, and the winner of the series matching the second- and seventh-seeded teams playing the winner of the series matching the third-
and sixth-seeded teams.
In every round, the best-of-7 series follows a 2–2–1–1–1 home-court pattern, meaning that one team will have home court in games 1, 2, 5, and 7, while the other plays at home in games 3, 4, and 6.
From 1985 to 2013, the NBA Finals followed a 2–3–2 pattern, meaning that one team had home court in games 1, 2, 6, and 7, while the other played at home in games 3, 4, and 5.The final playoff round, a best-of-seven series between the victors of both conferences, is known as the NBA Finals and is held annually in June.
The winner of the NBA Finals receives the Larry O'Brien Championship Trophy.
Each player and major contributor—including coaches and the general manager—on the winning team receive a championship ring.
In addition, the league awards the Bill Russell NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award to the best performing player of the series.

The league began using its current format, with the top eight teams in each conference advancing regardless of divisional alignment, in the 2015–16 season.
Previously, the top three seeds went to the division winners.

==
Championships ==
The Los Angeles Lakers and the Boston Celtics have won the most championships with each having 17 NBA Finals wins.
The third most successful franchise is the Golden State Warriors, who have six overall championships (2 in Philadelphia, 4 in Oakland).
Following the Warriors are the Chicago Bulls with six championships and the San Antonio Spurs with five championships, all since 1999.

Current teams that have no NBA Finals appearances:

Charlotte Hornets (formerly Charlotte Bobcats)
Denver Nuggets
Los Angeles Clippers (formerly Buffalo Braves, San Diego Clippers)
Memphis Grizzlies (formerly Vancouver Grizzlies)
Minnesota Timberwolves
New Orleans Pelicans (formerly New Orleans Hornets, New Orleans/Oklahoma City Hornets)


==
Media coverage ==
As one of the major sports leagues in North America, the NBA has a long history of partnerships with television networks in the United States.
The NBA signed a contract with DuMont Television Network in its eighth season, the 1953–54 season, marking the first year the NBA had a national television broadcaster.
Similar to the National Football League, the lack of television stations led to NBC taking over the rights from the 1954-55 season until April 7, 1962–NBC's first tenure with the NBA.
Currently in the U.S., the NBA has a contract with ESPN and TNT through the 2024–25 season.
Games that are not broadcast nationally are usually aired over regional sports networks specific to the area where the teams are located.

==
International competitions ==
The National Basketball Association has sporadically participated in international club competitions.
From 1987 to 1999 the NBA champions played against the continental champions of the FIBA in the McDonald's Championship.
This tournament was won by the NBA invitee every year it was held.

==
Ticket prices and viewership demographics ==
In 2012, a ticket cost from $10 to $3,000 each, depending on the location of the seat and the success of the teams that were playing.
In 2020, ticket prices for the NBA
All Star Game became more expensive than ever before, averaging around $2,600, and even more on the secondary market.

===
Viewership demographics ===
According to Nielsen's survey, in 2013 the NBA had the youngest audience, with 45 percent of its viewers under 35, but the least likely, along with Major League Baseball, to be watched by women, who make up only 30% of the viewership.
It also has the highest share of black viewers with 45 percent of its viewers being black and only about 40 percent of viewers being white, making it the only top North American sport that does not have a white majority audience.
As of 2017, the NBA's popularity further declined among White Americans, who during the 2016–17 season, made up only 34% of the viewership.
At the same time, the black viewership increased to 47 percent, while Hispanic (of any race) stood at 11% and Asian viewership stood at 8%.
According to the same poll, the NBA was favored more strongly by Democrats than Republicans.
Outside the U.S., the NBA's biggest international market is in China, where an estimated 800 million viewers watched the 2017–18 season.
NBA China is worth approximately $4 billion.

==
Controversies and criticism ==
The NBA has been involved in a number of controversies over the years and has received a significant amount of criticism.

==
Notable people ==


===
Presidents and commissioners ===
Maurice Podoloff, President from 1946 to 1963
Walter Kennedy, President from 1963 to 1967 and Commissioner from 1967 to 1975
Larry O'Brien, Commissioner from 1975 to 1984
David Stern, Commissioner from 1984 to 2014
Adam Silver, Commissioner from 2014 to present


===
Players ===
50 Greatest Players in NBA History
Lists of National Basketball Association players
List of foreign NBA players, a list that is exclusively for players who are not from the United States


===
Foreign players ===


====
International influence ====
Following pioneers like Vlade Divac (Serbia) and Dražen Petrović (Croatia) who joined the NBA in the late 1980s, an increasing number of international players have moved directly from playing elsewhere in the world to starring in the NBA.
Below is a short list of foreign players who have won NBA awards or have been otherwise recognized for their contributions to basketball, either currently or formerly active in the league:

Dražen Petrović, Croatia – 2002 inductee into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, 1986, 1989, 1992, 1993 Euroscar Player of the Year, 1986 and 1993
Mr. Europa Player of the Year, MVP of the 1986 FIBA World Championship and EuroBasket 1989, 2-time Olympic silver medalist, World Champion, European Champion, 50 Greatest EuroLeague Contributors
Šarūnas Marčiulionis, Lithuania – 2014 inductee into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.
First Soviet Union and one of the first Europeans to sign contract with NBA club and to play solidly in the league, helping to lead the way for the internationalization of the league in the late 1990s.

Toni Kukoč, Croatia – 3-time NBA Champion with Chicago Bulls (1996, 1997, 1998), 1996 Sixth Man Award winner, named in 2008 as one of the 50 Greatest EuroLeague Contributors
Vlade Divac, Serbia – 2-time Olympic silver medalist, 2001 NBA
All-Star, 2-time World Champion, 3-time European Champion, 1989
Mr. Europa, 50 Greatest EuroLeague Contributors
Arvydas Sabonis, Lithuania –
2011 inductee into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, 1984, 1985, 1988, 1995, 1999
Euroscar Player of the Year, 1985, 1997
Mr. Europa Player of the Year, Olympic gold medalist in 1988 with the Soviet Union and bronze medalist in 1992 and 1996 with Lithuania, 1996 NBA All-Rookie First Team, 50 Greatest EuroLeague Contributors
Peja Stojaković, Serbia – NBA Champion with Dallas Mavericks (2011), MVP of the EuroBasket 2001, member of the all-tournament team in the 2002 FIBA World Championship, 2001 Euroscar winner, 2001 and 2002
Mr. Europa, 2002 and
2003 NBA Three-Point Shootout champion, 3-time NBA All-Star (drafted in 1996, entered the NBA in 1998)
Dirk Nowitzki, Germany – NBA Champion with Dallas Mavericks (2011), MVP of the 2002 FIBA World Championship and EuroBasket 2005, member of the all-tournament team in the 2002 FIBA World Championship, 2002–2006 and 2011 Euroscar winner, 2005
Mr. Europa, 2005 and 2011 FIBA Europe Player of the Year,
2007 NBA MVP, 2011
Bill Russell
NBA Finals
Most Valuable Player Award, 2006 NBA Three-Point Shootout champion and 13-time
NBA All-Star (entered the NBA in 1998)
Hedo Türkoğlu, Turkey –
2008 Most Improved Player Award winner, member of the all-tournament team in the 2010 FIBA World Championship (entered the NBA in 2000)
Pau Gasol, Spain – 2-time NBA Champion with Los Angeles Lakers (2009 & 2010),
Six time NBA All-Star, 2002 NBA Rookie of the Year, 2004 and 2009
Mr. Europa, 2006 FIBA World Championship MVP, 2008 and 2009 Euroscar and FIBA Europe Player of the Year, EuroBasket 2009 MVP, winner of the NBA Citizenship Award in 2012 (entered the NBA in 2001)
Andrei Kirilenko, Russia – 2004 NBA
All-Star, EuroBasket 2007
MVP, 2007
FIBA Europe Player of the Year (drafted in 1999, played in the NBA from 2001 to 2011 before returning to Russia due to the lockout, returned in 2012 as a member of the Minnesota Timberwolves.)

Tony Parker, France – 4-time NBA Champion with the Spurs, 2007 NBA Finals MVP, 6-time
All-Star and 2007 Euroscar winner (entered the NBA in 2001)
Manu Ginóbili, Argentina – 4-time NBA Champion with San Antonio Spurs, 2008 Sixth Man Award winner, 2-time All-Star, 50 Greatest EuroLeague Contributors, gold medal in the 2004 Summer Olympics with Argentina (drafted in 1999, entered the NBA in 2002)
Yao Ming, China –
2016 inductee into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame
, first pick in the 2002 NBA draft and 8-time NBA
All-Star (played in the NBA from 2002 to 2011)
Leandro Barbosa, Brazil – NBA Champion with Golden State Warriors (2015), 2007 Sixth Man Award winner (entered the NBA in 2003)
Andrea Bargnani, Italy –
First pick in the 2006 NBA draft by the Toronto Raptors (entered the NBA in 2006)
Giannis Antetokounmpo, Greece – 2019 and 2020 NBA MVP, 2017
Most Improved Player, 5-time All-Star (entered the NBA in 2013)On some occasions, young players, most but not all from the English-speaking world, have attended U.S. colleges before playing in the NBA.
Notable examples are:

Nigerian Hakeem Olajuwon (top draft pick in 1984, 2-time champion, 12-time All-Star, 1994 MVP, 1994 and 1995 Finals MVP, 1994 and 1995 Defensive Player of the Year, only player to receive the MVP Award, Defensive Player of the Year Award, and Finals MVP award in the same season, and Hall of Famer)
Congolese Dikembe Mutombo (Four time NBA Defensive Player of the Year, selected fourth overall by the Denver Nuggets in the 1991 NBA Draft and 8-time NBA
All-Star)
Dutchman Rik Smits (1988 second overall pick, 1998 NBA All-Star, played 12 years for the Indiana Pacers)
German Detlef Schrempf (Sixth Man Award winner in 1991 and 1992, 3-time All-Star)
Canadian Steve Nash (2005 and 2006 MVP, 8-time All-Star)
Australians Luc Longley (3-time champion with the Bulls in the 1990s) and Andrew Bogut, (top draft pick in 2005).

Sudanese-born Englishman Luol Deng (2007 winner of the NBA Sportsmanship Award, 2-time
All-Star)
Cameroonian Joel Embiid (NBA All-Rookie First Team, 2 time All-Defensive Second Team, 2 time All-Star)Since 2006
, the NBA has faced EuroLeague teams in exhibition matches in the NBA Europe Live Tour, and since 2009 in the EuroLeague American Tour.

The 2013–14 season opened with a record 92 international players on the opening night rosters, representing 39 countries and comprising over 20% of the league.
The NBA defines "international" players as those born outside the 50 United States and Washington,
D.C. This means that:

Players born in U.S. possessions such as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, most notably USVI native Tim Duncan, are counted as "international" even though they are U.S. citizens by birth, and may even have represented the U.S. in international competition (like Duncan).

U.S.-born players are not counted as "international" even if they were born with citizenship in another country and represent that country internationally, such as Joakim Noah, and Kosta Koufos.

===
Coaches ===
List of current National Basketball Association head coaches
List of National Basketball Association head coaches
List of National Basketball Association player-coaches
List of NBA championship head coaches
List of foreign NBA coaches
Top 10 Coaches in NBA History
List of female NBA coaches


==
NBA Cares ==
The league has a global social responsibility program, NBA Cares, that is responsible for the league's stated mission of addressing important social issues worldwide.

==
See also ==
List of NBA champions
List of National Basketball Association awards
List of National Basketball Association seasons
National Basketball Association Cheerleading
National Basketball Association rivalries
NBA Salary Cap
List of NBA Playoffs Series
NBA Summer League
Criticisms and controversies
Music
Nielsen ratings
List of NBA franchise post-season droughts
List of NBA franchise post-season streaks
NBA Store


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Rosen, Charley (2009).
The First Tip-Off:
The Incredible Story of the Birth of the NBA.
McGraw-Hill Professional.
ISBN 978-0-07-148785-6.

Editors of Sports Illustrated (2007).
Sports Illustrated:
The Basketball Book.
Sports Illustrated.
ISBN 978-1-933821-19-1.

Havlicek, John (2003).
NBA's Greatest 1st edition.
DK.
ISBN 0-7894-9977-0.

Peterson, Robert W. (2002).
Cages to Jump Shots: Pro Basketball's Early Years.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
ISBN 0-8032-8772-0.
==
External links ==
Official website
The league also has an official English-language website with a more worldwide perspective, with emphasis on stories outside North America.
Localized English-language versions, some of which are partnerships with regional media outlets, also exist for Africa, Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand, and the Philippines.

National Basketball Players Association
National Basketball Referees Association
NBA & ABA Basketball Statistics & History
NBA & ABA Transactions Archive
Jefferson Parish (French: Paroisse de Jefferson; Spanish: Parroquia de Jefferson) is a parish in the state of Louisiana.
As of the 2010 census, the population was 432,552.
The parish seat is Gretna.
Jefferson Parish is included in the New Orleans-Metairie, LA Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==
History ==


===
1825 to 1940 ==
=
Jefferson Parish was named in honor of US President Thomas Jefferson of Virginia when the parish was established by the Louisiana Legislature on February 11, 1825, a year before Jefferson died.
A bronze statue of Jefferson stands at the entrance of the General Government Complex on Derbigny Street in Gretna.
The parish seat was in the city of Lafayette, until that area was annexed by New Orleans in 1852.
In that year the parish government moved to Carrollton, where it remained for twenty-two years.
Originally, this parish was larger than it is today, running from Felicity Street in New Orleans to the St. Charles Parish line.
However, as New Orleans grew, it absorbed the cities of Lafayette, Jefferson City, Carrollton, and several unincorporated areas (faubourgs).
These became part of Orleans Parish.
The present borders between Jefferson Parish and Orleans Parish were set in 1874.
The Jefferson Parish seat was moved to Gretna at the same time.
NOTE:
The historic city of Lafayette in Jefferson Parish, as it was recorded in U.S. Census records until 1870, should not be confused with Lafayette, Louisiana, in Lafayette Parish.

=== 1940 to 2000 ===
From the 1940s to the 1970s, Jefferson's population swelled with an influx of middle-class white families from Orleans Parish.
The parish's population doubled in size from 1940 to 1950 and again from 1950 to 1960 as the parents behind the post–World War II baby boom, profiting from rising living standards and dissatisfied with their old neighborhoods, chose relocation to new neighborhoods of detached single-family housing.

By the 1960s, rising racial tensions in New Orleans complicated the impetus behind the migration, as many new arrivals sought not only more living space but also residence in a political jurisdiction independent from New Orleans proper.

The earliest postwar subdivisions were developed on the Eastbank of Jefferson Parish ("East Jefferson") along the pre-existing Jefferson Highway and Airline Highway routes, often relatively far-removed from the New Orleans city line, as land prices were lower further away from New Orleans and land assembly was easier.
The completion of Veterans Highway in the late 1950s, following a route parallel to Airline but further north, stimulated more development.

The arrival of I-10 in the early 1960s resulted in the demolition of some homes in the Old Metairie neighborhood, where development began in the 1920s, but resulted in even easier access to suburban East Jefferson.

In the portion of Jefferson Parish on the Westbank of the Mississippi River ("West Jefferson"), large-scale suburban development commenced with the completion, in 1958, of the Greater New Orleans Bridge crossing the Mississippi River at downtown New Orleans.
Terrytown, within the city limits of Gretna, was the first large subdivision to be developed.

Subsequent development has been extensive, taking place within Harvey, Marrero, Westwego and Avondale.

Similar to the development trajectory observed by other U.S. suburban areas
, Jefferson began to enjoy a significant employment base by the 1970s and 1980s, shedding its earlier role as a simple bedroom community.
In East Jefferson, the Causeway Boulevard corridor grew into a commercial office node, while the Elmwood neighborhood developed as a center for light manufacturing and distribution.

By the mid-1990s, Jefferson Parish was exhibiting some of the symptoms presented by inner-ring suburbs throughout the United States.
Median household income growth slowed, even trailing income growth rates in New Orleans proper, such that the inner city began to narrow the gap in median household income, a gap at its widest at the time of the 1980 Census.
St. Tammany Parish and, to a lesser extent, St. Charles Parish began to attract migrants from New Orleans, and increasingly even from Jefferson Parish itself.
These trends were catalyzed by Hurricane Katrina, which destroyed much of New Orleans' low-income housing and propelled further numbers of lower-income individuals into Jefferson Parish.

Despite these challenges, Jefferson Parish still contains the largest number of middle class residents in metropolitan New Orleans and acts as the retail hub for the entire metro area.

===
Hurricane Katrina (2005) ===
Even though Jefferson Parish was affected by Hurricane Katrina, it has rebounded more quickly than Orleans Parish, since the devastation was not as severe.
The parish has a current population of 432,000, which is 15,000 fewer people than was recorded by the 2000 U.S. Census.
New Orleans' Katrina-provoked population loss has resulted in Jefferson Parish becoming the second most populous parish behind East Baton Rouge Parish, center of the Baton Rouge metropolitan area.

With the landfall of Hurricane Katrina on August 29, 2005, Jefferson Parish took a hard hit.
On the East Bank, widespread flooding occurred, especially in the eastern part of the parish, as well as much wind damage.
Schools also were reported to have been severely damaged.
On the West Bank, there was little to no flooding, though there was still much wind damage.
As a result, the Jefferson Parish Council temporarily moved the parish government to Baton Rouge.
Evacuees of Jefferson Parish were told that they could expect to be able to go back to their homes starting Monday, September 5, 2005 between the hours of 6 a.m. CDT and 6 p.m. CDT, but would have to return to their places of evacuation because life in the area was not sustainable.
There were no open grocery stores or gas stations, and almost the entire parish had no electric, water, or sewerage services.
Moreover, evacuations out of New Orleans were continuing to be staged from the heart of Metairie at the intersection of Interstate 10 and Causeway Boulevard, and traffic throughout the area was primarily restricted to emergency and utility vehicles.

On September 4, Jefferson Parish President Aaron Broussard broke down on Meet the Press
RUSSERT:
You just heard the director of Homeland Security’s explanation of what has happened this last week.
What is your reaction?

BROUSSARD: We have been abandoned by our own country.
Hurricane Katrina will go down in history as one of the worst storms ever to hit an American coast.
But the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina will go down as one of the worst abandonments of Americans on American soil ever in U.S. history.
…
Whoever is at the top of this totem pole, that totem pole needs to be chainsawed off and we’ve got to start with some new leadership.
It’s not just Katrina that caused all these deaths in New Orleans here.
Bureaucracy has committed murder here in the greater New Orleans area and bureaucracy has to stand trial before Congress now....
Three quick examples.
We had Wal-Mart deliver three trucks of water.
FEMA turned them back.
They said we didn’t need them.
This was a week ago.
FEMA, we had 1,000 gallons of diesel fuel on a Coast Guard vessel docked in my parish.
When we got there with our trucks, FEMA says don’t give you the fuel.
Yesterday — yesterday — FEMA comes in and cuts all of our emergency communication lines.
They cut them without notice.
Our sheriff, Harry Lee, goes back in, he reconnects the line.
He posts armed guards and said no one is getting near these lines…
I want to give you one last story
and I’ll shut up and let you tell me whatever you want to tell me.
The guy who runs this building I’m in, Emergency Management, he’s responsible for everything.
His mother was trapped in St. Bernard nursing home and every day she called him and said, "Are you coming, son?
Is somebody coming?"
and he said, "Yeah, Mama, somebody's coming to get you.
"
Somebody's coming to get you on Tuesday.
Somebody's coming to get you on Wednesday.
Somebody's coming to get you on Thursday.
Somebody's coming to get you on Friday… and she drowned Friday night.
She drowned Friday night!
[
Sobbing] Nobody's coming to get us.
Nobody's coming to get us…
By the following weekend, the local electrical utility, Entergy, had restored power to large swaths of Jefferson Parish, and the parish public works department had restored water and sewer service to most of the areas with power.

East Jefferson General Hospital never ceased operation, even through the storm.

Nevertheless, Mr. Broussard continued to discourage residents from returning until all major streets were clear of downed trees, powerlines and major debris.
The parish's initial focus was on helping businesses through the "Jumpstart Jefferson" program that allowed business operators into the parish before residents.

Nevertheless, some independent-minded residents began moving back into the parish even before Broussard issued a formal "all-clear", and some gas stations, grocery stores, restaurants and a Home Depot were in operation during this time.

Broussard's report of the events he discussed on Meet the Press have subsequently proven to be inaccurate.
The son of the drowned woman was later identified as Thomas Rodrigue, who replied, "
No, no, that's not true," when told of Broussard's account.
An MSNBC interview with the man revealed that Rodrigue tried to contact his mother at the St. Rita nursing home on the days before the storm – Saturday, August 27 and Sunday, August 28, not Monday through Friday as Broussard had claimed—to encourage the home to evacuate.
They did not, resulting in the deaths by drowning of more than 30 other residents.

Crucially, Jefferson's levees and floodwalls did not fail in the wake of Katrina, enabling floodwaters to be rapidly pumped out.
As of October 2006, Jefferson Parish had, in effect, completely rebounded from Hurricane Katrina, while far more damaged Orleans Parish continued recovering at a slower rate.

Estimates of Jefferson Parish's population ranged from 420,000 to 440,000, and this figure was expected to continue to rise as evacuated residents from Orleans Parish returned to metropolitan New Orleans.

====
Katrina-related flooding ====
Flooding on the east bank has been frequently attributed to the decision by parish leadership to deactivate the stormwater pumping systems and evacuate the operators during the storm.

Katrina's substantial storm surge may have swamped even operating pumping stations but Broussard's activation of the parish's "Doomsday Plan" is the most frequently cited reason for the flooding in all areas of the east bank except Old Metairie and parts of Harahan.
Pump operators were evacuated to areas outside the parish that were themselves severely affected by the storm and pump station personnel were consequently unable to immediately return to restart the pumps.
They did not arrive until the morning of August 31.
Water resulting from the backflow through the non-operating pumping stations, as well as storm-related rainwater, remained on the streets and in the homes of residents of Metairie and Kenner for a day and a half.

Many homes which were not severely damaged by storm winds took heavy flood damage, especially along both sides of the West Esplanade canal, from the 17th Street Canal to Kenner.

The parish has subsequently announced that it will change the way it evacuates critical personnel during an emergency, both through the construction of "safe-houses" and use of existing facilities on the west bank of Jefferson Parish.
The original "safe-house" project was severely modified due to rising costs and was further delayed due to a conflict of interest revealed by the original contractors.
There are also plans to add manual closures on the pumping stations due to the failure of the compressed air systems during Katrina's storm surge.

Much additional consideration has been given to the different problem of the flooding in Old Metairie that resulted from Jefferson Parish's reliance on the failed Orleans Parish drainage system at the 17th Street Canal and its Pumping Station No.
6.
Flooding in this area south of Metairie Road between the Orleans Parish line and Causeway Boulevard was catastrophic and deep water destroyed much of the most expensive real estate in the parish.

A temporary plan was devised to pool water at the Pontiff Playground and south of Airline Drive and to divert some into other Jefferson Parish drainage canals.
A longer-term project to divert water from this vulnerable area into the Mississippi River has also been suggested, although its expense appears to be prohibitive.
Jefferson Parish officials have also struggled to maximize the parish's ability to utilize the significantly reduced pumping capacity of the 17th Street Canal if the threat of storm surge again requires the Corps of Engineers to close the mouth of the canal.

====
Gretna controversy ====
The city of Gretna, Louisiana, the parish seat of Jefferson Parish, made news after its police force participated, along with Crescent City Connection Police and Jefferson Parish Sheriff's deputies, in a road block on the Crescent City Connection Bridge in the days following Hurricane Katrina.
The purpose was to stop evacuees from crossing over into the evacuated communities on the Westbank of the Mississippi River.

Gretna Police had charge of Westbank-bound lanes, while Jefferson Parish deputies controlled the east bank-bound lanes and the bridge police closed the transit lanes.

Initially, as many as 6,000 evacuees were permitted to cross and were shuttled out of the area on buses; however, that operation was eventually discontinued as available fuel supplies were exhausted.
Without transportation or sufficient supplies of food or water, west bank law enforcement personnel determined that they were unable to further assist the evacuees.
It was also believed at that time that federal relief efforts and supplies were soon to be concentrated in the downtown area of New Orleans.

The decision to stop further evacuees from crossing the river was then made after Oakwood Center mall was looted and burned by evacuees from the east bank of New Orleans.
A unified local police decision was made to lock down all areas.
Due to the lack of effective communications during the crisis, some New Orleans police officers independently continued to direct evacuees to buses across the bridge that were no longer operational.
The inevitable confrontation occurred on the section of the bridge controlled by the Gretna police, and warning shots were fired over the heads of desperate evacuees who had been misdirected onto the bridge.

=== Post–Katrina ===
A business report released in April 2007 found Jefferson Parish led the nation in job growth, for the quarter ending September 30, 2006,

as rebuilding continued after Hurricane Katrina.

Jefferson Parish president Aaron Broussard believes that Jefferson Parish will reach pre-Katrina numbers or even exceed those numbers, as residents who are still evacuated from New Orleans return to Jefferson Parish to be closer to New Orleans as they await federal recovery money to repair their homes.

==
Geography ==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the parish has a total area of 665 square miles (1,720 km2), of which 296 square miles (770 km2) is land and 370 square miles (960 km2) (56%) is water.
Lake Pontchartrain is situated in the northern part of Jefferson Parish with the parish line several miles north of the southern shore, with St. Tammany Parish at its northern shore.
The Mississippi River is located around the midpoint of Jefferson Parish flowing generally in a north-west to south-east direction.

Surrounding parishes include St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana at the north shore of Lake Ponchartrain, St. Charles Parish upriver to the west, Orleans Parish downriver to the east, and Plaquemines Parish downriver to the south-east.
The majority of the southern half of Jefferson Parish is uninhabited marshland with one of the exceptions being the town of Grand Isle; the only roads connecting Grand Isle to the rest of Jefferson Parish run through Lafourche Parish and St. Charles Parish.

===
National protected area ===
Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve (part, in Marrero)


===
State parks ===
Bayou Segnette State Park
Grand Isle State Park
===
Adjacent parishes ===
Orleans Parish (east)
St. Bernard Parish (east)
Plaquemines Parish (east)
Lafourche Parish (west)
St. Charles Parish (west)
St. Tammany Parish (north)


==
Transportation ==


===
East Bank ===
Interstate 10 – connects the East Bank to St. Charles Parish upriver and New Orleans downriver.

U.S. Highway 61 – connects the East Bank to St. Charles Parish upriver and New Orleans downriver.

U.S. Highway 90 – connects the East Bank to the West Bank on the south (via the Huey P. Long Bridge) and to New Orleans downriver (via Jefferson Highway).

Lake Pontchartrain Causeway – connects the East Bank to St. Tammany Parish on the north via Causeway Boulevard across Lake Pontchartrain.

===
West Bank ===
U.S. Highway 90 – connects the West Bank to the East Bank on the north (via the Huey P. Long Bridge) and to St. Charles Parish upriver.

U.S. Highway 90 Business – connects the West Bank to New Orleans on the east and intersecting U.S. Highway 90 to the west.

Planned future route of  Interstate 49.

Louisiana Highway 18 – connects the West Bank to St. Charles Parish.

Louisiana Highway 23 – connects the West Bank to Plaquemines Parish.

Louisiana Highway 45 – connects the West Bank with the towns in the southern portion of Jefferson Parish (Jean Lafitte, Lafitte and Barataria).

===
Grand Isle ===
Louisiana Highway 1 – connects Grand Isle to Lafourche Parish


==
Demographics ==
As of the 2010 census, there were 432,552 people living in Jefferson Parish.
The population density was 1,410 people per square mile (574/km2).

There were 187,907 housing units at an average density of 613 per square mile (237/km2).

The racial makeup of the parish was 60.82% White, 25.08% Black or African American, 0.68% Native American, 5.28% Asian, 0.13% Pacific Islander, 2.53% from other races, and 1.82% from two or more races.

14.85% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

As of the 2000 census, there were 455,466 people living in Jefferson Parish.
The population density was 1,486 people per square mile (574/km2).

There were 187,907 housing units at an average density of 613 per square mile (237/km2).

The racial makeup of the parish was 69.82% White, 22.86% Black or African American, 0.65% Native American, 3.09% Asian, 0.08% Pacific Islander, 2.18% from other races, and 1.65% from two or more races.

7.12% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 176,234 households, out of which 31.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.20% were married couples living together, 15.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.80% were non-families.

26.70% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.

The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.13.

In the parish the population was spread out, with 25.30% under the age of 18, 9.10% from 18 to 24, 30.20% from 25 to 44, 23.40% from 45 to 64, and 11.90% who were 65 years of age or older.

The median age was 36 years.

For every 100 females there were 92.40 males.

For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.60 males.

The median income for a household in the parish was $38,435, and the median income for a family was $45,834.
Males had a median income of $35,081 versus $24,921 for females.
The per capita income for the parish was $19,953.
About 10.80% of families and 13.70% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.00% of those under age 18 and 9.80% of those age 65 or over.

Between the 2000 U.S. Census and the 2010 U.S. Census the population of Jefferson Parish decreased while the population of Hispanics increased.
Greg Rigamer, a consultant of WWL-TV Eyewitness News, a chief executive officer of GCR and Associates, and a demographer stated.
He argued that the population increased because Hispanics came after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 to assist the already existing Hispanic community in Jefferson Parish before Katrina.
As of 2011, more than 15% of the parish population is Hispanic.

==
Government and infrastructure ==
Cynthia Lee-Sheng, daughter of former Sheriff Harry Lee is the current President of Jefferson Parish, elected in 2019.

The Bridge City Center for Youth, a juvenile correctional facility for boys operated by the Louisiana Office of Juvenile Justice, is in Bridge City in an unincorporated area in the parish.

==
Education ==
The parish's public schools are operated by Jefferson Parish Public Schools.

Historically a significant number of the parish's students were in private schools, and as of 2015 Catholic schools had the majority of private school students.
In 2000 the parish was the American county equivalent with the second highest per capita enrollment in private school.
As of October 1, 2014 there were fewer than 18,000 students in Jefferson Parish, or over 25% of the children of the ages for K-12 education, who attended private schools approved by the State of Louisiana.
There were also 1,246 children in the parish who were homeschooling or who were in private schools not approved by the state.
From 2013–2014 to 2014–2015 the percentage of students in the parish's private schools declined by 4%; the Catholic schools specifically had the same percentage of enrollment decline.
The non-Catholic private schools together had a 3% decline.
Jessica Williams of The Times Picayune stated that the establishment of charter schools and improved options in Jefferson Parish district schools, along with Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and the 2008 recession, caused decreases in private school enrollment.
Jefferson Parish Library operates the public libraries.

==
Economy
==
===
Largest employers ===
According to the Parish's 2011 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the parish are:


===
Other notable employers ===
Friedrich Custom Manufacturing, a leading maker of police barricades, including the ones used by the New York City Police Department.
==
Politics ==
Jefferson Parish was one of the first areas of Louisiana to turn Republican.
It has not voted for a Democrat for president since John F. Kennedy in 1960.
In the 2008 Presidential election, Jefferson Parish cast a majority of votes for Republican John McCain, who won 63% of the vote and 113,191 votes.
Democrat Barack Obama won 36% of the votes and 65,096 votes.
Although John McCain easily won Jefferson Parish, in the U.S Senate race that same year between Democrat Mary Landrieu and Republican John Neely Kennedy, Landrieu won Jefferson Parish.
She won 52% of the vote and 91,966 votes.
John Kennedy won 46% of the vote and 79,965 votes.
Other candidates won 2% of the vote.
In 2004, Republican George W. Bush won 62% of the vote and 117,882 votes.
Democrat John F. Kerry won 38% of the votes and 72,136 votes.
Since 2008, in contrast to much of the rest of Louisiana shifting somewhat towards the Republicans, Jefferson Parish appears to be trending slightly Democratic at the presidential level.
In 2012, Mitt Romney won it with only 58.2% of the vote, and in 2016, despite still losing the parish to Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton became the first Democrat since her husband in 1996, and only the third since Jimmy Carter in 1976, to crack 40% of the vote there.
==
Communities ==


===
Cities ===
Gretna (parish seat)
Harahan
Kenner (largest municipality)
Westwego


=== Towns ===
Grand Isle
Jean Lafitte


===
Census-designated places ===


==
Notable people ==
John Alario, Republican state senator from Jefferson Parish and Senate President since 2012; former Democratic Speaker of the Louisiana House of Representatives (1984–1988, 1992–1996)
Sherman A. Bernard (1925–2012), Louisiana insurance commissioner from 1972 to 1988
Jay Chevalier, singer and politician
Robert Billiot, member of the Louisiana House of Representatives for Jefferson Parish since 2008; former educator from Westwego, succeeded John Alario in the House
Tom Capella, Republican assessor of Jefferson Parish; former state representative and former Jefferson Parish Council member
Patrick Connick, Republican state representative from Jefferson Parish
Charles Cusimano, former state representative and judge from Jefferson Parish
Ellen DeGeneres, American stand-up comedian, television host and actress born at Ochsner Hospital in Jefferson Parish in 1958
Jim Donelon, Louisiana insurance commissioner; former state representative
Eddie Doucet, state representative for District 78 in Jefferson Parish from 1972 to 1988
David Duke, Klansman and former state representative for District 81 in Jefferson Parish
Robert T. Garrity, Jr., former state representative for District 78 in Jefferson Parish
Randal Gaines, African-American member of the Louisiana House for St. Charles and St. John the Baptist parishes; former resident of Kenner
James Garvey, Jr., Republican member of the Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education for District 1, which includes Jefferson Parish
Kernan "Skip" Hand, former state representative and former Jefferson Parish district court judge
Jennifer Sneed Heebe, former state representative and former member of the Jefferson Parish Council; resident of New Orleans since 2008
Girod Jackson, III, Democratic former state representative for District 87 in Jefferson Parish
Salman "Sal" Khan, founder of Khan Academy
Hank Lauricella (1930–2014), college football
All-American for the Tennessee Volunteers; state representative and state senator
Harry Lee (1932–2007), iconic longtime sheriff of Jefferson Parish from 1980 to 2007
Tony Ligi, Republican former state representative for District 79 in Jefferson Parish; director of the Jefferson Business Council
Hall Lyons, oilman and politician, originally from Shreveport; son of longtime Louisiana oilman and politician Charlton Lyons
Danny Martiny, state senator from Jefferson Parish
Elwyn Nicholson, state senator from Jefferson Parish from 1972 to 1988
Newell Normand, Jefferson Parish sheriff from Harry Lee's death in 2007 to 2017
Julie Quinn, Republican former state senator from Jefferson
Steven Seagal, Reserve Deputy Chief of Jefferson Parish
Julie Stokes, Republican current state representative from District 79
James St. Raymond, Republican former state representative for District 89 in Orleans Parish; businessman, former resident of Jefferson Parish
Ricky Templet, Republican former state representative from Jefferson Parish; Gretna city council member
Steve Theriot, former state representative and former state legislative auditor; accountant and lobbyist
David C. Treen (1928–2009), former Congressman (1973–1980) and governor (1980–1984); later relocated to St. Tammany Parish
John S. Treen (1926-2020), politician
Chris Ullo, member of both houses of the state legislature (1972–2008)
Roger F. Villere, Jr., chairman of the Louisiana Republican Party
Ebony Woodruff, state representative for District 87 in Jefferson Parish since 2013
Amy Coney Barrett, associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States since 2020


==
See also ==
Jefferson Transit
National Register of Historic Places listings in Jefferson Parish, Louisiana
West Return
Floodwall


== References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office
Jefferson Parish Convention and Visitors Bureau –
Tourism
Jefferson Parish Clerk of Court's Office
Jefferson Historical Society of Louisiana
East Jefferson Online Community – current events, history and organizational information.
The original American Basketball Association (ABA)  was a major men's professional basketball league from 1967 to 1976.
The ABA ceased to exist with the American Basketball Association–National Basketball Association merger in 1976, leading to four ABA teams joining the National Basketball Association and to the introduction of the 3-point shot in the NBA in 1979.

== League history ==
The ABA was conceived at a time stretching from 1960 through the mid-1970s when numerous upstart leagues were challenging, with varying degrees of success, the established major professional sports leagues in the United States.
Basketball was seen as particularly vulnerable to a challenge; its major league, the National Basketball Association, was the youngest of the Big Four major leagues, having only played 21 seasons to that point, and was still fending off contemporary challenging leagues (it had been less than five years since the American Basketball League (ABL) shut down).
According to one of the owners of the Indiana Pacers, its goal was to force a merger with the more established league.
Potential investors were told that they could get an ABA team for half of what it cost to get an NBA expansion team at the time.
When the merger occurred, ABA officials said their investment would more than double.
The ABA distinguished itself from its older counterpart with a more wide-open, flashy style of offensive play, as well as differences in rules—a 30-second shot clock (as opposed to the NBA's 24-second clock, though the ABA did switch to the 24 second shot clock for the 1975–76 season) and use of a three-point field goal arc, pioneered in the earlier ABL.
Also, the ABA used a colorful red, white and blue ball, instead of the NBA's traditional orange ball.
The ABA also had several "regional" franchises, such as the Virginia Squires and Carolina Cougars, that played "home" games in several cities.

The ABA also went after four of the best referees in the NBA: Earl Strom, John Vanak, Norm Drucker and Joe Gushue, getting them to "jump" leagues by offering them far more in money and benefits.
In Earl Strom's memoir Calling the Shots, Strom conveys both the heady sense of being courted by a rival league with money to burn—and also the depression that set in the next year when he began refereeing in the ABA, with less prominent players performing in inadequate arenas, in front of very small crowds.
Nevertheless, the emergence of the ABA boosted the salaries of referees just as it did the salaries of players.

The freewheeling style of the ABA eventually caught on with fans, but the lack of a national television contract and protracted financial losses would spell doom for the ABA as an independent circuit.
In 1976, its last year of existence, the ABA pioneered the now-popular slam dunk contest at its all-star game in Denver.

The league succeeded in forcing a merger with the NBA in the 1976 offseason.
Four ABA teams were absorbed into the older league: the New York Nets, Denver Nuggets, Indiana Pacers, and San Antonio Spurs.

As part of the merger agreement, the four teams were not permitted to participate in the 1976 NBA Draft.

The merger was particularly hard on the Nets; the New York Knicks were firmly established in their arena, Madison Square Garden, and would not permit the Nets to share dates there.
For drawing audience away from the Knicks, the Nets were forced to pay $4.3M to the Knicks organization.
The Nets offered league superstar Julius Erving instead but the Knicks declined.
The Nets had to settle for an arena in Piscataway, New Jersey and, to meet expenses, were forced to sell the contract of Erving to the Philadelphia 76ers.

Two other clubs, the Kentucky Colonels and the Spirits of St. Louis, were disbanded upon the merger, with each getting a buyout: the Colonels received a one-time buyout that owner John Y. Brown, Jr. used to purchase the NBA's Buffalo Braves, while the Spirits owners negotiated a cut of the other ABA teams' television revenues in perpetuity.
This deal netted the ownership group of the Spirits over $300M through nearly four decades due to a large increase in television revenues.
In 2014, the NBA and the Spirits ownership agreed to phase out future payments in exchange for a one-time payment of $500M, making the total value for the deal over $800M. The seventh remaining team, the Virginia Squires, received nothing, as they had ceased operations shortly before the merger.

The players from the Colonels, Spirits, and Squires were made available to NBA teams through a dispersal draft; the four teams absorbed by the NBA were allowed to choose players from this draft.

One of the more significant long-term contributions of the ABA to professional basketball was to tap into markets in the southeast that had been collegiate basketball hotbeds (including North Carolina, Virginia, and Kentucky).
The NBA was focused on the urban areas of the Northeast, Midwest and West Coast.
At the time, it showed no interest in placing a team south of Washington, D.C, other than the Atlanta metropolitan area where the NBA's Hawks franchise relocated from St. Louis in 1968.

===
Commissioners ===
George Mikan 1967–1969
James Carson Gardner 1969 (interim)
Jack Dolph 1969–1972
Bob Carlson 1972–1973
Mike Storen
1973–74
Tedd Munchak
1974–75
Dave DeBusschere
1975–76NBA
great George Mikan was the first commissioner of the ABA, where he introduced both the 3-point line and the league's trademark red, white and blue basketball.
Mikan resigned in 1969.
Dave DeBusschere, one of the stars of the New York Knicks championship teams, moved from his job as Vice President and GM of the ABA's New York Nets in 1975 to become the last commissioner of the ABA and facilitate the ABA–NBA merger in 1976.

===
Spencer Haywood Hardship Rule ===
One of the primary contributions of the ABA to modern NBA was the introduction of the Spencer Haywood Hardship Rule, which would later become the framework for the current NBA draft eligibility system that allows players to declare for the NBA after being one year removed from their high school graduation.
The origin of the Hardship Rule was a result of the NBA prohibiting players from joining the league until they had completed their four years of college eligibility.
The ABA was a league that frequently made up rules on the fly and was willing to push the envelope and determine the implications of the rules later.
In 1969, Spencer Haywood left the University of Detroit as a sophomore and signed with the Denver Rockets.
The ABA believed that in extenuating circumstances, such as financial situation or familial needs, players should be able to leave for professional leagues early.
While the NBA and NCAA initially contested the rule, after the courts ruled in favor of Haywood playing in the ABA, the NBA followed suit and relaxed the four year rule to allow for players to enter the league if they qualified as a hardship on the basis of “financial condition…family, [or] academic record.”
Haywood paved the way for other players to enter the ABA before they had completed their collegiate careers such as George McGinnis and Julius Erving.
Today, the one-and-done rule in the NBA can be traced back to the ABA's decision to allow players to leave college early and pursue a professional career before they had completed their collegiate careers.

===
Slam Dunk Contest ===
The ABA pioneered the advent of the now popular NBA slam dunk contest at the ABA All Star game in 1976.
The game was held in Denver, and the owners of the ABA teams wanted to ensure that the event would be entertaining for the sellout crowd of 15,021 people.
The ABA and NBA had begun to discuss a possible merger, and the ABA owners wanted to establish the viability and success of their league.
The Dunk Contest operated as a means of unique halftime entertainment that displayed the style and excitement that the ABA players brought to the game.
The dunk contest was held at halftime of the All-Star game and the contestants were Artis Gilmore, George Gervin, David Thompson, Larry Kenon, and Julius Erving.
The winner of the contest received $1,000 and a stereo system.
Julius Erving went on to win the competition by completing the now famous free throw line dunk.

==
Teams ==
Of the original 11 teams, only the Kentucky Colonels and Indiana Pacers remained for all nine seasons without relocating, changing team names, or folding.
However, the Denver Larks/Rockets/Nuggets, a team that had been assigned to Kansas City, Missouri, moved to Denver without playing a game in Kansas City due to the lack of a suitable arena.

In addition to the four surviving ABA teams, eight current NBA markets have ABA heritage:
Utah, Dallas, Houston, Miami, New Orleans, Memphis, Minnesota and Charlotte all had an ABA team before the NBA arrived.

===
Timeline ===
== List of ABA championships ==
With the ABA cut down to seven teams by the middle of its final season, the league abandoned divisional play.

==
Prominent players ==
For more information, see ABA All-Time Team.

==
Season leaders ==


===
Scoring leaders ===


===
Rebounding leaders ===


===
Assists leaders ===


===
Steals leaders ===
=== Blocks leaders ===


==
Awards and broadcasters ==


==
Succession ==
In 1999, a new league calling itself the ABA 2000 was established.

The new league uses a similar red, white and blue basketball as the old ABA, but unlike the original ABA, it does not feature players of similar caliber to the NBA, nor does it play games in major arenas or on television as the original ABA did.

== See also ==
American Basketball Association (2000–present)
List of defunct sports leagues
Loose Balls, written by Terry Pluto
Semi-Pro, a comedy about the ABA starring Will Ferrell, of the fictional Flint Tropics
World Hockey Association, another league that intended to compete with its professional counterpart, the NHL
American Football League


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Remember the ABA
The Chinese Basketball Association (simplified Chinese: 中国男子篮球职业联赛; traditional Chinese: 中國男子籃球職業聯賽;
pinyin: Zhōngguó Nánzǐ Lánqiú Zhíyè Liánsài), often abbreviated as the CBA, is the first-tier professional men's basketball league in China.
It is widely regarded as the preeminent professional men's basketball league in Asia.

The league is commonly known by fans as the CBA, and this acronym is even used in Chinese on a regular basis.
The CBA should not be confused with the National Basketball League (NBL), which is a professional minor league.
There is also a Women's Chinese Basketball Association (WCBA).

A few Chinese players who competed in the CBA in the early stages of their careers — including Wang Zhizhi, Mengke Bateer, Yao Ming, Yi Jianlian, Sun Yue, and Zhou Qi — have also played in the National Basketball Association (NBA).
Others such as Xue Yuyang and Wang Zhelin were chosen in the draft, but have not played in the NBA.

Only a limited number of foreign players are allowed on each CBA team.
Notable imports include former NBA All-Stars Stephon Marbury, Tracy McGrady, Gilbert Arenas, Steve Francis, and Metta World Peace — as well as several NBA veterans who would become CBA All-Stars — Michael Beasley, Aaron Brooks, Jimmer Fredette, Al Harrington, Lester Hudson, Kenyon Martin, Randolph Morris, Shavlik Randolph, Jeremy Lin and J.R. Smith.

==
Background ==
The CBA began play in the 1995–96 season.
The league should not be confused with the Chinese Basketball Association (organisation), which was founded in June 1956 and represents the country in matters involving the sport's governing body, FIBA.
Basketball in China is currently regulated by the Chinese Basketball Management Center.

Other Chinese basketball leagues include the National Basketball League (NBL), the Chinese University Basketball Association (CUBA), and the Chinese High School Basketball League (CHBL).
At one time there was a league called the Chinese New Basketball Alliance (CNBA), one of whose most prominent teams was the Beijing Sea Lions, but this venture lasted for just one winter
(1996–97).The first non-Chinese player to compete in the CBA was Mihail Savinkov of Uzbekistan, who joined the Zhejiang Squirrels in the league's
inaugural 1995–96 campaign.
During the 1996–97 season, James Hodges became one of the first Americans to play in the CBA, and his signing by the Liaoning Hunters helped pave the way for many more imports from the United States to follow in the ensuing years.

Some other notable foreign pioneers included John Spencer, who joined the Jiangsu Dragons later in the 1996–97 campaign, and David Vanterpool, who inked a deal with the Jilin Northeast Tigers the following winter, and helped the team move up to the CBA in time for the 1998–99 season.
The CBA's first international coach was American Robert Hoggard, who led the Sichuan Pandas for the last eight games of the 1997–98 campaign.

==
Team names ==
For a full list of teams, see Category:Chinese Basketball Association teams.

The full name of each team usually consists of three parts, in the following order:
A geographic designation (except in the case of Bayi, which technically translates into English as "August First," the day China's People's Liberation Army was founded).
All others are province-level designations (either a province or a Chinese municipality).

A corporate sponsor name.
This sponsor may change from year to year, and sometimes even in mid-season.

A nickname, such as the name of an animal.
The presence of corporate sponsor names can occasionally lead to confusion about what name to use in English because many variants may be seen.
Team names are usually abbreviated (in Chinese or English), so that either the corporate sponsor name or the nickname is used interchangeably (rarely both).
In addition, team nicknames can sometimes be translated into English in more than one way, and corporate sponsors tend to change frequently over time.

Nickname changes are rare, but occasionally happen, such as when the Shandong team switched from Flaming Bulls (1995) to Lions (2003) to Gold Lions (2004) to Golden Stars (2014).
Other examples include the Liaoning team dumping Hunters (1995) for Dinosaurs (2008) and then Flying Leopards (2011) -- as well as the Foshan team's evolving attempts to "Anglicize" its nickname—by going from Kylins (2001) to Dralions to Long-Lions
In previous years, the title of the league itself was available for corporate naming sponsorship.
In 1999–2000 and 2000–2001 it was known as the Hilton League, in 2001–2002 and 2002–2003 it was the Motorola League, and in 2003–2004 it was sponsored by China Unicom.
These corporate league titles were not always used in the news media, however, and this sponsorship practice was discontinued at the start of the 2004–2005 season.

==
Current clubs ==
While teams are listed by division here, the CBA does not use these designations for regular season purposes anymore, as each squad now plays each other once at home and once on the road (plus eight additional games within each of the four rotating "strength of schedule" sub-groupings).
Divisions are used for the league's annual All-Star Game, however, and are shown here for the sake of convenience.

==
Timeline ==
This is a chronological listing of current and former CBA teams according to the season that they entered the league.

Current Teams Defunct Teams
== Finals ==
In 2005, the league unveiled the Mou Zuoyun Cup (Chinese: 牟作云杯), which was awarded for the first time to the winning team in the CBA Finals.
Mou Zuoyun (1913–2007) was a member of the Chinese men's national basketball team which competed at the 1936 Summer Olympics, and he later served as a coach and a pioneer in building Chinese basketball.

===
Finals appearances ===
This is a list of the teams which have advanced to the CBA Finals and the overall win-loss records they have registered in the Championship Series.

==
Awards ==
The CBA Most Valuable Player award is presented to the league's best player in a given CBA season.
Since the 2012–13 campaign, two awards have been handed out each year, Domestic MVP and International MVP.
At the conclusion of each season, the CBA Finals MVP award is bestowed upon the most outstanding player in that year's championship series.

Each campaign's scoring leader is also recognized on an annual basis and the league maintains a list of single game, single season, and career record holders in various statistical categories.
Furthermore, a CBA All-Star Game MVP award is given to the player deemed to have the most impactful performance in the league's annual mid-season exhibition contest.

==
Scoring leaders ==
The CBA's highest single season scoring average, depending on how many games are required to be recognized as a statistical qualifier, is either 43.1 points per game by Jordan Crawford, who played in 26 of Tianjin's 38 games (68.4%) in 2015–16, or 42.0 points per game by Jonathan Gibson, who played in 36 of Qingdao's 38 games (94.7%) in 2015–16.

==
Records ==
This is a list of individual records separated into two categories — career records and single game records.

Records last updated and confirmed on March 13, 2019, the final day of the 2018–19 CBA regular season.

===
Single game records ===
===
Career records ===


==
Notable players ==
Listed below are some of the most accomplished Chinese players who have competed in the CBA.
Time spent with teams in lower leagues before they joined the CBA, or after they left the CBA, cannot be counted as CBA seasons.
Notes will be made of such service below a player's CBA information.

===
Domestic players from the CBA who are known for crossing over to the NBA ===


===
Domestic players from the CBA who were drafted but have not played in the NBA ===


===
Domestic players from the CBA who have only played in NBA pre-season games ===


===
Domestic players from the CBA who have participated in the NBA Summer League ===
Note: The Red Squad of the Chinese National Team toured the USA and played several NBA Summer League teams during the 2018 NBA Summer League season while the combined Chinese National Team did likewise during the 2019 NBA Summer League season.
===
Domestic players from the CBA who are known for league or national team exploits ===
Scroll down to view more names.

==
Foreign imports ==
Listed below are some of the most accomplished foreign imports who have competed in the CBA.
Players must appear in at least one game for the team to receive credit for a season.
Someone who signs a contract but never steps on the court does not count.

=== Non-Chinese players who spent 5 or more seasons in the CBA
===
Scroll down to view more names


===
Non-Chinese players who spent 2 to 4 seasons in the CBA ===
Scroll down to view more names


===
Non-Chinese players for whom 2019–20 is their 1st season in the CBA ===
Scroll down to view more names


===
Other Non-Chinese players who spent only 1 season in the CBA
===
Scroll down to view more names.

==
Politics ==
On October 4, 2019, the Houston Rockets general manager Daryl Morey issued a tweet in support of the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests.
Morey's tweet resulted in the Chinese Basketball Association's suspension of its relationship with the Houston Rockets and China Central Television's removal of all NBA games from its broadcast schedule until further notice.

== See also ==
Basketball in China
China men's national basketball team
China women's national basketball team
National Basketball League (NBL)
Women's Chinese Basketball Association (WCBA)
Chinese University Basketball Association (CUBA)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
CBA official website (in Chinese)
CBA at Asia-Basket.com
Ryan Merkley is the Chief of Staff to the office of the Executive Director of the Wikimedia Foundation, and former CEO of the American non-profit organization Creative Commons.
He is an advocate for open licenses, net neutrality and open data initiatives in the public sector.
Merkley is the Chair of the Open Worm Foundation board of directors and was trustee at the Quetico Foundation.
He writes and speaks on issues such as the sharing economy, academic publishing and legal infrastructure for sharing content.
In 2016, he was listed in the Globe and Mail's "Sixteen Torontonians to Watch in 2016".
==
Biography ==
Merkley was born in Cambridge, Ontario, and studied at the University of Waterloo from 1998 to 2001, and employed at Engineers Without Borders Canada as the Chief Communications Officer.
He worked for the City of Toronto government and the City of Vancouver government in roles such as Director of Communications and Senior Advisor to the Office of the Mayor, leading the open government data initiative of Toronto mayor David Miller.
In 2010, he moved to the Mozilla Foundation to take the role of Director of Programs and Strategy.
During his tenure at Mozilla, he contributed to the development of products in support of the open web including Lightbeam, Webmaker, and Popcorn.

==
Creative Commons ==
Merkley was recruited as CEO for Creative Commons in 2014, after the position was vacated by Catherine Casserly in 2013.
His focus included work on new, long-term strategy and sustainability of the Creative Commons mission and operations.
His 2016 op-ed in Wired criticising the academic publishing industry was referenced by then-Vice President of the United States Joe Biden in his speech to the American Association for Cancer Research, calling for more open research.
In 2016, he successfully secured a $10 million grant from The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation to support Creative Commons' new strategy, re-focusing the organisation on encouraging sharing.
On February 7, 2017, Merkley announced a partnership between Creative Commons, Wikimedia Foundation and The Metropolitan Museum of Art where the museum released 375,000 images under a public domain dedication Creative Commons Zero, known as CC0.

As part of the announcement, Creative Commons also released the beta of CC Search which included social features for list sharing and simple attribution.
The search engine, currently in BETA, pulls Creative Commons licensed images from The MET, Flickr, 500px, Rijksmuseum, and the New York Public Library.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Ryan Merkley's description on Creative Commons
Ryan Merkley's Blog on Tumblr
Ryan Merkley at TED
Basketball is a team sport in which two teams, most commonly of five players each, opposing one another on a rectangular court, compete with the primary objective of shooting a basketball (approximately 9.4 inches (24 cm) in diameter) through the defender's hoop
(a basket 18 inches (46 cm) in diameter mounted 10 feet (3.048 m) high to a backboard at each end of the court) while preventing the opposing team from shooting through their own hoop.
A field goal is worth two points, unless made from behind the three-point line, when it is worth three.
After a foul, timed play stops and the player fouled or designated to shoot a technical foul is given one, two or three one-point free throws.
The team with the most points at the end of the game wins, but if regulation play expires with the score tied, an additional period of play (overtime) is mandated.

Players advance the ball by bouncing it while walking or running (dribbling) or by passing it to a teammate, both of which require considerable skill.
On offense, players may use a variety of shots—the lay-up, the jump shot, or a dunk; on defense, they may steal the ball from a dribbler, intercept passes, or block shots; either offense or defense may collect a rebound, that is, a missed shot that bounces from rim or backboard.
It is a violation to lift or drag one's pivot foot without dribbling the ball, to carry it, or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling.

The five players on each side fall into five playing positions.
The tallest player is usually the center, the second-tallest and strongest is the power forward, a slightly shorter but more agile player is the small forward, and the shortest players or the best ball handlers are the shooting guard and the point guard, who implements the coach's game plan by managing the execution of offensive and defensive plays (player positioning).
Informally, players may play three-on-three, two-on-two, and one-on-one.

Invented in 1891 by Canadian-American gym teacher James Naismith in Springfield, Massachusetts, United States, basketball has evolved to become one of the world's most popular and widely viewed sports.
The National Basketball Association (NBA) is the most significant professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition.
Outside North America, the top clubs from national leagues qualify to continental championships such as the EuroLeague and the Basketball Champions League Americas.
The FIBA Basketball World Cup and Men's Olympic Basketball Tournament are the major international events of the sport and attract top national teams from around the world.
Each continent hosts regional competitions for national teams, like EuroBasket and FIBA AmeriCup.

The FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup and Women's Olympic Basketball Tournament feature top national teams from continental championships.
The main North American league is the WNBA (
NCAA Women's Division I Basketball Championship is also popular), whereas the strongest European clubs participate in the EuroLeague Women.

==
History ==


===
Creation ===
In December 1891, James Naismith, a Canadian professor of physical education and instructor at the International Young Men's Christian Association Training School (now Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts, was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day.
He sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his students occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long New England winters.
After rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums, he invented a new game in which players would pass a ball to teammates and try to score points by tossing the ball into a basket mounted on a wall.
Naismith wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto an elevated track.
Naismith initially set up the peach basket with its bottom intact, which meant that the ball had to be retrieved manually after each "basket" or point scored.
This quickly proved tedious, so Naismith removed the bottom of the basket to allow the balls to be poked out with a long dowel after each scored basket.

Basketball was originally played with a soccer ball.
These round balls from "association football" were made, at the time, with a set of laces to close off the hole needed for inserting the inflatable bladder after the other sewn-together segments of the ball's cover had been flipped outside-in.
These laces could cause bounce passes and dribbling to be unpredictable.
Eventually a lace-free ball construction method was invented, and this change to the game was endorsed by Naismith.
(
Whereas in American football, the lace construction proved to be advantageous for gripping and remains to this day.)
The first balls made specifically for basketball were brown, and it was only in the late 1950s that Tony Hinkle, searching for a ball that would be more visible to players and spectators alike, introduced the orange ball that is now in common use.
Dribbling was not part of the original game except for the "bounce pass" to teammates.
Passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement.
Dribbling was eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early balls.
Dribbling was common by 1896, with a rule against the double dribble by 1898.The peach baskets were used until 1906 when they were finally replaced by metal hoops with backboards.
A further change was soon made, so the ball merely passed through.
Whenever a person got the ball in the basket, his team would gain a point.
Whichever team got the most points won the game.
The baskets were originally nailed to the mezzanine balcony of the playing court, but this proved impractical when spectators in the balcony began to interfere with shots.
The backboard was introduced to prevent this interference; it had the additional effect of allowing rebound shots.
Naismith's handwritten diaries, discovered by his granddaughter in early 2006, indicate that he was nervous about the new game he had invented, which incorporated rules from a children's game called duck on a rock, as many had failed before it.

Frank Mahan, one of the players from the original first game, approached Naismith after the Christmas break, in early 1892, asking him what he intended to call his new game.
Naismith replied that he hadn't thought of it because he had been focused on just getting the game started.
Mahan suggested that it be called "Naismith ball", at which he laughed, saying that a name like that would kill any game.
Mahan then said, "Why not call it basketball?"
Naismith replied, "We have a basket and a ball, and it seems to me that would be a good name for it."
The first official game was played in the YMCA gymnasium in Albany, New York, on January 20, 1892, with nine players.
The game ended at 1–0; the shot was made from 25 feet (7.6 m), on a court just half the size of a present-day Streetball or National Basketball Association (NBA) court.

At the time, football was being played with 10 to a team (which was increased to 11).
When winter weather got too icy to play football, teams were taken indoors, and it was convenient to have them split in half and play basketball with five on each side.
By 1897–1898 teams of five became standard.

===
College basketball ===
Basketball's early adherents were dispatched to YMCAs throughout the United States, and it quickly spread through the United States and Canada.
By 1895, it was well established at several women's high schools.
While YMCA was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game, within a decade it discouraged the new sport, as rough play and rowdy crowds began to detract from YMCA's primary mission.
However, other amateur sports clubs, colleges, and professional clubs quickly filled the void.
In the years before World War
I, the Amateur Athletic Union and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (forerunner of the NCAA) vied for control over the rules for the game.
The first pro league, the National Basketball League, was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game.
This league only lasted five years.

James Naismith was instrumental in establishing college basketball.
His colleague C.O. Beamis fielded the first college basketball team just a year after the Springfield YMCA game at the suburban Pittsburgh Geneva College.
Naismith himself later coached at the University of Kansas for six years, before handing the reins to renowned coach Forrest "Phog" Allen.
Naismith's disciple Amos Alonzo Stagg brought basketball to the University of Chicago, while Adolph Rupp, a student of Naismith's at Kansas, enjoyed great success as coach at the University of Kentucky.
On February 9, 1895, the first intercollegiate 5-on-5 game was played at Hamline University between Hamline and the School of Agriculture, which was affiliated with the University of Minnesota.
The School of Agriculture won in a 9–3 game.

In 1901, colleges, including the University of Chicago, Columbia University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, the University of Minnesota, the U.S. Naval Academy, the University of Colorado and Yale University began sponsoring men's games.
In 1905, frequent injuries on the football field prompted President Theodore Roosevelt to suggest that colleges form a governing body, resulting in the creation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (IAAUS).
In 1910, that body changed its name to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA).
The first Canadian interuniversity basketball game was played at YMCA in Kingston, Ontario on February 6, 1904, when McGill University—Naismith's alma mater—visited Queen's University.
McGill won 9–7 in overtime; the score was 7–7 at the end of regulation play, and a ten-minute overtime period settled the outcome.
A good turnout of spectators watched the game.
The first men's national championship tournament, the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball tournament, which still exists as the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) tournament, was organized in 1937.
The first national championship for NCAA teams, the National Invitation Tournament (NIT) in New York, was organized in 1938; the NCAA national tournament began one year later.
College basketball was rocked by gambling scandals from 1948 to 1951, when dozens of players from top teams were implicated in match fixing and point shaving.
Partially spurred by an association with cheating, the NIT lost support to the NCAA tournament.

===
High school basketball ===
Before widespread school district consolidation, most American high schools were far smaller than their present-day counterparts.
During the first decades of the 20th century, basketball quickly became the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and personnel requirements.
In the days before widespread television coverage of professional and college sports, the popularity of high school basketball was unrivaled in many parts of America.
Perhaps the most legendary of high school teams was Indiana's Franklin Wonder Five, which took the nation by storm during the 1920s, dominating Indiana basketball and earning national recognition.

Today virtually every high school in the United States fields a basketball team in varsity competition.
Basketball's popularity remains high, both in rural areas where they carry the identification of the entire community, as well as at some larger schools known for their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at higher levels of competition after graduation.
In the 2016–17 season, 980,673 boys and girls represented their schools in interscholastic basketball competition, according to the National Federation of State High School Associations.
The states of Illinois, Indiana and Kentucky are particularly well known for their residents' devotion to high school basketball, commonly called Hoosier Hysteria in Indiana; the critically acclaimed film Hoosiers shows high school basketball's depth of meaning to these communities.

There is currently no tournament to determine a national high school champion.
The most serious effort was the National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament at the University of Chicago from 1917 to 1930.
The event was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg and sent invitations to state champion teams.
The tournament started out as a mostly Midwest affair but grew.
In 1929 it had 29 state champions.
Faced with opposition from the National Federation of State High School Associations and North Central Association of Colleges and Schools that bore a threat of the schools losing their accreditation the last tournament was in 1930.
The organizations said they were concerned that the tournament was being used to recruit professional players from the prep ranks.
The tournament did not invite minority schools or private/parochial schools.

The National Catholic Interscholastic Basketball Tournament ran from 1924 to 1941 at Loyola University.
The National Catholic Invitational Basketball Tournament from 1954 to 1978 played at a series of venues, including Catholic University, Georgetown and George Mason.
The National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament for Black High Schools was held from 1929 to 1942 at Hampton Institute.
The National Invitational Interscholastic Basketball Tournament was held from 1941 to 1967 starting out at Tuskegee Institute.
Following a pause during World War II it resumed at Tennessee State College in Nashville.
The basis for the champion dwindled after 1954 when Brown v. Board of Education began an integration of schools.
The last tournaments were held at Alabama State College from 1964 to 1967.

===
Professional basketball ===
Teams abounded throughout the 1920s.
There were hundreds of men's professional basketball teams in towns and cities all over the United States, and little organization of the professional game.
Players jumped from team to team and teams played in armories and smoky dance halls.
Leagues came and went.
Barnstorming squads such as the Original Celtics and two all-African American teams, the New York Renaissance Five ("Rens") and the (still existing)
Harlem Globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national tours.

In 1946, the Basketball Association of America (BAA) was formed.
The first game was played in Toronto, Ontario, Canada between the Toronto Huskies and New York Knickerbockers on November 1, 1946.
Three seasons later, in 1949, the BAA merged with the National Basketball League (NBL) to form the National Basketball Association (NBA).
By the 1950s, basketball had become a major college sport, thus paving the way for a growth of interest in professional basketball.
In 1959, a basketball hall of fame was founded in Springfield, Massachusetts, site of the first game.
Its rosters include the names of great players, coaches, referees and people who have contributed significantly to the development of the game.
The hall of fame has people who have accomplished many goals in their career in basketball.
An upstart organization, the American Basketball Association, emerged in 1967 and briefly threatened the NBA's dominance until the ABA-NBA merger in 1976.
Today the NBA is the top professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition.

The NBA has featured many famous players, including George Mikan, the first dominating "big man"; ball-handling wizard Bob Cousy and defensive genius Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics; charismatic center Wilt Chamberlain, who originally played for the barnstorming Harlem Globetrotters; all-around stars Oscar Robertson and Jerry West; more recent big men
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Shaquille O'Neal, Hakeem Olajuwon and Karl Malone; playmakers John Stockton, Isiah Thomas and Steve Nash;
crowd-pleasing forwards Julius Erving and Charles Barkley; European stars Dirk Nowitzki, Pau Gasol and Tony Parker; more recent superstars LeBron James, Allen Iverson and Kobe Bryant; and the three players who many credit with ushering the professional game to its highest level of popularity during the 1980s and 1990s:
Larry Bird, Earvin "Magic" Johnson, and Michael Jordan.

In 2001, the NBA formed a developmental league, the National Basketball Development League (later known as the NBA D-League and then the NBA G League after a branding deal with Gatorade).
As of the 2018–19 season, the G League has 27 teams.

===
International basketball ===
FIBA (International Basketball Federation) was formed in 1932 by eight founding nations:
Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Romania and Switzerland.
At this time, the organization only oversaw amateur players.
Its acronym, derived from the French Fédération Internationale de Basket-ball Amateur, was thus "FIBA".
Men's basketball was first included at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics, although a demonstration tournament was held in 1904.
The United States defeated Canada in the first final, played outdoors.
This competition has usually been dominated by the United States, whose team has won all but three titles.
The first of these came in a controversial final game in Munich in 1972 against the Soviet Union, in which the ending of the game was replayed three times until the Soviet Union finally came out on top.
In 1950 the first FIBA World Championship for men, now known as the FIBA Basketball World Cup, was held in Argentina.
Three years later, the first FIBA World Championship for women, now known as the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup, was held in Chile.
Women's basketball was added to the Olympics in 1976, which were held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada with teams such as the Soviet Union, Brazil and Australia rivaling the American squads.

In 1989, FIBA allowed professional NBA players to participate in the Olympics for the first time.
Prior to the 1992 Summer Olympics, only European and South American teams were allowed to field professionals in the Olympics.
The United States' dominance continued with the introduction of the original Dream Team.
In the 2004 Athens Olympics, the United States suffered its first Olympic loss while using professional players, falling to Puerto Rico (in a 19-point loss) and Lithuania in group games, and being eliminated in the semifinals by Argentina.
It eventually won the bronze medal defeating Lithuania, finishing behind Argentina and Italy.
The Redeem Team, won gold at the 2008 Olympics, and the B-Team, won gold at the 2010 FIBA World Championship in Turkey despite featuring no players from the 2008 squad.
The United States continued its dominance as they won gold at the 2012 Olympics, 2014 FIBA World Cup and the 2016 Olympics.

Worldwide, basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all age levels.
The global popularity of the sport is reflected in the nationalities represented in the NBA.
Players from all six inhabited continents currently play in the NBA.
Top international players began coming into the NBA in the mid-1990s, including Croatians Dražen Petrović and Toni Kukoč, Serbian Vlade Divac, Lithuanians Arvydas Sabonis and Šarūnas Marčiulionis, Dutchman Rik Smits and German Detlef Schrempf.

In the Philippines, the Philippine Basketball Association's first game was played on April 9, 1975, at the Araneta Coliseum in Cubao, Quezon City, Philippines.
It was founded as a "rebellion" of several teams from the now-defunct Manila Industrial and Commercial Athletic Association, which was tightly controlled by the Basketball Association of the Philippines (now defunct), the then-FIBA recognized national association.
Nine teams from the MICAA participated in the league's first season that opened on April 9, 1975.
The NBL is Australia's pre-eminent men's professional basketball league.
The league commenced in 1979, playing a winter season (April–September) and did so until the completion of the 20th season in 1998.
The 1998–99 season, which commenced only months later, was the first season after the shift to the current summer season format (October–April).
This shift was an attempt to avoid competing directly against Australia's various football codes.
It features 8 teams from around Australia and one in New Zealand.
A few players including Luc Longley, Andrew Gaze, Shane Heal, Chris Anstey and Andrew Bogut made it big internationally, becoming poster figures for the sport in Australia.
The Women's National Basketball League began in 1981.

===
Women's basketball ===
Women's basketball began in 1892 at Smith College when Senda Berenson, a physical education teacher, modified Naismith's rules for women.
Shortly after she was hired at Smith, she went to Naismith to learn more about the game.
Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she organized the first women's collegiate basketball game on March 21, 1893, when her Smith freshmen and sophomores played against one another.
However, the first women's interinstitutional game was played in 1892 between the University of California and Miss Head's School.
Berenson's rules were first published in 1899, and two years later she became the editor of A. G. Spalding's first Women's Basketball Guide.
Berenson's freshmen played the sophomore class in the first women's intercollegiate basketball game at Smith College, March 21, 1893.
The same year, Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College (coached by Clara Gregory Baer) women began playing basketball.
By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the country, including Wellesley, Vassar, and Bryn Mawr.
The first intercollegiate women's game was on April 4, 1896.
Stanford women played Berkeley, 9-on-9, ending in a 2–1 Stanford victory.

Women's basketball development was more structured than that for men in the early years.
In 1905, the Executive Committee on Basket Ball Rules (National Women's Basketball Committee) was created by the American Physical Education Association.
These rules called for six to nine players per team and 11 officials.
The International Women's Sports Federation (1924) included a women's basketball competition.
37 women's high school varsity basketball or state tournaments were held by 1925.
And in 1926, the Amateur Athletic Union backed the first national women's basketball championship, complete with men's rules.
The Edmonton Grads, a touring Canadian women's team based in Edmonton, Alberta, operated between 1915 and 1940.
The Grads toured all over North America, and were exceptionally successful.
They posted a record of 522 wins and only 20 losses over that span, as they met any team that wanted to challenge them, funding their tours from gate receipts.
The Grads also shone on several exhibition trips to Europe, and won four consecutive exhibition Olympics tournaments, in 1924, 1928, 1932, and 1936; however, women's basketball was not an official Olympic sport until 1976.
The Grads' players were unpaid, and had to remain single.
The Grads' style focused on team play, without overly emphasizing skills of individual players.
The first women's AAU All-America team was chosen in 1929.
Women's industrial leagues sprang up throughout the United States, producing famous athletes, including Babe Didrikson of the Golden Cyclones, and the All American Red Heads Team, which competed against men's teams, using men's rules.
By 1938, the women's national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team.

The NBA-backed Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) began in 1997.
Though it had shaky attendance figures, several marquee players (Lisa Leslie, Diana Taurasi, and Candace Parker among others) have helped the league's popularity and level of competition.
Other professional women's basketball leagues in the United States, such as the American Basketball League (1996–98), have folded in part because of the popularity of the WNBA.
The WNBA has been looked at by many as a niche league.
However, the league has recently taken steps forward.
In June 2007, the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN.
The new television deal ran from 2009 to 2016.
Along with this deal, came the first-ever rights fees to be paid to a women's professional sports league.
Over the eight years of the contract, "millions and millions of dollars" were "dispersed to the league's teams.
"
In a March 12, 2009 article, NBA commissioner David Stern said that in the bad economy, "the NBA is far less profitable than the WNBA.
We're losing a lot of money among a large number of teams.
We're budgeting the WNBA to break even this year."
== Rules and regulations ==
Measurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among tournaments and organizations; international and NBA rules are used in this section.

The object of the game is to outscore one's opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents' basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own.
An attempt to score in this way is called a shot.
A successful shot is worth two points, or three points if it is taken from beyond the three-point arc 6.75 metres (22 ft 2 in) from the basket in international games and 23 feet 9 inches (7.24 m) in NBA games.
A one-point shot can be earned when shooting from the foul line after a foul is made.
After a team has scored from a field goal or free throw, play is resumed with a throw-in awarded to the non-scoring team taken from a point beyond the endline of the court where the points(s) were scored.

===
Playing regulations ===
Games are played in four quarters of 10 (FIBA) or 12 minutes (NBA).
College men's games use two 20-minute halves, college women's games use 10-minute quarters, and
most United States high school varsity games use 8-minute quarters; however, this varies from state to state.
15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under FIBA, NBA, and NCAA rules and 10 minutes in United States high schools.
Overtime periods are five minutes in length except for high school, which is four minutes in length.
Teams exchange baskets for the second half.
The time allowed is actual playing time; the clock is stopped while the play is not active.
Therefore, games generally take much longer to complete than the allotted game time, typically about two hours.

Five players from each team may be on the court at one time.
Substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped.
Teams also have a coach, who oversees the development and strategies of the team, and other team personnel such as assistant coaches, managers, statisticians, doctors and trainers.

For both men's and women's teams, a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number, unique within the team, printed on both the front and back.
Players wear high-top sneakers that provide extra ankle support.
Typically, team names, players' names and, outside of North America, sponsors are printed on the uniforms.

A limited number of time-outs, clock stoppages requested by a coach (or sometimes mandated in the NBA) for a short meeting with the players, are allowed.
They generally last no longer than one minute (100 seconds in the NBA) unless, for televised games, a commercial break is needed.

The game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee (referred to as crew chief in the NBA), one or two umpires (referred to as referees in the NBA) and the table officials.
For college, the NBA, and many high schools, there are a total of three referees on the court.
The table officials are responsible for keeping track of each team's scoring, timekeeping, individual and team fouls, player substitutions, team possession arrow, and the shot clock.

=== Equipment ===
The only essential equipment in a basketball game is the ball and the court: a flat, rectangular surface with baskets at opposite ends.
Competitive levels require the use of more equipment such as clocks, score sheets, scoreboard(s), alternating possession arrows, and whistle-operated stop-clock systems.

A regulation basketball court in international games is 28 meters (92 feet) long and 15 meters (49 feet) wide.
In the NBA and NCAA the court is 94 by 50 feet (29 by 15 meters).
Most courts have wood flooring, usually constructed from maple planks running in the same direction as the longer court dimension.
The name and logo of the home team is usually painted on or around the center circle.

The basket is a steel rim 18 inches (46 cm) diameter with an attached net affixed to a backboard that measures 6 by 3.5 feet (1.8 by 1.1 meters) and
one basket is at each end of the court.
The white outlined box on the backboard is 18 inches (46 cm) high and 2 feet (61 cm) wide.
At almost all levels of competition, the top of the rim is exactly 10 feet (3.05 meters) above the court and 4 feet (1.22 meters) inside the baseline.
While variation is possible in the dimensions of the court and backboard, it is considered important for the basket to be of the correct height – a rim that is off by just a few inches can have an adverse effect on shooting.

The net must "check the ball momentarily as it passes through the basket" to aid the visual confirmation that the ball went through.

The act of checking the ball has the further advantage of slowing down the ball so the rebound doesn't go as far.
The size of the basketball is also regulated.
For men, the official ball is 29.5 inches (75 cm) in circumference (size 7, or a "295 ball") and weighs 22 oz (623.69 grams).
If women are playing, the official basketball size is 28.5 inches (72 cm) in circumference (size 6, or a "285 ball") with a weight of 20 oz (567 grams).
In 3x3, a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game, a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball
but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions (men's, women's, and mixed teams).
===
Violations ===
The ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot, passed between players, thrown, tapped, rolled or dribbled (bouncing the ball while running).

The ball must stay within the court; the last team to touch the ball before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession.
The ball is out of bounds if it touches a boundary line, or touches any player or object that is out of bounds.

There are limits placed on the steps a player may take without dribbling, which commonly results in an infraction known as traveling.
Nor may a player stop his dribble and then resume dribbling.
A dribble that touches both hands is considered stopping the dribble, giving this infraction the name double dribble.
Within a dribble, the player cannot carry the ball by placing his hand on the bottom of the ball; doing so is known as carrying the ball.
A team, once having established ball control in the front half of their court, may not return the ball to the backcourt and be the first to touch it.
A violation of these rules results in loss of possession.

The ball may not be kicked, nor be struck with the fist.
For the offense, a violation of these rules results in loss of possession; for the defense, most leagues reset the shot clock and the offensive team is given possession of the ball out of bounds.

There are limits imposed on the time taken before progressing the ball past halfway (8 seconds in FIBA and the NBA; 10 seconds in NCAA and high school for both sexes), before attempting a shot (24 seconds in FIBA, the NBA, and U Sports (Canadian universities) play for both sexes, and 30 seconds in NCAA play for both sexes), holding the ball while closely guarded (5 seconds), and remaining in the restricted area known as the free-throw lane, (or the "key") (3 seconds).
These rules are designed to promote more offense.

There are also limits on how players may block an opponent's field goal attempt or help a teammate's field goal attempt.
Goaltending is a defender's touching of a ball that is on a downward flight toward the basket, while the related violation of basket interference is the touching of a ball that is on the rim or above the basket, or by a player reaching through the basket from below.
Goaltending and basket interference committed by a defender result in awarding the basket to the offense, while basket interference committed by an offensive player results in cancelling the basket if one is scored.
The defense gains possession in all cases of goaltending or basket interference.

===
Fouls ===
An attempt to unfairly disadvantage an opponent through certain types of physical contact is illegal and is called a personal foul.
These are most commonly committed by defensive players; however, they can be committed by offensive players as well.
Players who are fouled either receive the ball to pass inbounds again, or receive one or more free throws if they are fouled in the act of shooting, depending on whether the shot was successful.
One point is awarded for making a free throw, which is attempted from a line 15 feet (4.6 m) from the basket.

The referee is responsible for judging whether contact is illegal, sometimes resulting in controversy.
The calling of fouls can vary between games, leagues and referees.

There is a second category of fouls called technical fouls, which may be charged for various rules violations including failure to properly record a player in the scorebook, or for unsportsmanlike conduct.
These infractions result in one or two free throws, which may be taken by any of the five players on the court at the time.
Repeated incidents can result in disqualification.
A blatant foul involving physical contact that is either excessive or unnecessary is called an intentional foul (flagrant foul in the NBA).
In FIBA and NCAA women's basketball, a foul resulting in ejection is called a disqualifying foul, while in leagues other than the NBA, such a foul is referred to as flagrant.

If a team exceeds a certain limit of team fouls in a given period (quarter or half) – four for NBA, NCAA women's, and international games – the opposing team is awarded one or two free throws on all subsequent non-shooting fouls for that period, the number depending on the league.
In the US college men's game and high school games for both sexes, if a team reaches 7 fouls in a half, the opposing team is awarded one free throw, along with a second shot if the first is made.
This is called shooting "one-and-one".
If a team exceeds 10 fouls in the half, the opposing team is awarded two free throws on all subsequent fouls for the half.

When a team shoots foul shots, the opponents may not interfere with the shooter, nor may they try to regain possession until the last or potentially last free throw is in the air.

After a team has committed a specified number of fouls, the other team is said to be "in the bonus".
On scoreboards, this is usually signified with an indicator light reading "Bonus" or "Penalty" with an illuminated directional arrow or dot indicating that team is to receive free throws when fouled by the opposing team.
(
Some scoreboards also indicate the number of fouls committed.)

If a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation, the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play.

If a player is fouled while attempting a shot
and the shot is unsuccessful, the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot.
A player fouled while attempting a regular two-point shot thus receives two shots, and a player fouled while attempting a three-point shot receives three shots.

If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful, typically the player will be awarded one additional free throw for one point.
In combination with a regular shot, this is called a "three-point play" or "four-point play" (or more colloquially, an "and one") because of the basket made at the time of the foul (2 or 3 points) and the additional free throw (1 point).

==
Common techniques and practices ==


===
Positions ===
Although the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever, they have evolved as part of basketball.
During the early years of basketball's evolution, two guards, two forwards, and one center were used.
In more recent times specific positions evolved, but the current trend, advocated by many top coaches including Mike Krzyzewski, is towards positionless basketball, where big players are free to shoot from outside and dribble if their skill allows it.
Popular descriptions of positions include:
Point guard (often called the "1") : usually the fastest player on the team, organizes the team's offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time.

Shooting guard (the "2") : creates a high volume of shots on offense, mainly long-ranged; and guards the opponent's best perimeter player on defense.

Small forward (the "3") : often primarily responsible for scoring points via cuts to the basket and dribble penetration; on defense seeks rebounds and steals, but sometimes plays more actively.

Power forward (the "4"): plays offensively often with their back to the basket; on defense, plays under the basket (in a zone defense) or against the opposing power forward (in man-to-man defense).

Center (the "5"): uses height and size to score (on offense), to protect the basket closely (on defense), or to rebound.

The above descriptions are flexible.
For most teams today, the shooting guard and small forward have very similar responsibilities and are often called the wings, as do the power forward and center, who are often called post players.
While most teams describe two players as guards, two as forwards, and one as a center, on some occasions teams choose to call them by different designations.

===
Strategy ===
There are two main defensive strategies: zone defense and man-to-man defense.
In a zone defense, each player is assigned to guard a specific area of the court.
Zone defenses often allow the defense to double team the ball, a manoeuver known as a trap.
In a man-to-man defense, each defensive player guards a specific opponent.

Offensive plays are more varied, normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball.
A quick movement by an offensive player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is known as a cut.
A legal attempt by an offensive player to stop an opponent from guarding a teammate, by standing in the defender's way such that the teammate cuts next to him, is a screen or pick.
The two plays are combined in the pick and roll, in which a player sets a pick and then "rolls" away from the pick towards the basket.
Screens and cuts are very important in offensive plays; these allow the quick passes and teamwork, which can lead to a successful basket.
Teams almost always have several offensive plays planned to ensure their movement is not predictable.
On court, the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will occur.

===
Shooting ===
Shooting is the act of attempting to score points by throwing the ball through the basket, methods varying with players and situations.

Typically, a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket.
A player will rest the ball on the fingertips of the dominant hand (the shooting arm) slightly above the head, with the other hand supporting the side of the ball.
The ball is usually shot by jumping (though not always) and extending the shooting arm.
The shooting arm, fully extended with the wrist fully bent, is held stationary for a moment following the release of the ball, known as a follow-through.
Players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to absorb its impact with the rim.
The ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat controversial, but generally a proper arc is recommended.
Players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket.

The two most common shots that use the above described setup are the set shot and the jump shot.
Both are preceded by a crouching action which preloads the muscles and increases the power of the shot.
In a set shot, the shooter straightens up and throws from a standing position with neither foot leaving the floor; this is typically used for free throws.
For a jump shot, the throw is taken in mid-air with the ball being released near the top of the jump.
This provides much greater power and range, and it also allows the player to elevate over the defender.
Failure to release the ball before the feet return to the floor is considered a traveling violation.

Another common shot is called the lay-up.
This shot requires the player to be in motion toward the basket, and to "lay" the ball "up" and into the basket, typically off the backboard (the backboard-free, underhand version is called a finger roll).
The most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the slam dunk, in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward, through the basket while touching it.

Another shot that is less common than the lay-up, is the "circus shot".
The circus shot is a low-percentage shot that is flipped, heaved, scooped, or flung toward the hoop while the shooter is off-balance, airborne, falling down,
and/or facing away from the basket.
A back-shot is a shot taken when the player is facing away from the basket, and may be shot with the dominant hand, or both; but there is a very low chance that the shot will be successful.
A shot that misses both the rim and the backboard completely is referred to as an air ball.
A particularly bad shot, or one that only hits the backboard, is jocularly called a brick.
The hang time is the length of time a player stays in the air after jumping, either to make a slam dunk, lay-up or jump shot.

===
Rebounding ===
The objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw, as it rebounds from the hoop or backboard.
This plays a major role in the game, as most possessions end when a team misses a shot.
There are two categories of rebounds: offensive rebounds, in which the ball is recovered by the offensive side and does not change possession, and defensive rebounds, in which the defending team gains possession of the loose ball.
The majority of rebounds are defensive, as the team on defense tends to be in better position to recover missed shots.

===
Passing ===
A pass is a method of moving the ball between players.
Most passes are accompanied by a step forward to increase power and are followed through with the hands to ensure accuracy.

A staple pass is the chest pass.
The ball is passed directly from the passer's chest to the receiver's chest.
A proper chest pass involves an outward snap of the thumbs to add velocity and leaves the defence little time to react.

Another type of pass is the bounce pass.
Here, the passer bounces the ball crisply about two-thirds of the way from his own chest to the receiver.
The ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the receiver.
The bounce pass takes longer to complete than the chest pass, but it is also harder for the opposing team to intercept (kicking the ball deliberately is a violation).
Thus, players often use the bounce pass in crowded moments, or to pass around a defender.

The overhead pass is used to pass the ball over a defender.
The ball is released while over the passer's head.

The outlet pass occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound.
The next pass after the rebound is the outlet pass.

The crucial aspect of any good pass is it being difficult to intercept.
Good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and they know exactly where each of their other teammates prefers to receive the ball.
A special way of doing this is passing the ball without looking at the receiving teammate.
This is called a no-look pass.

Another advanced style of passing is the behind-the-back pass, which, as the description implies, involves throwing the ball behind the passer's back to a teammate.
Although some players can perform such a pass effectively, many coaches discourage no-look or behind-the-back passes, believing them to be difficult to control and more likely to result in turnovers or violations.

===
Dribbling ===
Dribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously with one hand and is a requirement for a player to take steps with the ball.
To dribble, a player pushes the ball down towards the ground with the fingertips rather than patting it; this ensures greater control.

When dribbling past an opponent, the dribbler should dribble with the hand farthest from the opponent, making it more difficult for the defensive player to get to the ball.
It is therefore important for a player to be able to dribble competently with both hands.

Good dribblers (or "ball handlers") tend to bounce the ball low to the ground, reducing the distance of travel of the ball from the floor to the hand, making it more difficult for the defender to "steal" the ball.
Good ball handlers frequently dribble behind their backs, between their legs, and switch directions suddenly, making a less predictable dribbling pattern that is more difficult to defend against.
This is called a crossover, which is the most effective way to move past defenders while dribbling.

A skilled player can dribble without watching the ball, using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball's location.
By not having to focus on the ball, a player can look for teammates or scoring opportunities, as well as avoid the danger of having someone steal the ball away from him/her.

===
Blocking ===
A block is performed when, after a shot is attempted, a defender succeeds in altering the shot by touching the ball.
In almost all variants of play, it is illegal to touch the ball after it is in the downward path of its arc; this is known as goaltending.
It is also illegal under NBA and Men's NCAA basketball to block a shot after it has touched the backboard, or when any part of the ball is directly above the rim.
Under international rules it is illegal to block a shot that is in the downward path of its arc or one that has touched the backboard until the ball has hit the rim.
After the ball hits the rim, it is again legal to touch it even though it is no longer considered as a block performed.

To block a shot, a player has to be able to reach a point higher than where the shot is released.
Thus, height can be an advantage in blocking.
Players who are taller and playing the power forward or center positions generally record more blocks than players who are shorter and playing the guard positions.
However, with good timing and a sufficiently high vertical leap, even shorter players can be effective shot blockers.

==
Height ==
At the professional level, most male players are above 6 feet 3 inches (1.91 m) and most women above 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m).
Guards, for whom physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial, tend to be the smallest players.
Almost all forwards in the top men's pro leagues are 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m) or taller.
Most centers are over 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m) tall.
According to a survey given to all NBA teams, the average height of all NBA players is just under 6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m), with the average weight being close to 222 pounds (101 kg).
The tallest players ever in the NBA were Manute Bol and Gheorghe Mureșan, who were both 7 feet 7 inches (
2.31 m) tall.
At 7 feet 2 inches (2.18 m), Margo Dydek was the tallest player in the history of the WNBA.

The shortest player ever to play in the NBA is Muggsy Bogues at 5 feet 3 inches (1.60 m).
Other short players have thrived at the pro level.
Anthony "Spud" Webb was just 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m)
tall, but had a 42-inch (1.1 m) vertical leap, giving him significant height when jumping.
While shorter players are often at a disadvantage in certain aspects of the game, their ability to navigate quickly through crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low are strengths.

Players regularly inflate their height.
Many prospects exaggerate their height while in high school or college to make themselves more appealing to coaches and scouts, who prefer taller players.
Charles Barkley stated; "I've been measured at 6-5, 6-4 3⁄4.
But I started in college at 6-6."
Sam Smith, a former writer from the Chicago Tribune, said: "We sort of know the heights, because after camp, the sheet comes out.
But you use that height, and the player gets mad.
And then you hear from his agent.
Or you file your story with the right height, and the copy desk changes it because they have the 'official' N.B.A. media guide, which is wrong.
So you sort of go along with the joke.
"
In the NBA, there is no standard on whether a player's listed height uses their measurement with shoes on or without.
The NBA Draft Combine, which most players attend before the draft, provides both measurements.
Thereafter, a player's team is solely responsible for their listed height, which can vary depending on the process selected.
Notable players who overstated their height include:

Kobe Bryant whose listed height is 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m), while his actual height is 6 feet 4 inches (1.93 m)
Charles Barkley whose listed height is 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m), while his actual height is just under 6 feet 5 inches (1.96 m)
Kevin Love
whose listed height is 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m), while his actual height is just under 6 feet 8 inches (2.03 m)
Jason Collins whose listed height is 7 feet 0 inches (2.13 m), while his actual height is 6 feet 8 inches (2.03 m)
Dwight Howard whose listed height is 6 feet 11 inches (2.11 m), while his actual height is 6 feet 9 inches (2.06 m)On rare occasions, some players will understate their actual heights, not to be repositioned.
One example is Kevin Durant, whose listed height is 6 feet 9 inches (2.06 m), while his actual height is 7 feet 0 inches (2.13 m).
Durant's reasoning was, "Really, that's the prototypical size for a small forward.
Anything taller than that, and they'll start saying, 'Ah, he's a power forward."
== Variations and similar games ==
Variations of basketball are activities based on the game of basketball, using common basketball skills and equipment (primarily the ball and basket).
Some variations are only superficial rules changes, while others are distinct games with varying degrees of basketball influences.
Other variations include children's games, contests or activities meant to help players reinforce skills.

There are principal basketball sports with variations on basketball including Wheelchair basketball, Water basketball, Beach basketball, Slamball, Streetball and Unicycle basketball.
An earlier version of basketball, played primarily by women and girls, was Six-on-six basketball.
Horseball is a game played on horseback where a ball is handled and points are scored by shooting it through a high net (approximately 1.5m×1.5m).
The sport is like a combination of polo, rugby, and basketball.
There is even a form played on donkeys known as Donkey basketball, but that version has come under attack from animal rights groups.

=== Half-court ===
Perhaps the single most common variation of basketball is the half-court game, played in informal settings without referees or strict rules.
Only one basket is used, and the ball must be "taken back" or "cleared" – passed or dribbled outside the three-point line each time
possession of the ball changes from one team to the other.
Half-court games require less cardiovascular stamina, since players need not run back and forth a full court.
Half-court raises the number of players that can use a court or, conversely, can be played if there is an insufficient number to form full 5-on-5 teams.

Half-court basketball is usually played 1-on-1, 2-on-2 or 3-on-3.
Also, streetball commonly uses the same system.
The latter variation is gradually gaining official recognition as 3x3, originally known as FIBA 33.
It was first tested at the 2007 Asian Indoor Games in Macau and the first official tournaments were held at the 2009 Asian Youth Games and the 2010 Youth Olympics, both in Singapore.
The first FIBA 3x3 Youth World Championships were held in Rimini, Italy in 2011, with the first FIBA 3x3 World Championships for senior teams following a year later in Athens.
The sport is highly tipped to become an Olympic sport as early as 2016.
In the summer of 2017, the BIG3 basketball league, a professional 3x3 half court basketball league that features former NBA players, began.
The BIG3 features several rule variants including a four-point field goal.

===
Other variations ===
There are also other basketball sports, such as:
One-on-One - It is a variation in which two players will use only a small section of the court (often no more than a half of a court) and compete to play the ball into a single hoop.
Such games tend to emphasize individual dribbling and ball stealing skills over shooting and team play.

Water basketball - Water basketball, played in a swimming pool, merges basketball and water polo rules.

Beach basketball
- A modified version of basketball, played on beaches, was invented by Philip Bryant.
Beach basketball is played in a circular court with no backboard on the goal, no out-of-bounds rule with the ball movement to be done via passes or 21/2 steps, as dribbling is next to impossible on a soft surface.
Beach basketball has grown to a very popular, widespread competitive sport.
15 Annual World Championships have been organized.

Dunk Hoops - Dunk Hoops (a.k.a.
Dunk Ball) is a variation of the game of basketball, played on basketball hoops with lowered (under basketball regulation 10 feet) rims.
It originated when the popularity of the slam dunk grew and was developed to create better chances for dunks with lowered rims and using altered goaltending rules.

Slamball - Slamball is full-contact basketball, with trampolines.
Points are scored by playing the ball through the net, as in basketball, though the point-scoring rules are modified.
The main difference from the parent sport is the court; below the padded basketball rim and backboard are four trampolines set into the floor, which serve to propel players to great heights for slam dunks.
The rules also permit some physical contact between the members of the four-player teams.

Streetball - Streetball is a less formal variant of basketball, played on playgrounds and in gymnasiums across the world.
Often only one half of the court is used, but otherwise, the rules of the game are very similar to those of basketball.
The number of participants in a game, or a run, may range from one defender and one person on offense (known as one on one) to two full teams of five each.
Streetball is a very popular game worldwide, and some cities in the United States have organized streetball programs, such as midnight basketball.
Many cities also host their own weekend-long streetball tournaments.

Unicycle basketball - Unicycle basketball is played using a regulation basketball on a regular basketball court with the same rules, for example, one must dribble the ball while riding.
There are a number of rules that are particular to unicycle basketball as well, for example, a player must have at least one foot on a pedal when in-bounding the ball.
Unicycle basketball is usually played using 24" or smaller unicycles, and using plastic pedals, both to preserve the court and the players' shins.
In North America, popular unicycle basketball games are organized.
Spin-offs from basketball that are now separate sports include:
Ringball, a traditional South African sport that stems from basketball, has been played since 1907.
The sport is now promoted in South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho, India, and Mauritius to establish Ringball as an international sport.

Korfball (Dutch: Korfbal, korf meaning 'basket') started in the Netherlands and is now played worldwide as a mixed-gender team ball game, similar to mixed netball and basketball
Netball (formerly known as Women basketball but now played by both males and females), a limited-contact team sport in which two teams of seven try to score points against one another by placing a ball through a high hoop.
Australia New Zealand champions (so called ANZ Championship) is very famous in Australia and New Zealand as the premier netball league.

==
Social forms of basketball ==
Basketball has been adopted by various social groups, which have established their own environments and sometimes their own rules.
Such socialized forms of basketball include the following.

===
Recreational basketball ===
Basketball is played widely casually in schools and colleges where fun, entertainment and camaraderie rule rather than winning a game.

Basketball schools and academies, where students are trained in developing basketball fundamentals, undergo fitness and endurance exercises and learn various basketball skills.
Basketball students learn proper ways of passing, ball handling, dribbling, shooting from various distances, rebounding, offensive moves, defense, layups, screens, basketball rules and basketball ethics.
Also popular are the basketball camps organized for various occasions, often to get prepared for basketball events, and basketball clinics for improving skills.

College and university basketball played in educational institutions of higher learning.
This includes National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) intercollegiate basketball.

===
Disabled basketball ===
Disabled basketball is played by various disabled groups, such as the deaf and physically crippled people.

Deaf basketball - One of several deaf sports, deaf basketball relies on signing for communication.
Any deaf sporting event that happens, its purpose is to serve as a catalyst for the socialization of a low-incidence and geographically dispersed population.

Wheelchair basketball - A sport based on basketball but designed for disabled people in wheelchairs and considered one of the major disabled sports practiced.
There is a functional classification system that is used to help determine if the wheelchair basketball player classification system reflects the existing differences in the performance of elite female players.
This system gives an analysis of the players' functional resources through field-testing and game observation.
During this system's process, players are assigned a score of 1 to 4.5.
===
Show basketball ===
Show basketball is performed by entertainment basketball show teams, the prime example being the Harlem Globetrotters.
There are even specialized entertainment teams, such as teams of celebrities, people with short heights and others.

Celebrity basketball teams made of celebrities (actors, singers, and so on.)
playing in their own leagues or in public, often for entertainment and charity events.

Midget basketball teams made up of athletes of short stature offering shows using basketball;
Slamball offered as entertainment events.
Slamball is a very intense form of basketball that is infused with football tactics and involves bouncing on trampolines.
This game is very popular in places like Europe and Australia.
This game involves much contact, and just like football, the trampolines are embedded in the floor around the baskets.
The objective of the game is just like regular basketball - one scores points by getting the ball into the basket.
This is mostly done by the player using the trampoline to go fly high in the air to come down with a slam dunk.
Not only do they use tactics from football but they also do a similar style of substitution as hockey.
The positions of slamball are stopper, gunner and handler.
The stopper is the defender and is in control of the whole defensive plan.
The handler is basically the point guard of the game, they are in control of setting plays on the offensive end and helps a little on defensive end as well.
The last position, the gunner, is the one that does most of the scoring and all also helps out on the defensive end.

===
Other forms ===
Gay basketball played in LGBTQIA+ communities in gay basketball leagues.
The sport of basketball is a major part of events during the Gay Games, World Outgames and EuroGames.

Midnight basketball, a basketball initiative to curb inner-city crime in the United States and elsewhere by keeping urban youth off the streets and engaging them with sports alternatives to drugs and crime.

Mini Basketball played by underage children.

Maxi Basketball played by more elderly individuals.

Rezball, short for reservation ball, is the avid Native American following of basketball, particularly a style of play particular to Native American teams of some areas.

School or High school basketball, the sport of basketball being one of the most frequently exercised and popular sports in all school systems.

==
Fantasy basketball ==
Fantasy basketball was popularized during the 1990s after the advent of the Internet.
Those who play this game are sometimes referred to as General Managers, who draft actual NBA players and compute their basketball statistics.
The game was popularized by ESPN Fantasy Sports, NBA.com, and Yahoo!
Fantasy Sports.
Other sports websites provided the same format keeping the game interesting with participants actually owning specific players.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
General references ===


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==


===
Historical ===
Basketball Hall of Fame – Springfield, MA
National Basketball Foundation—runs the Naismith Museum in Ontario
Hometown Sports Heroes
===
Organizations ===
Basketball at the Olympic Games
International Basketball Federation
National Basketball Association
Women's National Basketball Association
Continental Basketball Association (oldest professional basketball league in the world)
National Wheelchair Basketball Association


===
Other sources ===
"Basketball".
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

Basketball at Curlie
Eurobasket website
Basketball-Reference.com:
Basketball Statistics, Analysis and History
Ontario's Historical Plaques – Dr. James Naismith (1861–1939)
The "PayPal Mafia" is a group of former PayPal employees and founders who have since founded and developed additional technology companies such as Tesla, Inc., LinkedIn, Palantir Technologies, SpaceX, Affirm, Slide, Kiva, YouTube, Yelp, and Yammer.
Most of the members attended Stanford University or University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign at some point in their studies.

==
History ==
Originally, PayPal was a money-transfer service offered by a company called Confinity which was acquired by X.com in 1999.
Later X.com was renamed PayPal and purchased by eBay in 2002.

The original PayPal employees had difficulty adjusting to eBay's more traditional corporate culture and within four years all but 12 of the first 50 employees had left.

They remained connected as social and business acquaintances, and a number of them worked together to form new companies in subsequent years.

This group of PayPal alumni became so prolific that the term PayPal Mafia was coined.
The term gained even wider exposure when a 2007 article in Fortune magazine used the phrase in its headline and featured a photo of former PayPal employees in gangster attire.

==
Members ==
Individuals whom the media refers to as members of the PayPal Mafia include:

Peter Thiel,  PayPal founder and former chief executive officer who is sometimes referred to as the "don" of the PayPal Mafia
Max Levchin, founder and chief technology officer at PayPal sometimes called the "consigliere" of the PayPal Mafia
Elon Musk, founder of X.com which acquired the company Confinity.
Musk later became a co-founder of Tesla Inc, he then founded SpaceX, Neuralink, OpenAI, The Boring Company, and is the Chairman of SolarCity
David O. Sacks, former PayPal COO who later founded Geni.com and Yammer
Roelof Botha, former PayPal CFO who later became a partner of venture capital firm Sequoia Capital
Steve Chen, former PayPal engineer who co-founded YouTube.

Reid Hoffman, former executive vice president who later founded LinkedIn and was an early investor in Facebook, Aviary, Friendster, Six Apart, Zynga, IronPort, Flickr, Digg, Grockit, Ping.fm, Nanosolar, Care.com, Knewton, Kongregate, Last.fm, Ning, and Technorati
Ken Howery, former PayPal CFO who became a partner at Founders Fund
Chad Hurley, former PayPal web designer who co-founded YouTube
Eric M. Jackson, who wrote the book The PayPal Wars and became chief executive officer of WND Books and
co-founded CapLinked.

Jawed Karim, former PayPal engineer who co-founded YouTube.
The first YouTube video, Me at the zoo, uploaded by Karim on April 23, 2005.

Jared Kopf, former PayPal (executive assistant to Peter Thiel) who co-founded Slide, HomeRun and NextRoll.

Joe Lonsdale, co-founder of Palantir, Addepar, and OpenGov.
Founding partner of investment firms 8VC and Formation 8
Dave McClure, former PayPal marketing director, a super angel investor for start up companies and founder of 500 Startups which has hit 500+ investments.

Andrew McCormack, co-founder of Valar Ventures
Luke Nosek, PayPal co-founder and former vice president of marketing and strategy, became a partner at Founders Fund with Peter Thiel and Ken Howery
Keith Rabois, former executive at PayPal who later worked at LinkedIn, Slide, Square, Khosla Ventures, and currently with Peter Thiel at Founders Fund, and personally invested in Tokbox, Xoom, Slide, LinkedIn, Geni, Room 9 Entertainment, YouTube, and Yelp.

Jack Selby, former vice president of corporate and international development at PayPal who co-founded Clarium Capital with Peter Thiel, later becoming managing director of Grandmaster Capital Management.

Premal Shah, former product manager at PayPal, became the founding president of Kiva.org.

Russel Simmons, former PayPal engineer who co-founded Yelp Inc.
Jeremy Stoppelman, former vice president of technology at PayPal who later co-founded Yelp, Inc.
Yishan Wong, former engineering manager at PayPal, later worked at Facebook and became the CEO of Reddit.
==
Legacy ==
The PayPal Mafia is sometimes credited with inspiring the re-emergence of consumer-focused Internet companies after the dot-com bust of 2001.
The PayPal Mafia phenomenon has been compared to the founding of Intel in the late 1960s by engineers who had earlier founded Fairchild Semiconductor after leaving Shockley Semiconductor.
They are discussed in journalist Sarah Lacy's book
Once You're Lucky,
Twice You're Good.

According to Lacy,  the selection process and technical learning at PayPal played a role, but the main factor behind their future success was the confidence they gained there.
Their success has been attributed to their youth; the physical, cultural, and economic infrastructure of Silicon Valley; and the diversity of their skill-sets.
PayPal's founders encouraged tight social bonds among its employees, and many of them continued to trust and support one another after leaving PayPal.
An intensely competitive environment and a shared struggle to keep the company solvent despite many setbacks also contributed to a strong and lasting camaraderie amongst former employees.

== See also ==
Traitorous eight


=
= References ==
Michael J. Saylor (born February 4, 1965) is an American entrepreneur and business executive, who co-founded and leads MicroStrategy, a company which provides business intelligence, mobile software, and cloud-based services.
Saylor authored the 2012 book The Mobile Wave: How Mobile Intelligence Will Change Everything.
He is also the sole trustee of Saylor Academy, a provider of free online education.
As of 2016, Saylor has been granted 31 patents and has 9 additional applications under review.
==
Life ==
Saylor was born in Lincoln, Nebraska on February 4, 1965 and spent his early years on various Air Force bases around the world, as his father was an Air Force chief master sergeant.
When Saylor was 11, the family settled in Fairborn, Ohio, near the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
In 1983, Saylor enrolled at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) on an Air Force ROTC scholarship.
He joined the Theta Delta Chi fraternity, through which he met the future co-founder of MicroStrategy, Sanju K. Bansal.
He graduated from MIT in 1987, with a double major in aeronautics and astronautics; and science, technology, and society.

A medical condition prevented him from becoming a pilot, and instead, he got a job with a consulting firm, The Federal Group, Inc. in 1987, where he focused on computer simulation modeling for a software integration company.
In 1988, Saylor became an internal consultant at DuPont, where he developed computer models to help the company anticipate change in its key markets.
The simulations predicted that there would be a recession in many of DuPont's major markets in 1990.

==
MicroStrategy ==
Using the funds from DuPont, Saylor founded MicroStrategy with Sanju Bansal, his MIT fraternity brother.
The company began developing software for data mining, then focused on software for business intelligence.
In 1992, MicroStrategy won a $10 million contract with McDonald's to develop applications to analyze the efficiency of its promotions.
The contract with McDonald's led Saylor to realize that his company could create business intelligence software that would allow companies to use their own data for insights into their businesses.
Saylor took the company public in June 1998, with an initial stock offering of 4 million shares priced at $12 each.
The stock price doubled on the first day of trading.
He owns over 39,521 units of the company worth over $4,804,963.
By early 2000, Saylor's net worth reached $7 billion, and the Washingtonian reported that he was the wealthiest man in the Washington D.C. area.
In 1996, Saylor was named KPMG Washington High-Tech Entrepreneur of the Year.
In 1997, Ernst & Young named Saylor its Software Entrepreneur of the Year, and the following year, Red Herring Magazine recognized him as one of its Top 10 Entrepreneurs for 1998.
Saylor was also featured by the MIT Technology Review as an "Innovator Under 35" in 1999.

===
SEC investigation ===
In March 2000, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) brought charges against Saylor and two other MicroStrategy executives for the company's inaccurate reporting of financial results for the preceding two years.
In December 2000, Saylor settled with the SEC without admitting wrongdoing by paying $350,000 in penalties and a personal disgorgement of $8.3 million.
As a result of the restatement of results, the company's stock declined in value and Saylor's net worth fell by $6 billion.
===
COVID-19 response criticism ===
In a 3,000-word memo to all MicroStrategy employees on March 16, 2020, entitled "My Thoughts on COVID-19," Saylor criticized countermeasures then being recommended against the disease, saying that it is "soul-stealing and debillitating [sic] to embrace the notion of social distancing & economic hibernation" and predicting that in the worst-case scenario, global life expectancy would only "click down by a few weeks."
Saylor also refused to close MicroStrategy's offices unless he was legally required to do so.
The full content of the memo appeared on Reddit for only a few minutes and was reposted in the Washington Business Journal.

===
Bitcoin investment ===
On MicroStrategy's quarterly earnings conference call in July 2020, Saylor announced his intention for MicroStrategy to explore purchasing Bitcoin, gold, or other alternative assets instead of holding cash.
The following month, MicroStrategy used $250 million from its cash stockpile to purchase 21,454 Bitcoin.
MicroStrategy later added $175 million of Bitcoin to its holdings in September 2020 and another $50 million in early December 2020.
On December 11, 2020, MicroStrategy announced that it had sold $650 million in convertible senior notes, taking on debt to increase its Bitcoin holdings to over $1 billion worth.
On December 21, 2020 MicroStrategy announced their total holdings include 70,470 bitcoins purchased for $1.125 billion at an average price of $15,964 per bitcoin.
As of February 24, 2021 holdings include 90,531 bitcoins acquired for $2.171 billion at an average price of $23,985 per bitcoin.
Saylor, who controls 70% of MicroStrategy's shares, dismissed concerns by observers that the move is turning MicroStrategy into a Bitcoin investment firm or exchange-traded fund (ETF).

==
The Mobile Wave ==
In June 2012, Saylor released The Mobile Wave:
How Mobile Intelligence Will Change Everything, published by Perseus Books, which discusses trends in mobile technology and their future impact on commerce, healthcare, education, and the developing world.

The book appeared on the New York Times Best Seller list, where it was ranked number seven in hardcover non-fiction books in August 2012, and was ranked number five in hardcover business books on the Wall Street Journal's Best-Sellers list in July 2012.

== Saylor Academy
==
In 1999, Saylor established The Saylor Foundation (later named Saylor Academy), of which he is the sole trustee.
To support his goal of making free education available to all students, Saylor.org was launched in 2008 as the free education initiative of The Saylor Foundation.
The site now offers roughly 100 college courses that are supported by free content from universities including MIT and Carnegie Mellon University, that students can access without having to pass through an admissions process.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Michael Saylor official website
James Lawrence Dolan (born May 11, 1955) is an American businessman who serves as executive chairman and CEO of Madison Square Garden Sports and Madison Square Garden Entertainment and executive chairman of MSG Networks.
As the companies' chairman, Dolan oversees all operations within the company and also supervises day-to-day operations of its professional sports teams, the New York Knicks and New York Rangers as well as their regional sports networks, which include MSG Network and
MSG Plus.
Dolan previously served as CEO of Cablevision until its sale in June 2016.

==
Early life ==
Dolan is the son of Cablevision founder Charles Dolan and his wife, Helen Ann Dolan.

He is of Irish descent.
After originally pursuing a career in music, Dolan eventually switched to a major in communications at SUNY New Paltz and began working for Cablevision in various capacities including sales before eventually being dispatched to Cleveland by his father to manage the launching of a sports radio station.

In 1995, he was made CEO of Cablevision.
Throughout his early adult life, Dolan battled drug and alcohol problems and was reportedly known for having a volatile temper.

In 1993, he went to drug rehabilitation at the Hazelden clinic in Center City, Minnesota.

==
Business management ==
Dolan opposed his father's proposed Voom satellite service, which became a polarizing controversy among Cablevision's Board of Directors.
While supporters argued Voom could propel Cablevision into the future emerging satellite market and a wider customer base, opponents of the plan, including James Dolan, argued it was too expensive with no expense relief for the foreseeable future.
In the end, the younger Dolan prevailed and Voom was shut down.
This was an instrumental event in Dolan emerging from his father's shadow, albeit reluctantly, as a viable businessman.
His business career has included multiple failures, which include purchasing the failing Wiz electronics and entertainment chain, which ended up posting losses of $250 million before being liquidated, and the Clearview Cinemas chain which has failed to generate any significant revenue.

==
Philanthropy ==
Dolan fostered Cablevision's philanthropic partnership with The Lustgarten Foundation, a private supporter of pancreatic cancer research.
Together with Charles Dolan and former Cablevision Vice Chairman and Madison Square Garden Chairman Marc Lustgarten.
Dolan established the Foundation in 1998.
In 2008, Cablevision made a multi-year commitment to underwrite the Foundation's costs, ensuring that 100 percent of every donation goes to researching this disease.
With Dolan's backing, Cablevision used its assets to advance the curePC campaign, aimed at increasing public awareness of pancreatic cancer and is responsible for organizing the Holiday Rock & Roll Bash, the Foundation's annual fundraiser.
Dolan played a role in organizing the recent "12-12-12" benefit concert, which raised an initial $50 million for the victims of Hurricane Sandy, with additional money still coming in.
Other benefit concerts included "The Concert For New York City," which generated more than $35 million in aid for 9/11 victims and heroes, and "From The Big Apple to The Big Easy," which raised nearly $9 million for Hurricane Katrina relief.
Dolan supports MSG's ongoing commitment to the community, particularly through the Garden of Dreams Foundation, the non-profit charity that partners with MSG to help children facing obstacles throughout the New York metropolitan area.

==
Sports management ==
In 1994, Paramount Communications, the owner of Madison Square Garden, was acquired by Viacom, who in turn sold the MSG properties to Cablevision and ITT Corporation, which had 50% ownership each.
ITT sold its share to Cablevision three years later.

In 1999, Dolan was given an increased role in managing Cablevision's sports properties and is now the primary manager of these assets.
The teams under his domain include most notably the National Basketball Association's New York Knicks, the National Hockey League's New York Rangers, the Women's National Basketball Association's New York Liberty, and the American Hockey League's Hartford Wolf Pack.

As Chairman of Madison Square Garden, he supervises day-to-day operations of its professional sports teams and regional sports networks, which include MSG Network and MSG Plus.
He also serves as a governor of the Knicks and Rangers to their respective leagues.

===
Controversies ===


====
New York Knicks ====
Like the Rangers, the Knicks performed abysmally in the early 2000s.
Unlike the Rangers, they have yet to fully recover, which fans mostly blame on Dolan's management missteps.
Although the Knicks made the NBA Finals in 1999,  they have not posted a winning season until the 2012–13 season.
Furthermore, the Knicks had not made the playoffs from the 2003–04 season to the 2010–11 season, which both ended in first round four game sweeps for the Knicks.

In 2007, NBA Commissioner David Stern criticized Dolan's management of the Knicks, saying "they're not a model of intelligent management.
"
One widely criticized decision was to give shooting guard Allan Houston a 6-year, $100 million maximum contract in 2001, when no other team had offered Houston more than $75 million.
Houston retired due to injury after just four seasons and with over $40 million remaining on his contract.

In 2003, Dolan hired Isiah Thomas as Team President of Basketball Operations and General Manager to replace embattled executive Scott Layden.
Thomas made aggressive moves to re-tool and upgrade the Knicks roster through trades, the NBA Draft, and free agency.
Despite the talent Thomas imported, the team did not perform up to expectations and Thomas was often the target of the frustration of Knick fans; Dolan was also on the receiving end of the ire of Knicks' fans for his commitment to Thomas in spite of Thomas' sometimes questionable decisions.

After the 2004–05 season, the Knicks signed head coach Larry Brown to a 5-year, $50 million contract.
After just one (losing) season, Brown was fired and the team bought-out Brown's contract for $18 million.
Brown walked away with a total of $28 million for coaching the Knicks for just one year.

After firing Larry Brown, Isiah Thomas assumed the duties of head coach of the Knicks.
During a staged interview on MSG Network, the last time Dolan answered questions from the media, Dolan gave Thomas an ultimatum to show "evident progress" or potentially be fired.
In the latter half of the 2006–07 season, with the Knicks within reach of a playoff spot, Dolan signed Thomas to a multi-year contract extension.
The team subsequently fell out of contention and Dolan was castigated in many quarters for his extension of Thomas' contract.
The next season, Dolan stripped Thomas of his front office duties because Thomas had taken the Knicks to the playoffs just once during his tenure.
New team President Donnie Walsh removed Thomas as head coach upon the conclusion of the season.

Other coaches that also had short-lived tenures as head coaches of the Knicks include Don Chaney (2001–2003) and Lenny Wilkens (2003–2005).
Like Thomas and Brown, they remained on the Knicks' payroll following their departure from the bench due to multi-year contracts signed with the owner (and in Chaney's case, 2 separate contract extensions).

In 2007, Dolan was named as a defendant in a sexual harassment lawsuit submitted by a former Knicks executive, Anucha Browne-Sanders.

Browne-Sanders accused Dolan of firing her out of spite after she complained about sexual harassment from Isiah Thomas.

The court ruled in favor of Brown-Sanders and Dolan had to pay $3 million of the $11 million settlement.

MSG was responsible for paying the remainder of the settlement.
In July 2012, Dolan faced criticism for allowing popular Knicks point guard Jeremy Lin to sign with the Houston Rockets without matching their $25.1 million offer.
In February 2015, Dolan responded to a letter from Irving Bierman, a 73-year-old, lifelong Knicks fan, that criticized Dolan's ownership of the Knicks and questioned his leadership with a seething letter of his own, telling the fan to "root for the Nets because the Knicks don't want you" and that Bierman was "a sad person" and probably an "alcoholic maybe".
Dolan later addressed the issue with the press, but did not apologize, only saying the letter was a case of "tit for tat" and declaring the incident "over".
Newly appointed NBA Commissioner Adam Silver did not reprimand or penalize Dolan, but instead further brushed the incident under the rug by calling Dolan a "consummate New Yorker" who received "an unkind email and responded with an unkind email".
On February 9, 2017, former Knicks player Charles Oakley was removed from Madison Square Garden during a Knicks–Clippers game following an altercation with MSG security.
Oakley contends that Dolan has ignored, if not ostracized, him.
Oakley later remarked on March 11, 2019 that Dolan tries to bully everyone because he has money and power, stating there was very little reason for reconciliation with him after the incident.
A similar incident occurred two days earlier where a fan remarked that Dolan should "sell the team," while Dolan threatened a ban on the fan in question.
In March 2019, Dolan threatened a ban towards a fan at Madison Square Garden after he yelled "sell the team" at Dolan.
ESPN discussed the situation on TV, questioning the reasoning behind his decision making there and saying Adam Silver needs to let Dolan either apologize to the fan or, ironically enough, actually sell the team.
Some fans of the team responded to the outrage by giving away free t-shirts saying "St. Patty Says Ban Dolan" on their March 17 game against the Los Angeles Lakers, though some of the shirts got confiscated by security before fans entered the arena.
In March 2021, Dolan had a fan removed from a Knicks game at Madison Square Garden for wearing a t-shirt reading, "Ban Dolan" in protest of Dolan's management of the organization and treatment of retired Knicks players.

====
New York Rangers ====
After winning the Stanley Cup in 1994, the Rangers saw a decline in performance in the wake of Dolan's increased role in managing the team and failed to make the playoffs from the 1997–98 season until the 2004–05 NHL lockout, despite leading the league in payroll in most of those years.
This was the longest playoff drought in the franchise's history, in part due to questionable, expensive free-agent signings, such as Eric Lindros, Pavel Bure, and Theo Fleury.
Despite fan and media calls for the team's general manager Glen Sather to be fired for the organization's shortcomings, Sather was retained.
However, since the resolution of the NHL lockout in 2005, Dolan has allowed Sather to rebuild from the ground up, which has led to a revival of the club and the organization, leading to a trip to the Eastern Conference finals in 2012, their first since 1997, and to the Stanely Cup Finals in 2014.
However, when Dolan spoke of the team's Stanley Cup chances in January 2012, Rangers head coach John Tortorella took issue with his remarks.

"I have my owner up here talking about a Stanley Cup.
That's a bunch of bullshit," Tortorella said in response.
"
We need to take it one game at a time."
====
New York Liberty ====
On May 5, 2015, Dolan announced that Isiah Thomas would serve as president of the WNBA's Liberty.
Considering Thomas' history being both a failed President/GM of the Knicks and Thomas being implicated in the Anucha Browne-Sanders sexual harassment incident, Dolan's judgment was questioned by many fans and members of the press.

====
Los Angeles Clippers Arena ====
In an ongoing lawsuit between the Madison Square Garden Company and the city of Inglewood, California, Dolan is said to be trying to avoid being deposed in the case.
The Los Angeles Clippers want to build a new arena, which would compete directly with The Forum, which is owned by the Madison Square Garden Company.
In December 2018, the Madison Square Garden Company was countersued by the Clippers for trying to prevent the construction of a competing arena.
In March 2019, leaked emails revealed that Irving Azoff attempted to lure the Los Angeles Lakers back to The Forum after their lease at the Staples Center was up.
Despite nothing coming of the proposal, Azoff's proposal to re-purpose The Forum was seen as a way of preventing the Clippers from building their own arena in Inglewood and ensuring that the Madison Square Garden Company got an unfair advantage over rival AEG, which already owns part of the Lakers.
In the summer of 2019, details emerged in regard to Dolan's tactics being used to prevent the construction of the competing arena.
The Madison Square Garden Company had spent money trying to influence Inglewood's mayoral election as a way of trying to stop the arena from being built.
They had also funded community groups to help their opposition to the arena.

==
Media policies ==
Dolan rarely speaks with members of the media and communicates to the press through released statements or in interviews with MSG Network.
In 2000, Dolan instituted media training for all Garden employees who might deal with the press and instituted an ironclad rule against team personnel criticizing others in the organization via the media.
Under Dolan's watch MSG implemented controversial media policies limiting access to players.
Some of these measures included prohibiting reporters and Knicks' beat writers from interviewing players without an MSG public relations official present, forbidding one-on-one interviews, and excommunicating writers who write articles critical of the organization.
The policies also forbid the MSG Network from being critical of the Knicks and the Rangers, regardless of their performance.
Such measures were not standard practice for other NBA teams.
In addition, the Knicks did not make their medical staff available to the press.
In 2004, longtime broadcaster Marv Albert's contract was not renewed by MSG Network, allegedly because of his criticism of the Knicks' play.

==
Personal life ==
Dolan lives on Long Island with his wife.
He has been married twice and has six sons.
He is the son of Cablevision founder Charles Dolan and nephew of Cleveland Indians owner Larry Dolan.
On March 28, 2020, it was announced that he had been diagnosed with COVID-19 amidst the COVID-19 pandemic.

===
Hobbies ===
Dolan performs blues-inspired rock as the singer for JD & The Straight Shot.
After a show in New York City in 2017, one reviewer wrote that Dolan "sings like he’s trying not to cough, and it’s possible he can’t play the guitar.
Worse, his songs belie his status as a cosplaying bluesman; most of his lyrics simply summarize current events or books that he’s read as if he were presenting a 10th grade English class project.
"
On August 1, 2018 his band released the song titled "I Should've Known" inspired by his own experiences perpetuating sexual harassment from the album The Great Divide.
The album was set to be released in October 2018.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
MSG profile
New York Magazine article from 2004
JD and the Straight Shot
The USA Basketball Women's National Team, commonly known as the United States Women's National Basketball Team, is governed by USA Basketball and competes in FIBA Americas.
The team is by far the most successful in international women's basketball, winning eight out of ten Olympic tournaments it had entered.
It also won eight of the last eleven World Cups (including the last three), and ten titles overall.
The team is currently ranked first in the FIBA World Rankings.

In 2016, it was named the USA Basketball Team of the Year for a record sixth time (having been previously honored in 1996, 2000, 2004, 2008, and 2012).
It was also named the USOC Team of the Year in 1996.The team is one of the most dominant in all Olympic sports, with a 66–3 record in Olympic play (no Olympic losses since 1992, no losses in any tournament since 2006), and a record six consecutive titles.
If they win their seventh straight championship in 2021, they will tie the US men’s basketball team (1936–1968, their winning streak) for the most consecutive Olympic team victories in all Olympic sports, men or women.

==
Competitive record ==


==
Team ==


===
Current roster ===
The following is the United States roster for the 2018 FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup.

===
Past rosters ===


==
Records ==


===
Olympic ===


====
Players medal leaders ====


====
Coaching staff ====


====
Statistics ====


====
All-time results ====


===
World Cup ===


====
All-time results ====


==
See also ==
United States
women's national under-19 basketball team
United States women's national under-17 basketball team
United States women's Pan American basketball team
United States women's World University Games basketball team
United States women's William Jones Cup basketball team
United States
women's national 3x3 team
Timeline of women's basketball
United States men's national basketball team
United States
men's national under-19 basketball team
United States men's national under-17 basketball team
USA Basketball
Basketball in the United States


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
FIBA profile
The USA Basketball Men's National Team, commonly known as the United States men's national basketball team, is the most successful team in international competition, winning medals in all eighteen Olympic tournaments it has entered, including fifteen golds.
In the professional era, the team won the Olympic gold medal in 1992, 1996, 2000, 2008, 2012, and 2016.
Two of its gold medal-winning teams were inducted to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in August 2010: the 1960 team, which featured six Hall of Famers (4 players, 2 coaches), and the 1992 "Dream Team", featuring 14 Hall of Famers (11 players, 3 coaches).
The team is currently ranked first in the FIBA World Rankings.

Traditionally composed of amateur players, the U.S. dominated the first decades of international basketball, winning a record seven consecutive Olympic gold medals.
However, by the end of the 1980s, American amateurs were no longer competitive against seasoned professionals from the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia.
In 1989, FIBA modified its rules and allowed USA Basketball to field teams with National Basketball Association players.
The first such team, known as the "Dream Team", won the gold medal at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, being superior in all matches.
With the introduction of NBA players, the team was able to spark a second run of dominance in the 1990s.

Facing increased competition, the U.S. failed to win a medal at the 2002 FIBA World Championship, finishing sixth.
The 2004 Olympic team, being depleted by a number of withdrawals, lost three games on its way to a bronze medal, a record that represented more losses in a single year than the country's Olympic teams had suffered in all previous Olympiads combined.

Determined to put an end to these failures, USA Basketball initiated a long-term project aimed at creating better, more cohesive teams.
The U.S. won its first seven games at the 2006 FIBA World Championship in Japan before losing against Greece in the semi-finals; ending the competition with the bronze medal.
The team won gold two years later—at the 2008 Summer Olympics—in a dominant fashion.
This success was followed up at the 2010 FIBA World Championship, where despite fielding a roster featuring no players from the 2008 Olympic team, the U.S. did not lose a single game en route to defeating host Turkey for the gold medal.

The Americans continued this streak of dominance in the 2010s by going undefeated and capturing gold at the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2014 FIBA World Cup.
At the 2016 Summer Olympics, the team, led by Mike Krzyzewski for a record third time, won its 15th gold medal, making him the most decorated coach in USA Basketball history.
After Krzyzewski stepped down in 2016, team USA lost to France in the quarter-finals of the 2019 FIBA World Cup, finishing seventh overall.

==
History ==


===
1936–1968 ===
The US men were dominant from the first Olympic tournament to hold basketball, held in Berlin in 1936, going 5–0 to win the gold, and joined by continental neighbors Canada and Mexico on the medal platform.
Through the next six tournaments, the United States went undefeated, collecting gold while not losing a single contest in the games held in London, Helsinki, Melbourne, Rome, Tokyo, and Mexico City.
Participation in these tournaments were limited to amateurs, but the US teams during this period featured players who would later go on to become superstars in professional basketball, including all-time greats Bill Russell, Oscar Robertson, Jerry West, and Jerry Lucas; the latter three competed on the 1960 Rome team often credited as the best U.S. roster until the formation of the 1992 Dream Team.
Alex Groza and Ralph Beard, both briefly NBA stars, made the 1948 squad as Kentucky Wildcats, with 3-time Oklahoma State
All-American and 6-time AAU All-American, and Hall of Famer Bob Kurland leading the way.
The 1952 team included big man Clyde Lovellette of the University of Kansas, a future Hall of Famer and NBA star.
Kurland once again led the team to victory.

The 1956 team was led by San Francisco Dons teammates Bill Russell and K. C. Jones, and defeated its opponents by an unsurpassed average margin of 53.5 points per game.

The 1960 team included nine future NBA players, including not just Robertson (1961 NBA Rookie of the Year), Lucas (1964 NBA Rookie of the Year) and West, but also Darrall Imhoff (1967 NBA All Star), Bob Boozer (1968 NBA All Star), Adrian Smith (1966 NBA All Star game MVP), Jay Arnette, Terry Dischinger (1963 NBA Rookie of the Year), and another Basketball Hall of Famer in Walt Bellamy  (1962 NBA Rookie of the Year).

They defeated their opponents by an average margin of 42.4 points per game.

=== 1972–1988 ===
The 1972 Olympic men's basketball gold medal game, marking the first ever loss for the US in Olympic play, is arguably the most controversial in Olympic history.
The United States rode their seven consecutive gold medals and 63–0 Olympic record to Munich for the 1972 Summer Olympics.
The team won its first eight games in convincing fashion, setting up a final against the Soviet Union, holding a 6–0 advantage over the Soviets in Olympic play.
With three seconds left in the gold medal game, American forward Doug Collins sank two free throws after being hit hard by a Soviet player to put the Americans up 50–49.
Immediately following Collins' free throws, the Soviets inbounded the ball and failed to score.
Soviet coaches claimed that they had requested a timeout before Collins' foul shots.
The referees ordered the clock reset to three seconds and the game's final seconds replayed.
The horn sounded as a length-of-the-court Soviet pass was being released from the inbounding player, the pass missed its mark, and the American players began celebrating.

Nevertheless, the final three seconds were replayed for a third time.
This time, the Soviets' Alexander Belov and the USA's Kevin Joyce and Jim Forbes went up for the pass, and Belov caught the long pass from Ivan Edeshko near the American basket.
Belov then laid the ball in for the winning points as the buzzer sounded.
The US players voted unanimously to refuse their silver medals, and at least one team member, Kenny Davis, has directed in his will that his heirs are never to accept the medals, even posthumously.
It was later revealed that game officials might have been bribed by the Communist party.
After the controversial loss in Munich, 1976 saw Dean Smith coach the US to a 7–0 record and its eighth Olympic gold medal in Montreal.
The success at this tournament pushed the USA's all-time Olympic record to an impressive 78–1.

The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan prompted the United States and 66 other countries to boycott the 1980 Olympics in Moscow.
The 1980 U.S. team, which featured a number of future NBA players, was the youngest American national team ever assembled.
This team featured: Mark Aguirre, Rolando Blackman, Sam Bowie, Michael Brooks, Bill Hanzlik, Alton Lister, Rodney McCray, Isiah Thomas, Darnell Valentine, Danny Vranes, Buck Williams and Al Wood.
Unable to compete in the Olympics due to the boycott, it instead participated in the "Gold Medal Series", a series of games against NBA all-star teams in various U.S. cities, recording a 5–1 record.
It was coached by Dave Gavitt.

Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing, and Chris Mullin, future members of the '92 Dream Team, made their Olympic debuts in 1984.
Jordan led the team with 17.1 points per game, and Bob Knight coached the team to an 8–0 record and another Olympic gold.

The 1988 U.S. team had a roster of collegians aged 20-23 that included future NBA all-stars David Robinson, Danny Manning, and Mitch Richmond.
The team came up short, winning the bronze medal.
The American team lost to the gold medal winner Soviet Union in the semifinals, but then regrouped and went on to beat Australia 78–49 in the bronze medal game.
Dan Majerle led the team in scoring, averaging 14.1 points per game.
This was the last time the American Olympic Team consisted of amateur college players.

=== 1992–2000 ===
The decade started with a semifinal loss to Yugoslavia in the 1990 FIBA World Championship, followed by another semifinal defeat to Puerto Rico in the 1991 Pan American Games in Havana.
The 1990 championship marked the last time that the U.S. was represented by college players at a major international tournament (World Championship & Olympics).

The decades-long use of "shamateurs" by the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and other international teams prompted FIBA to modify its rules and allow NBA players in the 1992 Olympics and beyond.
The team assembled by USA Basketball for the tournament in Barcelona in 1992 was one of the most illustrious collections of talent assembled in the history of international sport.
Of the twelve players on the team, ten were named in 1996 among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History, the NBA's official list of the 50 greatest players of the league's first 50 years.
Magic Johnson and Larry Bird served as co-captains.
Because of this star line-up, the team's games usually featured opposing teams asking for pregame photos and autographs with their U.S. opponents.
The USA team was so much better than the competition
that head coach Chuck Daly did not call a single timeout during the tournament.
The 1992 Dream Team won by an average of 43.8 points (second most, behind the 1956 US team) and the closest a team came to challenging the U.S. was Croatia, which was beaten by 32.
Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen became the first players to win both NBA championship and Olympic gold medal in the same year, having played for the Chicago Bulls.

Regarding drug-testing the athletes, according to USA Basketball spokesman Craig Miller, "Since 1990, all of our teams have been tested in competition.
I believe since around 1988 we have also been subject to out-of-competition testing.
We have been 100 percent fully compliant with USADA and WADA."The
United States fielded another team composed of NBA players in the 1994 World Championship, held in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
This was an entirely new roster, as USA Basketball elected to showcase stars who were not present at the 1992 Olympics.
Composed primarily of younger NBA players, the team lacked the widespread appeal of its predecessor but nevertheless continued its dominance.
Those players were Derrick Coleman, Joe Dumars, Kevin Johnson, Larry Johnson, Shawn Kemp, Dan Majerle, Reggie Miller, Alonzo Mourning, Shaquille O'Neal, Mark Price, Steve Smith and Dominique Wilkins.
Coached by Don Nelson of the Golden State Warriors, this team easily captured the gold medal in tournament play.
The team was referred to as the "Dream Team II".
The third team composed of NBA players participated in the 1996 Summer Olympics held in Atlanta.
The star quality of the team was impressive as it featured five members of the original Dream Team (Barkley, Malone, Pippen, Robinson, and Stockton), plus two other members of the NBA 50 Greatest Players list, Hakeem Olajuwon and Shaquille O'Neal.
Lenny Wilkens coached the team.

The Americans won another gold medal with an average margin of victory of 31.8 points per game.
They captured the gold medal after defeating Yugoslavia 95–69.
With Atlanta being home to the Hawks, these games were the first Olympics to take place in a city with an NBA team since the league started allowing its players to compete in the Olympics.

The team was commonly referred to as the "Dream Team III".
The 1998 World Championship in Athens, Greece was different from the previous teams, as none of its players were current members of NBA teams.
Because of a labor dispute that led to a lockout, no active NBA players were permitted to compete in the tournament.
The 12 NBA players picked before the lockout were Tim Duncan, Tim Hardaway, Vin Baker, Gary Payton, Terrell Brandon, Kevin Garnett, Tom Gugliotta, Grant Hill, Allan Houston, Christian Laettner, Glen Rice, and Chris Webber.
The replacement team was composed largely of players from American colleges, the minor-league Continental Basketball Association, or European pro leagues.
The unheralded roster captured a bronze medal, considered a solid achievement given its lack of top-notch talent.
The team was nicknamed the "Dirty Dozen" for its work ethic and teamwork.
Undrafted free agent Brad Miller became a two-time NBA All-Star.
Some of the other team members—including Trajan Langdon, Kiwane Garris, David Wood and Michael Hawkins—had brief spells in the NBA.
All went on to have careers in Europe, with Langdon being named to the Euroleague's All-Decade Team for the 2000s.

During the late 1990s, international basketball began to gather attention as more and more foreign players became stars in the NBA.
Therefore, the 2000 U.S. team had the enormous task of proving that American basketball could remain the best in the world.
The new team that was assembled again featured NBA players, but this time few of them were considered to be true superstars, as several elite players elected not to participate.

The U.S. team participated in the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, Australia and was coached by Rudy Tomjanovich.
It won its first two games by lopsided margins, but faced more difficult competition thereafter.
In a preliminary game against Lithuania, the U.S. team won 85–76, marking the first time a team of professional American players failed to win by double digits.
Two games later, in a 106–94 victory over France, Vince Carter pulled off one of the most famous dunks in basketball history, jumping over the 7 ft 2 in (2.18 m) French center Frédéric Weis on his way to the basket.
(
The French media would dub Carter's feat le dunk de la mort—"the dunk of death".)

A shock came in the semifinals when the United States defeated Lithuania by the close score of 85–83.
Lithuanian star (and future NBA player, first with the Indiana Pacers and later with the Golden State Warriors)
Šarūnas Jasikevičius failed to get a potential game-winning 3-point shot off in time.

The closeness of the semifinal game was so shocking that NBC took the unusual step of showing the gold medal game live rather than on tape delay.
(
The game started around 2 p.m. Sydney time on Sunday, October 1, which is late Saturday evening in the USA.
NBC originally planned to show the game almost 24 hours later during its Sunday prime time broadcast.)
The USA won the gold medal against France in a close game, 85–75.
Though the US went undefeated on its way to the gold medal, the team began to lose its aura of invincibility for the first time.

=== 2002–2004 ===
The 2002 team competed in the World Championship in Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
Coached by George Karl, the team finished a surprisingly disappointing sixth in the competition.
During the tournament, Argentina defeated the US in the second preliminary round group stage, thus becoming the first team ever to defeat a USA team composed of NBA players.
Yugoslavia knocked out the US in the quarterfinals, becoming the first team ever to defeat USA team of NBA players in knockout stage.
Then Spain repeated the outcome in the 5th place playoff.
To a greater degree than in 2000, a number of top NBA players declined to participate, forcing USA Basketball to resort to picking mostly second-tier players.

George Karl had a dispute with Paul Pierce, one of the few superstars on the team, which led to Karl benching Pierce, the team's leading scorer, in Team USA's final game.
The group has been considered as one of sport's greatest flops, as they failed to produce as previous teams had.
The United States lost 3 games in the tournament to countries with current or future NBA stars, like Argentina (led by Manu Ginóbili), Yugoslavia (led by Peja Stojaković and Vlade Divac) and Spain (led by Pau Gasol).

Two NBA superstars, Ray Allen and Jason Kidd, accepted roles to play on the World Championship team, but were unable to play on that team due to injuries.
Many other superstars, including Kobe Bryant, Shaquille O'Neal, and Kevin Garnett, turned down invitations to play in that tournament.

The close outcome of 2000 and the humiliating results of 2002 prompted a number of NBA superstars to agree to join the team for the FIBA Americas Championship 2003, dubbed as the  Dream Team IV,  which the squad was required to participate in to qualify for the 2004 Summer Olympics.
The team easily cruised to a first-place finish, earning it a spot in Athens, Greece, the following summer.

However, the dominant team that competed in 2003 could not be kept together.
Nine of its 12 players elected not to participate in Athens.
The new team consisted of some young NBA stars early in their careers, such as Dwyane Wade, LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony.
Only Richard Jefferson, Tim Duncan and Allen Iverson were part of the 2003 FIBA Americas San Juan gold medal team.
The team was coached by Larry Brown.

After struggles in several exhibition matches, the vulnerability of the 2004 team was confirmed when Puerto Rico defeated them 92–73, from which they earned the nickname "Nightmare team" (as mock opposed to the Dream Team concept), in the first game of the Olympic tournament in Athens.
The 19 point defeat was the most lopsided loss for the US in the history of international competition.
After the game, Larry Brown had strong comments about his coaching performance: "I'm humiliated, not for the loss -- I can always deal with wins and losses --
but I'm disappointed because I had a job to do as a coach, to get us to understand how we're supposed to play as a team and act as a team, and I don't think we did that".
After winning close games against Greece and Australia, The USA fell to Lithuania, dropping to 2–2 in the Olympic tournament.
Even after an 89–53 win over Angola, the Americans entered the knockout rounds in fourth place due to goal average, the lowest seed of their group.
The Americans faced undefeated Spain in their quarterfinal game, winning 102–94.

However, the semifinal match saw the team defeated by Argentina 89–81, ending the United States' hold on the gold medal.
The USA did rebound to capture the bronze medal by defeating Lithuania.

Still, it marked only the third time that an American team failed to win gold (excluding the 1980 Moscow Olympics boycott), and the first time for an American team composed of NBA players.

=== 2006–2016 ===
Following the disappointments in 2002 and 2004, USA Basketball appointed Jerry Colangelo to be solely responsible for selecting the team.
Colangelo made it clear that he would ask players for a three-year commitment—the 2006 FIBA World Championship and the 2008 Summer Olympics.
In the 2006 Worlds, the team was eliminated by Greece in the semifinal, losing the game 101–95.
The head coach was Duke University's Mike Krzyzewski, with assistants Jim Boeheim, Mike D'Antoni, and Nate McMillan.
While some prominent players, such as Tim Duncan and Kevin Garnett, stated that they did not plan to play for the team, superstars Dwyane Wade, Kobe Bryant and LeBron James publicly announced their commitment for the 2006 Worlds and the ensuing 2008 Olympics.
Wade, James and Carmelo Anthony were named captains of the 2006 USA World Championship Team.

The United States Team, dubbed Dream Team V or the Redeem Team, dominated Group B in pool play, defeating China, Angola, Greece, world champion Spain, and Germany by an average of 32.2 points.
After finishing first in their group, the USA earned the right to play the fourth-place finishers in Group A, Australia.
The United States soundly defeated Australia 116–85 in the quarterfinal.
Next up for the Americans in the semifinals was the 2004 Olympic gold medalist Argentina, led by Manu Ginóbili – the team that had beaten them in the semifinals four years prior.
However, Ginóbili was hobbled by an ankle injury and only played sparing minutes in the first half.
Behind Carmelo Anthony's 21 points, the USA defeated Argentina 101–81 to reach the gold medal game.
On August 24, the United States defeated Spain 118–107 to capture the Olympic gold medal with the electrifying spark by team U.S.A. leading scorer Dwyane Wade adding 27 points with 4 3's and 100% shooting inside the line.
The victory ended an eight-year drought at major international competitions (Olympics & World Championships) with the first win since 2000.

Due to winning gold at the 2008 Olympics, the USA automatically qualified for the World Championships.
The USA had not won the FIBA World Championship since 1994.
It was initially believed that there would be only 2–3 spots available with most players returning from the 2008 Olympic team.
However, by early July 2010, all ten invited players declined to participate, due to injury, free agency, rest, or personal commitments.
Due to the roster being filled with 12 new players and the lack of star power, the team was dubbed the "B Team".
Also, the coaches were criticized for selecting too many guards and inexperienced players, and not enough tall players.

However, the team won all five of its preliminary games, four of those by double digits (the exception being the win against Brazil by 2 points).
The success continued in the knockout stage with victories by 55, 10 and 15.
In the 2010 FIBA World Championship Final, the USA beat host nation Turkey by 17 points and won the gold medal.
Tournament MVP Kevin Durant broke several Team USA scoring records (most points in a tournament-205, most points in a single game-38, and average points per game-22.8).
In addition, Lamar Odom became the first player to win the NBA and FIBA World championships in the same year.

Team USA executive director Jerry Colangelo has said he's open to anyone from the 2010 team to play in future tournaments.

The US team clinched a berth in the 2012 Olympics in London by winning the 2010 World Championship.
The Olympic team lost some players to injuries who might have made the team and appeared to be short on big men.
Their roster featured five players returning from the 2008 Olympic team and five others from the 2010 World Championship team.

The US went undefeated but appeared vulnerable at times in winning five exhibition games.
They finished the tournament with a perfect 8–0 record, defeating opponents by an average of 32 points while trailing in the fourth quarter only once.
The Americans often played with a small lineup that emphasized speed, quickness, and outside shooting.
The team set an Olympic single-game record with 156 points scored against Nigeria in the preliminary round.
In a rematch of the 2008 finals, Team USA again narrowly defeated Spain to capture the gold.

This was announced as the final Olympic Games for Kobe Bryant.
By winning the gold medal, the USA automatically qualified for the 2014 FIBA World Cup.

The United States had automatically qualified for the World Cup by virtue of the gold medal won by their 2012 Olympic team.
The Americans were considered favorites to win the World Cup.
The roster was filled with two players returning from the 2012 Olympic team, three from the 2010 FIBA Championship Team, while seven other NBA players made their senior international debuts.
The 2014 roster featured four players 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m) or larger, the most of any USA team since Mike Krzyzewski began coaching the team in 2006.
The team was also the youngest American team since 1992 when NBA players were first allowed on the team; the average player was 24.08 years old, roughly a half-year younger than their 2010 team.

The team advanced to the knockout phase after starting the tournament 5–0 during the group stage.
They went undefeated 9–0 in the tournament, winning by an average margin of 33.0 points.
The United States was just the third country in World Cup history to repeat as champions.
Combined with their 2010 World Championship along with gold by their 2008 and 2012 Olympic teams, they also became the first country in FIBA basketball history to win four consecutive major titles.
The United States defeated Serbia in the World Cup Final by 37 points and clinched a berth for the 2016 Summer Olympics.

Multiple withdrawals (largely triggered by a freak injury to Paul George in a pre-2014 World Cup scrimmage) left the 2016 U.S. team with just two players with prior Olympic experience (Durant and Anthony).
The Americans seemed vulnerable in the preliminary round, narrowly defeating Australia, Serbia, and France by a combined 16 points.
However, the team gained momentum in the quarterfinal match against Argentina, winning 105–78.
The U.S. team then defeated Spain in the semifinals setting up a rematch versus Serbia in the gold medal game.
The Americans proved their superiority, easily defeating their rival by 30 points.
The team averaged 100.9 points (with an average margin of victory at 22.5 points) a game with Anthony (he won a record third straight Olympic gold medal) and Durant as top scorers.
Krzyzewski stepped down as the most decorated coach in USA Basketball history, winning three Olympic gold medals and two FIBA World Cups.

==
Honors ==
Olympic Games
Gold medalists (15): 1936, 1948, 1952, 1956, 1960, 1964, 1968, 1976, 1984, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2008, 2012, 2016
Silver medalists (1): 1972
Bronze medalists (2): 1988, 2004FIBA World Cup
Champions (5): 1954, 1986, 1994, 2010, 2014
Runners-up (3): 1950, 1959, 1982
Third place (4): 1974, 1990, 1998,
2006FIBA AmeriCup

Champions (7): 1992, 1993, 1997, 1999, 2003, 2007, 2017
Runners-up (1):
1989


===
Other awards ===
Pan American Games
Gold medalists (8): 1951, 1955, 1959, 1963, 1967, 1975, 1979, 1983
Silver medalists: (3): 1987, 1995, 1999
Bronze medalists (3): 1991, 2011, 2015, 2019Goodwill Games
Gold medalists (3): 1986, 1998, 2001
Silver medalists (1): 1990
Bronze medalists (1):
1994World University Games
Gold medalists (14): 1965, 1967, 1973, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1989, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2005, 2015, 2019
Silver medalists (4): 1970, 1985, 1987, 2017
Bronze medalists (3): 1983, 2001,
2009


==
Competitions ==


===
Olympic Games ===
The U.S. team has achieved unparalleled success in the Olympic games.
While always being at a disadvantage to the Eastern Bloc countries that had used their best and most experienced professional players listed as soldiers or workers in a profession to subvert the amateur rules, the U.S. team (typically composed of AAU or collegiate players) did surprisingly well, winning nine out of eleven Olympic tournaments they had entered before the introduction of NBA players.
The U.S. is the only Western country that achieved success in a team sport during the Eastern Bloc dominance.
Canada's results in ice hockey and Western European football teams' results in soccer significantly deteriorated after the introduction of the Eastern Bloc countries and their quasi-professional players in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
In 1992, the U.S. team was represented by the NBA players for the first time and defeated its opponents by an average of 44 points en route to the gold medal against Croatia.
The Americans have continued to dominate the Olympic tournaments ever since, excluding underachieving performance at the 2004 Summer Olympics.

===
FIBA World Cup ===
Prior to the introduction of the NBA players, the United States was usually represented by military, industrial or collegiate players.
European and South American countries, meanwhile, were allowed to use their best players.
In 1950 and 1954, AAU teams Denver Chevrolets (in 1950) and Peoria Caterpillars (1954) were the U.S. representatives,; in 1959, the United States sent an Air Force team; in 1963 and 1967, the team was composed of AAU, armed forces and college ranks; in 1970 and 1974 (with the 1974 team being the youngest and least experienced team in history), the U.S. fielded exclusively collegians; in 1978, an Athletes In Action (AIA) team was the American representative; in 1982, 1986, and 1990, the team was again made up of collegiate players.
Starting with 1994 and with the exception of 1998, when the U.S. used players from the European leagues and college players, the team was made up of NBA players.

===
FIBA AmeriCup ===
Prior to the implementation of a new FIBA competition system in 2017, the U.S. team used different players depending on the circumstances.
In 1992, 1999, 2003 and 2007, the Americans sent in NBA players as they needed to qualify for the Olympics.
In 1989 and 2005, the U.S. also used the tournament for qualification purposes but sent in either college players (in 1989 NBA players weren't allowed) or NBA Development League, CBA and European leagues players (in 2005 the U.S. team didn't need to win gold in order to qualify for the World Championship).
In 1993, 1997 and 2001, the U.S. team entered the tournament without any specific purpose and was represented by CBA players in 1993 and 1997, and by junior players in 2001.
In 1980, 1984, 1988, 1995, 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2015, the American team didn't enter the tournament.
In 2017, the U.S. participated for the first time in ten years with a squad of NBA G League players and American professionals playing in European leagues.
==
Team ==


===
Current roster ===


===
Medal leaders ===


====
Olympic ====
Until 1992, there were few players who got the opportunity to compete in multiple Olympics.
Unlike their seasoned and veteran counterparts from Europe, U.S. players usually participated in a single Olympics (with Bob Kurland, Bill Hougland, and Burdette Haldorson being lone exceptions) and after winning a medal turned pro.
Consequently, prior to 1992, U.S. teams were assembled from scratch every four years.
After the introduction of NBA players, U.S. teams became more cohesive, and players often chose to compete in more than one Olympic tournament.

====
World Cup ====


===
Past rosters ===


==
See also ==
United States
men's national under-19 basketball team
United States
men's national under-17 basketball team
United States
men's national 3x3 team
United States women's national basketball team
United States
women's national under-19 basketball team
United States women's national under-17 basketball team
United States women's national 3x3 team
USA Basketball
Basketball in the United States


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
FIBA Profile
U.S. Olympic Basketball Team Rosters and Stats
The United States women's national soccer team (USWNT) represents the United States in international women's soccer.
The team is the most successful in international women's soccer, winning four Women's World Cup titles (1991, 1999, 2015, and 2019), four Olympic gold medals (1996, 2004, 2008, and 2012), and eight CONCACAF Gold Cups.
It medaled in every World Cup and Olympic tournament in women's soccer from 1991 to 2015, before being knocked out in the quarterfinal of the 2016 Summer Olympics.
The team is governed by United States Soccer Federation and competes in CONCACAF (the Confederation of North, Central American, and Caribbean Association Football).

After mostly being ranked No.
2 from 2003 to 2008 in the FIFA Women's World Rankings, the team was ranked No.
1 continuously from March 2008 to November 2014, the longest consecutive top ranking of any team.
Since FIFA rankings were established in 2003, it has been ranked No.
1 for a total of 13 years; the only other team to be ranked No.
1, Germany, has been there for a total of 4½ years.
The USWNT has never been ranked lower than second.

The team was selected as the U.S. Olympic Committee's Team of the Year in 1997 and 1999, and Sports Illustrated chose the entire team as 1999 Sportswomen of the Year for its usual Sportsman of the Year honor.
On April 5, 2017, U.S. Women's Soccer and U.S. Soccer reached a deal on a new collective bargaining agreement that would, among other things, lead to a pay increase.

==
History ==


===
Origins in the 1980s ===
The passing of Title IX in 1972, which outlawed gender-based discrimination for federally-funded education programs, spurred the creation of college soccer teams across the United States at a time when women's soccer was rising in popularity internationally.
The U.S. Soccer Federation tasked coach Mike Ryan to select a roster of college players to participate in the 1985 Mundialito tournament in Italy, its first foray into women's international soccer.
The team played its first match on August 18, 1985, losing 1–0 to Italy, and finished the tournament in fourth place after failing to win its remaining matches against Denmark and England.
Despite the tournament loss, the first match against Italy is where the United States’ famous “Oosa Oosa Oosa Ah!”
chant was born.
During the match, the style of play and athleticism of the United States ultimately won over the Italian fans.
To the team's surprise, the Italians began cheering for the US, which they pronounced as “oosa.”
Such surprising support from the Italians impressed the United States so much that the team decided to adopt the Italians' endearing mispronunciation as its new chant that it would use to conclude its pre-game huddles.
From then on, the United States has concluded each pre-game huddle with the same chant, “Oosa Oosa Oosa Ah!”
as a call back to where it all began in 1985 that honors the legacy of those who came before.
University of North Carolina coach Anson Dorrance was hired as the team's first full-time manager in 1986 with the goal of fielding a competitive women's team at the next Mundialito and at future tournaments.
In their first Mundialito under Dorrance, the United States defeated China, Brazil, and Japan before finishing as runners-up to Italy.
Dorrance gave national team appearances to teenage players, including future stars Mia Hamm, Julie Foudy, and Kristine Lilly, instead of the college players preferred by the federation.
The United States played in the 1988 FIFA Women's Invitation Tournament in China, a FIFA-sanctioned competition to test the feasibility of a regular women's championship, and lost in the quarterfinals to eventual champions Norway.

=== 1990s ===
Following the 1988 tournament, FIFA announced plans for a new women's tournament, named the 1st FIFA World Championship for Women's Football for the M&M's Cup until it was retroactively given the "World Cup" name.
The United States qualified for the tournament by winning the inaugural CONCACAF Women's Championship, hosted by Haiti in April 1991, outscoring their opponents 49–0 for the sole CONCACAF berth in the tournament.
The team played several exhibition matches abroad against European opponents to prepare for the world championship, while its players quit their regular jobs to train full-time with meager compensation.
Dorrance utilized a 4–3–3 formation that was spearheaded by the "Triple-Edged Sword" of forward Michelle Akers-Stahl and wingers Carin Jennings and April Heinrichs.
At the Women's World Cup, the United States won all three of its group stage matches and outscored its opponents 11–2.
In the opening match against Sweden, the U.S. took a 3–0 lead early in the second half, but conceded two goals to end the match with a narrower 3–2 victory.
The U.S. proceeded to win 5–0 in its second match against Brazil and 3–0 in its third match against Japan in the following days, clinching first place in the group and a quarterfinal berth.
The United States proceeded with a 7–0 victory in the quarterfinals over Chinese Taipei, fueled by a five-goal performance by Akers-Stahl in the first fifty minutes of the match.
In the semifinals against Germany, Carin Jennings scored a hat-trick in the first half as the team clinched a place in the final with a 5–2 victory.
The team's lopsided victories in the earlier rounds had brought attention from American media outlets, but the final match was not televised live in the U.S.
The United States won the inaugural Women's World Cup title by defeating Norway 2–1 in the final, played in front of 65,000 spectators at Tianhe Stadium in Guangzhou, as Akers-Stahl scored twice to create and restore a lead for the Americans.
Akers-Stahl finished as the top goalscorer at the tournament, with ten goals, and Carin Jennings was awarded the Golden Ball as the tournament's best player.
Despite their Women's World Cup victory, the U.S. team remained in relative obscurity and received a small welcome from several U.S. Soccer Federation officials upon arrival at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City.
The team were given fewer resources and little attention from the federation as they focused on improving the men's national team in preparation for the 1994 men's World Cup that would be hosted in the United States.
The women's team was placed on hiatus after the tournament, only playing twice in 1992, but returned the following year to play in several tournaments hosted in Cyprus, Canada, and the United States, including a second CONCACAF Championship title.
The program was still supported better than those of the former Soviet Union, where football was considered a "men's game".
The United States played in several friendly tournaments to prepare for the 1995 FIFA Women's World Cup and its qualification campaign.
The first was the inaugural staging of the Algarve Cup in Portugal, which saw the team win its two group stage matches but lose 1–0 to Norway in the final.
It followed by a victory in the Chiquita Cup, an exhibition tournament hosted in August on the U.S. East Coast against Germany, China, and Norway.
Dorrance resigned from his position as head coach in early August and was replaced by his assistant, Tony DiCicco, a former professional goalkeeper who played in the American Soccer League.
DiCicco led the United States to a berth in the Women's World Cup by winning the 1994 CONCACAF Championship, where the team scored 36 goals and conceded only one.
In February 1995, the U.S. women's program opened a permanent training and treatment facility in Sanford, Florida, and began a series of warm-up friendlies that were paid for by American company Nike.
The team topped their group in the Women's World Cup, despite a 3–3 tie with China in the opening match and losing goalkeeper Brianna Scurry to a red card in their second match.
The United States proceeded to beat Japan 4–0 in the quarterfinals, but lost 1–0 to eventual champions Norway in the semifinals.
The team finished in third place, winning 2–0 in its consolation match against China.

The team won the gold medal in the inaugural Olympic women's soccer tournament in the 1996 Summer Olympics, defeating China 2–1 in the final before a crowd of 76,481 fans.
Julie Foudy, Kristine Lilly, and the rest of the 1999 team started a revolution towards women's team sports in America.
An influential victory came in the 1999 World Cup, when they defeated China 5–4 in a penalty shoot-out following a 0–0 draw after extended time.
With this win they emerged onto the world stage and brought significant media attention to women's soccer and athletics.
On July 10, 1999, over 90,000 people (the largest ever for a women's sporting event and one of the largest attendances in the world for a tournament game final) filled the Rose Bowl to watch the United States play China in the Final.
After a back and forth game, the score was tied 0–0 at full-time, and remained so after extra time, leading to a penalty kick shootout.
With Briana Scurry's save of China's third kick, the score was 4–4 with only Brandi Chastain left to shoot.
She scored and won the game for the United States.
Chastain dropped to her knees and whipped off her shirt, celebrating in her sports bra, which later made the cover of Sports Illustrated and the front pages of newspapers around the country and world.
This win influenced many girls to want to play on a soccer team.

=== 2000s ===
In the 2003 FIFA Women's World Cup, the U.S. defeated Norway 1–0 in the quarterfinals but lost 0–3 to Germany in the semifinals.
The team then defeated Canada 3–1 to claim third place.
Abby Wambach was the team's top scorer with three goals, while Joy Fawcett and Shannon Boxx made the tournament's all-star team.
In the 2004 Olympics, the last major international tournament for Hamm and Foudy, the U.S. earned the gold medal, winning 2–1 over Brazil in the final on an extra time goal by Wambach.
At the 2007 FIFA Women's World Cup, the U.S. defeated England 3–0 in the quarterfinals but then suffered its most lopsided loss in team history when it lost to Brazil 0–4 in the semifinals.
The U.S. recovered to defeat Norway to take third place.
Abby Wambach was the team's leading scorer with 6 goals, and Kristine Lilly was the only American named to the tournament's all-star team.

The team won another gold medal in the 2008 Olympics, but interest in the Women's National Team had diminished since their performance in the 1999 World Cup.
However, the second women's professional league was created in March 2009, Women's Professional Soccer.

=== 2010s ===
In the quarterfinal of the 2011 Women's World Cup in Germany, the U.S. defeated Brazil 5–3 on penalty kicks.
Abby Wambach's goal in the 122nd minute to tie the game 2–2 has been voted the greatest goal in U.S. soccer history and the greatest goal in Women's World Cup history.
The U.S. then beat France 3–1 in the semifinal, but lost to Japan 3–1 on penalty kicks in the Final after drawing 1–1 in regulation and 2–2 in overtime.
Hope Solo was named the tournament's best goalkeeper and Abby Wambach won the silver ball as the tournament's second-best player.

In the 2012 Summer Olympics, the U.S. won the gold medal for the fourth time in five Olympics by defeating Japan 2–1 in front of 80,203 fans at Wembley Stadium, a record for a women's soccer game at the Olympics.
The United States advanced to face Japan for the gold medal by winning the semifinal against Canada, a 4–3 victory at the end of extra time.
The 2012 London Olympics marked the first time the USWNT won every game en route to the gold medal and set an Olympic women's team record of 16 goals scored.

The National Women's Soccer League started in 2013, and provided competitive games as well as opportunities to players on the fringes of the squad.
The U.S. had a 43-game unbeaten streak that spanned two years – the streak began with a 4–0 win over Sweden in the 2012 Algarve Cup, and came to an end after a 1–0 loss against Sweden in the 2014 Algarve Cup.
The U.S. defeated Japan 5–2 in the final of the 2015 World Cup, becoming the first team in history to win three Women's World Cup titles.
In the 16th minute, Carli Lloyd achieved the fastest hat-trick from kick-off in World Cup history, and Abby Wambach was greeted with a standing ovation for her last World Cup match.
Following their 2015 World Cup win, the team was honored with a ticker tape parade in New York City, the first for a women's sports team, and honored by President Barack Obama at the White House.
On December 16, 2015, however, a 0–1 loss to China in Wambach's last game meant the team's first home loss since 2004, ending their 104-game home unbeaten streak.
In the 2016 Summer Olympics, the U.S. drew against Sweden in the quarterfinal; in the following penalty kick phase, Sweden won the game 4–3.
The loss marked the first time that the USWNT did not advance to the gold medal game of the Olympics, and the first time that the USWNT failed to advance to the semifinal round of a major tournament.
After the defeat in the 2016 Olympics, the USWNT underwent a year of experimentation which saw them losing three home games.
If not for a comeback win against Brazil, the USWNT was on the brink of losing four home games in one year, a low never before seen by the USWNT.
2017 saw the USWNT play 12 games against teams ranked in the top-15 in the world.
Throughout 2018, the U.S. would pick up two major tournament wins, winning both the SheBelieves Cup and the Tournament of Nations.
The team would enter qualifying for the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup on a 21-game unbeaten streak and dominated the competition, winning all five of its games and the tournament whilst qualifying for the World Cup as well as scoring 18 goals and conceding none.
On November 8, 2018, the U.S. earned their 500th victory in team history after a 1–0 victory over Portugal.
The start of 2019 saw the U.S. lose an away game to France, 3–1, marking the end of a 28-game unbeaten streak and their first loss since a 1–0 defeat to Australia in July 2017.The
USWNT started off their 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup campaign with a 13–0 victory against Thailand, setting a new Women's World Cup goal record.
Alex Morgan equaled Michelle Akers' record of scoring five goals in a single World Cup match, while four of her teammates scored their first World Cup goals in their debut at the tournament.
The U.S. would win its next match against Chile 3–0 before concluding the group stage with a win of 2–0 over Sweden.
The team emerged as the winners of Group F and would go on to face Spain in the Round of 16, whom they would defeat 2–1 thanks to a pair of Megan Rapinoe penalties.
The team would achieve identical results in their next two games.
With 2–1 victories over France and then England seeing them advance to a record third straight World Cup final, they played against the Netherlands for the title.
They beat the Netherlands 2–0 in the final on July 7, 2019, becoming the first team in history to win four Women's World Cup titles.

On July 30, 2019, Jill Ellis announced that she would step down as head coach following the conclusion of the team's post-World Cup victory tour on October 6, 2019.Vlatko Andonovski was hired as head coach of the USWNT in October 2019, replacing Ellis.

===
2020s ===
The USWNT began the new decade by winning both the 2020 CONCACAF Women's Olympic Qualifying tournament (which qualified the team for the 2020 Summer Olympics) and the 2020 SheBelieves Cup titles.
In early March 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the USSF cancelled previously scheduled USWNT friendlies against Australia and Brazil.
Later that same month, it was announced by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the Tokyo Metropolitan Government that the 2020 Summer Olympics were to be postponed until July 2021.
They later made a comeback on November 27, 2020, where they took on the Netherlands in a friendly match.
Rose Lavelle and Kristie Mewis scored both goals in the match, winning the game 2–0.

==
Team image ==


===
Media coverage ===
U.S. television coverage for the five Women's World Cups from 1995 to 2011 was provided by ESPN/ABC and Univision, while coverage rights for the three Women's World Cups from 2015 to 2023 were awarded to Fox Sports and Telemundo.
In May 2014 a deal was signed to split TV coverage of other USWNT games between ESPN, Fox Sports, and Univision through the end of 2022.
The USWNT games in the 2014 CONCACAF Women's Championship and the 2015 Algarve Cup were broadcast by Fox Sports.
NBC will broadcast the Olympic tournament through 2032.The 1999 World Cup final set the original record for largest U.S. television audience for a women's soccer match, averaging 18 million viewers.
It was the most viewed English-language U.S. broadcast of any soccer match until the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup final between the United States and Japan.
The 2015 Women's World Cup Final between the United States and Japan was the most watched soccer match—men's or women's—in American broadcast history.
It averaged 23 million viewers and higher ratings than the NBA finals and the Stanley Cup finals.
The final was also the most watched US-Spanish language broadcast of a FIFA Women's World Cup match in history.

Overall, there were over 750 million viewers for the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup, making it the most watched Women's World Cup in history.
The FIFA Women's World Cup is now the second-most watched FIFA tournament, with only the men's FIFA World Cup attracting more viewership.

===
In popular culture ===
A narrative nonfiction book covering the entire history of the team from 1985 to 2019 called The National Team:
The Inside Story of the Women Who Changed Soccer was named one of Vanity Fair's best books of 2019 and made NPR's 2019 year-end books list.

A book about the team's 1999 Women's World Cup campaign, Girls of Summer: The U.S. Women's Soccer Team and
How It Changed the World was released in 2001 and in 2020 Netflix announced a film based on the book.
In 2005, HBO released a documentary called Dare to Dream:
The Story of the U.S. Women's Soccer Team.
In 2013, a documentary about the 1999 World Cup-winning team called The 99ers was produced by former player Julie Foudy and ESPN Films.

===
Attendance ===
The 1999 World Cup final, in which the United States defeated China, set a world attendance record for a women's sporting event of 90,185 in a sellout at the Rose Bowl in Southern California.
The record for Olympic women's soccer attendance was set by the 2012 Olympic final between the USWNT and Japan, with 80,023 spectators at Wembley Stadium.
==
Legal issues ==


===
Pay discrimination ===
In recent years, the players of the USWNT have waged an escalating legal fight with the United States Soccer Federation over gender discrimination.
Central to their demands is equal pay.
The players point to their lower paychecks as compared to the U.S. men's national team, despite their higher record of success in recent years.
In April 2016, five players filed a wage-discrimination action against the U.S. Soccer Federation with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
The group consisted of Hope Solo, Carli Lloyd, Alex Morgan, Megan Rapinoe, and Becky Sauerbrunn.

One year later, in April 2017, it was announced that a new collective bargaining agreement (CBA) with U.S soccer had been made.
The agreement stated that the players would have an increased base pay and improved match bonuses.
These changes could increase their previous pay from $200,000 to $300,000.
However, the CBA did not guarantee the U.S national women's team equal pay with the men's team.
The CBA's five-year term through 2021 ensured that the next negotiation would not become an issue for the team in its upcoming competitions.
On top of this CBA, U.S Soccer had agreed to pay the players for two years' worth of unequal per-diem payments.
On March 8, 2019, all 28 members of the U.S. team filed a gender discrimination lawsuit against the U.S. Soccer Federation.
The lawsuit, filed in the U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, accused the Federation of "institutional gender discrimination".
The lawsuit claims that the discrimination affects not only the amount the players are paid but also their playing, training, and travel conditions.
In May 2020, several key parts of the case were dismissed, with federal judge R. Gary Klausner noting that the team had agreed to take higher base compensation and other benefits in their most recent CBA instead of the bonuses received by the men's national team.
On March 8, 2021, the second anniversary of the team's pay discrimination lawsuit, Congresswomen Doris Matsui and Rosa DeLauro introduced the Give Our Athletes Level Salaries (GOALS)
Act to ensure the U.S. women's national soccer team "are paid fair and equitable wages compared to the U.S. Men's team".
The GOALS Act threatens to cut federal funding for the 2026 World Cup if the U.S. Soccer Federation does not comply.

===
Artificial turf ===
Along with their lawsuit for pay-equity, the US Women’s Soccer players have fought FIFA on policies regarding artificial turf.
This battle to eliminate the use of turf in major women’s games heightened around the 2015 FIFA Women’s World Cup, hosted by Canada; during this tournament, the US Women played 8 of their 10 games on artificial turf.
Prior to the 2015 World Cup, Abby Wambach headed a discrimination lawsuit with other global soccer stars including Marta of Brazil and Homare Sawa of Japan.
Due to the tournament’s quick approach
, the suit was dropped as players were denied an expedited hearing.

==
Staff ==
Coaching staff
Technical staff


==
Players ==


===
Current squad ===
The following 23 players were named to the squad for the friendlies against  Sweden and  France on April 10 and 13, 2021, respectively.
Caps and goals are current as of April 13, 2021, after match against  France.

===
Recent call-ups ===
The following players were also named to a squad in the last 12 months.

Notes:

PRE:
Preliminary squad


==
Recent schedule and results ==
The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.

Win
Draw
  Lose
Postponed


===
2020 ===
=== 2021 ===
USWNT Schedule
USWNT Results
USA:
Fixtures and Results –
FIFA.com


==
Competitive record ==
For results in minor tournaments, see the History of the United States women's national football team


===
All-time results ===
As of April 10, 2021Sources


===
Major ===
The two highest-profile tournaments the U.S. team participates in are the quadrennial FIFA Women's World Cup and the quadrennial Olympic Games.

====
World Cup ====
The team has participated in every World Cup through 2019 and won a medal in each.
====
Olympic Games ====
The team has participated in every Olympic tournament through 2016 and reached the gold medal game in each until 2016, when they were eliminated in the quarterfinals on a penalty shootout loss to Sweden.

===
Minor ===


====
CONCACAF Championship and Gold Cup ====
1
The U.S. team directly qualified for the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup as hosts of the event.
Because of this, they did not participate in the 1998 CONCACAF Championship, which was the qualification tournament for the World Cup.

====
Algarve Cup ====
The Algarve Cup is a global invitational tournament for national teams in women's soccer hosted by the Portuguese Football Federation (FPF).
Held annually in the Algarve region of Portugal since 1994, it has been one of the more prestigious women's soccer events other than the Women's World Cup and Olympic tournament, and it has been nicknamed the "Mini FIFA Women's World Cup."
Since 2016, the SheBelieves Cup replaced it on the U.S. team's schedule.

====
SheBelieves Cup ====
The SheBelieves Cup is a global invitational tournament for national teams in women's soccer hosted in the United States.

====
Tournament of Nations ====
The Tournament of Nations is a global invitational tournament for national teams in women's soccer hosted in the United States in non-World Cup and non-Olympic years.

==
Player records ==
As of April 13, 2021.
Active players are shown in Bold.
The women's national team boasts the first six players in the history of the game to have earned 200 caps.
These players have since been joined in the 200-cap club by several players from other national teams, as well as by five more Americans: Kate Markgraf, Abby Wambach, Heather O'Reilly, Carli Lloyd and Hope Solo.
Kristine Lilly and Christie Rampone are the only players to earn more than 300 caps.

In March 2004, Mia Hamm and Michelle Akers were the only two women and the only two Americans named to the FIFA 100, a list of the 125 greatest living soccer players chosen by Pelé as part of FIFA's centenary observances.

The USWNT
All-Time Best XI was chosen In December 2013 by the United States Soccer Federation:
Goalkeeper: Briana Scurry
Defenders: Brandi Chastain, Carla Overbeck, Christie Rampone, Joy Fawcett
Midfielders: Kristine Lilly, Michelle Akers,
Julie Foudy
Forwards:
Mia Hamm, Abby Wambach, Alex Morgan
Source
Source

Source
Sources
Note:
The goal record for most scored in a match by a member of the USWNT is five, which has been accomplished by the eight players above.

==
Head coaches ==
As of April 13,
2021Sources


== Honors ==


==
See also ==
Dare to Dream:
The Story of the U.S. Women's Soccer Team – 2005
HBO documentary
List of United States women's national soccer team
hat-tricks
U.S. Women's National Team Players Association
U.S. women's national soccer team pay discrimination claim
USWNT All-Time Best XI
National Women's Soccer League (NWSL), 2013–present
Soccer in the United States
United States
men's national soccer team


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
FIFA profile
Scorum
The USA men's national under-19 basketball team, is controlled by USA Basketball, and represents the United States in international under-19 and under-18 (under age 19 and under age 18) basketball competitions.

==
Competitive record ==
A red box around the year indicates tournaments played within the United States


==
See also ==
United States men's national basketball team
United States
men's national under-17 basketball team
United States women's national basketball team
United States
women's national under-19 basketball team
United States women's national under-17 basketball team
United States
men's national 3x3 team
United States women's national 3x3 team


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official Site
FIBA Profile
USA Olympic Basketball Team Rosters and Stats @ basketball-reference.com
The USA women's national under-19 basketball team is the women's basketball team, administered by USA Basketball, that represents the United States in international under-19 and under-18 (under age 19 and under age 18) women's basketball competitions, consisting mainly of the FIBA Americas Under-18 Championship for Women and FIBA Under-19 World Championship for Women.
The events were originally referred to as the FIBA Americas Junior World Championship Qualifying Tournament and the FIBA Junior World Championship.
The usual sequence is for the U18 team to play in a regional championship in one year, with the top four qualifying teams being invited to the FIBA Under-19 World Championship in the following year, as the U19 team.
The first Junior World Championship was held in 1985, without a qualifying tournament in the prior year.
Starting in 1988, the events were on a four-year cycle, with the FIBA Americas Junior World Championship Qualifying Tournament in 1988, followed by the FIBA Junior World Championship in 1989.
This continued until the format was changed in 2006.
Now, the U18 team plays in the U18 Americas event every other year, and the U19 World event in subsequent years.
The U18 team becomes the U19 team, with largely the same players and coaches, although changes can occur.
For example, while Debbie Ryan served as head coach for the 1988 U18 team, and again as head coach for the 1989 U19 team, the head coach for the 1992 U18 team was Nancy Wilson, but changed to Jim Foster for the 1993 U19 team.
There are also changes in the playing roster, although many of the players on the U18 team go on to play on the U19 team.

==
Record ==


== 1993 ==
Jim Foster served as the head coach, with Rene Portland serving as an assistant coach at the FIBA Junior World Championship.
The event was held in Seoul, South Korea August 1–8, 1993.
The USA improved their record from the 1985 and 1989 events to 5–2, but that finish placed the team seventh overall.

== 1997 ==
In 1997, Portland became the head coach, with Marianna Freeman and Jim Lewis assistant coaches of the USA team competing in the Junior World Championship (now the U19 World Championship).
That event was held in Natal, Brazil July 5–13, 1997.
After beating Japan in the opening game, the USA played defending champion Australia in the second round.
Despite having a 13-point lead at one time, the USA let the lead slip away and lost 80–74.
However, the USA team then went on to win a four-point game against Cuba, and won easily against Russia and Spain to move to the medal rounds.
In the semi-final the USA team faced Slovakia, and won 90–77 to move the team into their first ever finals for a FIBA Junior World team.
The final was against Australia who had beaten the US in the second game.
The USA team had a three-point lead with three seconds to go, but Australia hit a three-pointer to send the game to overtime.
Australia scored first, the USA out scored the Australians 7–2 to take a small lead.
The lead was down to two points with 30 seconds left in the game, but the USA hit free throws to win 78–74, notching the first ever gold medal for a Junior World Championship team from the USA.

== 2001 ==
Geno Auriemma was named as head coach, with Sherri Coale and Willette White assistant coaches of the USA team which would compete at the Junior World Championship in Brno, Czech Republic during July 2001.
The team won their first five games, including a record setting win against Mali.
The 97–27 final score represented the largest margin of victory by a USA team in Junior World Championship history.
The preliminary round results qualified the team for the medal rounds, where they faced the host team, the Czech Republic.
With a home crowd cheering them on, the Czech team held a nine-point lead with just over six minutes to go.
The USA team cut the lead down to three points with seconds to go, and good defense gave the ball back to the USA.
However, the USA was called for an offensive foul, and lost possession.
The Czech Republic team won 92–88, and went on to beat Russia 82–80 to win the gold medal.
The USA team beat Australia 77–72 to win the bronze medal.
Diana Taurasi was the leading scorer for the US with 19.3 points per game, while Alana Beard was close behind with 18.0 points per game.
Nicole Powell was the leading rebounder for the US, with seven rebounds per game.

== 2005 ==
Gail Goestenkors served as the head coach of the team representing the US at the 2005 FIBA Americas U19 Championship for Women in Tunis, Tunisia.
Carol Ross and Felisha Legette-Jack served as assistant coaches.
The USA team won all eight of their games, including the championship game against Serbia & Montenegro.
Crystal Langhorne hit 77.5% of her field goal attempts, to lead the USA scorers with over 16 points per game.
Candice Wiggins was close behind with almost 16 points per game.
The USA team was dominant, winning every game by more than 20 points.

== 2006 U18 ==
The 2006, U18 competition was held in Colorado Springs, Colorado in June.
The head coach was Doug Bruno, who was assisted by Jennifer Rizzotti and Carol Owens.
The team emphasize defense, holding their opponent's to an average of about 51 points a game.
The team won all four games, earning the gold-medal and a qualification for the 2007 U19 world championship.
In the game against Paraguay, Tina Charles hit eight of her 10 field-goal attempts to set a tournament record while Khadijah Rushdan's nine assists in the game against Brazil was also a tournament record.

== 2007 U19 ==
The 2007, U19 competition was held in Bratislava, Slovakia in August.
The head coach was Doug Bruno, who was assisted by Cynthia Cooper-Dyke and Carol Owens.

The USA team was dominant, winning all nine games at the event to earn the gold-medal.
The margin of victory averaged almost 35 points, with only an eight-point victory in the first game against Spain in single digits.
The USA reached the semi-finals unbeaten and faced Spain again, but this time led by 24 points from Maya Moore, the USA defeated Spain 69–46.
The set up a match-up between the US and Sweden the only remaining undefeated teams.
Five players for the USA scored double figures in the USA won the championship game
99–57.

== 2008 U18 ==
The U18 Americas Championship was held in July 2008.
Players were eligible for the U18 and U19 teams in those years if they were born on January 1, 1990 or later.
The USA won the gold, winning all five games.
The result qualified the U19 team for the World Championships in July/August 2009 in Thailand, where the USA lost their opening game against Spain, but went on to win every subsequent game, including the gold medal rematch against Spain.

== 2009 USA U19 results ==
The 2009 competition was held in Bangkok, Thailand in August.
The head coach was Carol Owens, who was assisted by Amanda Butler and Bill Fennelly.

In preparation for the tournament, the USA team played an exhibition game against France, and played a scrimmage with Australia.
In the exhibition game, the USA team defeated France 86–46.
In the opening game of the tournament, Spain defeated USA 90–86.
After playing evenly for the first eight minutes, Spain pulled out to a 17-point lead in the first half, which the USA could only cut to 14 at halftime.
In the second half the USA team tied the game at 58 all, then pulled to a 66–61 lead, but Spain tied the game again at 66, as part of a 21–1 run to take a commanding lead.
The USA would fight back, but could not close the gap, losing by 4.In the second game, USA defeated China 88–53, led by Nnemkadi Ogwumike with 18 points, and Kelsey Bone with 16.
Kelsey Bone and Nnemkadi Ogwumike combined to score the first ten USA points, to help the USA jump out to a 10–2 lead.
The game was never close again, with the USA winning
88–53.
Skylar Diggins would score 13 points to join Bone and Ogwumike as double digit scorers.
The USA would out rebound China 54–26 and held the Chinese team to under 30% shooting from the field.
USA plays Mali July 25, 2009.
In the following game, USA defeated Mali, 100–38, led by Kelly Faris with 13 points.
Four other players had double digit scoring.
Every available player scored, and the USA team held Mali to just over 20% shooting from the field.
The USA team will have a day off Sunday, after the completion of the preliminary round and will return to action in the next round July 27, 2009.After the day off, the USA defeated Canada 64–50.
USA used an 11–0 run to take a commanding lead.
Prahalis and Bone tied for the scoring lead with 14 points apiece; Ogwumike added a double-double with 11 points and 12 rebounds.
In the following game, the USA team faced the undefeated team from Russia.
The USA team led by six at the end of the first quarter, but, in the third quarter, Russia came back to retake the lead at 45–44.
However, USA held Russia to 26% shooting from the field, and outrebounded 50–34 to earn the win.
Russia had only 4 assists on 20 baskets, compared to eleven assists on 29 baskets for the Americans.
The USA team won 75–56.Then, the USA team defeated Japan 109–68, behind 15 points from Taber Spani, one of six players with double-digit scoring.
The USA team shot 53% from beyond the three-point arc.
Every player scored, every player played at least ten minutes and every player had at least one rebound.
The USA used a 12–0 run early in the game to put themselves well ahead, and were never threatened again.
The USA team had beaten France in an unofficial exhibition game by 40 points eleven days earlier, but this game proved to be much different.
France had a lead in much of the first half, as much as eight points at one time.
The USA pulled ahead to a 14-point lead early in the second half, but France would pull to within two points early in the final period.
The USA team then went on a 15–3 run to put the game out of reach, and won 88–75.
Skyler Diggins and Nnemkadi Ogwumike each scored 16 points for the USA team.
In the semi-final game, USA played Canada, after Canada beat Australia to reach the semi-final.
The USA team held Canada to just over 30% shooting from the field, and won easily, 82–51.
This win set up a replay with Spain, who beat the USA team in the opening match.
In the final game, a rematch with Spain, the USA team won 87–71 to win the gold.
The USA team hit its first twelve shots, and were 15 for 18 in the first quarter, to open up a commanding lead.
The USA would hit less than a third (19 of 59) of their field goals in the remainder of the game, but the opening quarter lead would prove sufficient.
The USA held Spain to under 34% shooting for the game.
The loss would be the first of the event for Spain.

==
2010
USA U18 results ==
The U18 competition was among teams in the Americas, and would determine which teams would be invited to the 2011 World Championships.
Before the formal games started, the USA team played Canada in an exhibition game, winning 58–39.
After starting out sluggishly, leading only 19–15 at the half, the team came together to outscore the Canadian team by 14 points in the second half.
Chiney Ogwumike was the leading scorer with 155 points, and Bria Hartley had ten points, three assists and four steals.
In the first official game, the USA was matched up against Argentina.
The USA team turned the ball over on each of their first three possessions, but then settled down and beat Argentina convincingly, 91–32.
All USA players scored, while Bria Hartley, Kayla McBride, Chiney Ogwumike and Stephanie Dolson were all double-digit scorers.
Head Coach Jennifer Rizzotti was pleased with the overall effort, other than the first minute of play.
In the second game, the USA played the team from Brazil.
Ogwumike again was the leading scorer with 15 points, all in the first half.
Bria Hartley added 14 points, while Alexis Jones and Kayla McBride were also double-digit scorers.
The USA team started out strong, with Hartley scoring eight points as part of a 13–2 run.
The team was 15 of 17 from the free throw line, setting a USA FIBA Americas U18 Championship for Women record.
The next game was against Puerto Rico.
The USA team was losing briefly, 3–2, before scoring 19 consecutive points to set the tone for the game.
Diamond DeShields was the top scorer with 14 points, but seven other players were double-digit scorers.
The team had 22 assists on their 35 baskets, as the team beat Puerto Rico 108–44.
This win propelled the USA team into the semi-final match up against Chile. "
The Beast of Twain" Ogwumike would again lead all scorers with 17, while Theresa Plaisance had 11 and Kayla McBride had 10.
Reshanda Gray was the leading rebounder with 8.
The game wasn't close after the opening minutes, with the USA team winning 98–28.
This win set up the gold medal game, with a rematch against Brazil.

The USA team won the rematch with Brazil solidly, 81–38.
Malina Howard, at sixteen years of age, was the second youngest on the team (only Diamond DeShields was younger), but led the entire tournament in field goal percentage, hitting 62.% of her attempts.
Chiney Ogwumike led the USA team in scoring with 13.2 points per game, followed by Bria Hartley, with 10.6 per game.
The head coach of the team was Jennifer Rizzotti of the University of Hartford.

== 2011
USA U19 results ==
After winning the gold in 2010, the USA team was one of the teams selected to play in the 2011 World's Championships.
Prior to the formal start of the tournament, the USA team played an exhibition game against Brazil on June 5, 2011, winning the game
49–37.
The team was finalized following the game, with twelve players identified to compete in the World Championships in Puerto Montt and Puerto Varas, Chile in July.
The USA selection committee chose the team members to represent the USA.
The twelve players selected were:

Jordan Adams (
Mater Dei H.S. / Irvine, Calif.)
Cierra Burdick (Butler H.S. / Matthews, N.C.)
Diamond DeShields (Norcross H.S. / Norcross, Ga.)
Stefanie Dolson (Connecticut / Port Jervis, N.Y.)
Bria Hartley (Connecticut / North Babylon, N.Y.)
Alexis Jones (Irving MacArthur H.S. / Irving, Texas)
Ariel Massengale (Bolingbrook H.S. /
Bolingbrook, Ill.)
Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis
(Mater Dei H.S. / Anaheim, Calif.)
Imani Stafford (Winward H.S. / Los Angeles, Calif.)
Breanna Stewart (Cicero-North Syracuse H.S. / North Syracuse, N.Y.)
Morgan Tuck (Bolingbrook H.S. / Bolingbrook, Ill.)
Elizabeth Williams (Princess Anne H.S. / Virginia Beach, Va.)The opening game for the USA team was against Japan, who started out with a very early lead, 5–2.
The USA team played with what head coach Jennifer Rizzotti called.
"
a lot of intensity".
USA's Bria Hartley tied the game with a three-pointer, and the USA team went on a 20–2 run to take a large lead 22–7.
However, Japan came back, and cut the lead to 27–22 in the second quarter.
The lead was up to 17 points at halftime, but Japan took advantage of a "defensive lapse" in the second half, and cut the lead to eight points.
The margin was still within single digits in the fourth quarter, when the USA team concentrated on defense, and went on a 10–3 run, leading to a final score of 85–63.
Bria Hartley was the leading scorer with 18 points.
Breanna Stewart had a double-double, with 13 points and 13 rebounds.
Ariel Massengale was the assists leader, with five.
The USA team shot 54% from the field, and held the Japanese team to a 28% shooting percentage.
In the next game against Russia, the USA team never trailed, playing with better defensive intensity, according to Coach Rizzotti.
The scoring started slowly, with the score tied at six apiece more than six minutes into the game.
The USA team then went on a 12–1 run, and never relinquished the lead, finishing with a 76–53 win.
Diamond DeShields was the top scorer for the USA team, with 16 points.
The USA team held the Russian team to 26% shooting.
The third game typically determines which teams make it to the medal round, but that wasn't the case in this game.
The Argentine team had been mathematically eliminated, and the USA team was certain to move on, win or lose.
However, both teams played to win, and Argentina took an early lead 7–3.
However, a balanced offense proved too much for the Argentine team.
With eleven of the twelve USA players scoring between five and twelve points, led by Breanna Stewart on 3–3 shooting from the field, the USA team had too much offense and defense.
The USA team held the opposition to under 30% shooting for the third consecutive game, allowing the Argentine team only a 27% shooting percentage.
The USA team won the game 83–49, advancing them to the second round.
The USA team faced its toughest test to date in their match-up against China.
The USA squad began the fourth quarter with a 12-point lead, but the team from China went on to score 31 points in the period.
They started the period with a 12–2 run, cutting the lead to two points.
It remained close, and was a tie game at 72 points apiece with 1:26 left to play.
Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis hit a three-pointer, one of five she hit during the game.
After a score by China, Bria Hartley hit the three to extend the lead to four points.
China responded with a three-pointer, cutting the lead back to a single point.
With a half a minute to go in the game, Hartley passed underneath to Stephanie Dolson, who scored the final points of the game.
China tried to tie the score with a three-pointer, but aggressive defense by Elizabeth Williams forced China to take an off-balance shot.
Hartley rebounded the miss, and the USA team finished with an 80–77 win.
Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis led all scorers with 19 points, followed closely by Bria Hartley with 18.
Stephanie Dolson had 12 points and eight rebounds, while Elizabeth Williams had a game-high nine rebounds.
China shot 50% from beyond the arc, hitting 11 of their 22 three-point attempts.

In the next game, against Italy, the USA team started off strong, opening up a 31–13 lead early.
Coach Rizzotti was happy with the team's intensity, that led to a 90–64 win over Italy.
Cierra Burdick shot 5–7 from the field and hit 8 of 9 free throws to lead the team in scoring with 17 points.
Her nine rebounds were a team high.
The USA team shot well overall, hitting 55% of their shots.
The USA team outrebounded their opponents 44–22.
This win set up a match-up between the USA team and Canada, each coming into the game with spotless (5–0) records.
Canada jumped out to an early 6–0 lead.
Although the USA team closed the gap to 8–6, Canada extended the lead to double digits.
The USA team was plagued by poor shooting, hitting only a third of their shots in the game, and ending up only marginally better, at 36%.
Canada started out shooting well, over 60% in the first quarter, but would end up with a lower shooting percentage than the US at 35%.
However, turnovers would be a key measure, as the USA team turned the ball over 24 times, the most of any game they played so far, leading to more shooting opportunities for the team from Canada.
Ariel Massengale was the only USA player to score in double digits with 17 points.
In contrast, Canada had three double-digit scorers, led by 24 points for Michelle Plouffe.
Canada won the game 64–52.
Both teams were still in medal contention.
The following game was against the team from France.
The USA team started out slowly, hitting only one of their first six shots at the basket.
France pulled out to a 14–5 early lead, hitting two-thirds of their shot attempts in the first quarter, and extended the lead to a 13-point margin during the first half.
The USA team came back, but was still down 30–25 at halftime.
The USA team cut into the lead in the third quarter, but with one quarter to go, France led 49–47.
Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis, who would score nine of her thirteen points in the final quarter, helped the USA take the lead, and the USA team pulled out to an eleven-point lead with just over six minutes to play.
However, France hit consecutive three-pointers as part of a 9–0 run to bring the margin down to two points.
With just over a minute to play, the score was even at 64 points apiece.
Bria Hartley passed to Breanna Stewart, who was fouled going for the basket.
She sank both free throws.
After a turnover by France, Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis scored with 23 seconds to go to give the USA a four-point lead.
France did not score again, and the USA won the game 70–64.The USA opponent in the semi-final game was Brazil.
Each team had a single loss, with the USA losing to Canada, and Brazil losing to France.
The teams traded leads early on, then Brazil moved out to a four-point margin 13–9.
Bria Hartley hit back-to-back three-point attempts to put the USA back in a lead.
Hartley ended up scoring 20 points in the first half, helping the team to a thirteen-point halftime lead.
Brazil cut the lead to five points in the second half, but the USA built the lead back to double digits, was never seriously threatened again, and won the game 82–66.
Hartley was the team's leading scorer with her 20 first-half points, while Ariel Massengale led the team with nine assists.
Breanna Stewart and Cierra Burdick had nine rebounds apiece.
The USA team faced Spain in the Gold medal game.
In the opening minutes, the lead changed several times, until the USA team went on a 14–3 run to open up a 25–12 lead just before the end of the first quarter.
The USA team extended the lead to 15 points by halftime.
The USA team did not have great shooting, with under 40% for the game, but defensively held Spain to under 30%.
USA's Stephanie Dolson said "Last year was an experience of a lifetime because that was qualifying for here.
Then winning the world championship gold medal is so surreal.
Getting up there, getting the gold around your neck, it's a moment you'll never forget".
Dolson was one of the three high-scorers for the game, with 15 points, sharing the honors with Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis, and Elizabeth Williams.
The all-tournament team included two members of the USA squad, Ariel Massengale and Breanna Stewart.

== 2012 U18 results ==
The 2012 FIBA Americas U18 Championship was held in Gurabo, Puerto Rico August 15–19, 2012.
The USA squad underwent training at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida between 28 May and June 1, then re-assembled at the U.S. Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado from the fourth through the twelfth of August.
The training schedules overlapped with the U17 team locations and schedules, so they played a scrimmage against each other on May 31, 2012.
The U17 team led the U18 team for most of the game, but Breanna Stewart took over in the fourth quarter, and the U18 team prevailed
73–66.
The team then traveled to Puerto Rico for the Americas Championship.

===
Preliminary round ===
The twelve qualifying teams are separated into two groups, with four teams in each group.

Group A

Argentina
Columbia
Dominican Republic
USAGroup B

Brazil
Canada
Mexico
Puerto RicoThe first five rounds are played as a round-robin, in which each team plays all three of the other teams in their group.
The preliminary rounds were scheduled for 15—17 August.

The first USA opponent was the Dominican Republic.
Although the score was close in the first quarter, with only a two-point margin by the US at the end of the first quarter, the USA team overcame first-game jitters and scored 31 consecutive points in the second quarter to take an insurmountable lead.
Every team player scored at least five points, with game high scoring honors going to Morgan Tuck.
Michaela Mabrey set a U18 record for the US with ten assists.
The final score was 99–26.The USA team faced Argentina in their second game.
The USA team held Argentina to single digit scoring in each of the four-quarters, to keep the point total for their opponents to 28.
Although the USA team shot only 37% for the game, they hit 44% of their three-point shots.
Breanna Stewart, with 17 points, was one of three double digit scorers, along with Morgan Tuck and Michaela Mowbrey.
Lexie Brown had six blocks.
The final score in favor of the USA was 68–28.The USA team faced Columbia in the third and final match of the preliminary round.
Michaela Mabrey hit five of six three-point attempts to tie a USA U18 record for three-point field goal percentage, set by Candice Wiggins in 2004.
The team shooting was better in this game, with the team hitting 55% of their field goal attempts.
The USA team won 87–36, to finish undefeated in preliminary play, and secure the top seed in the next round.
===
Medal round ===
In their semi-final game, the USA team faced Canada.
Although Canada managed an early 4–2 lead, the USA team quickly took over and led 24–8 at the end of the first quarter.
Morgan Tuck hit nine of her 12 field goal attempts, leading to 22 points, while Breanna Stewart hit 8 of her 11 attempts, leading to 20 points.
The USA won easily, 95–46, which puts the USA team in the gold medal game against undefeated Brazil.
The USA team had played 16 quarters leading to the gold medal game, and had not been out scored in any of them.
That would change in the championship game.
The team from Brazil scored the first six points, and held a 186–7 lead at the end of the first quarter.
Brazil would score the opening two-point of the second period, but the USA team regained its bearings and took over the game.
The USA team outscored Brazil 22–8 in the second period and 21–7 in the third to take a commanding lead.
Four USA players scored in double digits, led by Morgan Tuck with 15.
The final score of the championship was 71–47.Breanna
Stewart won the Tournament MVP award, while Morgan Tuck was the tournament's overall scoring leader at 17.8 points per game.
The USA coach Katie Meier had praise for Stewart, Bashaara Graves, and Tuck, "Those three were workhorses down there".

== 2013
U19 results ==
The USA Basketball team invited 34 players to Colorado Springs for tryouts for the U19 team.
Three coaches, Matt Corkery (American University), Bobbie Kelsey (Wisconsin) and Matilda Mossman (Tulsa) were chosen as court coaches to help the players on court at the tryouts and assist in the selection of the final team.
The coaches who will travel with the team also participate in the training process.
The head coach is Katie Meier (Miami), who will be assisted by Nikki Caldwell (Louisiana State University) and Kelly Graves (Gonzaga University).
As a result of the tryout, the USA organization selected twelve players at the U19 World Championship in Klaipėda and Panevėžys, Lithuania as well as the preliminary event the Lanzarote International Invitational Title, held in the Canary Islands.
The twelve players to represent the USA are:
Candice Agee
Nia Coffey
Bashaara Graves
Gabby Green
Linnae Harper
Moriah Jefferson
Alexis Jones
Kelsey Plum
Breanna Stewart
Morgan Tuck
Brianna Turner
A'ja
Wilson


===
Lanzarote International Invitational Title ===
The opening game of the preliminary event was against Australia.
The Aussies held a four-point lead at halftime 33–29, and extended the lead to seven points 40–33 part way through the third period.
Morgan Tuck, who has scored only two points in the first half scored 11 of the USA's first 13 points in the second half to help cut into the lead, but at the beginning of the fourth quarter, the USA was still four points behind the Aussies.
After swapping baskets, the USA scored twice to tie the game.
Tuck scored a basket to give the USA the lead at 56–55, as part of an 8–2 run by the USA team.
They extended the lead to seven points, and held on for the close 71–66 win.
In the second game, the USA team squared off against the host team, Spain.
Unlike the previous game, the USA pulled out to an early lead and never relinquished it.
Linnae Harper led all scorers with 15 points, en route to a 78–49 win by the USA.
In the final game of the preliminary event, held July 14, the USA team opened up an early lead and held on to win 69–49 to capture the Lanzarote International Invitational title.

===
Lithuania preliminary rounds ===
The teams traveled from the Canary Islands to Lithuania for the remainder of the U19 championship.
The USA team took on Lithuania in the first game of pool play in Group D.
The other teams in Group D are China, with a 2–1 record in the preliminary round, and Mali who were 0–3 in the preliminary round.
Lithuania was 1–2 in the preliminary round.

Four USA players scored in double digits in the game against Lithuania, including Nia Coffey with ten points, Bashaara Graves with 13 points and a tie for a team-high seven rebounds, Morgan Tuck with 18 points and a team high six assists.
The leading scorer was Breanna Stewart, who played 20 minutes but scored 26 points.
Stewart did not miss any of the six field goal attempts she took in the first quarter, and went on to score 19 points in the quarter.
She ended 8 for 8 from the free throw line.
The game was never close, with the USA up by 66 points at the end of the game, with a score of 112–47.The USA team then faced China.
The lead changed several times in the opening quarter, and the quarter ended with a five-point lead by the USA.
China hit a three-pointer to open the second quarter, but then the USA team went on a 12–0 run to open up a larger lead.
The USA held a 44–27 lead at the half.
In the second half the USA put together a string of 17 consecutive points to give the USA a commanding lead.
Six USA players scored in double digits, with Breanna Stewart scoring 20.
A'ja
Wilson had a double-double with 16 points and 10 rebounds, earning praise from head coach Katie Meier, who said, "A double-double in your second international game.
That's very poised, very composed."
The USA won the game 103–56.
In the next game, the USA faced Mali.
Although Mali held a very early 3–2 lead after the first minute, the game result was never in doubt, as the USA team scored 23 consecutive points and led 30–5 early.
The team would go on win 103–26.
The USA had advantages in experience as well as height, with a USA team averaging over six feet per player, while Mail averaged only five feet eight inches per player.
Stewart again was the leading scorer with 17 points.
The USA entered the second round of preliminary play with a game against the Netherlands.
The USA opened with a three-pointer, and never lost the lead.
The team had two runs, one 8–0 and one 16–0 to open up large leads.
The USA won, 102–42.
The leading scorer was the youngest member of the team, Wilson, who had 20 points along with eight rebounds.
Tuck, Jones, Graves and Stewart also scored in double digits.
The next game for the USA team was against Canada.
The team from Canada scored first, and tied the game at three points apiece, but the USA opened up a lead they would never relinquish.
In the second half, the USA opened up a 15-point lead, but Canada cut it back to ten, prompting a timeout.
Shortly after, the USA team out together
an 8–0 run to close the third quarter.
The run continued in the fourth quarter when Stewart scored three consecutive goals, contributing to a run that extended to 19 points.
Alexis Jones was the team's leading scorer, with 17 points.
The USA faced one of the other two remaining unbeaten teams, France, in their next match.
France held a 15–11 lead late in the first quarter, when the USA scored the next eight points to take the lead.
The USA extended the lead several times, but France fought back and kept the game close.
The USA held a six-point lead at halftime.
The third quarter was close, with the USA managing to outscore France by only two points in the period.
Late in the game, the USA was up by twelve points, but France went on a 12–2 run, including six straight points to bring the margin back to two points with under a minute to play.
Then Alexis Jones, who had missed all four of her three-point attempts, took another one and hit to give the USA five-point lead.
France tried to respond with a three-point attempt of their own, but Jones blocked it to seal the win, and preserve the undefeated status of the USA.
The USA team won 69–63 to advance to the quarterfinals.

===
Medal rounds ===
The USA played Japan in the quarterfinals.
The USA had a height advantage, with USA's A'ja Wilson four inches taller than her counterpart.
She took advantage of the mismatch, scoring a team high 19 points.
The game was reasonable close in the opening minutes, with the USA leading 12–9, but the USA gradually extended the lead.
At halftime, the score was 51–32.
The USA used their height advantage on the boards, out-rebounding
Japan 70–32,
setting a new record for rebounds by a USA U19 team.
The prior record of 68 was held by the 2007 squad.
The final score was 108–67.The semi-final match was against Australia, a team they had played in the Canary Islands as part of the Lanzarote International Invitational Title.
The USA had won the game, but it was close up until the end of the game.
In the semi-final game, the Aussies started strong.
The score was tied on several occasions early, and the Australian team led the low-scoring game 20–17 with six minutes to go in the half.
Then Breanna Stewart took over, scoring nine consecutive points herself to start a 21–0 run to end the half.
At that time, the USA had pushed to a 28–20 lead.
The Aussies did not quit, and played close to even in the third period, but they did not make up any ground.
The final period was also close, with the USA team slightly outscoring the Aussies, but by the end of the game, the lead was 13 points and the USA won
77–54.The championship game was a rematch against France, a team the USA had played in the preliminary round, winning by just six points.
France scored first, and a few minutes into the game, the score was tied at six points each.
However, the USA then went on an 11–2 run to open up a double-digit lead.
The game was roughly even from then until the end of the half, with France cutting into the lead slightly.
The USA led at halftime 27–20.
Earlier in the day, Spain held a 14-point halftime lead over Australia in the Bronze medal game, but could not hold on to the lead, so no one was thinking that a seven-point lead was safe.
The second half was all USA.
The USA started on a 10–0 run, and would end up surrendering only eight points in the second half.
France ended up shooting under 22% from the field, and the USA would go on to win the game and the gold medal by a score of 61–28.
Stewart was the high scorer for the team with 16 points, and also set a U19 all-time record for scoring with 152 points, which put her ahead of Maya Moore, who scored 147 in 2007.
Alexis Jones had 29 assists during the tournament, tying an all-time U18 record established by Ariel Massengale.
Stewart was named the MVP of the tournament and named to the all-tournament team.

== 2014
U18 results ==
The 2014 FIBA Americas U18 Championship was held in Colorado Springs, Colorado from August 6–10.

The USA team's opening game was against Mexico.
The USA team started strong and had an early 14–2 lead.
Mexico scored the next five points, but late in the first period, the USA started an 18–0 run that continued into the second period.
All USA players scored in a 104–55 win.
The second game was against El Salvador.
The team from El Salvador held an early lead, 5–2, but from then on the USA was the dominant team.
Eight of the USA team players recorded double-digit points, while the team hit 68% of their field goal attempts.
The USA went on to win easily, 118–50.
Game 3 was against undefeated Canada.
The team from Canada pulled out to a narrow 23–21 lead at the end of the first quarter.
The USA team took the lead in the second quarter and gradually extended the lead, finishing the game with a score of 107–76 Napheesa Collier was the leading scorer, recording a double-double with 22 points and 10 rebounds.
Briana Turner scored 21
points and set a U18 record, hitting nine of eleven free throw attempts.
The win secured a spot in the semi-final game against Argentina.
The semi-final match was against Argentina.
The game was never close.
The USA team held Argentina to 8 points in the first and second periods, while scoring 30 and 26 respectively.
While Argentina out scored the US in the third quarter, the game was largely decided by that point.
The USA finished with a win, 97–51, to advance to the gold medal game.
The gold medal game was a re-match with Canada.
Although Canada scored first and stayed close for a few minutes, with a score at 10–8 halfway through the first period, the USA went on a 12–0 run to take command.
Canada got the margin back to eleven at one point, but the USA team extended the lead to 18 points by halftime.
The USA won the game and the gold medal by a score of 104–75.
A'ja
Wilson was the leading scorer with 25 points, and led all rebounders with 11.

== 2015 U19 results ==
The 2015 FIBA Under-19 World Championship for Women was held in Chekhov, Russia from July 8 to 26, 2015.In
the opening game of the preliminary rounds the USA faced Spain.
Both Napheesa Collier and A'ja Wilson recorded double doubles, with Collier scoring 13 points and a game-high 14 rebounds, while Wilson recorded a game-high 18 points along with 10 rebounds.
Their performances help the team when the opening game 72–57.
The following day, the USA play China.
Wilson again recorded a double double with 17 points and 10 rebounds.
Collier also scored 17 points, while Azurá Stevens and Shakayla Thomas contributed 16 points and 11 points respectively.
The USA won the game
88–62.
While there is one game remaining in preliminary play, the USA has already locked up the number one seed in group B.
After a day off, the USA faced Egypt in the final game of the preliminary rounds.
The USA started out slowly and were down 7–6 early in the game.
The USA got untracked in the second quarter outscoring Egypt 38–9, to take a commanding lead.
They went on to win easily 104 – 41.
Every player on the USA's squad scored, with double digit results for Moore, Thomas, Wilson, Cox and Stevens.
In the round of 16 the USA faced Argentina.
The game was never close.
The USA had a 28–4 lead at the end of the first quarter, and coasted to win 89–39
when to advance to the quarterfinals.
Wilson was the leading scorer with 18 points while Collier, Moore and Stevens each scored 11 points.
Moore and Gabbi Ortiz share the lead for assist with six piece.
After a day off, the USA played Canada in the quarterfinals.
The USA scored the first 11 points of the game, and led 28–5 at the end of the first quarter.
Every player on the team scored with game-high honors going to Collier and Moore each with 12 points.
Cox led the team in rebounds with 10.
The USA won 93–45 to advance to the semi-final game.
The USA played Spain in the semi-finals, a team they had beaten earlier in preliminary play.
Collier and Wilson each recorded a double double.
Collier scored 24 points on 10 of 13 shooting from the field.
Wilson had 20 points and led the team in rebounds with 16.
The USA team lead throughout the game and ended up with the win 80–65.
The win advanced the team to the finals against the host team Russia.
The gold-medal game matched up undefeated Russia (6–0) versus the US, who were also undefeated (6–0).
The Russians started off strong, and opened up an eight-point lead at 27–19 in the second quarter.
They led through most of the second quarter but late in the second quarter Stevens scored to give the US a lead 35–34
and Wilson had back to back buckets as part of a 9–0 run to take a 39–34 lead at halftime.
In the second half, the USA led most of the way
but Russia kept the game close and was within a basket at 68–65.
The USA then went on a 7–0 run to open up a 10-point lead with under three minutes to go.
Russia scored five quick points to cut the lead but Collier scored and Russia was unable to come back.
The USA won 78–70
to win the gold-medal for the event.
Wilson scored 30 points to set a USA record for a U19 game.
That performance helped her earn the MVP award for the event.
She along with teammate Collier were named to the five player all-tournament squad.

== 2016
U18 results ==
The 2016 FIBA Americas U18 Championship was held in Valdivia, Chile July 13–17, 2016.
In May 2016, the USA Basketball organization selected 30 players to attend Team Trials at the Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado.
After three days of trials, twelve players were selected to represent the US at the Americas championship.
The twelve players representing the USA were:

Jeannie Boehm
Rellah Boothe
Chennedy Carter
Sidney Cooks
Lauren Cox
Dana Evans
Tyasha Harris
Ruthy Hebard
Valerie Higgins
Amber Ramirez
Megan Walker
Evina
WestbrookThe team members returned to the training center in July to continue training for the competition, including scrimmages against the Japan Women's U24 National Team.
The opening game was against Guatemala.
The USA team took advantage of a 7-inch average height differential to overpower the Guatemala team.
The USA team scored the first 14 points of the game and cruised to an easy 117–32 victory.
The second game, against Brazil, was much more competitive especially at the beginning.
USA was down 8–2 in the early minutes.
The game was tied at 13 points apiece when the USA went on a run to take a nine-point lead at the end of the first quarter.
The second half started like the first with Brazil scoring the first six points of the half in cutting the lead to six points before the USA expanded the lead.
While the USA only scored 20 points in the final quarter their defense held Brazil to 16, leading to a final score in favor the US, 80–59.The USA had a relatively easy time in the final preliminary match against Venezuela, more than doubling up the score, and winning 110–52.
That victory place them into the semi-finals against Puerto Rico, and the results were even more lopsided.
The USA one easily 104–36.
That set up the gold-medal game against Canada.
The USA had only a three-point margin at the end of the first quarter extended that
in the second quarter but put the game away in the third quarter when they outscored Canada 33–14.
The final score the championship game was 109–62.Lauren Cox from Flower Mound, Texas was named the tournament MVP.

==
Coaches and results ==
Head coaches, assistant coaches and managers for the U18 and U19 teams, through 2016.
==
Players ==
Players participating on U18 and U19 teams, 1985 through 2016.

== See also ==
USA Basketball
United States women's national basketball team
United States women's national under-17 basketball team
USA Women's Pan American Team
USA Women's World University Games Team
United States
women's national 3x3 team
FIBA Under-19 World Championship for Women
FIBA Americas Under-18 Championship for Women
United States men's national basketball team
United States
men's national under-19 basketball team
United States
men's national under-17 basketball team


==
Notes ==


==
External links ==
Official site
U19
Official site U18
Official site 2009 FIBA U19 World Championship for Women
U19 media Guide
The United States men's national soccer team (USMNT) represents the United States in men's international soccer competitions.
The team is controlled by the United States Soccer Federation and is a member of FIFA and CONCACAF.

The team has appeared in ten FIFA World Cups, including the first in 1930, where they reached the semi-finals.
The U.S. participated in the 1934 and 1950 World Cups, winning 1–0 against England in the latter.
After 1950, the U.S. did not qualify for the World Cup until 1990.

The U.S. hosted the 1994 World Cup, where they lost to Brazil in the round of sixteen.
They qualified for five more consecutive World Cups after 1994 (for a total of seven straight appearances, a feat shared with only seven other nations), becoming one of the tournament's regular competitors and often advancing to the knockout stage.
The U.S. reached the quarter-finals of the 2002 World Cup, where they lost to Germany.
In the 2009 Confederations Cup, they eliminated top-ranked Spain in the semi-finals before losing to Brazil in the final, their only appearance in the final of a major intercontinental tournament.
United States will co-host the 2026 FIFA World Cup along with Canada and Mexico.

The U.S. also competes in continental tournaments, including the CONCACAF Gold Cup and Copa América.
The U.S. won six Gold Cups, and has achieved a fourth-place finish in two Copa Américas, including the 2016 edition.
The team's head coach is Gregg Berhalter, since November 29, 2018.
Earnie Stewart is the team's General Manager since August 1, 2018.

==
History ==


===
Early years ===
The first U.S. national soccer team was constituted in 1885, when it played Canada in the first international match held outside the United Kingdom.
Canada defeated the U.S. 1–0 in Newark, New Jersey.
The U.S. had its revenge the following year when it beat Canada 1–0, also in Newark, although neither match was officially recognized.
The U.S. earned both silver and bronze medals in men's soccer at the 1904 St. Louis Summer Olympics through Christian Brothers College and St. Rose Parish, though the tournament is declared official only by the IOC (FIFA doesn't endorse tournaments held before 1908).
The U.S. played its first official international match under the auspices of U.S. Soccer on August 20, 1916, against Sweden in Stockholm, where the U.S. won 3–2.

The U.S. fielded a team in the 1930 World Cup in Uruguay, the first ever World Cup to be played.
The U.S. began group play by beating Belgium 3–0.
The U.S. then earned a 3–0 victory over Paraguay, with FIFA crediting Bert Patenaude with two of the goals.
In November 2006, FIFA announced that it had accepted evidence that Patenaude scored all three goals against Paraguay, and was thus the first person to score a hat trick in a World Cup.
In the semifinals, the U.S. lost to Argentina 6–1.
There was no third place game.
However, using the overall tournament records in 1986, FIFA credited the U.S. with a third-place finish ahead of fellow semi-finalist Yugoslavia.
This remains the U.S. team's best World Cup result, and is the highest finish of any team from outside of South America and Europe.

The U.S. qualified for the 1934 World Cup by defeating Mexico 4–2 in Italy a few days before the finals started.
In a straight knock-out format, the team first played host Italy and lost 7–1, eliminating the U.S. from the tournament.
At the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin, the U.S. again lost to Italy in the first round and were eliminated, although this time with a score of 1–0.

The 1950 World Cup in Brazil was the next World Cup appearance for the U.S. as it withdrew in 1938 and the tournament wasn't held again until 1950.
The U.S. lost its first match 3–1 against Spain, but then won 1–0 against England at Independência Stadium in Belo Horizonte.
Striker Joe Gaetjens was the goal scorer.
Called "The Miracle on Grass", the result is considered one of the greatest upsets in the history of the World Cup.
Months before the World Cup, England had beaten an all-star "rest of
Europe" side 6–1 in an exhibition match.
In their third game of the tournament, a 5–2 defeat by Chile saw the U.S. eliminated from the tournament.
It would be four decades before the U.S. would make another appearance in the World Cup finals.

===
Drought (1960s–1980s) ===
The national team spent the mid-to-late 20th century in near complete irrelevance in both the international game and the domestic sporting scene.
There was only one World Cup berth for CONCACAF during this period until 1982.
The emergence of the North American Soccer League in the 1960s and 1970s raised hopes that the U.S. national team would soon improve and become a global force.
However such hopes were not realized and by the 1980s the U.S. Soccer Federation found itself in serious financial struggles, with the national team playing only two matches from 1981 to 1983.
U.S. Soccer targeted the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles and the 1986 World Cup as means of rebuilding the national team and its fan base.
The International Olympic Committee declared that teams from outside Europe and South America could field full senior teams, including professionals (until then, the amateur-only rule had heavily favored socialist countries from Eastern Europe whose players were professionals in all but name).
The U.S. had a very strong showing at the tournament, beating Costa Rica, tying Egypt, losing only to favorite Italy and finishing 1–1–1
but didn't make the second round, losing to Egypt on a tiebreaker
(both had three points).

To provide a more stable national team program and renew interest in the NASL, U.S. Soccer entered the national team into the NASL league schedule for the 1983 season as Team America.
This team lacked the continuity and regularity of training that conventional clubs enjoy, and many players were unwilling to play for the national team instead of their own clubs when conflicts arose.
Team America finished the season at the bottom of the league, with U.S. Soccer canceling the experiment and withdrawing the national team from the NASL after one season.
By the end of 1984, the NASL had folded, leaving the U.S. without a single professional-level outdoor soccer league.
The U.S. bid to host the 1986 FIFA World Cup after Colombia withdrew from contention due to economic concerns, but FIFA selected Mexico to host the tournament.
In the last game of CONCACAF qualifying for the 1986 World Cup, the U.S. needed only a tie against Costa Rica to reach the final qualification group against Honduras and Canada.
U.S. Soccer scheduled the game to be played in Torrance, California, an area with many Costa Rican expatriates, and marketed the game almost exclusively to the Costa Rican community.
Costa Rica won the match 1–0, and kept the U.S. from reaching its fourth World Cup finals.
In 1988, U.S. Soccer attempted to re-implement its national-team-as-club concept, offering contracts to players to train with the national program full-time while occasionally loaning them to club teams as a revenue source for the federation.
This brought many key veterans back into the program and allowed the team to begin playing more matches which, combined with an influx of talent from new youth clubs and leagues established across the nation in the wake of the NASL's popularity, allowed the national team to end the 1980s with optimism and higher hopes of qualifying for the 1990 World Cup than had existed for previous tournaments.

===
Rise in the U.S. (1990s) ===
In 1988, FIFA named the U.S. as the host of the 1994 World Cup (success of the 1984 Summer Olympics played the major role), but it did so under significant international criticism because of the perceived weakness of the national team and the lack of a professional outdoor league.
This criticism diminished somewhat when a 1–0 win against Trinidad and Tobago, the first road win for the U.S. in nearly two years, in the last match of the 1989 CONCACAF Championship, earned the U.S. its first World Cup appearance in 40 years.

The team was managed by Bob Gansler in preparation for the 1990 World Cup in Italy, with two of the team's more experienced players, Rick Davis and Hugo Perez, recovering from serious injuries and unavailable for selection.
Rather than fill out his team with veteran professionals from U.S. indoor soccer leagues as suggested by some, Gansler and his assistant Stejem Mark chose to select many younger players with better conditioning for the outdoor game, including some amateurs playing for college teams.
The U.S. entered the tournament as massive underdogs and suffered defeats in all three of its group games to Czechoslovakia, Italy, and Austria.

In a noteworthy match, in 1993 U.S. Cup, the U.S. beat England by 2–0.After qualifying automatically as the host of the 1994 World Cup under Bora Milutinović, the U.S. opened its tournament schedule with a 1–1 tie against Switzerland in the Pontiac Silverdome in the suburbs of Detroit, the first World Cup game played indoors.
In its second game, the U.S. faced Colombia, then ranked fourth in the world, at the Rose Bowl.
Aided by an own goal from Andrés Escobar, the U.S. won 2–1.
Escobar was later murdered in his home country, possibly in retaliation for this mistake.
Despite a 1–0 loss to Romania in its final group game, the U.S. made it past the initial round for the first time since 1930.
In the round of 16, the U.S. lost 1–0 to the eventual champion Brazil.
Despite this success, the team fired Bora in 1995, reportedly because he was not interested in administrative duties.
In a 1995 friendly, the U.S. came back from 3–0 to win 4–3 against Saudi Arabia, the biggest comeback in the team's history.

In the 1998 World Cup in France, the team lost all three group matches, 2–0 to Germany, 2–1 to Iran, and 1–0 to Yugoslavia, finishing dead last in the field of 32.
Head coach Steve Sampson received much of the blame for the performance as a result of abruptly cutting team captain John Harkes, whom Sampson had named "Captain for Life" shortly before, as well as several other players who were instrumental to the qualifying effort, from the squad.
Thomas Dooley became the Captain at that point.
It emerged in February 2010 that Sampson removed Harkes from the team due to Harkes allegedly having an affair with teammate Eric Wynalda's wife.

===
Success in the 2000s ===
In the 2002 World Cup under Bruce Arena, the U.S. reached the quarterfinals, its best finish in a World Cup since 1930.
The team advanced in the group stage with a 1–1–1 record, beginning with a 3–2 upset win over Portugal, followed by a 1–1 tie with co-host and eventual semi-finalist, South Korea.
The third and final match was a 3–1 loss to Poland, but the team still got to the round of 16 when South Korea defeated Portugal.
This set the stage for a face-off with continental rivals Mexico, the first time they met in a World Cup.
The U.S. won the game 2–0.
Brian McBride opened the scoring, and Landon Donovan scored the second goal.
That victory advanced the team to the quarterfinals, where it met Germany.
The team lost 1–0 after being denied a penalty when Torsten Frings handled the ball to prevent a Gregg Berhalter goal.
All of the U.S. games in the 2002 World Cup were played in South Korea and all their victories came wearing the white kit while their only defeats came while wearing the blue kit.

In the 2006 World Cup, after finishing top of the CONCACAF qualification tournament, the U.S. was drawn into Group E along with the Czech Republic, Italy, and Ghana.
The United States opened its tournament with a 3–0 loss to the Czech Republic.
The team then tied 1–1 against Italy, who went on to win the World Cup.
The U.S. was then knocked out of the tournament when beaten 2–1 by Ghana in its final group match, with Clint Dempsey scoring the U.S.'s only goal in the tournament – the goal against Italy had been an own goal by Italian defender Cristian Zaccardo.
Following the tournament, Arena's contract was not renewed.
After the national team remained dormant for the rest of 2006 while negotiating with various coaches, the federation hired former Chicago Fire, MetroStars and Chivas USA manager Bob Bradley in early 2007.

Bradley began his competitive career with the national team with the 2007 Gold Cup.
In the final, the United States beat Mexico 2–1, which qualified it for the 2009 Confederations Cup.
The U.S. had a notable performance at the 2009 Confederations Cup.
In the semifinals, the U.S. defeated Spain 2–0.
At the time, Spain was atop the FIFA World Rankings and was on a run of 35 games undefeated.
With the win, the United States advanced to its first-ever final in a men's FIFA tournament.
The team lost 3–2 to Brazil after leading 2–0 at half time.
The United States then hosted the 2009 Gold Cup.
In the final, the United States was beaten by Mexico 5–0.
This defeat broke the U.S. team's 58-match home unbeaten streak against CONCACAF opponents, and was the first home loss to Mexico since 1999.

In the Fourth round of the 2010 World Cup qualification, the U.S. began by beating Mexico 2–0.
The February 2009 loss extended Mexico's losing streak against America on U.S. soil to 11 matches.
Jozy Altidore became the youngest U.S. player to score a hat-trick, in a 3–0 victory over Trinidad and Tobago.
Near the end of the summer of 2009, the United States lost 2–1 to Mexico at Estadio Azteca.
On October 10, the U.S. secured qualification to the 2010 World Cup with a 3–2 win over Honduras.
Four days later, the U.S. finished in first place in the group with a 2–2 tie against Costa Rica.

=== 2010–present ===
In the 2010 FIFA World Cup, the U.S. team was drawn in Group C against England, Slovenia and Algeria.
After drawing against England (1–1) and Slovenia (2–2), the U.S. defeated Algeria 1–0 with a stoppage time goal from Landon Donovan, taking first place in a World Cup Finals group for the first time since 1930.
In the round of 16, the U.S. was eliminated by Ghana, 2–1.
On FIFA's ranking of World Cup teams the U.S. finished in 12th place out of the 32-team field.

The U.S. again hosted the Gold Cup in 2011.
The U.S. advanced past the group stage, then defeated Jamaica 2–0 in the quarterfinals and Panama 1–0 in the semifinals before losing to Mexico 4–2 in the final.
Later in the summer, Bob Bradley was relieved of his duties and former German national team manager Jürgen Klinsmann was hired as head coach.

The U.S. had some success in friendlies in 2012 and 2013.
The U.S. team won 1–0 in Italy on February 29, 2012, the team's first ever win over Italy.
On June 2, 2013, the U.S. played a friendly against Germany at a sold out RFK Stadium in Washington D.C., with the U.S. winning 4–3.
In July 2013, the U.S. hosted the 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup where it went undefeated in the group stage and won with a 1–0 victory over Panama in the final, with Landon Donovan winning the tournament's golden ball award.

A 4–3 victory over Bosnia and Herzegovina in an international friendly match in Sarajevo represented the 12th straight win for the USMNT, the longest winning streak for any team in the world at that time.
The 12 game winning streak ended September 6, 2013, when the U.S. lost to Costa Rica 3–1 in San José.
In 2013 the national team played the final round of qualification, and by defeating Mexico in September, the U.S. clinched a spot in the 2014 World Cup.
The U.S. absorbed many German elements leading up to the 2014 World Cup.
U.S.'s German head coach Jürgen Klinsmann surprised the U.S. soccer world by calling up five "Jürgen Americans"—half-blooded Germans born and professionally trained in Germany—to the 23-men squad in the 2014 FIFA World Cup.
The U.S. was drawn into Group G, along with Ghana, Germany, and Portugal.
The U.S. took revenge on the Ghanaians, winning 2–1.
They tied their second group game against Portugal 2–2.
In the final game of the group stage, the U.S. fell to Germany 1–0, but moved on to the knockout stage on goal difference.
This was the first time that the team made two consecutive trips to the knockout stage of the FIFA World Cup.
In the round of 16, the U.S. lost 2–1 to Belgium in extra time, despite goalkeeper Tim Howard making a World Cup record 15 saves during the match.

The national team's next tournament under Klinsmann was the 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup.
The U.S. were eliminated by Jamaica 2–1 in the semifinals, before losing to Panama on penalties in the third place match.
The fourth-place finish was the worst Gold Cup performance by the national team since 2000, and the first time the team failed to make the tournament final since 2003.
In the 2015 CONCACAF Cup playoff to determine the region's entry to the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup, the U.S. were defeated 3–2 by Mexico at the Rose Bowl.
In June 2016, the U.S. played as hosts of Copa América Centenario.
The U.S. topped Group A on goal difference against Colombia.
The U.S. beat Ecuador 2–1 in the quarter-finals, but then fell to Argentina 4–0 and lost to Colombia again
1–0 in the third place match.
They finished fourth at the Copa América, tying their best finish ever in 1995.

Following consecutive losses to Mexico and Costa Rica in the opening games of the final round of qualification for the 2018 FIFA World Cup, Klinsmann was removed as national team coach and technical director and replaced by previous U.S. manager Bruce Arena.
World Cup qualification resumed on March 24, 2017, where Arena and his team had a record 6–0 win over Honduras.
Four days later, the team traveled to Panama City, drawing Panama 1–1.
After beating Trinidad and Tobago 2–0, the U.S. got their third ever result in World Cup Qualification at the Estadio Azteca when they drew 1–1 against Mexico.
In July 2017, the U.S. won their sixth CONCACAF Gold Cup with a 2–1 win over Jamaica in the final.
Following an agonizing 2–1 defeat to Trinidad and Tobago on October 10, 2017, the U.S. failed to qualify for the 2018 World Cup, missing the tournament for the first time since 1986.
Many pundits and analysts called this the worst result and worst performance in the history of the national team.
Following Arena's resignation on October 13, 2017, assistant coach Dave Sarachan was named interim manager during the search for a permanent replacement.

The search for a permanent head coach was delayed by the USSF presidential election in February 2018 and the hiring of Earnie Stewart as general manager in June 2018.
Gregg Berhalter, coach of the Columbus Crew and a former USMNT defender, was announced as the team's new head coach on December 2, 2018.

==
Team image ==


===
Uniforms and crest ===
Since their first unofficial game against Canada, the most common U.S. uniform has been white tops with blue shorts.
In 1950, the U.S. adopted a Peru-styled diagonal stripe or "sash" across the shirt.
The stripe has been on third uniforms for 2003, 2004, and 2006, as well as the 2010 home, road and third uniforms.
An additional color scheme based on the U.S. flag has been occasionally used (most prominently in the 1994 World Cup and 2012–13 qualifiers as well the 1983 Team America franchise of the North American Soccer League) comprising a shirt with red and white stripes with blue shorts.

German brand Adidas provided the uniforms for the United States from 1984 until 1994.
Since 1995, American company Nike has been the uniform supplier.

====
Kit suppliers ====
=== Rivalries ===
The teams of Mexico and the United States are widely considered as the two major powers of CONCACAF.
Matches between the two nations often attract much media attention, public interest and comment in both countries.
Although the first match was played in 1934, their rivalry was not considered major until the 1980s, when the teams began to frequently compete in CONCACAF cups.
On August 15, 2012, the United States defeated Mexico at Estadio Azteca in the first victory for the U.S. against Mexico on Mexican soil in 75 years.

Ever since their first meeting in 1934, the two teams have met 70 times, with Mexico leading the overall series 36–19–15
(W–L–T), outscoring the U.S. 142–80.
However, since the 1990s, the tide began to change due to a rapid growth of soccer in the United States.
During the 21st century, the series has favored the U.S.
14–9–6 (W–L–T).
Either the United States or Mexico has won every edition of the CONCACAF Gold Cup except one (the 2000 CONCACAF Gold Cup was won by Canada).

In recent years the United States has also begun to develop a rivalry with Costa Rica.

===
Supporters ===
There have been two main supporter groups backing the United States men's national soccer team, Sam's Army and The American Outlaws.
Sam's Army started shortly after the 1994 World Cup in the United States and were active through 2014.
Sam's Army members wore red to matches and sung or chanted throughout the match.
They often brought huge U.S. flags and other banners to the game.

The American Outlaws was started in Lincoln, Nebraska in 2007 as a local supporters' group.
The group's membership attempted to address a lack of consistency from game to game in supporter organization and social events on match days.
To achieve this goal the American Outlaws became a nationwide, non-profit supporters' group.
Some American Outlaws members wear U.S. flag bandanas over their faces and commonly wear soccer supporter scarves.
Some branches of the American Outlaws have their own scarves specific to their branch.
The US Men's National team has had a tremendous following on social media, especially Twitter and Instagram in recent years.
Interest in young American players and the attention they bring has led to an increase in foreign investment in US players.

===
Home stadium ===
The United States does not have a dedicated national stadium like other national teams; instead, the team has played their home matches at 112 venues in 29 states and the District of Columbia.
Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium, located in the national capital of Washington, D.C., has hosted 24 matches, the most of any stadium.
The State of California has hosted 113 matches, the most of any state, and the Los Angeles metropolitan area has hosted 74 matches at several venues in and around the city of Los Angeles.
The Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum hosted 20 matches from 1965 to 2000, but fell out of use due to its age.
The Rose Bowl, a 92,000-seat venue in Pasadena, has hosted 17 national team matches, as well as the 1994 FIFA World Cup Final, the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup Final, and the 1984 Olympics Gold Medal Match.
===
Media coverage ===
ESPN and Fox Sports 1 evenly split the English language rights for U.S. Soccer broadcasts from 2015 to 2022.
Univision Deportes has the Spanish language rights to all U.S. Soccer broadcasts from 2015 to 2022.
These agreements do not apply to FIFA World Cup away qualifiers, whose rights are distributed by the host country.
Therefore, these matches can often be found on other networks such as beIN Sports and Telemundo.

==
Recent schedule and results ==
The following is a list of match results from the previous 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.

===
2020 ===
=== 2021 ===
=== 2022
===
==
Coaching staff ==
Coaching staff
Technical staff


==
Players ==
For all past and present players who have appeared for the national team, see List of United States men's international soccer players.

===
Current squad ===
The following 23 players were named to the squad for the friendly against Northern Ireland on March 28, 2021.Caps and goals are updated as of March 28, 2021 after the match against Northern Ireland.

===
Recent call-ups ===
The following players have also been called up to the United States squad within the last twelve months.

==
Player records ==
As of March 28, 2021.

Players in bold are still active with the United States.

==
Competitive record ==
For all past match results of the national team, see single-season articles and the team's results page.

For the all-time record of the national team against opposing nations, see the team's all-time record page.
The U.S. regularly competes at the FIFA World Cup, the CONCACAF Gold Cup, and the Summer Olympics.
The U.S. has also played in the FIFA Confederations Cup, Copa América by invitation, as well as several minor tournaments.

The best result for the United States in a World Cup tournament came in 1930 when the team reached the semifinals.
The team was composed of six naturalized internationals, five of them from Scotland and one from England.
The best result in the modern era is the 2002 World Cup, when the U.S. reached the quarterfinals.
The worst world Cup tournament results in the modern era were group stage eliminations in 1990, 1998, and 2006, although the country failed to even qualify for the final tournament in 2018.

In the Confederations Cup, the United States finished in third place in both 1992 and 1999, and were runner-up in 2009.
The United States appeared in their first intercontinental tournament final at the 2009 Confederations Cup.
In the semifinals, the United States upset top ranked Spain 2–0, to advance to the final.
In the final, the United States lost 3–2 to Brazil after leading 2–0 at halftime.

The U.S. men's soccer team have played in the Summer Olympics since 1924.
From that tournament to 1980, only amateur and state-sponsored Eastern European players were allowed on Olympic teams.
The Olympics became a full international tournament in 1984 after the IOC allowed full national teams from outside FIFA CONMEBOL & UEFA confederations.
Ever since 1992 the men's Olympic event has been age-restricted, under 23 plus three overage players, and participation has been by the United States men's national under-23 soccer team.

In regional competitions, the United States has won the CONCACAF Gold Cup six times, with their most recent title in 2017.
Their best ever finish at the Copa América was fourth-place at the 1995 and 2016 editions.

===
FIFA World Cup ===


===
CONCACAF Gold Cup ===
CONCACAF Championship 1963–1989, CONCACAF Gold Cup 1991–present


===
Summer Olympics ===


===
Copa América ===
South American Championship 1916–1967, Copa América
1975–present
=== FIFA Confederations Cup ===


===
CONCACAF Nations League ===


==
Honors ==
Major competitions
FIFA World CupThird place (1):
1930
FIFA Confederations CupRunners-up (1):  2009
Third place (2):  1992,
1999CONCACAF Championship / CONCACAF Gold CupChampions (6):  1991, 2002, 2005, 2007, 2013, 2017
Runners-up (6):  1989, 1993, 1998, 2009, 2011, 2019
Third place (2):  1996, 2003Summer OlympicsSilver medal (1):  1904
Bronze medal (1):  1904Minor competitions
U.S. CupChampions (3):  1992, 1995, 2000
Runners-up (1):  1999
Third place (2):  1993,
1996Marlboro CupChampions (2):  1989, 1989
Runners-up (3):  1987, 1988, 1989
Third place (1):
1990North American Nations CupRunners-up (2):  1949, 1991
Third place (2):  1947, 1990


== See also ==
Fútbol de Primera Player of the Year
United States men's national under-17 soccer team
United States men's national under-20 soccer team
United States men's national under-23 soccer team
U.S. National Soccer Team Players Association
U.S. Soccer Athlete of the Year
United States
women's national soccer team


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
US Soccer Schedule at USSF
US Soccer Results at USSF
USA Matches at FIFA
US National Soccer Team Players Association
US soccer team at Association of Football Statisticians
United States at FootballDatabase.eu
USA Men's National Team:
All-time Results, 1885–1989
USA Men's National Team: All-time Results, 1990–present
USA Men's National Team:
Current Value of Players on Team
The USA women's national under-17 basketball team is the women's basketball team, administered by USA Basketball, that represents the United States in international under-17 and under-16
(under age 17 and under age 16) women's basketball competitions, consisting mainly of the FIBA Americas Under-16 Championship for Women and FIBA Under-17 World Championship for Women.
These events replaced the USA Basketball Women's Youth Development Festival.

The usual sequence is for the U16 team to play in a regional championship in one year, with the top three qualifying teams being invited to a World Championship in the following year, as the U17 team.
The first FIBA Americas U16 Championship For Women was held in 2009.

The qualifying teams were invited to the 2010 FIBA U17 World Championship for Women held in France.

The events are on a two-year cycle, with U16 events in 2009 and 2011, and the corresponding U17 events in 2010 and 2012.

The U16 team becomes the U17 team, with largely the same players and coaches, although invitations are not automatic and changes can occur.

==
Record ==
2009
U16:
1st 
2010 U17:
1st 
2011
U16:
1st 
2012
U17:
1st 
2013
U16:
1st 
2014 U17:
1st 
2015 U16: 3rd 
2016 U17:
3rd 


== 2011
U16 results ==
The USA team opened the 2011 FIBA Americas U16 Championship in Mexico City  with a game against Brazil on Monday, 13 June.
Although the USA team started the game with a 6–0 run, the team from Brazil responded, and held a 34–31 lead at halftime.
The USA team held Brazil to eight points in the third period to retake the lead.
The USA squad held on to win the first game with a score of 71–54.
Mercedes Russell, from Springfield High School in Springfield Oregon, set USA single game records for points and rebounds, with 21 and 15 respectively.
The USA team faced the team from Argentina on the following day.
The score was close for the early part of the game, with both teams tied at nine points apiece, then a lead by Argentina at 14–13, and a lead by the US at 17–16.
The USA put on a 17–0 run in the second quarter to take a large lead, and continued on to a win with a score of  82–46.
Rebecca Greenwell from Owensboro Catholic High School in Owensboro
Kentucky was the leading scorer with 22 points.
The USA team faced Venezuela on the following day, Wednesday.
The USA team opened up an early lead, and held the Venezuela team to single digit scoring for the first three periods.
The USA team won with a final score of 114–32.
Rebecca Greenwell tied with Stephanie Mavunga from Brownsburg High School in Indianapolis Indiana for the scoring lead; each player had 18 points.
The win qualified the team for the medal rounds.
After a day off, the USA team faced Puerto Rico in the semifinal game.
The USA team jumped out to a ten-point margin in the first quarter, but a 23–0 run in the second quarter produced a commanding lead that would not be challenged.
The USA won, with a final score of 99–51.
Rebecca Greenwell repeated as the scoring leader, with 20 points.
The gold medal game on Saturday was a rematch between the US and first round opponent Brazil.
While the earlier game had been close at the half, in this game, the USA outscored Brazil 19–8 in the first period, and held a 21-point lead by halftime.
The USA went on to win the game, the gold medal and a n invitation to the 2012 world championships with a score of 73–40.
Jannah Tucker's seven steals set a USA U16 single game record, eclipsing the previous record of five steals in a game.
Rebecca Greenwell shared tournament MVP honors with Izabella Frederico Sangalli of Brazil.

==
2012
U17 results ==
The 2012 U17 World Championship was held in Amsterdam 17–26 August 2012.
The USA squad underwent training at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida between 28 May and 1 June, then re-assembled at the U.S. Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado from the first through the eighth of August.
The team then flew to Caorle, Italy for more training, including exhibition games against some of the teams.
The team then traveled to Amsterdam, for the World Championships.

===
Preliminary round ===
The twelve qualifying teams are separated into two groups, with six teams in each group.

The first five rounds are played as a round-robin, which each team playing all five of the other teams in their group.
The preliminary rounds were scheduled for 17—22 August, with 20 August as an off day.

The first game for the USA team was against South Korea.
Although South Korea tried to utilize a full-court press, the USA team was able to break the press, and scored 72 points in the first half.
Rebecca Greenwell and Brianna Turner each scored 20 or more points, while Linnae Harper set a USA U17 record with five steals.

Mercedes Russell scored 17 points on perfect shooting from the field, hitting all eight of her field goal attempt.
The USA won 131–89.The second preliminary round game was against Canada.
The game was close at first, with the USA team holding a six-point lead at the end of the first quarter, 18–12.
In the second quarter,  Diamond DeShields scored eleven of her game total 29 points to help extend the USA lead.
The USA team held Canada to 21% shooting, and ended up with an 86—47 victory.
In addition to her team high 29 points, DeShields also had five steals, tying the USA U17 record set the day before.
The third game was against Italy.
The USA team had five scorers in double digits, lead by Rebecca Greenwell with 16 points.
The USA team held the Italian team to under 17% field goal shooting for the game, leading to an 83–43 victory.
The USA team started slow against Belgium, holding only a four-point lead at the end of the first quarter.
Although they opened up the lead to 16 points by halftime, the Belgian team cut the lead back to eight in the third period.
The USA team responded with an 11–4 run to extend the lead to 15, then broke open the game in the fourth quarter, and won by thirty points
80–50.
Diamond DeShields had a double-double with 14 points and 11 rebounds, while Linnae Harper broke her own steals record by swiping seven in the game.
The team hit 7 of 11 three-point attempts to set a record for three-point shooting.
The USA team had little trouble with Mali in the final game of the preliminary round.
Four bench players had more minutes than the starter with e most minutes, but the USA team still managed to set a record for the largest margin of victory in U17 history, admittedly brief, as it only goes back to 2010.
The final score was 98–28.
===
Quarterfinals ===
The USA advanced to the quarterfinals with a game against the fourth place team in Group B, Australia.
The USA team scored first, but Australia at on an 11–1 run to take a seven-point lead.
The Australian team still lead by five at the end of the first quarter.
The USA team out-scored the Aussies
22–13 in the second period, but this left them with only a four-point margin at halftime.
The USA team extended the margin in the third quarter, and again in the fourth, ending up with a win 89–68.
The USA did not shoot well, hitting only a third of their shots, but blocked 16 shots, a USA U17 record, and Linnae Harper broke her own steals record with eight.
The win advances the USA team to the semi-finals against Canada, a team they beat earlier in the preliminary rounds.

===
Semifinals ===
The semifinal game against Canada resembled the quarterfinal game in many respects.
The USA scored the first three points, then gave up a run to give up the lead.
The USA team shot poorly, again hitting a third of their shots, but garnered 23 steals, lead by Harper's seven.
They forced the Canadians into 31 turnovers, and ended up with an 84–59 win, in a game in which every USA player scored.
The win sets up the gold medal game against Spain.

===
Finals ===
The gold medal game matched up the US with Spain.
The opening of the game looked headed toward a blowout.
The USA had a 22–8 lead at the end of the first quarter.
However, the team from Spain did not quit, and out-scored the US in the second quarter.
They were unable to take the lead, but cut the margin to single digits.
The game continued to see-saw, with the USA opening up a large lead, then Spain responding and trimming the margin to single digits.
Spain was unable to close the gap, and the USA ended up earning the gold medal with a 75–62 win.

The MVP of the Tournament was presented to Diamond DeShields.
Teammate Linnae Harper was also named to the All Tournament team.

== 2013
U16 results ==
The 2013 FIBA Americas U16 Championship was held in Cancun, Mexico.
In the opening game, the USA team took on Brazil.
They scored the first eight points of the game, and went on to open up a commanding lead.
The USA won 76–20, with Asia Durr scoring 20 points.
During one stretch starting at the end of the first quarter, and extending into the second, the team scored 21 consecutive points.
In the second game, the USA faced the team from Argentina.
Asia Durr again led all scorers, with 23 points.
Crystal Dangerfield scored 16  on 7 of 9 shooting.
DeJanae Boykin had a double-double with 12 points and 12 rebounds.
The USA team had a 23-point lead at halftime, but outscored their opponents 38–6
in the third period to leave no doubt as to the outcome, winning easily, 98–28.

In the last game of preliminary round play, the USA faced Costa Rica.
The USA completely out matched their opponents, with seven players reaching double figures, led by Katie Lou Samuelson's 20 points.
Costa Rica held a brief lead at 4–2, but the USA team scored the nest 33 points to put the game away.
The final score was 106–19.
The win secured the USA position in the 2014 FIBA U17 World Championship, because the top four finishers in the U16 event are qualifiers.

===
Semifinals ===
The USA faced the host team, Mexico in the semis.
Mexico started out with an early lead, up 5–4 in the second minute, but the USA team then scored the next 25 points.
Three players shared top scoring honors, each with 16 points: Lauren Cox, Arike Ogunbowale and  Katie Lou Samuelson.
The final score was 101–29.
===
Finals ===
In the first four games, the outcome was all but decided by the end of the first quarter.
In the gold medal game against Canada, the results would be very different.
Canada entered the game with a 4–0 record, the same as the USA team.
The game started with low scoring, neither team managing to reach double digits in the quarter.
At the end of the first quarter the teams were tied 9–9.
The scoring picked up in the second quarter, but by both teams.
The USA team, after hitting only 3 of their first 16 field goal attempts, went on a 10–0 run to take an eight-point lead, but Canada did not fold, and responded to tie the game.
The teams were tied at 27 points each at halftime.
The teams traded baskets early in the third period, but then the USA went on a 22–0 run to take a large lead.
The USA extended the lead until it reached 38 points in the fourth quarter.
Canada outscored the USA over the final minutes, but the game was out of reach, and the USA went on to win the game 82–48, and the gold medal.
Asia Durr was named the tournament MVP.
She had set three single game records for the U16 tournament, including most points, 26, most steals, 8, and most field goal attempts 22.
Teammate Katie Lou Samuelson also set a record.
She hit 8 three-pointers on only eight attempts in the final game, to set a record for three-pointers made and three-point shooting percentage for a game.

==
2014
U17 results ==
The 2014 FIBA U17 World Championship For Women were held in Klatovy and Plzeň, Czech Republic.
Prior to the official matches, some teams played friendlies in Nogent-sur-Seine, France.

===
Exhibitions ===
The USA team took on China in a match on 20 June 2014.
The game was close at the end of the first quarter, with the USA holding a six-point lead, 23–17.
The USA extended the lead at halftime to 15 points.
In the second half, the USA team continued to extend the lead, and ended the game with a 40-point victory, 89–49.
The five starters for the USA squad all scored in double digits, led by Arike Ogunbowale with 16 points.
The USA took on Canada in the second exhibition.
The game began as a close match, with the USA holding only a three-point lead at halftime, 33–30.
In the third period, the USA held Canada to nine points, and extended the lead, then stepped up defensively and offensively in the fourth period, outscoring Canada 31–6 to win the game 80–45.
Joyner Holmes recorded a double-double with 14 points and 11 rebounds.
The third and final exhibition was against the host team, France.
The opening period was close, with the USA holding on to a slim lead, 18–15.
The USA outscored France in the second period by 20–8, to take a large lead at halftime.
The USA hit 47% of their shots in the first half while holding France to % shooting.
These numbers would almost reverse in the second half, with the USA shooting under 30% and France hitting 57% of their shots.
The halftime lead of 15 points was cut to only two points at the beginning of the last period.
France outscored the US in the final period to win the game
78–72.

===
Preliminary round ===
The USA faced China in the first game of the preliminary round.
The two teams had played each other in a friendly match the week before in France.
The USA shot poorly, hitting under 30% of their shots in the first half, but defense helped the USA team hold China to four points in the opening quarter.
China did better ant
he second quarter, but was only able to cut the lad to seven points.
The offense started working for the US in the third quarter, when the USA scored 25 points, and the USA went on to win
69–41.
Katie Lou Samuelson, who had not played in any of the exhibition games, tied a USA U17 record for three-pointers attempted, hitting four of ten attempts.
Samuelson led all scorers with 22 points, while Lauren Cox led the team in rebounds with 12.The second opening round game was against France, a team that had beaten the USA a week earlier.
This time the result was very different.
The USA scored first, never trailed, and went on to a convincing 88–40 win.
The team shot better than they had the previous day, hitting 46% of their shots, and holding France to 28% shooting.
The USA outscored France in each quarter, but especially in the final quarter scoring 26 points and holding France to a single point.
Samuelson was the leading scorer with 17 points, while Asia Durr led the team in assist with four, and scored 14 points.
Sabrina Ionescu was the leading rebounder with six rebounds and led the team in steals with four.
Early in the final game of the opening round, the USA scored 22 consecutive points against Mali to set the tone for the game.
The USA only allowed six points in the first quarter, then improved to allowing only four in the second quarter, and only gave up three in the third period.
By then, the outcome was not in doubt, and the USA went on to win
78–22.
Joyner Holmes had a double-double with 12 points and 11 rebounds.

===
Medal rounds ===
The USA faced Canada in the quarter finals.
The teams were familiar with each other, as they had played in an exhibition  in France a week earlier.
The game started slowly, with Canada holding an early 5–3 lead, when Ogunbowale scored seven straight points as part of a 13–0 run to open up a USA lead.
Samuelson hit back to back three-pointers in the second quarter and the USA held a comfortable 41–14 lead at the half.
After a strong third quarter, the team from Canada came back and outscored the US in the final period, but by then the game was out of reach.
The USA won
86–45.
Joyner Holmes was the leading scorer with 24 points.
In the semi-final game against Hungary, the USA team gave up 26 points in the first quarter, but still managed to end the quarter with a six-point lead, largely due to six three-pointers hit by Samuelson, a USA Women’s U17 record.
The second period was lower scoring, with the USA scoring 14 to Hungary's 13.
In the third and fourth periods, the USA extended the lead, ending with a 91–63 win.
Samuelson was the leading scorer with 25 points, but Asia Durr led the team with 24 efficiency points, with 14 scoring points, along with three steals, four rebounds and a team leading six assists.
Kristine Anigwe recorded a double-double with 14 rebounds and 14 points.
In the gold medal game, both the US and Spain entered the game undefeated.
The USA started well, opening up an early 7–2 lead, but Spain came back strong.
The lead changed hands in the first half, with the USA holding on to a five-point lead at halftime.
The USA scored the first six points of the second half to push the lead to double digits, but Spain cut the lead back to just two points at the end of the third period.
Spain hit three-pointers in the final period and took the lead; the game was tied at 71 points each late in the game.
The USA team outscored Spain by just 6–4 over the remaining time to win the game and the gold medal.
Spain's Ángela Salvadores scored 40 points for her team and was awarded the tournament MVP honors, but it wasn't quite enough.
USA's Lauren Cox scored 20 points, while the team set a USA U17 record for blocked shots, with eight.
USA’s Joyner Holmes and Katie Lou Samuelson were named to the all-tournament team.

== 2015 U16 results ==
The 2015 FIBA Americas U16 Championship was held in  Puebla, Mexico.
Eight teams from North, South and Central America qualified for the event, which will crown a champion for the event, and that team will be automatically qualified for the U17 World Championship in 2017.
===
Preliminary round ===
USA team faced Argentina in their first game.
The USA team started out slowly, but led Argentina 17–8 by the end of the first quarter.
The USA team outscored Argentina in each of the four quarters, and ended up winning 80–48.
Alexis Morris and Andre Espinoza-Hunter shared high scorer honors with 16 points each Valencia Myers was the leading rebounder with eight rebounds.
All 12 players participated with every player earning at least 10 minutes.
In the second game, the USA team faced Honduras.
The team started out even slower than they did against Argentina falling behind early and ending the first quarter with a one-point deficit
13–12.
They came alive in the second quarter outscoring Honduras 26–7.
That opened up a largely
they would never relinquish an end of the game with the win
86–41.
Honesty Scott-Grayson was the leading scorer for the US, with 18 points.
Desireé Caldwell recorded 10 assists, which is a USA Women’s U16 record.
The third game was against the host team Mexico.
The host team started with a very early lead 5–2, but Alexis Morris would hit a three as the start of a 9–0 run to open up a lead for the USA.
Morris would go on to score 15 points in the game.
USA had a small lead at the end of the first quarter which they extended in the second
but the third quarter with an outscore the host
32–13 put the game out of reach.
Destiny Littleton was the leading scorer for the US with 17 points.
Aquira DeCosta ad a double double with 10 points and 12 rebounds.
The final score, in favor of the US, was 85–44, which advances the USA team to the medal rounds.

===
Medal rounds ===
The USA team took on Brazil in the semifinals.
The USA team fell behind early and was as many as 22 point behind.
They worked even the score and got to within six points in the fourth.
But could not close the gap and lost 73–63.
By virtue of the top four finish in the event the team automatically qualifies for the 2016 FIBA U17 World Championship.
The bronze medal game was a rematch between the US and Mexico
a team the USA had beaten earlier.
This time would be no different although the margin of victory was larger.
The USA team jumped to a 22–6 lead in the first quarter and outscored the opponents and each quarter including a 10–0 fourth-quarter.
The final score was 81–24 in favor of the USA team.

==
2016
U17 results ==
The 2015 FIBA U17 World Championship was held in Zaragoza, Spain from June 22 to July 2, 2016.
Sixteen countries, including the USA competed.

===
Preliminary rounds ===
The USA defeated South Korea 104 – 45 in their first game setting several records, including team records for rebounds
with 85 free throws aid with 31 and free throws attempted with 43.
Aquira DeCosta set an individual record with 17 rebounds.
The second game was against the Czech Republic.
Although the USA team led by as much as 15 points, the Czech team cut the margin to three points with just under seven minutes left in the game.
The USA team went on to win 72–63.

In the game against Italy, the Italian team lead for more than half the game, but the USA team put together a 12–0 run late in the game to take the lead in hang on for the win 59–55.
In the final preliminary round game the USA beat Brazil 79 – 62.
Christyn Williams scored 19 points, including hitting all seven of her feet throw attempts to tie a record for free-throw percentage.
===
Quarterfinals ===
The USA took on France in the quarterfinals.
The USA had a three-point lead with just over six minutes left in the game but the defense held France scoreless for the final six minutes; the USA finished with a 56–45 win.

===
Semi-finals ===
Both Australia and USA were undefeated going into their semi final match.
The Australian team took an early lead and never gave up the lead.
The USA attempted several comebacks but were never able to overtake the Aussies.
The final score in favor of Australia was 73–60.
===
Bronze medal game ===
The USA faced China and the bronze medal game.
Although the USA had a double-digit lead at halftime they only led by two points with just over five minutes left.
The USA extended the lead to eight points and held China scoreless for 3+1⁄2 minutes to end up with a 65–50 win and the bronze medal.

==
Coaches and results ==
Head coaches, assistant coaches and managers for the U16 and U17 teams, through 2016.
==
Players ==
Players participating on U16 and U17 teams, 2009 through 2016.

== See also ==
USA Basketball
United States women's national basketball team
United States women's national under-19 basketball team
USA Women's Pan American Team
USA Women’s World University Games Team
United States
women's national 3x3 team
FIBA Under-19 World Championship for Women
FIBA Americas Under-18 Championship for Women
United States men's national basketball team
United States
men's national under-19 basketball team
United States
men's national under-17 basketball team


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official site U17
Official site U16
The Australian women's national basketball team is nicknamed the Opals, after the brightly coloured gemstone common to the country.
From 1994 onwards, the Opals have been consistently competitive and successful having won nine medals at official FIBA international tournaments (Olympics and World Cups), highlighted by a gold medal winning performance at the 2006 World Championship in Brazil.
At the now-defunct regional Oceania Championship for Women, the Opals won 15 titles.
Effective in 2017, FIBA combined its Oceanian and Asian zones for official senior competitions; following this change, the Opals compete in the FIBA Women's Asia Cup.

==
History ==


===
1950-60s:
Beginnings ===
Basketball arrived in Melbourne in 1905, but the first major international women's tournament was the 1953 FIBA World Championships held in Chile.

Although the Opals did not qualify for the first tournament, they did, however, qualify for the 1957 Championships held in Brazil.
Captained by Lorraine Eiler, the Opals defeated Cuba and Peru.
Sixteen year-old Bronte Cockburn led the scoring for Australia with an average of 9.5 points per game, but the inexperienced team ultimately finished in 10th place.
Since then, the Opals have helped increase the popularity of the sport in Australia.
Australia would not get the opportunity to participate at the 1959 World Championship held in Moscow because at the time, the Australian Government would not allow the team to travel to the USSR.
The Opals would not qualify for a World Championship again until the 1967 contest in Czechoslovakia.

With an entirely new team and a single victory over Italy, Australia finished in 10th position for the second time.
Team captain, Jean Forster, led the scoring for Australia with an average of 21.2 points per game, with a tournament high of 34 against Brazil.
Her 21.2 points per game would remain unchallenged for 35 years.

=== 1970s:
Early development ===
In 1971, the Opals travelled once again to Brazil.

Led by new head coach Merv Harris, and featuring Jill Hammond, the team made several improvements with only three players from the 1967 squad selected.

Although the Opals finished in ninth place, they had victories over Madagascar (twice), Argentina, Ecuador and Canada.
In 1975, the team headed to Colombia with another new head coach, Jim Madigan.

Despite a 74–25 confidence building win over Senegal, as well as victories over Japan, Brazil and Hungary, the team finished in 10th place.
The 1976 Olympics held in Montreal marked the first Olympic medals awarded for women's basketball, but Opals did not qualify for the tournament.

Their next major competition would be the 1979 World Championships in South Korea, which would prove to be their first taste of success.

The coach again was Jim Madigan, and the squad featured some of the faces of the Opals for the next decade such as Jenny Cheesman, Robyn Maher, Julie Nykiel, Karin Maar and Patricia Mickan.

The team would have early success defeating Italy and France, as well as thrashing Malaysia 119–14.

Australia would lose their next three games, but bounced back winning their final game over Japan to finish in fourth place, their best international result to that time.

=== 1980s:
Into the Olympics ===
In the early days of women's Olympic basketball, only six countries competed in the tournament, and the host country received an automatic entry.
Therefore, there were 22 countries competing for the remaining five spots in 1980 Olympics held in Moscow.
In the preliminary tournament, the Opals fell to the USA and Hungary, and did not qualify for the Olympics.

Three years later, the team traveled to Brazil for the 1983 World Championships, looking to demonstrate that their 1979 success was no accident.

Despite an early victory over Japan, Australia failed to advance and finished in 11th place.
The Opals were not expected to participate at the 1984 Olympic Games held in Los Angeles.
However, following the decision by Cuba to boycott the games, the door was opened for the Opals to compete in their first ever Olympics.
Led by head coach Brendan Flynn, and team captain Jenny Cheesman, the Opals played competitively in every game, but finished fifth out of the six teams.
The next tournament for the Opals was the 1986 World Championships in Moscow.

The first game against Hungary was a two overtime thriller that the Opals lost 79–77.
The game set the tone for the tournament, and despite some close finishes against the top rated teams, Australia finished in ninth place.
The Opals then headed into the 1988 Seoul Olympics with a medal hope, but they lost the first game to host nation Korea.
The Opals bounced back and defeated Bulgaria, meaning that only the powerful Soviet Union stood between them and a semi-finals berth.

In a major upset, the Opals defeated the USSR 60–48, setting up a meeting against Yugoslavia.

In a memorable game, the Opals lost a closely contested game at the buzzer
57–56, sending them to a rematch with the USSR for the bronze medal.

Motivated by the previous loss, the USSR came out determined and outplayed the Opals
68–53.

Despite the loss, the fourth-place finish equalled the Opals’ previous best international placing.

=== 1990s:
Rise as an International force ===
Building from their success at Seoul, the Opals headed to Malaysia for the 1990 World Championships with high hopes.

The team won their first two games against Malaysia and Italy, before suffering a string of losses to Bulgaria, the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia.
In their final game, the Opals came back from seven point halftime deficit to beat Bulgaria 73–71 and finish in sixth place.
Fifteen teams competed for the five open spots at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, and despite a respectable 4–2 record at the preliminary tournament, the Opals did not qualify.
Two years later, Australia played host to the 1994 FIBA World Championships.
Led by guard Shelley Sandie's 11.9 points per game, the team scored victories over Japan, Italy, Slovakia and Canada to set up a semi-finals match against China.

The Opals held an early lead, but China mounted a second half comeback led by Haixia Zheng's 36 points, and Australia just lost by a single point
66–65.
In the bronze medal game, Australia played the United States, and despite a small halftime lead, the Opals lost a close game 100–95.
The loss however, resulted in a respectable fourth-place finish.
The young 1994 team featured the backbone of Australian teams over the next decade; Rachael Sporn, Trisha Fallon, Michelle Brogan, Allison Tranquilli, Sandy Brondello, Annie La Fleur and Jenny Whittle.
At the 1994 tournament, the team also adopted the Opals as its nickname.

At the 1996 Summer Olympics held in Atlanta, the Olympic tournament was expanded to twelve teams, making an easier path for Australia to qualify.
Captained by Robyn Maher, the Opals started off with strong wins over South Korea, Zaire, and Cuba before losing to eventual gold medalist USA and Ukraine.

Australia then persevered through an overtime game against Russia to set up a semi-finals match against the United States.

The US won the game 93–71, sending the Opals to a rematch against the Ukraine for the bronze medal.

Australia held back a second half comeback by the Ukraine to win the game 66–56, earning Australia its first ever international basketball medal for either men or women.
In 1998, the Opals looked to build off the bronze medal at the World Championships in Germany.

The team featured 17-year-old future star Lauren Jackson, and was led by Michelle Brogan's average of 13.1 points per game.
Australia put together a dominant performance, winning their first seven games before losing to Russia 82–76 in a close semi-final match.
In the bronze medal game, Carla Boyd's 26 points proved too much for Brazil, and the Opals won 72–67 to earn their second bronze medal in international play.

=== 2000s:
A decade of medals & World Champions ===
With Sydney hosting the 2000 Olympic Games, the Opals gained automatic entry into the tournament.
Captained by Michele Timms, the team started out with dominating performances winning all of their first seven games, sending them to their first ever gold medal match, against the USA.
The American team proved too strong for the Opals however, as they won
76–54.
Australia won the Silver Medal, their best result in international competition at the time.
In 2002, the Opals looked to continue their success in China at the World Championships.

Coached by Jan Stirling, captained by Kristi Harrower, and powered by Lauren Jackson's 23.1 points per game (which led the tournament), Australia won its first five games all by double figures.

In the second round the Opals lost to Brazil, but bounced back with a 78–52 victory over France in the quarterfinal.

In the semi-finals, the Opals lost to eventual gold medalist USA, but recovered the next day to capture the bronze medal with a convincing 91–63 win over South Korea.

At the 2004 Olympics held in Athens, Greece, the Opals were led by Lauren Jackson's tournament best 22.9 points and 10 rebounds per game.
With Penny Taylor contributing with 14.8 points per game, Australia dominated early winning their first seven games, all by double digits.
The Opals set up a rematch of the 2000 Olympic gold medal match against the USA.

The United States outlasted the Opals in the fourth quarter to win 74–63, giving the Opals their second straight Olympic silver medal.
The Opals headed to Brazil for the 2006 World Championships looking to win their sixth straight medal in international competitions.

Led by Lauren Jackson's 21.3 points per game and Penny Taylor's 18 points per game, first and third best in the tournament respectively, the Opals played their best tournament to date.

Australia began the tournament with a forfeit victory over Lithuania.
They continued the trend by winning their next seven games decisively, with only one contest being decided by less than 10 points.
In the gold medal game against Russia, the Opals led throughout, paced by Penny Taylor's 28 points and Lauren Jackson's 11 rebounds.

At the final buzzer, the scoreboard read Australia 91, Russia 74; a convincing victory that delivered Australia's first ever basketball gold medal.
Penny Taylor was named the Most Valuable Player of the tournament.
At the 2008 Beijing Olympics, the Opals looked to reaffirm their title as World Champions.

In the lead up, Australia went undefeated against Belarus, Brazil, South Korea, Latvia, Russia, Czech Republic and host China to set up a third straight gold medal match against the United States.

The Opals had trouble hitting the basket and shot just 24% en route to a 92–65 defeat.

The team earned their third straight Olympic silver medal, and their seventh straight international medal finish.
The 2000s was a golden era for the Opals, winning at least a bronze medal at every official FIBA tournament.

=== 2010s:
Ushering a new era ===
In 2010, the 16th edition of the World Championship was held in the Czech Republic.
Pre-tournament favourites Australia, USA, and Russia, dominated play in the first two rounds.

In the quarterfinals, however, Australia suffered a shock 79–68 loss to the Czech Republic.
The loss meant that the Opals could not finish any higher than 5th place, its worst international result since the early 1990s.

Looking to rebound from their disappointing 2010 result, the Opals qualified for the 2012 Olympic Games in London by beating New Zealand three games to nil in the 2011 FIBA Oceania Championship.
They finished the Olympic preliminary series with a 4 – 1 record, losing to France in game 2, but after Belinda Snell sank a well behind the half-court line 3 point shot with less than one second on the clock to send the game into overtime.
Against Russia, Liz Cambage became the first woman in Olympic history to successfully slam dunk a basketball.
In the quarterfinal against China, Lauren Jackson became the Olympic Games record holder for points scored, overtaking Brazilian legend Janeth Arcain's tally of 535 points.
The Opals accounted for China 75–60 to set up a semifinal game with their long-time rivals USA.
Despite holding a half-time lead, the Opals again fell short
losing 86–73.
The Opals would however, win their 5th consecutive Olympic medal with an 83–74 win over Russia to claim the bronze.
Leading up to the 2014 World Championship in Turkey, a number of long-serving players announced their retirements or declared themselves unavailable.
Those players included Kristi Harrower, Jenni Screen, Kristen Veal, Abby Bishop, Kathleen MacLeod, Samantha Richards, Suzy Batkovic and Jenna O'Hea.
Three weeks before the start of the tournament, Lauren Jackson withdrew from the team because of a knee injury.
Two weeks later Liz Cambage ruptured her achilles tendon during a pre-tournament game and was ruled-out because of the injury.
This resulted in the selection of seven debutants into the squad of 12, a move seen as ushering in a new era of Opals basketball.
Despite the loss of veteran players, the Opals went through the preliminary rounds and quarter-final undefeated, setting up a semi-final clash with USA.
In a hard-fought game, the Opals cut the lead from 16 points to just six early in the final quarter, before losing 82–70.
The Opals would however claim their third bronze medal at world championships with a comfortable 74–44 win against host nation Turkey.
Penny Taylor was named to the tournament All-Star Five.
The Opals qualified for the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro following a series win against New Zealand in August 2015.
On 31 March 2016, Lauren Jackson announced her retirement from basketball, citing a chronic knee injury as the reason for her decision.
The Olympic squad was announced on 12 July 2016 and included seven Olympic debutants and only three players from the 2012 squad.
Notable exclusions included three-time Olympic medallist Suzy Batkovic, reigning WNBL MVP Abby Bishop and Rebecca Allen.
Despite slow starts which had plagued Australia throughout the tournament, the Opals finished on top of their group with a 5–0 record, outscoring Japan 33–15 in the final quarter to win by six points.
In the Quarter-final, the Opals suffered a shock 73–71 loss to Serbia, conceding 26 turnovers and eliminating them from medal contention.
This ended a run of five successive Olympic medals dating back 20 years.
One highlight was Liz Cambage breaking Lauren Jackson's Australian Olympic record of points scored in a single game with 37 against Japan.
It was the third-highest haul by a woman in Olympic history and the highest in 28 years.
Following the early exit from the Rio Olympics, Brendan Joyce was replaced in April 2017 by former Opals player and Phoenix Mercury head coach, Sandy Brondello.
Unlike previous years, the Opals qualified for the 2018 World Cup through the FIBA Women's Asia Cup held in India where they won a silver medal.
Kelsey Griffin was named tournament most valuable player.
With basketball returning to the Commonwealth Games for the first time since 2006, the Opals easily accounted for England in the final winning the gold-medal game 99–55.
At the 2018 World Cup held in Spain, the Opals led their group with a 3–0 record.
They then defeated China 83–42
in the quarter-final and Spain 72–66 in the semi-final to set up a gold-medal final with their long-time rivals USA.
The Opals lost the game 73–56 with head coach Sandy Brondello stating a lack of offence proved their downfall.
Liz Cambage led the tournament scoring with an average of 23.8 points per game and was named to the All-Star Five.
==
Competitive record ==


===
Olympic Games ===
Women's basketball was introduced as an Olympic sport at Montreal in 1976.
From 1976 to 1992, only six countries (teams) participated in the Olympic tournament.
However, in 1996 at Atlanta the tournament was expanded to twelve teams.
Through the 2016 Olympics, Australia qualified for the Olympic Games through competing in the FIBA Oceania Basketball Championship held each four years in the year preceding the games.
Typically, this tournament featured either a two or three-game series between Australia and New Zealand.
With the Oceania Championship having been discontinued after its 2015 edition, and FIBA having removed all women's continental championships except for EuroBasket Women from the Olympic qualification process in 2017, Australia will qualify for future Olympics through a two-stage process, starting with an Olympic pre-qualifying tournament involving Asian and Oceanian national teams in the year before the Olympics and followed by a worldwide Olympic qualifying tournament held in the year of the Games.
===
World Cup ===
The first official Women's World Cup, known as the Women's World Championship through its 2014 edition, was held in Chile in 1953.
The tournament was expanded to 16 countries (teams) in 1990.
Since 2017, Australia qualifies for the World Cup through competing in the FIBA Women's Asia Cup, held each four years in the year preceding the Women's World Cup.
Before then, Australia qualified through the FIBA Oceania Championship.
Typically, this tournament featured either a two or three-game series between Australia and New Zealand.
FIBA discontinued the Oceania championships for both women and men after their respective 2015 editions, combining FIBA Asia and FIBA Oceania into a single zone for purposes of World Cup and Olympic qualification.
===
Asia Cup ===
Commencing in 2017, teams from Oceania and Asia zones competed together for the first time ever with the top four finishing teams qualifying for the 2018 World Cup.

===
Statistics ===


==
Team ==


===
Current roster ===
Roster for the 2018 FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup.
===
Past World Cup squads ===


===
Past Olympics squads ===


===
International caps ===
The following is a chronological list of Australian players who have played at official senior FIBA international tournaments (Olympic Games and World Cups).
The list includes both past and present players.
Active players are shown in bold.
Where two or more players debuted in the same series, their cap number is determined by their official uniform number (and not alphabetically).
As of the 2018 World Cup, 111 players have represented Australia at Olympic Games and World Cups.
There were no debutants at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney.

† Deceased


===
Individual achievements ===


===
=
Opals
all-time games played ====
Legend
Games played is current as at the completion of the London Olympic Games in August 2012.

(*) denotes the player is a member of the Australian Basketball Hall of Fame.

Italic denotes the player is still active.
===
Opals Team Captains ===
Legend
Tournaments are those officially sanctioned by FIBA.

== See also ==
Australia men's national basketball team
Australia women's national 3x3 team
Australia women's national under-17 basketball team
Australia women's national under-19 basketball team
Australia women's national wheelchair basketball team
Australian Basketball Hall of Fame
List of Australian WNBA players
List of Olympic medalists in basketball


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Basketball Official website
FIBA profile
AustraliaBasket.com –
Australia Women Current Squad
Australia Basketball Records at FIBA Archive
Basketball is the second most popular sport in the United States (counting amateur levels), after American football.
In terms of revenue, the National Basketball Association (NBA) is the third most popular sports league in the United States, after the National Football League (NFL) and Major League Baseball (MLB).
According to the National Sporting Goods Association, over 26 million Americans play basketball regularly, more than any other team sport.

Basketball was invented in 1891 by Canadian physical education teacher James Naismith in Springfield, Massachusetts.

==
NBA ==
The National Basketball Association (NBA) is the world's premier men's professional basketball league and one of the major professional sports leagues of North America.
It contains 30 teams (29 teams in the U.S. and 1 in Canada) that play an 82-game season from October to June.
After the regular season, eight teams from each conference compete in the playoffs for the Larry O'Brien Championship Trophy.
The NBA get high ratings on television.

==
Race and ethnicity ==
The composition of race and ethnicity in the National Basketball Association (NBA) has changed throughout the league's history.
By 2020, 81.1% of players in the NBA are black (if mixed are also counted as black), 17.9% white, 12.5% mixed race (mostly half-black half-white), and 1.1% of other races.
The league has the highest percentage of black players of any major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada.
As of 2020, the NBA's viewership appears to be predominantly black and Hispanic.

==
National teams ==
Since the 1992 Summer Olympics, NBA players have represented the United States in international competition and won numerous important tournaments.
The Dream Team was the unofficial nickname of the United States men's basketball team that won the gold medal at the 1992 Olympics.
The Women's national team has won eight gold medals at the Olympics.

==
High school Basketball ==
High school Basketball is a popular activity.
The National Federation of State High School Associations featured 541,479 boys and 429,504 girls in basketball teams as of the 2014–15 season.
Many high school basketball teams have intense local followings, especially in the Midwest and Upper South.
Indiana has 10 of the 12 largest high school gyms in the United States, and is famous for its basketball passion, known as Hoosier Hysteria.

==
College Basketball ==
College basketball is quite popular and draws TV high ratings.
Every March, a 68-team, six-round, single-elimination tournament (commonly called March Madness) determines the national champions of NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship men's college basketball.

==
Women's Basketball ==
The Women's National Basketball Association or WNBA is an organization governing a professional basketball league for women in the United States.
The WNBA was formed in 1996 as the women's counterpart to the National Basketball Association, and league play began in 1997.
The regular WNBA season is June to September (North American Spring and Summer).
Most WNBA teams play at the same venue as their NBA counterparts.
The top tier professional Basketball league for women is the WNBA.
Women's NCAA Basketball is also popular, although less so than men's basketball.
The women's national team has won eight Olympic gold medals and ten FIBA World Cups.

==
References ==
Women's basketball is a team ball sport developed in the United States of America in the late 1800s, in tandem with its men's counterpart.
Women's basketball became popular, spreading from the east to west coast of the United States in large part via women's college competitions.
As of 2020, women's basketball is played globally, with basketball being one of the most popular and fastest growing sports in the world.
There are multiple professional leagues and tournaments for professional women basketball players.
The main North American league is the WNBA.
The FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup and Women's Olympic Basketball Tournament feature top national teams from continental championships.
In the US, the NCAA Women's Division I Basketball Championship is also popular.
The strongest European women's basketball clubs participate in the EuroLeague Women.

==
Early women's basketball ==
Women's basketball began in the fall of 1892 at Smith College.
Senda Berenson, recently hired as a young "physical culture" director at Smith, taught basketball to her students, hoping the activity would improve their physical health.
While for men, basketball was designed as an indoor addition to existing team sports such as baseball and football, basketball became the first women's team sport, followed shortly after by hockey, rowing, and volleyball.
Basketball's early adherents were affiliated with YMCAs and colleges throughout the United States, and the game quickly spread throughout the country.
However, Berenson was taking risks simply in teaching the game to women.
Nineteenth-century Victorian culture stressed the frailty of women and prioritized the status of women in the home, and Berenson expressed concern about the women suffering from "nervous fatigue" if games were too strenuous for them.
In order to keep it acceptable for women to play at all within Victorian ideals of refinement and gentility, she taught modified rules.
She increased participation to nine players per team, and the court was divided into three areas.
Three players were assigned to each area (guard, center, and forward) and could not cross the line into another area.
The ball was moved from section to section by passing or dribbling, and players were limited to three dribbles and could only hold the ball for three seconds.
No snatching or batting the ball away from another player was allowed.
A center jump was required after each score.
Variations of Berenson's rules spread across the country via YMCAs and women's colleges, where educated middle-class women were following the prevailing trend in men's games of playing intercollegiate sports.

Early basketball was played with peach baskets and soccer balls, similarly to the men's game, but women's uniforms again reflected the Victorian culture of the times and were designed to be practical, yet maintain the woman athlete's dignity and femininity.
While upper-class women had been playing sports at country clubs since the mid-nineteenth century, they were able to participate in activities such as tennis and croquet in full-length skirts and corsets.
However, similar attire was impractical for a more active sport like basketball, so the first trousers for women were worn.
Initially loose and covered by a knee-length skirt, these early pants were replaced soon after by loose bloomers over stockings.
Despite men being forbidden from watching these collegiate games, the attire still drew public ridicule.

Originally exclusively intramural, the first intercollegiate women's basketball game was played between teams from Stanford University and the University of California, Berkeley, on April 4, 1896.
Berenson herself opposed intercollegiate play for women, and prioritized the health and fitness benefits for a larger goal: she believed that women, newly entering the workforce and seeking paid jobs outside the home, were at a health-related disadvantage to men, which she saw as limiting women's opportunities and the possibility for equal wages.
For much of the early 20th century, other coaches and administrators felt similarly, due in part to an increasing sentiment that men's college sports were becoming too commercialized and exploitive of the athletes.
The women's branch of the National Amateur Athletic Foundation was founded in the 1920s, and the organization's goals included keeping women's sports non-competitive by discouraging travel and awards, discouraging publicity, and keeping women coaches and administrators in charge of women's sports.
From 1895 until 1970, the term "women's basketball" was also used to refer to netball, which evolved in parallel with modern women's basketball.

==
Recent women's basketball ==
The popularity of women's basketball grew steadily around the world for decades.
By the 1970s, the sport had attracted the notice the International Olympic Committee, which added women's basketball as an official sport of the Olympic Games in 1976, the men debuted in 1936.
Throughout the 1970s, funding for (and interest in)
women's basketball began to dramatically increase as schools receiving federal funding began to come into compliance with new laws mandating a lack of discrimination based on sex.
The sport was also gaining attention at the collegiate level, under the auspices of the Association of Intercollegiate Athletics for Women (AIAW).
America's first professional basketball league for women was founded in 1978 as the Women's Basketball League.
The WBL competed for three seasons, launching in 1979 with 8 teams.
The league expanded to 14 teams in 1980.
Financial issues, poor marketing, and the cancelation of America's participation in the 1980 Summer Olympic Games severely impacted the league's viability, and it collapsed at the end of its third season in 1981.
The next major development in women's basketball occurred in 1982 when the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) began to sponsor the sport..
After several failed attempts at women's professional leagues in the U.S., the NBA founded the WNBA in 1996.

The first nationally televised championship game occurred in 1979.

Ivy Kirkpatrick of Stephen F. Austin State University coordinated the collaboration between NBC Sports and the AIAW.

Only the title game was televised with Old Dominion University defeating Louisiana Tech University.

Thereafter the Women's Final Four has been televised as an annual event.

At the moment the WNBA consist of 12 Teams all over America.

== Rules and equipment ==
Basketball is a team sport in which two teams, most commonly with five players each, opposing one another on a rectangular court, compete with the primary objective of shooting a basketball through the defender's hoop.
The rules for women's basketball are identical to the rules for men's basketball.
The most noticeable differences are in the circumference of the women's basketball and the location of the women's three point line.
The circumference of the women's basketball is one inch (2.54 cm) less than the men's basketball.
The smaller ball was introduced for NCAA play in the fall of 1984..
The women's three-point line is one foot (0.30 m) closer to the basket than men's.
===
Basketball size ===
The regulation WNBA ball is a minimum 28.5 inches (72.4 cm) in circumference, which is one inch (2.54 cm) smaller than the NBA ball.
This is a standard size 6 ball.
As of 2008, this size is used for all senior-level women's competitions worldwide.

===
Court dimensions ===
The standard court size in U.S. college and WNBA play is 94 by 50 feet (28.65 by 15.24 m), while the FIBA standard court is slightly smaller at 28 by 15 m (91 ft 10.4 in by 49 ft 2.6 in) .
For most of its distance, the three-point line is 6.75 m (22 ft 2 in) from the middle of the basket under both FIBA and WNBA rules.
Near the sidelines, the three-point line runs parallel to the.sideline, at a distance of exactly 3 feet in the WNBA and 0.9 m in FIBA play.
Under NCAA rules, the three-point distance is 20 ft 9 in (6.32 m) for most of the width of the court, with a minimum distance of 4 ft 3 in (1.30 m) from the sidelines.
The WNBA, FIBA, and NCAA all use a block/charge arc near each basket, with the WNBA and NCAA distance at 4 ft (1.2 m) from the center of the basket and FIBA using a marginally wider radius of exactly 1.25 m (4 ft 1 in).

=== Shot clock ===
The WNBA shot clock was changed from 30 to 24 seconds, which has been in FIBA play since 2000, and has been used by the NBA since the shot clock was first introduced in 1954.
Both men's and women's NCAA college basketball use a 30-second shot clock; the men's clock was introduced in 1985 at 45 seconds, lowered to 35 seconds in 1993, and 30 seconds in 2015.

===
Game clock ===
Most high school games are played with four 8-minute quarters, while NCAA, WNBA, and FIBA games are played in four 10 minute quarters.
In 2015-2016 the NCAA changed the rules to 10 minute quarters from 20 minute halves.
High lobs or tip-ins can be attempted with up to 0.3 seconds left in the period per the Trent Tucker Rule.

Game Length and Quarters
Within the WNBA there are four quarters that will be ten minutes in length.

This has been a change that was made to help the speed of the game.

It was also an attempt to help the game flow.

There was also a rule added to not have a jump ball at the start of the second half as well.

==
Governance ==
Women's basketball is governed internationally by the International Basketball Federation (FIBA).
Since 1953 FIBA has hosted a world championship tournament for women, currently known as the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup.
The event, renamed from "FIBA World Championship for Women" after its 2014 edition, is currently held in even-numbered non-Summer Olympic years.
There has been some concern about the reach of the sport after one governing body disallowed Muslim women playing in hijabs.

==
Levels of competition ==


===
University ===
Berenson's freshmen played the sophomore class in the first women's collegiate basketball game held on 22 March 1893.
University of California and Miss Head's School, had played the first women's extramural game in 1892.
Also in 1893, Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College, coached by Clara Gregory Baer (the inventor of Newcomb ball) women began playing basketball.
By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the country, including Wellesley, Vassar and Bryn Mawr.
The first intercollegiate women's game was on 4 April 1896.
Stanford women played California, 9-on-9, ending in a 2–1 Stanford victory.
Clara Gregory Baer published the first book of rules for women's basketball in 1895 she first called the game 'Basquette', a name later dropped in her first revision of rules, the Newcomb College Basketball Rules, published in 1908.Despite participating in the first intercollegiate women's basketball game, Stanford's faculty athletic committee banned intercollegiate competition for women, first in team sports like basketball and later extending to all sports, and
Cal (as well as many other prestigious colleges at the time) followed suit.
In many cases, such bans were not lifted until the 1970s and the introduction of Title IX.

While Senda Berenson's desire to limit competition was not realized forever, her larger goals were.
College basketball and other women's college sports impacted the American cultural mindset around women and women's rights at the turn of the century, and colleges played a large role in enabling women to participate in athletics at all levels.
Though in 1900 only 2.8% of American women were enrolled in college, the percentage of total college graduates who were women had increased to 36%, as colleges increased in number, size, and accessibility to larger portions of the population.
The cultural significance of these college graduates exceeded their numbers, as college-educated women comprised the bulk of progressive professionals of their era.
Women who played sports were able to craft a new image of femininity and athleticism, and the association between athletics and college was able to make sports acceptable and a central part of the image of progressive women in the early 1900s.
Women's basketball continued to grow in universities across the country, expanding especially rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s as the Equal Rights Amendment raised awareness of unequal treatment in college athletics and the official position of the Division for Girls and Women in Sport (which later developed into the Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women) was changed to allow and encourage women's intercollegiate competition.
In 1971 the five-player, full court game was adopted, followed by the Women's Sports Foundation, which was formed in 1974.
Women's college basketball remains very popular throughout North America, with the sport being sponsored by all of the major college athletic associations:
the NCAA, the NAIA, the NJCAA, the NCCAA, the CCAA and the CIS.
Division
I of the NCAA is considered the highest level of college competition, with the winner of the annual NCAA Women's Division I
Basketball Championship game declared "national champion."
===
Professional leagues ===
There have been several professional leagues established in several countries including the United States, Europe, Japan, England and Australia.
===
International competitions ===
Though it was originally an American sport, it quickly spread internationally and outstanding players and teams are found today all over the world.
Women's basketball leagues now exist in most areas of the world including Australia, Asia, South America, and Europe.

====
Olympics ====
Women's basketball has been contested in the Summer Olympics since 1976.

====
Additional International Competitions ====
In addition to the Olympics and Women's World Cup, women's basketball is also contested in the Pan American Games and the Central American and Caribbean Games.
Women's basketball made its first appearance at the Commonwealth Games in 2006.
Basketball (for both men and women) is one of the sports that the host nation of the Island Games may select for competition.
Women also compete in wheelchair basketball in the Paralympic Games.

==
Around the world ==


===
Africa ===
AfroBasket Women is the women's basketball continental championship of Africa, played biennially under the auspices of FIBA, the basketball sport governing body, and the African zone thereof.
The tournament also serves to qualify teams for participation in the quadrennial FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup and the Olympic basketball tournament.

===
Americas ===


====
United States ====
One of the major important events in the development of women's basketball in the United States was Title IX.

Title IX was passed in 1972 to end sexual discrimination and stereotyping in admission to colleges and also in academic subjects (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
Therefore, Congress' original goal was eliminating this discrimination in academic and educational processes.
“
Title IX is today generally viewed as having fixed the problem of gender inequality of sports, at least in educational settings” (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 79).
It started out as simply involving education but then shifted in a debate to sports.
Some groups such as the NCAA fought to keep things the way they were in reference to men's sports.
The NCAA had built up the programs and earned financial support and popularity and did not want to throw that down the drain (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
In 1974, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare issued Title IX regulations regarding intercollegiate athletics (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
Title IX implies that if a school has a specific sport's team for boys then they must have a team in that same sport for girls.
This will occur unless the men's sport happens to be a contact sport in which the rule will not necessarily apply (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
In 1978, colleges and universities were forced to apply Title IX's rules and regulations.
Athletic departments had to adhere to one of three requirements which were the proportionality rule, the gender equity rule, or historical progress rule
(McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
Each of these requirements addressed Title IX and its regulations in a fair manner.
To ensure that schools comply with Title IX, they face the consequence of losing federal funding for any violation (Sadker, 2001).

The proportionality rule entails that a school provides opportunities proportional to its enrollment.
As an example, if a school is 55% male and 45% female then the athletic participation should be 55:45 (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
Not only does the proportionality rule apply to athletic participation, but it also addresses scholarships.
“
So if a college is spending $400,000 per year on athletic scholarships and half of the athletic participants are women then half of that amount, $200,000, should be funding athletic scholarships for women (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 299).
The gender equity rule entails that a school must prove that it “meets the interest of the gender that is underrepresented” (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 107) which happens to be women.
The historical progress rule entails that if a school is unable to provide proportional opportunities then they must put forth an effort to create more opportunities for the underrepresented gender (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).Between 1971 and 2000
, Title IX has proven to have had a huge impact on female collegiate sports.
Sports participation among college women has risen from 372 percent over that time, from 32,000 to more than 150,000 women (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 108).
Also now 33.5% of female students participate in sports (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008).
The issue still remaining is that women's sports beyond college do not benefit from Title IX.
As a whole, they make less income than men in professional sports which Title IX cannot do much about.
However, due to Title IX some women have gotten recognition as a result of the debate. "
Women athletes receive greater respect today but relatively skimpy media attention.
Thank Title IX for…the growing visibility of women's college basketball that has USA Today producing a pullout section for the women’s NCAA March Madness tournament" (McDonagh, Pappano, 2008, 109).Professional women's basketball has been played in the United States.
There have been several leagues, the most recent of which is the WNBA.
The first attempt was the Women's Pro Basketball League.
The league played three seasons from the fall of 1978 to the spring of 1981.
The league is generally considered to be the first American professional women's basketball league to be founded.
The second women's professional league to be created in the United States was the WBA.
The league played three seasons from the summer of 1993 to the summer of 1995.
The league is considered to be the first American professional women's basketball league to be successful as a summer league, like the WNBA.
The league played three full seasons with plans to play as a 12-team league in 1997 but disbanded before 1997 season.
The WBA played a 15-game schedule and games were broadcast on Liberty Sports of Dallas.
When FOX Sports purchased Liberty Sports and the WBA, they disbanded the league.
In 1996, two professional women's leagues were started in the United States.
They were the American Basketball League and the WNBA.
The American Basketball League was founded in 1996 during an increase in the interest in the sport following the 1996 Summer Olympics.
The league played two full seasons (1996–97 and 1997–98) and started a third (1998–99) before it folded on 22 December 1998.

=====
WNBA =====
The Women's National Basketball Association or WNBA is an organization governing a professional basketball league for women in the United States.
The WNBA was formed in 1996 as the women's counterpart to the National Basketball Association, and league play began in 1997.
The regular WNBA season is June to September (North American Spring and Summer).
Most WNBA teams play at the same venue as their NBA counterparts.
Most team names are also very similar to those of NBA teams in the same market, such as the Washington Wizards and Washington Mystics, the Minnesota Timberwolves and Minnesota Lynx.

Officially approved by the NBA Board of Governors on 24 April 1996, the creation of the WNBA was first announced at a press conference with Rebecca Lobo, Lisa Leslie and Sheryl Swoopes in attendance.
While not the first major women's professional basketball league in the United States (a distinction held by the defunct WBL), the WNBA is the only league to receive full backing of the NBA.

On the heels of a much-publicized gold medal run by the USA women's national team at the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, the WNBA began its first season on 21 June 1997 to much fanfare.
The league began with eight teams.
The first WNBA game featured the New York Liberty facing the Los Angeles Sparks in Los Angeles and was televised in the United States on the NBC television network.
At the start of the 1997 season, the WNBA had television deals in place with NBC, ESPN and Lifetime Television Network.

The league is divided into two conferences, the Eastern Conference and the Western Conference.
Each of the 12 teams plays a 34-game regular season schedule, beginning in June and ending in mid September.
Although the WNBA is divided into conferences for scheduling purposes, it has used a single table for purposes of playoff qualifying since the 2016 season.
The eight teams with the best overall records, regardless of conference affiliation, compete in the WNBA Playoffs during September with the WNBA Finals in early October.

An All-Star Game is typically held in the middle of July, while regular play stops temporarily for it.
In Olympic years, there is no all-star game, but a break of about five weeks in the middle of the WNBA season allows players to participate in the Olympics as members of their national teams.

There have been a total of 18 teams in WNBA history.
A total of five teams have folded: the Charlotte Sting, the Cleveland Rockers, Houston Comets, the Miami Sol and the Portland Fire.
Three other teams have moved, two of them twice and the other once.
The Utah Starzz have moved twice, first after the 2002 season to San Antonio, where they were first known as the Silver Stars and later as the Stars, and then after the 2017 season to Las Vegas as the Aces.
At the same time the Starzz moved to San Antonio, the Orlando Miracle moved to Uncasville, Connecticut, where they now play as the Connecticut Sun.
The Detroit Shock moved after the 2009 season to Tulsa, Oklahoma, where they played as the Tulsa Shock, and then moved to the Dallas–Fort Worth Metroplex after the 2015 season, now playing as the Dallas Wings.
Since 1997 when the league was established there have been 9 teams that have won the WNBA championship.

The Houston Comets were the first team to win the championship and they won it 4 years in a row, 1997, 1998, 1999,2000.
The Los Angeles Sparks have won 3 championships in their time in the league, 2001,2002, 2016.
The Tulsa Shock also won 3 championships when they were still in the league, 2003, 2006, 2008.The Seattle Storm also have 3 championships to their name, 2004, 2010, 2018.
The Sacramento Monarchs were a WNBA team that won 1 championship in 2005.

The Phoenix Mercury Won the WNBA championship 3 times in 2007, 2009, 20014.
The Indiana Fever have one championship to their name and that came in 2012.
The Minnesota Lynx have the most championships of any of the teams currently active in the WNBA with 4 championships that came in 2011, 2013, 2015, 2017.
The Washington Mystics have won the most recent championship in 2019.
===
Asia ===
The Women's Chinese Basketball Association (WCBA) is a professional women's basketball league established in 2002.The Women's Hong Kong Basketball Association is the highest women's professional club basketball competition in Hong Kong.
The Indian National Basketball Championship for Women is a professional basketball tournament in India for women
The Women's Japan Basketball League is a premier women's basketball league in Japan.
The Lebanese Basketball League or FLB League is the top-tier professional basketball league in Lebanon.

The Women's Philippine Basketball League was a women's basketball league in the PhilippinesThe Women's Korean Basketball League (WKBL) is the premier women's basketball league in South KoreaThe
Women's Super Basketball League is the highest women's professional club basketball competition in Republic of China


===
Europe ===
The Russian Women's Basketball Premier League is the dominant league in Europe (largely because it is the main attraction of the WNBA players during the off-season).
Other notable leagues are the Italian Serie A1, the Spanish Liga Femenina and the Turkish Women's Basketball League.

====
England ====
Professional basketball exists in England.
Women's English Basketball League is major professional competition.
The league has grown steadily over recent years, and has now reached a level of thirty national league sides.
The league is split into two levels.
Division 1 is as close to professional as women's sport gets in the United Kingdom, with teams such as Rhondda Rebels and Sheffield Hatters bringing in players from the US and Europe.
The Nottingham Wildcats make up the trio of clubs that helped establish the women's league and remain amongst the top three or four places.
The gap between these top teams and the rest of the league has remained, but gradually as the women's game has developed, the gulf in results has been reduced, and each year there have been more competitive games.
Promotion from Division 2 has always reinforced the gap between the two leagues, as the winner of the Division 2 promotion play-offs has found the step-up difficult.
The Division 2 play-offs take the top four teams from the North and South of the Second Divisions, with the top playing the bottom of the other pool.
This year (2006/7) saw several new teams join the second division, showing the continual growth of the women's game.
These included the SevenOaks Suns, Enfield Phoenix, Taunton Tigers and Bristol Storm.

===
Oceania ===


====
Australia ====
Professional women's basketball exists in Australia in the form of the Women's National Basketball League.
The league was founded in 1981 as a way for the best women's basketball teams in the various Australian States to compete against each other on a regular basis.
Today the WNBL is the premier women's basketball league in Australia.

==
Women's basketball in film ==


===
Documentaries ===
Off the Rez — A 2011 documentary for TLC about the journey of future WNBA player Shoni Schimmel from the Oregon Indian reservation where she was raised to Portland in high school, and ultimately to the University of Louisville.

She Got Game is based on the high school basketball success of Brigid Touey Humphrey
Training Rules —
A 2009 documentary examining how women's collegiate sports, caught in a web of homophobic practices, collude in the destruction of the lives and dreams of many of its most talented athletes.

===
Theatrical releases ===
Believe in Me
Double Teamed
Love & Basketball
The Heart of the Game
The Mighty Macs
The St. Tammany Miracle
Salaam Dunk
The Winning Season
Woman Basketball Player
No.
5


== See also ==
Timeline of women's basketball
Six-on-six basketball
Women's Basketball Hall of Fame


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
