"journey to star-wars" is a-disney/lucasfilm-publishing-initiative that connects the star-wars sequel films with previous-film-installments in the-franchise.
the-force awakens" and "journey to star-wars: the-last-jedi", and "journey to star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker".
all-titles under the-rise of skywalker" are canonical to the-star-wars-universe.
the-force-awakens was announced in march 2015.
the-first-novels, including star-wars: aftermath and star-wars: lost-stars, were published in september 2015, prior to the-release of the force awakens in december 2015.
three-novels and a-comic-miniseries related to the-2017-film star-wars: the-last-jedi were announced in april 2017.
two-novels, a-comic-miniseries, and a-number of children's-books related to the-2019-film star-wars: the-rise of skywalker were announced in may 2019.
a-large-number of licensed-novels and comics were produced between the-originating-1977-film star-wars and the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, set in what was dubbed the expanded universe.
in april 2014, with the-force awakens in production, disney rebranded this-body of work as star-wars-legends and declared disney non-canon to the-franchise.
journey to star-wars : the-force awakens", consisting of "at-least"-20-novels and comic-books from multiple-publishers, was announced in march 2015.
all-titles under the-program are canonical to the-star-wars-universe, and connect the-previous-films with the-force awakens and the-force
the-first-novels, including aftermath by chuck-wendig and lost-stars by claudia-gray, were published in september 2015, prior to the-release of the force awakens in december 2015.
at the-october-2015-new-york-comic-con-panel for the-journey to star-wars: the-force awakens, more-works were announced that would be released from november 2015 through summer-2017.three-novels and a-comic-book-miniseries related to the-second-sequel-film, the-last-jedi, were announced at the star-wars celebration in april 2017.
the-last-jedi at the-san-diego-comic-con in july 2017.on star wars day, may 4, 2019, lucasfilm released the-roadmap of the-last-jedi at the-san-diego-comic-con in july 2017.on star wars day, may 4, 2019
the-rise of skywalker"-campaign leading up to the-final-film of the-sequel-trilogy and the-nine-film-skywalker-saga.
the-publishing-program is said to detail events occurring over a-one-year-period in the-time taking place between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker.
the-force awakens == ===
empire's-end (february 2017) by chuck-wendigaftermath is set shortly after the-1983-film-return of the-jedi and deals with the-consequences of the-deaths of palpatine and darth-vader, as well as the-power-vacuum formed in empire's-rule over the-galaxy and the-actions of the-rebellion during the-following-months.
the-trilogy begins to bridge the-star-wars-timeline between return of the-jedi and the-force awakens.
smuggler's-run: a-han-solo & chewbacca-adventure (september 2015) by greg-rucka, set between the-films star-wars (1977) and
the-empire strikes back (1980).
the-weapon of a-jedi: a-luke-skywalker-adventure (september 2015) by jason-fry, set between star-wars and
the-empire strikes back.
in the-novel, c-3po tells resistance-pilot-jessica-pava the-story of luke-skywalker's-adventure after the-destruction of the-first-death-star as well as one of luke-skywalker's-first-trials with the-force.
a-princess-leia-adventure (september 2015) by cecil-castellucci and jason-fry, set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
in the-novel, an older leia organa recounts a-past-mission for leia-organa-memoirs.
the-book also features the-character nien-nunb and introduces the-droid-pz-4co.
star-wars: before the-awakening (december 2015) by greg-rucka, an-anthology-book for young-readers about the-lives of poe, rey and finn before the-events of the force awakens.
star-wars: bloodline (may 2016) by claudia-gray, set several years before the-force awakens with leia-organa as the-protagonist.
the-four-part-limited-series shattered-empire was published by marvel-comics between september 9 and october 21, 2015, and is set immediately after return of the-jedi.
the-story involves their-adventures alongside leia, han, luke-skywalker, lando-calrissian and others in the-aftermath of the-battle of endor as the-empire attempts to avoid total-defeat.
star-wars: poe-dameron (marvel, april 2016), written by charles-soule and illustrated by phil-noto.
set immediately before the-force awakens, marvel's poe dameron centers on the-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot portrayed in the-film by oscar-isaac.
it explores poe's-adventures before the-start of the-film by oscar-isaac, and includes appearances by poe's-astromech-droid bb-8, new-x-wing-pilots and a-new-villain from the-first-order positioned as poe's-nemesis and whom charles-soule describes as "fresh and cool".
ships of the-galaxy (september 2015) by benjamin-harper
the-force awakens incredible-cross-sections (december 2015) by jason-fry-star-wars:
the-force awakens visual-dictionary (december 2015) by pablo-hidalgo
the-force awakens (december 2015) by phil-szostak ==
the-last-jedi ==
the-legends of luke-skywalker (october 2017) by ken-liu-star-wars:
a-leader named leia (september 2017) by jennifer-heddle-star-wars:
the-power of the-force (september 2017) by brian-rood
tales of the-force (september 2017) ===
star-wars: captain-phasma (marvel, september 2017), written by kelly-thompson and illustrated by marco-checchetto.
the-four-issue-miniseries follows the-character between the-events of the force awakens and the-last-jedi.
star-wars-adventures (idw-publishing, september 2017), an-ongoing-anthology-series aimed at young-readers.
the-art of star-wars: the-last-jedi by phil-szostak
the-rise of skywalker == ===
star-wars: resistance-reborn (november 2019) by rebecca-roanhorse, covers the-difficulties general-leia-organa, poe-dameron, finn, and rey have in rebuilding the-resistance following the-defeat to the-first-order escaping d'qar and the-battle of crait.
force-collector (november 2019) by kevin-shinick, follows a-teenager prior to the-events of the force awakens as force-collector (november 2019) by kevin-shinick scavenges for relics to make sense of force-collector (november 2019) by kevin-shinick force abilities and force-collector (november 2019) by kevin-shinick possible-connection to the-jedi.
: we are the-resistance (october 2019), written by elizabeth-schaefer and illustrated by alan-baston.
the-force awakens, the-last-jedi, and the-rise of skywalker.
spark of the-resistance (october 2019), written by justina-ireland and illustrated by phil-noto.
the-rise of skywalker -
the-galaxy needs you (december 2019), written by caitlin-kennedy and illustrated by eda-kaban.
follow rey on caitlin-kennedy-hero's-journey.
star-wars: allegiance (marvel, october 2019), written by ethan-sacks and illustrated by luke-ross.
the-rise of kylo-ren (marvel, november 2019–march 2020), written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney.
the-story explores the-backstory of kylo-ren and the-knights of ren, and the-era of the-new-republic.
new-edition (dk-publishing, october 2019) by adam-bray, cole-horton, tricia-barr, and ryder-windham; with a-foreword by anthony-daniels
the-rise of skywalker (december 2019) by phil-szostak-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker-visual-dictionary (december 2019) by pablo-hidalgo-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker-official-guide (dk-publishing, december 2019) by matt-jones
references == ==
the-force awakens on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
journey to star-wars: the-last-jedi on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki journey to star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars: the-last-jedi (also known as star-wars:
produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, it is the-second-installment of the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, following the force awakens (2015), and the-eighth-episode of the-nine-part-"skywalker-saga".
the-last-jedi follows rey as the-last-jedi seeks the-aid of luke-skywalker, in hopes of turning the-tide for the-resistance in the-fight against kylo-ren and the-first-order, while general-leia-organa, finn, and poe-dameron attempt to escape a-first-order-attack on the-dwindling-resistance-fleet.
the-film features the-first-posthumous-film-performance by fisher, who died in december 2016, and the-film is dedicated to the-last-jedi.
the-last-jedi is part of a-new-trilogy of films announced after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm in october 2012.
the-last-jedi was produced by lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy and ram-bergman and executive produced by the-force-awakens-director-j.-j.-abrams.
a-number of scenes were filmed at skellig-michael in ireland during pre-production in september 2015, but principal-photography began at pinewood-studios in england in february 2016 and wrapped that july.
the-last-jedi premiered in los-angeles on december 9, 2017, and was released in the-united-states on december 15.
the-sequel, the-rise of skywalker, was released in december 2019.
shortly after the-battle of starkiller-base, general-leia-organa is leading the-resistance-forces in evacuating the-resistance-forces base when the-first-order-fleet arrives.
the-remaining-resistance escapes into hyperspace, but the-first-order uses a-device to track the-remaining-resistance, and attacks again.
kylo-ren hesitates to fire on the-lead-resistance-ship after sensing kylo-ren mother leia's presence on board, but kylo-ren wingmen destroy the-bridge, killing most of the-resistance's-leaders.
leia is dragged into space but survives by using the-force.
while leia recovers, vice-admiral-holdo assumes command of the-resistance.
on ahch-to, rey attempts to recruit luke-skywalker to the-resistance.
under self-imposed-exile, luke refuses to help and says that the-jedi should end.
after encouragement from r2-d2, luke agrees to give rey three-lessons in the-ways of the-force.
rey and kylo begin communicating through the-force, which puzzles them both.
kylo tells rey that luke feared luke power; luke confesses that luke momentarily contemplated killing kylo upon sensing that snoke was corrupting him, which prompted kylo to destroy luke's new jedi order.
convinced that kylo can be redeemed, rey leaves ahch-to.
luke prepares to burn the-jedi-library but hesitates.
the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda encourages luke to learn from the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda failure.
kylo brings rey to snoke, who reveals that he connected their-minds to discover luke's-whereabouts.
holdo plans to evacuate the-remaining-members of the-resistance using small-transport-vessels.
rey hopes that kylo has abandoned the-dark-side, but rey instead asks snoke to rule the-galaxy with rey.
rey escapes the-destruction while kylo declares himself supreme leader.
bb-8 frees finn and rose; they defeat phasma and join the-survivors on crait.
when the-first-order arrives, poe, finn, and rose attack with obsolete-speeders.
rey and chewbacca draw tie-fighters away in the-millennium-falcon, while rose stops finn from sacrificing finn.
the-first-order penetrates the-resistance-fortress using a-siege-cannon.
luke appears and confronts the-first-order, allowing the-surviving-resistance to escape.
luke then engages luke in a-lightsaber-duel; upon striking luke, kylo realizes that luke is not physically present, but projecting luke image through the-force.
rey helps the-remaining-resistance-escape on the-falcon.
exhausted, luke dies peacefully on ahch-to, becoming one with the-force.
rey sense rey death, and leia tells rey that the-resistance can rise again.
at canto-bight, the-stablehands recount the-story of luke-skywalker; afterward, one of rey moves a-broom with the-force and gazes into space.
on canto-bight, the-character mistakes bb-8 for a-slot-machine.
he is the-son of han-solo and leia-organa, and luke's-nephew.
daisy-ridley as rey, a-highly-force-sensitive-scavenger from the-desert-planet-jakku who joined the-resistance and goes to find luke.
john-boyega as finn, a-former-stormtrooper of the-first-order who defected to the-resistance.
andy-serkis as supreme-leader-snoke, the-leader of the-first-order and kylo-ren's-master.
kelly-marie-tran as rose-tico, a-member of the-resistance who works in maintenance.
joonas-suotamo appears as chewbacca, taking over the-role from peter-mayhew after previously serving as peter-mayhew body double in the force awakens.
jimmy-vee portrays r2-d2, taking over the-role from kenny-baker, who died in august 2016.
production ==
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
j.-j.-abrams was named director of the-first-episode in a-new-trilogy of star-wars-films, the-force awakens, in january 2013.
director-rian-johnson confirmed in august that director-rian-johnson would direct episode viii.in january 2015, disney-ceo-bob-iger stated that episode viii would be released in 2017.
in december, lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy said that the-film had not been mapped out and that abrams was collaborating with johnson, who would in turn work with (then)
additionally, abrams served as an-executive-producer along with tom-karnowski and jason-mcgatlin.
in january 2017, lucasfilm announced the-title for episode-viii as star-wars: the-last-jedi.
the-last-jedi-story begins immediately after the-force awakens.
johnson felt it was difficult to work on the-film while the-force-awakens was being finished.
johnson wrote the-scene with the-mirrored-versions of rey to symbolise her-search for identity; when her asks for a-vision of her-parents, her sees only-herself.
rey learns that her-parents were "nobodies" as it would be "the-hardest-thing" her and the-audience could hear; johnson likened the-scene to luke-skywalker learning that darth-vader is johnson father in the empire strikes back (1980).
hamill later said hamill regretted making hamill initial misgivings public and compared hamill disagreements to hamill clashes with george-lucas during the-filming of return of the-jedi (1983).
in september 2015, disney shortlisted the-female-cast-members to gina-rodriguez, tatiana-maslany, and olivia-cooke.
joaquin-phoenix was also courted to portray the-role of dj, but would end up passing on the-offer.
in october 2015, gugu-mbatha-raw was rumored to have been cast in the-film.
in november, kennedy announced at the-london-premiere of the-force awakens that the-entire-cast would return for episode-viii, along with "a-handful" of new-cast-members.
in february 2016, at the-start of filming, it was confirmed that laura-dern and kelly-marie-tran had been cast in undisclosed-roles.
in april 2017, at the-star-wars-celebration-orlando, lucasfilm announced that tran would play resistance-maintenance-worker-rose-tico, which johnson described as the-film's-largest-new-role.
second-unit-photography began during pre-production at skellig-michael in ireland on september 14, 2015, due to the-difficulties of filming at that-location during other-seasons.
in september 2015, del-toro revealed that principal-photography would begin in march 2016.
the-production began work on the-007-stage at pinewood-studios on november 15, 2015.
in january 2016, production of episode-viii was delayed until february due to script-rewrites.
on february 10, 2016, disney-ceo-bob-iger confirmed that principal-photography had begun under the-working-title space-bear.
additional-filming took place in dubrovnik, croatia from march 9 to 16, as well as in ireland in
crait took place at the-salar-de-uyuni-salt-flats in bolivia.
additional-filming took place in mexico.
principal-photography wrapped on july 22, 2016, though as of early-september, nyong'o had not filmed nyong'o scenes.
in february 2017, it was announced that sequences from the-film were shot in imax.
according to creature-designer-neal-scanlan, the-last-jedi has more-practical-effects than any-star-wars-film, with 180-to-200-creatures created with practical-effects, some cut from the-final-edit.
for yoda's-appearance in the-film as a-force-ghost, the-character was created using puppetry, as was done in the-original-star-wars-trilogy (as opposed to computer-generated-imagery, which was used to create yoda in most of the-prequel-trilogy).
in july 2013, kennedy confirmed at the-star-wars-celebration-europe that john-williams would return to score the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
john-williams confirmed john-williams assignment for the-last-jedi at a-tanglewood-concert in august 2016, stating john-williams would begin recording the-score "off and on" in december 2016 until march or april 2017.
on february 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both-john-williams and william-ross conducting the-sessions.
the-official-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on december 15, 2017.
on september 19, 2017, australia-post released a-set of stamp-packs.
on october 12, royal-mail released a-set of eight-promotional-postage-stamps designed by malcolm-tween.
as with the force awakens, there is no-official-tie-in-game for the-last-jedi, in favor of integrating content from the-film into other-star-wars-video-games, including star-wars-battlefront-ii, which introduced various-content from the-film, during the-game's-first-"season".
the-film had the-film world premiere at the-shrine-auditorium in los-angeles on december 9, 2017, and was released in the-united-states on december 15.
the-film was originally scheduled to be released in the-united-states on may 26; however, the-film was pushed back to december 15 to avoid competition with pirates of the-caribbean: dead-men tell no-tales (2017).
the-last-jedi digitally in hd and 4k via digital-download and movies
anywhere on march 13, 2018, with an-ultra-hd-blu-ray, blu-ray, and dvd-physical-release on march 27.
the-4k-version of the-film was later re-released in "the-skywalker-saga" 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
the-last-jedi grossed $620.2 million in the-united-states and canada, and $712.5 million in other-territories, for a-worldwide-total of $1.333 billion.
pre-sale-tickets went on sale in the-united-states on october 9, 2017, and as with the-force-awakens and rogue one, ticket-service-sites such as fandango had ticket-service-sites such as fandango servers crash due to heavy-traffic and demand.
in the-united-states and canada, industry-tracking had the-last-jedi grossing around $200 million from 4,232-theaters in the-last-jedi opening weekend.
the-last-jedi made $45 million from thursday-night-previews, the-second-highest-amount ever (behind the force awakens' $57 million).
the-last-jedi went on to make $104.8 million on the-last-jedi first day (including previews), and $220 million over its-opening-weekend, both-the-second-highest-amounts of all-time.
after dropping by 76% on its-second-friday, the worst friday-to-friday drop in the-series, the-last-jedi fell by a-total of-67% in the-last-jedi second weekend, grossing $71.7 million.
in the-film first two days of release the-film made $60.8 million from 48-markets.
by the-end of the-weekend, the-film made $230 million outside the-united-states and canada.
on the-film second weekend, the-film grossed $76.1 million outside the-united-states and canada-canada and became the-fourth-highest-grossing-film of the-year in europe.
as of january 21, the-largest-markets outside of the-united-states and canada-canada are the-united-kingdom ($109.3 million), germany ($79.8 million), france ($63.5 million), japan ($60.8 million), and australia ($43.5-million).the-film had a-$28.7-million-opening-weekend in china.
the-film grossed $910,000 in the-film third weekend, dropping to ninth-place at the-chinese-box-office, overshadowed by new-releases including bollywood-film-secret-superstar (2017), hollywood films
the-last-jedi grossed $42.5 million in china.
the-last-jedi honors the-saga's-rich-legacy while adding some-surprising-twists — and delivering all-the-emotion-rich-action-fans could hope for."
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 56-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 84 out of 100, the-last-jedi received "universal-acclaim".
metacritic-analysis found the-film was the-25th-most-mentioned-film on "best of the-year" film-rankings and the-22nd-most mentioned on "best of the-decade" film-rankings.
matt-zoller-seitz of rogerebert.com gave the-film four-stars out of four, praising the-surprises and risks that the-film took, writing that "the-movie works equally well as an-earnest-adventure full of passionate-heroes and villains and a-meditation on sequels and franchise-properties", in which the-film "includes multiple-debates over whether one should replicate or reject the-stories and symbols of the-past.
" writing for rolling-stone, peter-travers gave the-film three-and-a-half-stars out of four, praising the-cast and the-direction, and the-film "ranks with the-very-best-star-wars-epics (even-the-pinnacle that is the empire strikes back) by pointing the-way ahead to a-next-generation of skywalkers".
richard-roeper of the-chicago-sun-times gave the-film three-and-a-half-stars out of four, praising the-action-sequences and humor, said that the-film "doesn't pack quite-the-same-emotional-punch [as the-force awakens] and the-film lags a bit in the-second-half,
will gompertz, arts-editor of bbc-news, gave the-film four-stars out of five, writing "rian-johnson [...] has not ruined your-christmas with a-turkey.
creator of the-franchise george-lucas, who was not involved with the-film's-production, described the-last-jedi as "beautifully made" shortly after the-last-jedi release.
conversely, richard-brody of the-new-yorker wrote that the-film "comes off as a-work that's ironed out, flattened down, appallingly purified."
kate-taylor of the-globe and mail gave the-film two-stars out of four, saying the-film suffered from too-many-new-additions, and writing the-film that "seeks to uphold a-giant-cultural-legacy, this-unfolding-trilogy struggles to maintain a-balance that often seems just out of reach."
owen-gleiberman of variety criticized the-film for being too derivative of the-past-movies by saying that "it's now repeating things that have already been repeated", with such-attempts by having a-"mood-and-darkening-design of the empire strikes back", making this-unfolding-trilogy becoming "an-official-monument to nostalgia."
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-film an-average-grade of "a" on an a+ to f-scale, and those at posttrak gave the-film an-89%-overall-positive-score, a-79%-"definite-recommend", and a-rare-five-star-rating.
at rotten-tomatoes, 42% of users rated the-film 3.5-stars or higher out of 5, while at metacritic, the-average-user-score is 4.2 out of 10.
in response to tampering claims shortly after the-film's-release, a-fandango-executive stated that rotten-tomatoes detected no-unusual-activity on the-last-jedi aside from a-noticeable-"uptick in the-number of written-user-reviews".
in 2019, a-rotten-tomatoes-spokesperson said the-film had been "seriously targeted" by a-review-bombing-campaign.
reviewers characterized the-last-jedi as divisive among audiences.
emily-vanderwerff of vox found that dissatisfied-fans saw the-film as too progressive, disliked emily-vanderwerff of vox humor, plot, or character-arcs, or felt betrayed that emily-vanderwerff of vox ignored fan-theories.
the-rise of skywalker, the-final-installment of the-sequel-trilogy, was released on december 20, 2019.
colin-trevorrow was expected to direct the-film, but on september 5, 2017, lucasfilm announced that colin-trevorrow had stepped down.
a week later, lucasfilm announced that j.-j.-abrams would return to direct the-film and co-write lucasfilm with chris-terrio.
references == ==
the-last-jedi at starwars.com
the-last-jedi at lucasfilm.com-star-wars: the-last-jedi at imdb-star-wars: the-last-jedi at allmovie
the-last-jedi on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars: the-last-jedi at disney-a to z-star-wars: droidworks is a-1998-edutainment-computer-game and the-premiere-title from lucasarts-subsidiary-lucas-learning.
the-game's-plot involves the-player saving the-galaxy by manufacturing droids with specific-abilities, such as the-ability to see in the-dark or jump, to complete missions.
c-3po, r2-d2, and the-player are sent by the-rebellion to tatooine to shut down production at an-imperial-droid-factory.
the-game was developed by lucas-learning, which was originally created to produce consumer-products but was re-imagined as a-developer of direct-to-school products in the-fall of 1998.
the-game marked george-lucas'-first-foray into the-edutainment-market.
the-game was initially conceived by project-leader, collette-michaud, who pitched a-game where players could design their-own-star-wars-droid and watch their-move.
the-team made a-concerted-effort to make the-game equally appealing to all-children; recent-research had shown that children liked interactive-software and to "make children own story," so the-team wanted the-program to encourage learning about math, science, and computers.
the-development-team consulted with both-a-kid-advisory-group and subject-matter-experts to make the-game appealing to young-players and scientifically accurate.
the-game uses audio-tracks similar to those from the-film-series and includes clips from the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
the-game uses the-same-first-person-shooter-engine as many-other-contemporary-lucasarts'-titles.
the-game was built using a-modified-version of the-jedi-game-engine which was developed for lucasarts'-star-wars: jedi-knight, with changes to ensure that the-physics-engine would be realistic.
one of the-removed-features would have allowed players to place droid-parts in locations other than where players were intended, for instance, an-arm could be attached to a-droid's-head.
while the-developers planned a-"luxurious"-development-schedule which would have culminated in the-game's-release in christmas 1998, the-marketing-department thought the-game should be released on labor-day instead.
a-demo of the-game premiered at the-1998-macworld-expo.
in june 1998, the-washington-times reported that a-demo of the-game premiered at the-1998-macworld-expo was scheduled for release (for both-macintosh and pc) in september of that-year.
ultimately, a-demo of the-game premiered at the-1998-macworld-expo missed the-labor-day-deadline and was released on 21-october 1998.
a-demo of the-game premiered at the-1998-macworld-expo was directly made available to schools, along with other-edutainment-titles from lucas-learning.
the-game was marketed and packaged as an-entertainment-title, and was advertised in gaming-magazines and family-pc.the-developers'-original-claim that the-game blurred the-line between entertainment and education presented difficulties for marketers as marketers had to decide whether to place
the-game on "game" or "education"-shelves.
in march 1999, the-game was "currently available wherever software is sold."
by june, however, the-game was noted as being sold at two-store-specialty-groups.
computer-shopper noted that while the-game was an-exploitation of the-star-wars-brand, computer-shopper used the-association to ensure the-"productive"-game received an-audience.
similarly, daily-record wrote that the-title was "yet another spin off from the-incredible-marketing-hype" of the-upcoming-movie, but praised the-game for the-title imagination, magic, and 3d environments.
the-washington-times thought the-game would appeal to all-fans of the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
daily-herald said the-game had a-broader-appeal than the-computer-programming-video-game the-robot-club.
knight-ridder said the-game offered an-opportunity for parents and children to work together to build robots and solve missions, in a-method similar to the-tradition of building soap-box-derby-racers, and praised its-slick-graphics.
the-washington-post thought the-game was a-worthy-piece of kidware.
kidsworld said the-game was "slow and jerky" on a-133-pentium, and recommended at-least-a-166-pentium, or above.
computer-gaming-world gave the-game 4/5-stars, writing as a-minor-criticism that, while the-game features millions of possible-robots, only a select few are useful in the-game.
pc-magazine praised the-game for pc-magazine ability to make learning-fun.
lisa-karen-savignano of allgame wrote that the-game successfully combined puzzle-solving, education and action into an-enjoyable-title.
pc-accelerator thought the-game proved that "educational-game" was an-oxymoron and suggested that people would have been more interested in prequel-games.
the-game was included in national-association for gifted-children-magazine's-parenting for high-potential-1999-list of favorite-holiday-educational-toys, and commented that the-game sufficiently challenges young-players.
in january 1999, software-industry-report noted that the-game was a-popular-title on the-mac.
playthings, in june 1999, noted that the-game was selling "robustly" at $30.
from october 1998 to march 1999, the-game received seven-awards, including the-bafta-interactive-entertainment-award and two-new-media-invision-awards, and was "singled out by several-prominent-educational-software-newsletters, magazines and web-sites".
by may 1999, the-game had received two-more-awards.
the-game was the-highest-rated-science-software-title from 1999 to 2000.
while noting that they had previously never considered including educational-software in they list, the-game was featured in parenting for high-potential.
references == ==
droidworks-homepage-postmortem of the-game
luke-skywalker, luke-skywalker twin sister princess-leia, and their-father darth-vader are central-characters in the-original-star-wars-film-trilogy.
darth-vader, in darth-vader previous identity as anakin-skywalker, is the-lead-character in the-prequel-film-trilogy; darth-vader mother shmi is a-minor-character in the-first-and-second-film respectively.
leia-and-han-solo's-son (and hence-luke's-nephew and anakin and padmé's-grandson)
in the-1999-film star-wars, jedi-knight-qui-gon-jinn discovers shmi-skywalker and jedi-knight-qui-gon-jinn son anakin as slaves on the-planet-tatooine.
shmi informs qui-gon that anakin has no-father, leading qui-gon to suggest that anakin is a-product of midi-chlorians-(force-imparting-microorganisms).
as the-film progresses, anakin leaves tatooine to begin anakin jedi training.
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) reveals that, in anakin's-absence, shmi has married cliegg-lars, becoming the-stepmother of owen.
owen tells anakin they are stepbrothers and later marries beru-whitesun.
anakin secretly marries naboo-senator-padmé-amidala at the-end of the-film.
in star-wars: episode iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), padme dies giving birth to twins, luke and leia.
luke is raised by beru and owen-lars on tatooine.
leia is raised by senator-bail-organa and queen-breha-organa on alderaan.
neither of the-twins know of neither of the-twins relation until the-events of star-wars: episode vi –
return of the-jedi
since the-last-name of han's-father is unknown, han would be the-last-name-"solo"the-last-name-"solo".
in the-2015-film star-wars: episode vii – the-force awakens, it is revealed that han had a-son named ben with leia.
the-family breaks apart following ben's-descent into the-dark-side as kylo-ren, with leia and han separating.
luke is not revealed to have any-children.
at the-end of star-wars: episode-ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019), all-blood-related-members of the skywalker bloodline have died out, as leia dies to bring leia son back to the-light-side and ben-solo dies to save rey.
later, rey adopts "skywalker" as leia surname to honor the-skywalker-family and continue the-skywalker-family legacy while cutting ties with leia-palpatine-lineage.
shmi-skywalker (portrayed by pernilla-august) is the-mother of anakin-skywalker, the-mother-in-law of padmé-amidala, the-paternal-grandmother of luke-skywalker and leia-organa, the-grandmother-in-law of han-solo, and the-maternal-great-grandmother of ben-solo.
i – the-phantom-menace and star-wars: episode ii – attack of the-clones.
she welcomes jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) into their-home, and tells jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) that anakin (jake-lloyd) has no-father; she simply became pregnant with
in spite of she-poverty, shmi tries to give anakin (jake-lloyd) a-good-home in the-slave-quarter of mos-espa.
qui-gon helps anakin win qui-gon freedom, but cannot get shmi out of slavery.
qui-gon allows anakin to leave with qui-gon, assuring qui-gon heartbroken son that they will meet again.
in attack of the-clones, anakin (hayden-christensen), now-a-young-adult-jedi-apprentice, senses through the-force that qui-gon is in pain.
heartbroken and enraged by the-loss of his-mother, anakin slaughters every-single-tusken in the-camp, including the-women and children.
shmi's-death ignites a-strong-anger in anakin, and sets anakin on the-path to becoming darth-vader.
anakin later brings shmi's-body back to the-lars'-homestead where anakin is given a-burial.
anakin-skywalker ===
anakin-skywalker is the-son of shmi-skywalker, born without a-father through the-force.
a-father is the-secret-husband of padmé-amidala, the-father of luke-skywalker and leia-organa, the-father-in-law of han-solo, and the-maternal-grandfather of ben-solo.
anakin is discovered on tatooine by jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn who is sure that the-boy is the "chosen one" of jedi-prophecy, who will bring balance to the-force.
torn between the-boy-loyalty to the-jedi and the-boy drive for power, anakin succumbs to temptation and becomes darth-vader.
as darth-vader, anakin spends the-following-decades serving under palpatine's-galactic-empire until reuniting with anakin son, luke, redeeming anakin by defeating anakin master to protect anakin (therefore, forfilling anakin role as the chosen one) while sacrificing anakin in the-process and becoming one with the-force.
anakin is portrayed by jake-lloyd in the-phantom-menace (1999) and hayden-christensen in attack of the-clones (2002) and revenge of the-sith (2005).
padmé-amidala (portrayed by natalie-portman) is the-secret-wife of anakin-skywalker, the-mother of luke-skywalker and leia-organa, the-daughter-in-law of shmi-skywalker, the-mother-in-law of han-solo, and the-maternal-grandmother of ben-solo.
her-closest-friend in the-senate reconnected and fell in love with anakin-skywalker after he was assigned to protect her-closest-friend in the-senate from an-assassination-attempt, and secretly married he shortly after the-battle of geonosis.
three years later, she reveals to anakin that she is pregnant and plans to raise she is pregnant and plans to raise their-child on naboo-child on naboo.
she realizes that anakin has started to have nightmares of she dying in childbirth and assures her dying in childbirth that it was just-a-dream and that it won't happen.
after anakin turned to the-dark-side and massacred the-jedi at the-jedi temple, anakin was told by anakin that the-jedi the-jedi had taken over the-republic.
obi-wan arrives and asks padmé about obi-wan husband's whereabouts and informs obi-wan that her-husband has turned to the-dark-side.
padmé accuses obi-wan of lying and doesn't believe that anakin would kill younglings.
obi-wan states that anakin is the-father of padmé's-child and sets off to find the-father of padmé's-child.
padmé tracks anakin, now-darth-vader, to mustafar and tries to persuade the-father of padmé's child to abandon the-dark-side, but vader refuses and force chokes mustafar unconscious when obi-wan arrives.
padmé gives birth to birth-children shortly after the-first-empire-day, whom birth calls luke and leia.
padmé tells obi-wan that obi-wan believes there is still good left in vader, before passing away.
during obi-wan-funeral, obi-wan-body was altered to make obi-wan appear still pregnant.
obi-wan and yoda decided to separate the-children in order to keep the-children hidden from darth-vader.
luke-skywalker ===
luke-skywalker ==
is the-brother of leia-organa, the-brother-in-law of han-solo, the-uncle of ben-solo, the-son of anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala, and the-grandson of anakin-skywalker.
in return of the-jedi, a-dying-yoda confirms to luke, that darth-vader (previously-anakin-skywalker) is actually darth-vader (previously-anakin-skywalker) father, despite luke's belief that vader's-claim to fatherhood in the empire strikes back was a-ruse to pull luke to the-dark-side.
luke also finds out from obi-wan's-force-ghost that princess-leia-organa is luke sister.
in the force awakens, as the-last-known-jedi, luke is in hiding after failing to prevent luke nephew and apprentice-ben-solo (now-kylo-ren) from turning to the-dark-side to join supreme-leader-snoke and has cut supreme-leader-snoke off from the-force.
in the-last-known-jedi, a-young-scavenger named rey has located luke and tries to convince supreme-leader-snoke to show a-young-scavenger named rey the ways of the-force, but supreme-leader-snoke refuses.
after knowing the-death of han-solo, after knowing the-death of han-solo trains rey about how to use the-force and to become a-jedi.
luke reveals to rey that luke sensed the-dark-side in ben and was scared for luke, but ben retaliated by using the-force to collapse the-hut, burying luke underneath.
when ben refuses to help rey turn ben back to the-light, luke plans to burn the-jedi-library-tree and is greeted by yoda, who convinces luke to help rey and not to mourn luke failure of losing ben to snoke.
on the-planet crait, luke appears with luke old lightsaber and duels ben, who tries to attack luke, but luke dodges ben, who tries to attack luke.
luke tries to reason with ben and then disappears, revealing that luke was still on the-island and that ben was dueling a-force-projection of ben.
luke falls to the-ground and gets up, and afterwards dies after disappearing, becoming one with the-force ===
=== is the-wife of han-solo, the-mother of ben-solo, the-sister of luke-skywalker, the-daughter of anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala, and the-granddaughter of shmi-skywalker, raised by bail and breha-organa of alderaan.
at age 19, leia-organa-skywalker === is the-princess of alderaan, and is captured by darth-vader while in the-tantive-iv-blockade-runner on a-so-called-"diplomatic-mission".
leia is shown to be force-sensitive.
in the-empire strikes back, leia professes leia love for han-solo when han-solo is put into carbonite-stasis, although it is originally han and luke who compete for leia affections.
in return of the-jedi, planning to feed luke, han, and chewbacca to the-flesh-eating-sarlacc, jabba the-hutt is instead strangled to death by leia by a chain han solo
leia later becomes involved in the-battle of endor.
in the-years that follow, leia becomes general-organa, the-leader of the-resistance, a-military-organization unofficially backed by the-new-republic to counter the-first-order.
she married han-solo and had a-son named ben solo, later kylo-ren, whose turning to the-dark-side separated the couple before the-events of the force awakens.
leia has been on a-search to find leia missing brother-luke and find a-way to save leia son from the-dark-side.
leia dies spending leia energy trying to reach ben, which helps her-son come back to the-light-side.
leia-body later disappears and leia becomes one with the-force.
han-solo ===
=== is the-husband of leia-organa, the-brother-in-law of luke-skywalker, the-father of ben-solo, the-son-in-law of anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala, and the-grandson-in-law of anakin-skywalker.
han-solo ===:
a-star-wars-story reveals that han-solo's-father constructed ships on the-planet-corellia, where han was born.
han's-surname, solo, was not his-birth-name, with han being given his solo surname by an-imperial-officer right before han joined the-imperial-flight-academy, which his would leave three years after.
a-new-hope where he is played by harrison-ford.
he and he wookiee co-pilot and best-friend, chewbacca, are initially hired to transport luke-skywalker and obi-wan-kenobi.
han and chewbacca later become involved in the-rebel-alliance and are committed to the-rebel-alliance cause.
over the-course of the-franchise, han becomes a-military-leader for the-alliance, falling in love with and marrying leia-organa, with whom he has a-son named ben.
=== is the-son of leia-organa and han-solo, the-nephew of luke-skywalker, the-grandson of anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala, and the-great-grandson of shmi-skywalker.
soon, luke suspects ben has been influenced by snoke, and ignites ben lightsaber because of instinct in an-attempt to kill ben in ben sleep to prevent ben from causing the-destruction.
but when ben thinks about killing ben, ben wakes up and this causes ben to fall to the-dark-side.
ben becomes kylo-ren, working for the-first-order and working under the-influence of snoke.
ben also forms an-uneasy-alliance with general-hux.
ren is obsessed with the-legacy of ren grandfather, the-sith-lord-darth-vader, and aspires to finish what vader started:
ren stabs han solo, ren father, in the-heart but spares ren mother when ordered to destroy his-mother-ship.
ben becoming
ren also caused han and leia to break up, with neither of han and leia able to stop loving han and leia son.
luke confronts luke and also disappears trying to stop ben's-actions.
after ben-'s-death, rey saves ben-life and admits to ben his-mother did want to join ben as ben solo, ben then sees a-vision of ben father and ben decides to come back to the-light-side becoming ben solo again.
later, he sacrifices he to bring rey back to life, and forms a-brief-relationship with rey before vanishing into the-force as the last of the-skywalker-bloodline.
as a-child, rey was hidden by rey parents on the-planet-jakku to save rey from emperor-palpatine.
years later, rey meets kylo-ren, with whom she has a-connection in the-force.
she also becomes the-last-jedi-apprentice of luke-skywalker and leia-organa.
at the-end of the-rise of skywalker, rey adopts "skywalker" as she surname (having considered the skywalkers she true family) despite not being part of the skywalker bloodline; until then, she had been mononymous.
since the-2000s-prequel-trilogy, and according to the-2018-comic-book darth-vader: dark lord of the-sith written by charles-soule and giuseppe-camuncoli, it has been implied that shmi-skywalker's-impregnation was the-result of palpatine influencing the-force to do so, making palpatine the-father of anakin-skywalker.
in an-early-draft of the-script for revenge of the-sith, palpatine states that palpatine is anakin's-father via this-method.
in december 2019, after the-release of the-rise of skywalker, matt-martin of the-lucasfilm-star-wars-story-group stated that palpatine's-involvement in anakin's-birth is not confirmed.
the-following-characters are exclusive to what is now retroactively known as the-legends-brand since april 2014, and non-canonical to any-and-all-star-wars-material produced under the-ownership of the-walt-disney-company.
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.following the-events of the-original-film-trilogy, leia and han marry and have children, and luke does likewise several years after leia and han do.
the-skywalker-bloodline-branches from luke and leia's-descendants, but only luke's side continues to carry the-skywalker-name.
leia and han-han marry in the-courtship of princess leia (1994) by dave-wolverton.
leia is pregnant with twins in timothy-zahn's-heir to the-empire (1991) and leia and han are born in zahn's-the-last-command (1993).
han have another-child by the-time of the-jedi-academy-trilogy (1994) by kevin-j.-anderson, by which-time leia has become the-chief of state of the-new-republic.
all three of the-solo-children become jedi-knights under the-tutelage of the-solo-children maternal uncle luke skywalker.
the-solo-children were ranked as the-16th-top-star-wars-heroes, according to ign in 2008.having refounded the-jedi-order and trained several-new-jedi including leia, luke eventually marries an-enemy-turned-ally-mara-jade, and the-solo-children have a-son named ben, who was voted the 40th top star wars character by ign and
mara-jade was created by timothy-zahn as an-antagonist for heir to the-empire (1991), and mara-jade and luke marry several years later in the-comic-miniseries-union (1999-2000).
her-twin-brother jacen is the-eldest-child of han-solo and leia-organa-solo, and has appeared in various-novels and the-champions of the-force set for the-star-wars-miniatures-game.
jaina, named after han's-mother, is born five minutes before her-twin-brother jacen-brother-jacen in the-thrawn-trilogy (1991–93), set about five years after return of the-jedi.
in champions of the-force (1994), jaina helps jaina brother defend jaina unconscious-uncle from the-spirit of sith-lord-exar-kun.
elaine-cunningham, author of the-dark-journey, commented that the-story of the-2002-novel is a-personal-one focusing on a-difficult-time in jaina's-life.
in betrayal (2006), jacen falls to the-dark-side of the-force, and jaina realizes jacen duty as the-"sword of the-jedi" requires jacen to stop his.
jacen turns to boba-fett to train jacen.
jaina and jagged's-descendants include emperor-roan-fel and emperor-roan-fel daughter-marasiah-fel in the-legacy-series (2006–14), set nearly 140 years after return of the-jedi.
jacen-solo is the-son of han-solo and leia-organa, introduced in utero in the-1994-star-wars expanded universe-novel-heir to the-empire, and born and named in the last command.
=== is the-youngest-child born to han-solo and princess-leia, and the younger brother of jacen and jaina-solo.
anakin is named after anakin maternal grandfather, anakin skywalker, and, like anakin namesake, is a-talented-pilot who is prodigiously gifted both in the-force-and-mechanical-engineering.
anakin appears as an-infant and toddler in many-star-wars-novels such as the-jedi-academy-trilogy (1994).
anakin and his-siblings play central-roles in other-novels such as the-crystal-star (1994), the-corellian-trilogy (1995) and the-new-rebellion (1996).
anakin's-birth is first referred to as han-solo, jr. by anakin's-birth father, but leia corrects anakin's-birth, having named the-baby after anakin, as a-reminder of hope.
however, anakin still fears the-name and anakin grandfather's legacy.
on october 1, 1995, nancy-richardson started the-junior-jedi-knights-series with the-golden-globe starring anakin and his-best-friend tahiri-veila.
anakin is now an-eleven-year-old-child starting anakin training at the-jedi-academy on yavin 4.
richardson continued anakin's-adventures in the-following-two-novels, lyric's-world and promises, before rebecca-moesta finished the-series with anakin's-quest, vader's-fortress, and kenobi's-blade, starting in 1996.
anakin appears in the-young-jedi-knights-series by kevin-j.-anderson and rebecca-moesta, which follows the-adventures of anakin's siblings, jacen and jaina.
anakin is now a-teenager, who often spends time alone thinking about the-role of the-force, and would get into arguments with anakin brother jacen on the-ways of a-jedi and the-force.
anakin plays major-roles in dark-tide:
: ruin by michael-a.-stackpole published 1 february 2000 and 1 june 2000, respectively, and is the-main-focus of the-books-edge of victory: conquest and edge of victory:
rebirth by greg-keyes published april 1, 2001 and august 1, 2001, respectively.
in the-2001-novel-star by star by troy-denning, anakin leads a-team of jedi to take out a-dangerous-enemy, resulting in jedi death.
writers of the-new-jedi-order-storyline revealed in a-question-and-answer-section of the-paperback-edition of the-unifying-force published on august 3, 2004 that anakin was supposed to be the-hero of the-story and lead the-jedi-order, but this was changed due to the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin.
instead, the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin dies in battle at the-conclusion of the-novel.
even after the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin , anakin-solo has been mentioned several times in most-following-novels, including a-possible-appearance in traitor by matthew-stover, as a-droid in betrayal by aaron-allston as anakin-sal-solo, and in backlash, where the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin appeared to the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin maternal uncle luke skywalker and to luke's-son, ben-skywalker by aaron-allston.
anakin is portrayed in the-earlier-books as being a-genius and a-loner, but is haunted by anakin name.
in lyric's-world, it is revealed that anakin loves to take computers apart and put computers back together and sees it as a-puzzle.
anakin would also have dreams of emperor-palpatine and darth-vader trying to persuade anakin to fall to the-dark-side of the-force; anakin overcomes this-fear in anakin's quest, in which anakin confronts anakin.
luke-skywalker and mara-jade-skywalker's-son.
in fate of the-jedi: outcast-love-interest is vestara-khai, formerly-a-sith-apprentice, then a the-jedi apprentice.
by the-end of the-following-series fate of the-jedi, she jedi-training is about to begin.
emperor-roan-fel is leia's-great-grandson, jaina-solo's-grandson and the-head of the-imperial-knights (who split from the-jedi refounded by luke, but are still opposed to the-dark-side).
his-daughter and an-imperial-knight herself oppose the-new-sith-order who have taken over most of the-galaxy, and ally with cade-skywalker and the-surviving-jedi-and-republic-forces in order to fight jedi and republic.
he took the-name bantha-rawk upon leaving the-jedi and works as a-mechanic.
the-second-volume of star-wars: legacy (2013-2014) follows ania-solo, the-great-granddaughter of leia and granddaughter of jacen-solo.
legacy-comic-book-series from dark-horse, which takes place 125 years after return of the-jedi.
despite this, cade still encounters other-the-jedi, as well as the-ghost of cade ancestor luke skywalker, and ultimately reclaims cade heritage to fight the-sith.
the-character was voted the 84th top star wars character by ign.
references == ==
star-wars: union on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki star-wars rebels is an-american-3d-animated-science-fiction-television-series produced by lucasfilm-animation and set in the star-wars galaxy five years before a-new-hope.
it takes place during the-dark-times, when the-galactic-empire is hunting down the last of the-jedi while a-fledgling-rebellion against the-galactic-empire is emerging.
the-visual-style of the-series is inspired by the-original-star-wars-trilogy concept art by ralph-mcquarrie.
the-series features new-characters, along with some from the-original-trilogy and from the-previous-animated-series, the-clone-wars.
the-series premiered as a-one-hour-television-film, spark of rebellion, on october 3, 2014, on disney-channel prior to the-premiere of the-series on october 13 on disney-xd.
the-third-season premiered on september 24, 2016, with the-television-film, steps into shadow.
the-fourth-and-final-season premiered on october 16, 2017, with another-one-hour-television-film, heroes of mandalore.
the fourth and final season premiered on october 16, 2017, with another-one-hour-television-film, heroes of mandalore-final-episode aired on march 5, filoni served as executive-producers of season one.
greg-weisman left its-final-episode aired on march 5, 2018.dave-filoni, simon-kinberg and greg-weisman after season one.
filoni was also the-supervising-director for the-first-two-seasons, a-role filoni relinquished after accepting a-promotion that expanded filoni creative role into overseeing all-lucasfilm-animation-projects; filoni chose justin-ridge to succeed filoni for season three.
filoni assumed the-role back for the-fourth-season.
the-series has been generally well-received with several-award-wins and nominations.
fourteen years after the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-jedi-order and the-rise of the-galactic-empire depicted in revenge of the-sith, a-motley-group of rebels unite aboard a-freighter-starship called the ghost and begin to conduct covert-operations against the-imperial-garrison on and around the-planet-lothal and other-planets that are menaced by the-galactic-empire.
freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, formerly known as jedi-padawan, caleb-dume, who survived the-events of order 66.
freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, formerly known as jedi-padawan, caleb-dume, who survived the-events of order 66 is ezra's-mentor and leader of the-ghost-crew.
steven-blum as garazeb-"zeb"-orrelios, a-former-lasat-honor-guard-member who wants the-empire to pay for enslaving his-people.
dee-bradley-baker as captain-rex (seasons 2–4), a-former-high-ranking-clone-trooper, who served under anakin-skywalker in the-clone-wars.
sam-witwer as maul (seasons 2–3), a-former-sith-lord and apprentice to palpatine who is attempting to hunt down obi-wan-kenobi.
jason-isaacs as grand-inquisitor, a-former-jedi-temple-guard who turned to the-dark-side and was tasked with hunting down surviving jedi.
james-earl-jones as darth-vader, an-evil-sith-lord and apprentice to palpatine who was once jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker.
sam-witwer and ian-mcdiarmid as emperor-palpatine, the-ruler of the-galaxy and also known as darth-sidious, sith-master of darth-vader.
mary-elizabeth-mcglynn as governor-arihnda-pryce, a-high-ranking-officer of the-empire and governor of the-lothal-sector.
frank-oz as yoda, the-wise-and-powerful-grand-master of the-jedi who is exiled on the-planet-dagobah.
the-first-two-episodes, titled spark of rebellion, premiered on october 3, 2014, on disney-channels worldwide and on family-channel in canada.
in australia, the series premiered on october 17 on disney-xd.
the-siege of lothal premiered on june 28, 2015, and the-second-season debuted on october 18.
in canada, the series premiered on october 19 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd.
however, due to dhx-media losing the-rights to disney-content, in canada, the-series premiered on october 19 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd was later moved to disney-channel.
the second season premiered on november 7, and in canada, the-series premiered on october 19 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd was moved to disney-channel on december 1.in
the-middle-east and africa, spark of rebellion premiered on october 11 and the-series debuted on october 18 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd.
siege of lothal premiered on october 10, followed the-official-season-premiere on october 17.
in southeast-asia, spark of rebellion premiered on disney-xd on october 4 and the-series officially started on november 29.
siege of lothal premiered on october 3 on disney-xd-and-disney-channel, and the-second-season was released on october 24.
in the-united-kingdom and ireland, the-series debuted on october 16 on disney-xd.
siege of lothal premiered on july 18, 2015, followed by the-second-season-debut on october 17.
spark of rebellion was released by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on dvd in the-us at all-retailers on october 14, 2014.
one of star-wars-rebels was released by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on dvd and blu-ray on september 1, 2015, in america, and in germany on september 10, 2015.
the complete season four is announced to be released on dvd and blu-ray on november 15, 2018, in germany, and july 31, 2018, in america.
the-series is also available on the-disney+-streaming-service, which launched on november 12, 2019.
on the-review-aggregation-website rotten-tomatoes, the-first-season has received a-92%-positive-score, based on 12-reviews, and seasons 2, 3 and 4 have received a-100%-score based on 6-reviews for season 2, 6-reviews for season 3, and 10-reviews for season 4, with an-average-rating of 8.17/10 for season 1, 7.38/10 for season 2, 9/10 for season 3, and 9.22/10 for season 4.
the-rise of skywalker during the-final-battle over exegol.
the-voice of freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus can also heard in the-2019-film star-wars as one of the-voices of jedi past who provide rey with encouragement to defeat emperor-palpatine.
on september 2, 2014, del-rey-books published star-wars: a-new-dawn, a-prequel-novel by john-jackson-miller telling the-story of how kanan and hera met (set about six years before the-series).
a-sequel to thrawn, titled thrawn: alliances, was released on july 24, 2018.
the-book explored thrawn's-partnerships with darth-vader and anakin-skywalker.
another-grand-admiral-thrawn-novel, thrawn: treason was released on july 23, 2019.
it takes place during the-events of rebels'-fourth-season.
alphabet-squadron novel-trilogy, as a-general of the-recently-christened-new-republic's-eponymous-starfighter-squadron in the-final-days of the-galactic-civil-war, hunting down the-weakened-imperial-forces after the-battle of endor and the-death of emperor-palpatine.
from april 1, 2015, through march 16, 2016, marvel-comics published a-12-issue-comic-series, titled kanan, and set during the-events of the-first-season.
written by former-executive-producer of the-series greg-weisman and illustrated by pepe-larraz, jacopo-camagni and andrea-broccardo, the-story is centered on kanan having flashbacks to kanan days as a-padawan in the-jedi-temple and the-clone-wars.
the-first-issue was released on february 14, 2018, with new-issues being released over the-following-five-months.
the-second-part appeared in the-next-issue, which was released on march 28, 2018.
a-side-scrolling-run-and-gun-game based on the-show's-first-season, titled star wars rebels: recon-missions, was released by disney-mobile on ios, android, and windows-store in early 2015, before being discontinued on july 28, 2016, due to the-limitations of the-support-team.
additionally, several of the-characters from the-series are playable in other-games such as disney-infinity 3.0, angry-birds-star-wars-ii, roblox (as virtual-accessories and gears), lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (as downloadable-content only),
references == ==
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977)
the-empire strikes back (1980)
episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983)
i – the-phantom-menace (1999)
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002)
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005)
the-force awakens (2015)
the-last-jedi
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
the-empire strikes back
return of the-jedi
from star-wars to jedi:
references ==
star-wars-locations and their-gps-coordinates---article featuring every-filming-location, lat/long-coordinates and scene comparisons star-wars-locations - fan site devoted to star-wars filming locations star-wars filming locations category on wookieepedia star-wars filming locations category on 501st-legion-spanish-garrison
attack of the clones episode iii: revenge of the sith episode iv:
return of the-jedi-episode-vii:
the-force awakens
george-lucas's-filming-locations on movie-locations.com-"hostage-crisis" first aired on march 20, 2009 on cartoon-network.
a-few-levels above, in senator-padmé-amidala's-office, anakin-skywalker offers to take anakin-skywalker to somewhere in the-galaxy for a-few-weeks where no-one will recognize them, but padmé is too focused on anakin-skywalker work.
padmé gives anakin skywalker padmé lightsaber to show padmé devotion.
however, he has to hide, as c-3po and bail-organa are about to enter.
palpatine refuses to do so.
bane takes everyone's-comlinks, but before bane can search padmé, who is holding anakin's-lightsaber in anakin-sleeve, bane notices anakin in the-upper-levels and orders an-ig-86-sentinel-droid and shahan-alama to get bane.
anakin eludes anakin pursuers and hot-wires-a-terminal to communicate with palpatine.
the-chancellor advises anakin to get to the-central-power-core to contact for help.
anakin manages to disconnect and hide before the-bounty-hunters find anakin, and then uses a-mind-trick to convince alama to check the-other-two-floors.
as the-bounty-hunters split up, anakin follows the-ig-86-sentinel-droid and manages to bash the-ig-86-sentinel-droid into submission.
noticing no lightsaber slashes, alama quickly figures out that anakin isn't armed.
anakin locates the-power-core, but a-panicked-robonino shuts the-door behind a-panicked-robonino.
alama and sing then attack anakin, and a-panicked-robonino shocks a-panicked-robonino into unconsciousness.
the-effectiveness of the-episode that contained the-debut of cad-bane's-portrayal of anakin-skywalker was disputed among critics.
references ==
references == ==
attack of the-clones (2002), episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005),
the-three-year-conflict between the-clones and the-separatists'-battle-droid-armies is known as the-"clone-wars", in reference to the former, and was secretly orchestrated by the-galactic-republic's-chancellor-palpatine to seize power and transform the-galactic-republic into the-galactic-empire.
all-clone-troopers are humans, bred from the-dna of all-clone-troopers are humans, bred from the-dna of their-genetic-template, the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, at the-cloning-facilities on kamino, run by the native kaminoans, who genetically modified the-clones to display unquestioned-obedience to the-higher-chain of command, and age at twice the-rate of a-normal-human-genetic-template, the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, at the-cloning-facilities on kamino, run by the native kaminoans, who genetically modified the-clones to display unquestioned-obedience to the-higher-chain of command, and age at twice the-rate of a-normal-human.
during the-clone-wars, they served under the-command of the-jedi-order, but ultimately turned on they and killed they, as a-result of the-republic's-chancellor-palpatine issuing order 66, which branded the-jedi as traitors and ordered they deaths.
the-nature of order 66 is explored in more-detail in the-clone-wars-animated-series, which reveals that palpatine had secretly arranged for the-clone-army's-creation almost a decade before the-clone-wars, and ordered that all-clones be outfitted with inhibitor-chips, which would alter all-clones mentality and force all-clones to carry out order 66 unquestionably.
during development of the empire strikes back, lucas initially conceived a-planet of clones, which is why the-clone-wars was mentioned for the-first-time in the-original-star-wars (1977)-film.
the-clone-trooper-armor was designed to suggest an-evolution into the-stormtroopers of the-original-trilogy, and the-clone-trooper-armor incorporated features from both-the-armor of stormtroopers and boba-fett, revealed in attack of the-clones to be an-unaltered-clone of jango.
the-armored-troopers in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith are computer-generated-images voiced by temuera-morrison, who played jango.
in writing the empire strikes back, leigh-brackett's-first-draft of the-film initially developed lando-calrissian as a-clone from a-planet of clones involved in the-clone-wars mentioned in a-new-hope and were nearly made extinct by the-war, but this-concept was not featured in the-film.
george-lucas later came up with this-concept.
george-lucas intended for the-prequel-trilogy to depict the-evolution of the-galaxy's-fighting-forces, and the-clone-troopers were the-step after flawed-battle-droids.
initial-concept-models implied that the-first-generation-armor was thicker and bulkier than stormtrooper-armor, and this-characteristic was retained by the-art-department for revenge of the-sith.
lucas expressed a-desire for individualized-trooper-armor from the-beginning of art-development for revenge of the-sith.
the clone trooper designs "progressed" closer toward the-stormtrooper-designs, and the-film included variant-designs similar to the-sandtrooper, scout-trooper, and snowtrooper-armor of the-original-trilogy.
the-designs of clone-trooper in snow and cold-weather-gear, seen in season one of the-clone-wars, are heavily inspired by early-concept and costume by ralph-mcquarrie, joe-johnston, and john-mollo for the empire strikes back.
in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, all-clone-troopers are computer-generated-images and are voiced by temuera-morrison, who played the-clone-template jango-fett.
commander-cody, seen in armor without his-helmet in revenge of the-sith, was played by a-younger-morrison.
like morrison, taylor also played armored-and-unhelmeted-clones in revenge of the-sith, wearing a-blue-bodysuit that isolated his-head.
some-clone-troopers are voiced by dee-bradley-baker in the-2008-animated-film the-clone-wars and the-clone-wars related animated-television-series of the-same-name.
in attack of the-clones (2002), jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi discovers the-clone-army on kamino.
army is deployed to geonosis under the-command of the-jedi to rescue obi-wan, anakin-skywalker, and padmé-amidala from execution by the-separatists.
in revenge of the-sith (2005), set three years later, the-clone-army continues to fight in the-clone-wars against the-separatist-battle-droid-army.
however, just as it appears that the-republic will win the-war, chancellor-palpatine, secretly-the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, orders the-clone-army to execute order 66, turning the-clone-army against the-jedi.
the-clone-troopers kill the-clone-troopers the-jedi-commanders, although a few manage to escape, while the-501st-legion, led by the-newly-christened-darth-vader, storms the-jedi-temple, burning the-jedi-temple and killing the-jedi inside, which effectively ends the-jedi order.
following vader's-assassination of the-remaining-separatist-leaders, palpatine transforms the-republic into the-galactic-empire and the-clone-army becomes the-basis of the-imperial-army.
clone-troopers are referenced in the force awakens (2015) when kylo-ren chides general-hux for the-betrayal of rogue-stormtrooper-fn-2187 and suggests that supreme-leader-snoke should consider a-clone-army.
the-clone-wars ====
ultimately, jedi-jedi remained unaware of this as fives was executed by a-shock-trooper-clone ordered by palpatine to conceal the-existence of the-contingency-order.
star-wars-rebels features a-group of former-clone-troopers who had removed star-wars-rebels chips and, therefore, were not forced to carry out order 66.
it is also revealed that in the-years after the-end of the-clone-wars, the-empire gradually replaced the-aging-clones with the-less-effective-but-more-numerous-stormtroopers.
in the-novels lords of the-sith by paul-s.-kemp, and tarkin by james-luceno, several-clone-troopers are still in active-service during the-early-years of the-empire's-reign, such as among stormtroopers serving darth-vader, and even among the-emperor's-elite-imperial-guard.
is a-division of the-grand-army of the-republic tasked with internal-security-and-peacekeeping-operations on coruscant, protecting "soft-target" public-spaces and important-"hard-target"-buildings, and serving as escorts and guards on diplomatic-missions.
they first appear in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, where they search for yoda's-body in the-senate-building after commander-fox-duel with darth-sidious and later help darth-sidious recover darth-vader's-body on mustafar.
the-coruscant-guard hunt jedi fugitive ahsoka-tano when jedi fugitive ahsoka-tano is framed for the-bombing of the-jedi-temple and for murder in season five, and the-coruscant-guard search for arc-trooper-fives when commander-fox is framed for an-assassination-attempt on supreme-chancellor-palpatine in season six.
in season seven, a-skirmish broke out onboard former-jedi-padawan-ahsoka-tano's-venator-class-star-destroyer during the-final-days of the-clone-wars when clone-troopers of the-332nd-company and coruscant-guard received order 66 from supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine.
following the-battle on teth, fox's-squad rescued senator-padmé-amidala from ziro the-hutt.
additional-sources state that fox continued fox duty on coruscant, until an-error on fox part led darth-vader to execute fox by force snapping fox neck.
following the-initiation of order 66 and the-subsequent-confrontation between yoda-and-emperor-palpatine in 19-bby,-thire-and-thire-troopers were ordered to hunt the-jedi-master.
the-failure to locate his-body convinced mas-amedda that yoda was still alive, leading the-emperor to order thire to resume the-search.
however, yoda succeeded in escaping from coruscant with the-aid of senator-bail-organa.
thire later accompanied palpatine to mustafar to recover the-critically-wounded-darth-vader.
the-501st-legion first appears unnamed in revenge of the-sith under the-leadership of commander-appo, and they assault the-jedi-temple on coruscant under order 66.
in the-star-wars-legends expanded universe, after the-conversion of the-republic into the-galactic-empire,
legion include: 332nd-company, which was active during the-clone-wars after former-jedi-padawan-ahsoka-tano left the-jedi-order.
after order 66 is issued, the-332nd's-star-destroyer crash lands on the-surface of an-unnamed-moon, killing all except ahsoka, rex, and maul, who manage to escape; the-troopers under the-command of ahsoka tano have orange-marks on the-troopers under the-command of ahsoka tano helmets.
ahsoka and rex have dug graves for the-fallen-soldiers as a-memorial to the-fallen-soldiers.
torrent-company is distinguished for torrent-company engagements against the-confederacy of independent-systems throughout the-war, including the-battle of christophsis, battle of teth, and the-battle of horain.
torrent-company died along with the-332nd soon after order 66.during-star-wars-celebration 2016, dave-filoni stated that in a-planned-story-arc for the-clone-wars, ahsoka, who has left the jedi order, is given command of part of the-501st-legion, including captain-rex; those under her-command repaint those under her-command helmets orange and adorn those under her-command with ahsoka's togruta markings.
her leads those under her-command at the-siege of mandalore, which takes place at the-same-time as the-beginning of revenge of the-sith.
first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, in which commander appo ====
and other-members of the-501st carry out order 66 and follow anakin, now-darth-vader, in attacking the-jedi-temple on coruscant.
appo later appears in season four of the-clone-wars-television-series as a-sergeant in the-501st serving under clone-captain-rex.
in the-seventh-season of the-series (which overlaps with revenge of the-sith), captain-rex ==== is promoted to commander and leads part of the-501st-legion, called the-332nd-legion (ahsoka-troopers) in the-siege of mandalore alongside ahsoka.
when order 66 is issued, often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano attempts to execute ahsoka, but ahsoka removes often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano chip and restores often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano free-will, before the-pair fake the-pair deaths and part-ways.
rex later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
in season six, during a-battle over ringo-vinda, fives and the-501st are winning the-battle until fellow-clone-tup mysteriously executes jedi-general-tiplar, forcing the-501st to retreat.
jedi-master-shaak-ti brings jedi-master-shaak-ti to inform palpatine about the-chips, where palpatine, being the-true-mastermind behind the-conspiracy, reveals the-chips’ true purpose to fives.
with the-help of 501st-medic-kix, fives is able to contact rex and anakin-skywalker, and rex attempts to warn rex and anakin-skywalker of the-conspiracy and of palpatine's-involvement.
when tup begins behaving abnormally due to tup inhibitor chip malfunctioning, fives goes to great-lengths and disregards order to attempt to save tup's life and, later, discover the-true-cause of tup's death.
echo is rescued by captain-rex, and with captain-rex ability to understand separatist-transmissions, captain-rex plays a-key-role in the-battle of anaxes, earning a-victory against the-separatists.
later, after his-rescue from separatist-capture, his is visibly a-cyborg, with various-apparatus protruding from his-head and a-droid-plug in place of his-right-hand; post-rescue, his takes to wearing what appears to be a-stripped-down-variant on standard-phase-ii-armor.
in season four' battle of umbara, jesse, like fives comes to consider general-pong-krell to be ruthless and reckless (mainly over the-casualty-numbers).
in season seven, general-pong-krell takes part in the-siege of mandalore, during which general-pong-krell is captured and interrogated by maul, and later attempts to execute ahsoka-tano when order 66 is issued.
after commander-rex has commander-rex chip removed and sides with ahsoka, jesse accuses commander-rex of treason and tries to kill commander-rex as well, but dies along with all-the-troopers aboard when-the-venator-class-star-destroyer they are on crashes on a-small-moon, and is buried by ahsoka and rex.
in season six, kix aids fives, a-fugitive because a-medic serving in the-501st
the-501st-legion under captain-rex served in the-umbara-campaign and was key to the-capture of treasonous-jedi-general-pong-krell, supporting and siding with the-501st-legion under captain-rex friend fives even after fives had been condemned to death by krell and stunning the-jedi after a-fierce-battle with mutinous-501st-clones led by captain-rex.
intended to ensure that the-clones obeyed order 66, a-biotechnical-chip implanted in his-brain shortly after his-creation by the-kaminoans caused tup to shoot and kill jedi-general-tiplar despite not having been ordered to.
tup's-actions led to the-discovery of the-chips by both-the-jedi and the-clones themselves, but tup died of medical-complications soon afterwards.
is a-division of the-grand-army of the-republic under the-command of jedi-general-obi-wan-kenobi and his subordinate,-commander-cody.
during the-latter-battle, kenobi killed general-grievous, marking a-major-loss for the-separatists and bringing the-republic one step closer to winning the-war.
however, kenobi was ultimately betrayed by kenobi soldiers upon the-activation of order 66, a protocol that called for the-extermination of all-jedi.
the-clones failed to execute the-clones former-leader, however.
foxtrot-group - an-elite-commando-unit, led by clone-captain-gregor, within the-special-operations-brigade of the-grand-army of the-republic was attached in direct-support to the-212th-attack-battalion and was deployed during the-battle of sarrish, though many of foxtrot-group - an-elite-commando-unit, led by clone-captain-gregor, within the-special-operations-brigade of the-grand-army of the-republic troopers perished in the-battle of sarrish.
he first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith during the-battle of utapau, aiding obi-wan against general-grievous on utapau.
he is the-first-clone-trooper to receive order 66 on-screen, and he obediently commands he troopers to shoot down obi-wan and to locate he body to confirm the-kill.
cody is particularly loyal to obi-wan, whom cody complemented well, and obi-wan, whom he complemented well-relationship is characterized by a-mutual-camaraderie and trust, though this did not prevent cody from attempting to kill kenobi as part of order 66.
gregor later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
he is revealed to have removed he inhibitor chip, preventing he from carrying out order 66.
gar-special-forces—was a-brigade of elite-clone-troopers in the-grand-army of the-republic under the-command of jedi-general-arligan-zey and jedi-general iri-camas.
in july 2020, echo was announced that clone-force 99 would be receiving clone-force 99 own spin-off series in 2021 on disney+
during a-mission on kashyyyk at the-end of the-clone-wars, depicted at the-end of republic-commando, sev's-transmission-signal is lost, and sev is declared missing in action; sev ultimate fate is uncertain.
he first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith aiding jedi-general-yoda on kashyyyk.
he attempts to carry out order 66, but he and another-kashyyyk-scout-trooper are decapitated by yoda.
he armor bears green-markings, and he appears in green-camouflage-armor in revenge of the-sith.
first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, in which commander bly ====
men carry out order 66 and shoot aayla in the-back, killing aayla.
later appears in season one of the-clone-wars-television-series alongside aayla.
marshal-commander-neyo, cc-8826, leads the-91st-mobile-reconnaissance-corps, with initial-command given to jedi-general-mace-windu in the-battle of ryloth and battle of anaxes; command was later transferred to jedi-generals-adi-gallia and stass-allie.
while patrolling the-planet's-surface, the-commander received a-message from supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine instructing supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine to execute order 66.
he later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
wolffe is revealed to have removed wolffe inhibitor chip, preventing wolffe from carrying out order 66.
when rex and gregor are sought by the-rebel-protagonists, wolffe is suspicious of rex and gregor motives and contacts the-empire to protect himself, rex, and gregor.
graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter felt the-decision to make an-army of clones is a-"softening of the-star-wars'-own-mythology", though the-article later corrected that not-all-troopers in the-franchise were clones.
graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter praised the-decision of the-force awakens to explicitly move away from clone-troopers as bringing "much-needed-moral-complexity" to the-film's-conflict.
references == ===
the-force-unleashed, released in september 2008, and september 2008 sequel
,-star-wars: the-force-unleashed-ii, released in october 2010, as well as two-corresponding-tie-in-novels, action-figures, a-comic-book, a-reference-book, a-role-playing-game-supplement, and a-book on the-making of the-game.
after the-walt-disney-company acquired lucasfilm in 2012 and began production of the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, the-unleashed-project, along with all-other-star-wars expanded universe-works, was discarded from the-current-star-wars-canon and reassigned as part of the-legends-non-canonical-stories on april 25, 2014, preventing the-video-game-series representing production of the-star-wars from continuing further past unleashed-ii.
the-force-unleashed tells the-story of darth-vader's-secret-apprentice,-code-named-"starkiller" but born galen-marek, as galen-marek hunts down the-remaining-jedi after emperor-palpatine orders them killed.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-and-star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope
, the-story explores the-aftermath of the great jedi purge as well as the-rise of darth-vader.
the-events of the force unleashed are "pivotal" in darth-vader-history and development as a-character and offer illumination into other-characters from a-new-hope, the-empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi.
the-game explores themes of redemption and self-sacrifice; aside from hunting jedi, starkiller helps build the-rebel-alliance on darth-vader's-orders, who plots to overthrow the-emperor, but eventually comes to truly believe in the-rebel-cause and sacrifices the-emperor to save the-rebel-alliance's leaders from the-empire, who honor the-emperor by adopting the-emperor family's crest as his-family-symbol.
in the-sequel, the-players controls a-clone of starkiller, who was created by darth-vader to replace the original starkiller.
however, a-clone of starkiller, who was created by darth-vader to replace the original starkiller has the original starkiller's memories and begins to rebel against a-clone of starkiller, who was created by darth-vader to replace the original starkiller master, eventually escaping to search for a-clone of starkiller, who was created by darth-vader to replace the original starkiller identity.
the-story ends on a-cliffhanger where starkiller prepares to take vader to dantooine to stand trial, but is secretly followed by boba-fett.
due to the-cancellation of the-third-game, as well as the-previous-two-games being assigned into the-discarded-legends-brand of non-canonical-stories, a-cliffhanger where starkiller prepares to take vader to dantooine to stand trial may never be resolved.
the-force unleashed ====
the-force-unleashed-game was released in north-america on september 16, 2008, and in australia and southeast-asia on september 17, 2008, and was released in europe on september 19, 2008.
the-force-unleashed-game follows the-story of darth-vader's-secret-apprentice-starkiller, who is tasked with hunting down jedi while killing rebels and imperials alike in order to hide his-existence from the-emperor, but soon starts to slowly redeem his to the-light-side of the-force.
the-force unleashed-ii ====
a-sequel was released on october 26, 2010.
this time, the-player assumes the-role of a-clone of starkiller that, upon escaping from darth-vader's-clutches, embarks on a-quest to find darth-vader's-identity and the original starkiller's love interest, juno-eclipse, but is soon forced to join the-rebel-alliance and help the-rebel-alliance bring down the-empire and vader, who has captured juno to lure the-clone back to darth vader's.
sean-williams'-novelization was released in the-united-states on august 19, 2008.
the-novel focuses on the-dark-side of the-force and the-novel practitioners; williams found the-novel "interesting" to portray the-jedi as "bad-guys."
williams most enjoyed developing the-character of juno-eclipse, exploring the-"feminine"-side of the-force unleashed in a-way the-video-game does not.
witwer remained involved with the-star-wars-franchise, voicing darth-maul in the-animated-series star-wars: the clone wars and star-wars rebels and the-film solo:
a-star-wars-story also has voiced palpatine and other-minor-characters.
star-wars: shadows of the-empire ==
references == ==
the-force unleashed on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
in 1999, an-analytical-model of the-sith was developed for the-pspice-circuit-simulator.
references == ==
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith is a-2005-american-epic-space-opera-film written and directed by george-lucas.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-stars ewan-mcgregor, natalie-portman, hayden-christensen, ian-mcdiarmid, samuel-l.-jackson, christopher-lee, anthony-daniels, kenny-baker and frank-oz.
revenge of the-sith is set three years after the-onset of the-clone-wars, established in star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002).
the-jedi are spread across the-galaxy, leading a-large-scale-war against the-separatists.
the-jedi-council dispatches obi-wan-kenobi to eliminate general-grievous, the-leader of the-separatist-army, to put an-end to a-large-scale-war against the-separatists.
meanwhile, after having premonitions of obi-wan-kenobi-wife-padmé-amidala dying in childbirth, anakin-skywalker is tasked by the-jedi-council to spy on palpatine, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic and, secretly, a-sith-lord known as darth-sidious.
palpatine manipulates anakin into turning to the-dark-side of the-force and becoming palpatine apprentice, darth-vader, at the-same-time anakin's love, padme gives birth to twins, luke and leia; however, due to leia discontent of anakin becoming vader, leia passes away due to a-broken-heart.
lucas began writing the-script before production of attack of the-clones ended, citing that lucas wanted to end the-trilogy to have similar-aspects of a-romantic-tragedy, thus building into darth-vader's-state at the-beginning of the-next-film.
production of revenge of the-sith started in september 2003, and filming took place in australia with additional-locations in thailand, switzerland, china, italy and the-united-kingdom.
revenge of the-sith premiered on may 15, 2005, at the-cannes-film-festival, then released worldwide on may 19, 2005.
the-film also holds the-record for the highest opening-day gross on a-thursday, making $50 million.
above coruscant, obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker lead a-mission to rescue the-kidnapped-supreme-chancellor-palpatine from the-cyborg-separatist-commander-general-grievous.
after infiltrating grievous'-flagship, the-jedi-battle sith-lord-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates at the-kidnapped-supreme-chancellor-palpatine's-urging.
there, anakin reunites with anakin wife, padmé-amidala, who reveals that she is pregnant.
while initially excited, anakin soon begins to have nightmares about padmé dying in childbirth.
palpatine appoints anakin to the-jedi-council as palpatine personal representative.
the-council, suspicious of palpatine, approve the-appointment, but decline to grant anakin the-rank of jedi-master and instead instruct the-rank of jedi-master to spy on palpatine, diminishing anakin's trust in the-jedi-council.
obi-wan travels to utapau, where obi-wan kills grievous, and yoda travels to the-wookiee-homeworld of kashyyyk to defend the-wookiee-homeworld of kashyyyk from a-separatist-invasion.
meanwhile, palpatine tempts anakin with palpatine knowledge of the-force, including the-power to prevent death, which palpatine offers to teach palpatine to save padmé's-life.
anakin deduces that anakin is the-sith-lord behind the-war and reports palpatine's-treachery to mace-windu, who confronts and subdues him.
desperate to save padmé's-life, anakin disarms windu before anakin can kill palpatine, who sends windu falling to anakin death.
anakin pledges anakin to the-sith, and sidious-knights him darth-vader.
palpatine then issues order 66, which commands the-clone-troopers to kill the-clone-troopers commanding jedi-officers, thus sending the-jedi-order into near-extinction.
meanwhile, vader and a-battalion of clone-troopers kill jedi-jedi in the-jedi-temple, after which vader travels to the-volcanic-planet mustafar to assassinate the-separatist-leaders.
palpatine declares palpatine emperor before the-galactic-senate, transforming the-republic into the-galactic-empire, and denounces jedi as traitors.
having survived the-chaos, obi-wan and yoda return to coruscant and learn of anakin's-turn to the-dark-side.
yoda orders obi-wan to confront vader while he faces darth-sidious.
when padmé learns of anakin's-treachery, padmé travels to mustafar – with obi-wan stowing away on padmé ship – and implores vader to abandon the-dark-side, but vader refuses.
sensing-obi-wan's-presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill obi-wan's, vader angrily uses the-force to strangle padmé to unconsciousness.
obi-wan's then engages vader in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with obi-wan's severing vader's legs and left-arm.
yoda then flees with senator-bail-organa and regroups with obi-wan and padmé on the-planetoid polis-massa.
there, padmé gives birth to twins, whom she names luke and leia, and dies soon after, having lost she will to live.
palpatine tells palpatine that palpatine killed padmé in a-blind-rage, devastating vader.
obi-wan and yoda plan to conceal the-twins from the-sith and go into exile until the-time is right to challenge the-empire.
as padmé's-funeral takes place on her-homeworld of naboo, sidious and vader supervise the-construction of the-death-star.
bail takes leia to bail homeworld of alderaan, where bail and bail wife adopt his-wife, while obi-wan delivers luke to his-step-uncle and aunt, owen and beru-lars, on tatooine before going into exile to watch over the-boy.
hayden-christensen as anakin-skywalker, a-jedi-knight, hero of the-clone-wars and former-padawan of obi-wan, who turns to the-dark-side of the-force and becomes the-sith-lord-darth-vader.
ian-mcdiarmid as palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic who is secretly a-sith-lord, and later-the-founder and leader of the-galactic-empire takes advantage of anakin's-distrust of the-jedi and fear of padmé dying to turn ian-mcdiarmid as palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic who is secretly a-sith-lord, and later-the-founder and leader of the-galactic-empire towards the-dark-side, becoming vader's-master.
anthony-daniels as c-3po, anakin-and-padmé's-personal-protocol-droid that anakin created as a-child.
joel-edgerton and bonnie-piesse also make cameo-appearances, reprising joel-edgerton and bonnie-piesse roles as owen and beru-lars respectively from attack of the-clones.
sound-engineer-matthew-wood provides the-voice of general-grievous, the-fearsome-cyborg-commander of the-separatists'-droid-army; temuera-morrison portrays commander-cody and the-rest of the-clone-troopers; bruce-spence portrays tion-medon, local-administrator of utapau; jeremy-bulloch (who played boba-fett in the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi) appears as captain-colton, the-pilot of the-rebel-blockade-runner-tantive-iv; genevieve-o'reilly portrays senator-mon-mothma, though genevieve-o'reilly scene was ultimately cut.
editor-roger-barton's-son aidan-barton portrays luke-skywalker and leia-organa as infants.
one of lucas'-daughters, amanda, appears as terr-taneel, seen in a-security-hologram, while lucas'-other-daughter katie plays a-blue-skinned-pantoran named chi eekway, visible when palpatine arrives at the-senate after being saved by the-jedi and talking to baron-papanoida at the-opera-house.
production ==
lucas stated that lucas conceived the-star-wars-saga's-story in the-form of a-plot-outline in 1973.
however, lucas later clarified that, at the-time of the-saga's-conception, lucas had not fully realized the-details —only major plot points.
the-film-basis in the-return of the-jedi-novelization, in which obi-wan recounts obi-wan battle with anakin that ended with the latter falling "into a-molten-pit".
lucas began working on the-screenplay for episode-iii before the-previous-film, attack of the-clones, was released, proposing to concept artists that the-film would open with a-montage of seven-battles on seven-planets.
in the-secret-history of star-wars, michael-kaminski surmises that lucas found flaws with anakin's-fall to the-dark-side and radically reorganized the-plot.
for example, instead of opening the-film with a-montage of clone-war-battles, lucas decided to focus on anakin, ending the-first-act with lucas killing count-dooku, an-action that signals lucas turn to the-dark-side.
a-significant-number of fans speculated online about the-episode-title for the-film with rumored-titles including rise of the-empire,
the-creeping-fear (which was also named as the-film's-title on the-official-website on april fool's 2004), and birth of the-empire.
eventually, revenge of the-sith also became a-title guessed by fans that george-lucas would indirectly confirm.
a-title guessed by fans that george-lucas would indirectly confirm is a-reference to revenge of the-jedi, the-original-title of return of the-jedi; george-lucas changed a-title guessed by fans that george-lucas would indirectly confirm scant-weeks before the-premiere of return of the-jedi, declaring that the-jedi do not seek revenge.
since george-lucas refocused the-film on anakin, george-lucas had to sacrifice certain-extraneous-plot-points relating to attack of the-clones.
george-lucas had previously promised fans that george-lucas would explain the-mystery behind the-erasure of the-planet-kamino from the-jedi-archives.
however, lucas abandoned this-plot-thread in order to devote more-time to anakin's-story, leaving the-matter unresolved on film.
lucas had originally planned to include even-more-ties to the-original-trilogy, and wrote early-drafts of the-script in which a-10-year-old-han-solo appeared on kashyyyk, but the-role was not cast or shot.
lucas also wrote a-scene in which palpatine reveals to anakin that palpatine created palpatine from midichlorians, and is thus palpatine "father", a-clear-parallel to vader's-revelation to luke in the empire strikes back, but lucas ejected this-scene as well.
another-planned-scene by lucas that was written during the-early-development of film was a-conversation between master-yoda and the-ghostly-qui-gon-jinn, with liam-neeson reprising liam-neeson role as jinn
however, another-planned-scene by lucas that was written during the-early-development of the-film was never filmed and liam-neeson was never recorded, although another-planned-scene by lucas that was written during the-early-development of the-film
neeson finally reprised the-role in an-episode of the-clone-wars in 2011.after-principal-photography was complete in 2003, lucas made even-more-changes in anakin's-character, rewriting the-entire-"turn"-sequence.
lucas accomplished this-"rewrite" through editing the-principal-footage and filming new-scenes during pickups in london in 2004.
in the-previous-versions, anakin had myriad-reasons for turning to the-dark-side, one of which was anakin sincere belief that the-jedi were plotting to take over the-republic.
although this is still intact in the-finished-film, by revising and refilming many-scenes, lucas emphasized anakin's-desire to save padmé from death.
thus, in the-version that made it to theaters, anakin falls to the-dark-side primarily to save padmé.
over a-period of months, lucas would approve hundreds of designs that would eventually appear in the-film.
lucas would later rewrite entire-scenes and action-sequences to correspond to certain-designs lucas had chosen.
ben-burtt would edit these-scenes with lucas in order to pre-visualize what the-film would look like before the-scenes were filmed.
later, the-pre-visualization-and-art-department-designs were sent to the-pre-visualization-department to begin "bringing the-film out of the-concept-phase" by building-sets, props and costumes.
although the-first-scene filmed was the-final-scene to appear in the-film (shot during the-filming of attack of the-clones in 2000), the-first-bulk of principal-photography on the-film occurred from june 30, 2003 to september 17, 2003, with additional-photography occurring at shepperton-studios in surrey and elstree-studios in hertfordshire from august 2004 to january 31, 2005.
the-initial-filming took place on sound-stages at fox-studios-australia in sydney, although practical-environments were shot as background-footage later to be composited into the-film.
while shooting key-dramatic-scenes, lucas would often use an-"a-camera" and "b-camera", or the-"v-technique", a-process that involves shooting with two-or-more-cameras at the-same-time in order to gain several-angles of the-same-performance.
hayden-christensen says lucas asked lucas "to bulk up and physically show the-maturity that had taken place between the-two-films.
hayden-christensen and ewan-mcgregor began rehearsing christensen and ewan-mcgregor climactic lightsaber duel long before lucas would shoot it.
the-speed at which vader and obi-wan engage in vader and obi-wan duel is mostly the-speed at which it was filmed, although there are instances where single-frames were removed to increase the-velocity of particular-strikes.
an-example of this occurs as obi-wan strikes down on vader after applying an-armlock in the-duel's-first-half.
revenge of the-sith eventually became the-first-star-wars-film in which anakin-skywalker and the-suited-darth-vader were played by the-same-actor in the-same-film.
as christensen recounted, it was originally intended to simply have a-"tall-guy" in the-darth-vader-costume, but after "begging and pleading" christensen persuaded lucas to have the-vader-costume used in the-same-film created specifically to fit lucas.
gary-oldman backed out of the-role rather than violate the-union's-rules.
the-post-production-department (handeled by industrial-light & magic) began work during filming and continued until weeks before the-film was released in 2005.
revenge of the-sith has 2,151-shots that use special-effects, a-world-record.
the-dvd-featurette within a-minute illustrated the-film required 910-artists and 70,441-man-hours to create 49-seconds of footage for the-mustafar-duel alone.
many-times-the-stars, and lucas himself, were spotted on the-webcam.
lucas himself excised all-the-scenes of a-group of senators, including padmé, bail-organa, and mon-mothma (genevieve-o'reilly), organizing an-alliance to prevent palpatine from usurping any-more-emergency-powers.
the-scene where yoda arrives on dagobah to begin yoda self-imposed exile was also removed, but is featured as an-extended-scene in the-dvd-release, although mccallum stated mccallum hopes lucas may add it to the-release if lucas releases a-six-episode-dvd-box-set.
bai-ling filmed minor-scenes for the-film playing a-senator, but bai-ling role was cut during editing.
lucas denied this, stating that the-cut had been made more than a year earlier, and that lucas had cut lucas own daughter's scenes as well.
the-bonus-features show an-additional-removed-scene in which jedi-master-shaak-ti is killed by general-grievous in front of obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker.
the-bonus-features also show obi-wan-kenobi and skywalker running through grievous's-ship, escaping droids through a-fuel-tunnel, and arguing over what the-droid r2-d2 is saying.
a-music-video titled a hero falls was created for the-film's-theme, "battle of the-heroes", featuring footage from the-film and was also available on the-film's soundtrack also came with a-collectors'-dvd ,-star-wars: a-musical-journey, at no-additional-cost.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-charity-premieres took place in seattle, los-angeles, chicago, washington-d.c., boston, denver, atlanta, san-francisco, and miami on thursday, may 12, 2005; and on may 13, 2005, there were two-additional-charity-premiere-screenings in george-lucas's-hometown of modesto, california.
the-official-premiere-theatrical-release in most-other-countries took place on may 19 to coincide with the-1999-release of the-phantom-menace
(the-1977-release of a-new-hope and the-1983-release of return of the-jedi were also released on the-same-day and month, six years apart).
most of people took advantage of an-offer to see the-film at a-nearby-cinema, arclight cinemas (formerly-the-"cinerama-dome").
a-copy of the-film leaked onto peer-to-peer file sharing networks just hours after opening in theaters.
the-film was a-time-stamped-workprint, suggesting the-film may have come from within the-industry rather than from someone who videotaped an-advance-screening.
documents filed by the-los-angeles-district-attorney allege that a-copy of the-film was taken from an-unnamed-californian-post-production-office by an-employee, who later pleaded guilty to his-charges.
a-copy of the-film was passed among seven-people until reaching an-eighth-party, who also pleaded guilty to uploading to an-unnamed-p2p-network.
in 2016, youtube-user-gratefuldeadpool uploaded a-fan-edit of revenge of the-sith in which the-cast's-voices were dubbed by other-actors to match the-bootleg-subtitles.
revenge of the-sith is the-first-star-wars-film to receive a-pg-13-rating from the-motion-picture-association of america (mpaa), officially for "thematic-elements sci-fi-violence and some-intense-images", namely for the-scene in which darth-vader is set aflame by lava and molten-rock.
lucas had stated months before the-mpaa's-decision that lucas felt the-first-star-wars-film to receive a-pg-13-rating from the-motion-picture-association of america (mpaa) should receive a-pg-13-rating, because of anakin's-final-moments and the-first-star-wars-film to receive a-pg-13-rating from the-motion-picture-association of america
all-previously-released-films in the-series were rated pg.
the-film was released on dvd and vhs on october 31, 2005, in the-uk and ireland; on november 1, 2005, the-film was released in the-united-states and canada on dvd; and on november 3, 2005, the-film was released in australia.
the-film was also released in most-major-territories on or near the-same-day.
dvd included a-number of documentaries including a-new-full-length-documentary as well as two-featurettes, one which explores the-prophecy of anakin-skywalker as the chosen one, the other looking at the-film's-stunts and a-15-part-collection of web-documentaries from the-official-web-site.
six-deleted-scenes were included with introductions from lucas and mccallum.
this-release was re-released in a prequel trilogy box set on november 4, 2008.the-star-wars-films were released by 20th-century-fox-home-entertainment on blu-ray on december 16, 2010, in three-different-editions.
on april 7, 2015, walt-disney-studios, 20th-century-fox, and lucasfilm jointly announced the-digital-releases of the-six-released-star-wars-films.
revenge of the-sith was released through the-itunes-store, amazon-video, vudu, google-play, and disney-movies
anywhere on april 10, 2015.walt
disney-studios-home-entertainment reissued revenge of the-sith on blu-ray, dvd, and digital-download on september 22, 2019.
additionally, all-six-films were available for 4k-hdr and dolby-atmos streaming on disney+ upon the-service's-launch on november 12, 2019.
this-version of the-film was released by disney on 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray on march 31, 2020.
on september 28, 2010, it was announced that all-six-films in the-series were to be stereo-converted to 3d. all-six-films in the-series would be re-released in chronological-order beginning with the-phantom-menace on february 10, 2012.
revenge of the-sith was originally scheduled to be re-released in 3d on october 11, 2013.
however, on january 28, 2013, lucasfilm announced that lucasfilm was postponing the-3d-release of episodes ii and iii in order to "focus 100-percent of our-efforts on star-wars:
the-force awakens" and that further-information about 3d-release-plans would be issued at a-later-date.
the-premiere of the-3d-version was shown on april 17, 2015, at star-wars-celebration-anaheim.
the-site's-critical-consensus reads, "with episode iii: revenge of the-sith
, george-lucas brings george-lucas second star wars trilogy to a-suitably-thrilling-and-often-poignant-–-if-still-a-bit-uneven-–-conclusion."
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-film an-average-grade of "a–" on an-a+ to f-scale, the-same-score as the-previous-two-films.
most-critics have considered the-film to be the best of the-prequel-trilogy.
a.-o.-scott of the-new-york-times concluded that the-film was "the best of the-four-episodes mr.-lucas has directed", and equal to the-empire strikes back as "the-richest-and-most-challenging-movie in the-cycle".
in a-2007-summary of the-100-best-science-fiction-films on rotten-tomatoes, revenge of the-sith was placed 51 out of 100, making it the only star wars prequel film to earn a-rank on that-list.
j.r.-jones, a-chicago-reader-critic who disliked the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones, gave the-film a-positive-review, saying that the-film had a-"relatively-thoughtful-story".
roger-ebert of the-chicago-sun-times gave the-film three-and-a-half-out-of-four-stars, writing "if [lucas] got bogged down in solemnity and theory in episode-ii:
attack of the-clones, the-force is in a-jollier-mood this time, and revenge of the-sith is a-great-entertainment", but revenge of the-sith noted that "the-dialogue throughout the-movie is once again the-movie weakest-point".
though many-critics and fans viewed revenge of the-sith as the strongest of the-three-prequels, some-viewers thought it was more or less on par with the-previous-two-episodes.
much of the-criticism was directed towards the-dialogue, particularly-the-film's-romantic-scenes; critics claimed this demonstrated lucas's-weakness as a-writer of dialogue, a-subject with which lucas openly agreed when receiving the-lifetime-achievement-award from the-american-film-institute.
in 2012, glittering-images-art-critic camille-paglia praised the-film, comparing some of the-film scenes to works by modern-painters and calling the-film "the-greatest-work of art in recent-memory".
i had considered using japanese-anime for the-digital-art-chapter of the-book, but the-film lacked the-overwhelming-operatic-power and yes,-seriousness of lucas's-revenge of the-sith.
during the-late-2010s, the-film amassed a-cult following on social-media among young-fans who were children when the-film was released, using the-film's dialogue to create internet-memes out of nostalgia.
some-american-conservatives criticized the-film, claiming the-film had a-liberal-bias and was a-commentary on the-george-w.-bush-administration and iraq-war.
lucas defended the-film, stating that the-film's storyline was written during the-vietnam-war and was influenced by that-conflict rather than the-war in iraq.
lucas also said "the-parallels between vietnam and what we're doing in iraq now are unbelievable".
the-film was released in 115-countries.
the-film worldwide gross eventually reached $849 million—making the-film the second most financially successful film of 2005, behind harry-potter and the-goblet of fire.
the-film earned an estimated $16.91 million from 2,900-midnight-screenings in north-america upon the-film release.
in total, the-film earned a record $50 million on
the-film opening-day.
the-film was surpassed the following year by pirates of the-caribbean: dead-man's-chest, which earned $55.5 million on its-opening-day.
with only-the-may-19-earnings, the-film broke four-box-office-records:
gross-records were later surpassed by pirates of the-caribbean: dead-man's-chest on july 7, 2006, when that-movie grossed $55.5 million on the-matrix-opening-day, and the-matrix-midnight-screening-gross was broken by the-dark-knight on july 18, 2008 with $18.5 million.
in eight-days run in american-theaters on october 20, 2005, finishing with a-total-gross of $380,270,577.
following the-release of revenge of the-sith—the completion of the-original-and-prequel-star-wars-series—on june 9, 2005, george-lucas was presented with the-33rd-american-film-institute-lifetime-achievement-award.
the-33rd-american-film-institute-lifetime-achievement-award honored george-lucas "astonishing-contributions to the-art and technology of filmmaking, as well as the-impact of the-epic-star-wars-series".
as did every-film of the-original-trilogy, the-film won the-saturn-award for best-science-fiction-film.
the-film was nominated for ten-saturn-awards overall, including best-director and best writing for lucas, best-actor for christensen, best-actress for natalie-portman and best-supporting-actor for ian-mcdiarmid.
of the-three-star-wars-prequels, the-film received the-fewest-golden-raspberry-awards-nominations: only one, for christensen as worst-supporting-actor, which christensen won.
( the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones received seven-nominations each, with one-and-two-wins, respectively.)
throughout revenge of the-sith, lucas refers to a-wide-range of films and other-sources, drawing on political,-military,-and-mythological-motifs to enhance lucas story's impact.
perhaps the-most-media-coverage was given to a-particular-exchange between anakin and obi-wan, which led to the-aforementioned-controversy: "if you're not with me, then you're my-enemy", anakin declares.
midway through the-film, lucas intercuts between anakin and padmé by themselves, thinking about one another in the-jedi-temple and themselves apartment, respectively, during sunset.
the-film includes much-more-dialogue than the-film, and certain-story-elements were fleshed out further in the-novelization, such as anakin and palpatine's-relationship and palpatine's-apprenticeship to darth-plagueis.
a-video-game based on the-film was released on may 5, 2005, two weeks before the-film.
a-video-game based on the-film followed the-film's storyline for the-most-part, integrating scenes from the-film.
the-style of the-game was mostly-lightsaber-combat and fighting as obi-wan or anakin.
the-style of the-game also has a-form of multiplayer-mode, which includes both-"vs" and "cooperative"-mode.
the-clone-wars and subsequent-star-wars-media ===
the-2008-animated-film and subsequent-television-series fill the-three-year-gap between the-events of attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith.
several-plot-threads planned but ultimately dropped from revenge of the-sith were instead incorporated into the-clone-wars; these included boba-fett's-revenge-plot against mace-windu for boba-fett's-father-jango's-death, as well as the-mystery behind deceased-jedi-master-sifo-dyas introduced in attack of the-clones.
the-final-four-episodes of the-series take place concurrently with revenge of the-sith.
several-scenes from the-film were recreated and expanded for the-final-four-episodes of the-series in order to showcase the-whereabouts of anakin-skywalker's-former-padawan-ahsoka-tano during the-events of the-film.
while ahsoka was a-major-character in the-clone-wars, ahsoka is not alluded to in revenge of the-sith as the-character had not yet been created when the-film was in production.
references == ===
star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at starwars.com star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at lucasfilm.com star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at imdb
star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith-title listing at the internet speculative fiction database star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at the tcm movie database star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at allmovie-star-trek:
the-eighth-star-trek-series features a-retired-jean-luc-picard who has been deeply affected by the-death of data in the-film star-trek: nemesis (2002) and the-destruction of the-planet romulus in the-film star-trek (2009).
patrick-stewart-executive produces the-series and stars as picard, reprising patrick-stewart-executive role from the-series star-trek:
the-series was first rumored in june 2018, and was officially announced that august.
stewart had previously said stewart would not return to the-franchise after nemesis.
the-series is produced by cbs-television-studios in association with secret-hideout, weed-road-pictures, escapist-fare, and roddenberry-entertainment, and was designed to be slower and more character-focused than previous-series in the-franchise.
filming takes place in california, which granted the-series large-tax-credits.
picard premiered on cbs all-access on january 23, 2020, and picard first season ran for 10-episodes until march 26.
the second is in production and is set to debut on paramount+
the-series was met with positive-reviews from critics, who praised stewart's-performance and the-focus on character over action, though some criticized the-series slow pace.
the-companion-series star-trek begins 20 years after jean-luc-picard's-last-appearance in star-trek: nemesis (2002), and finds the-character deeply affected by the-death of data in that-film as well as the-destruction of the-planet romulus in the-film star-trek (2009).
season 1 (2020) === ===
season 2 ===
co-creator-alex-kurtzman saw the-series as a-redemption-story for patrick-stewart as jean-luc-picard: a-former-starfleet-admiral who previously commanded the-uss-enterprise who is now at the-end of co-creator-alex-kurtzman life and must face the-consequences of co-creator-alex-kurtzman choice to abandon starfleet and the-romulans, with the-series depicting the-suffering that has happened since co-creator-alex-kurtzman retired and patrick-stewart as jean-luc-picard: a-former-starfleet-admiral who previously commanded the-uss-enterprise's attempts to make up for co-creator-alex-kurtzman past-actions.
production == ===
in june 2018, after becoming sole-showrunner of the-series star-trek:-discovery, alex-kurtzman signed a-five-year-overall-deal with cbs-television-studios to expand the star-trek franchise beyond discovery to several-new-series, miniseries, and animated-series.
one of several-new-series, miniseries, and animated-series was reported to star patrick-stewart, reprising alex-kurtzman-role of jean-luc-picard from the-series star-trek: the-next-generation.
when cbs had first approached kurtzman and akiva-goldsman (who worked on the-first-season of discovery) about making more-star-trek-series, alex kurtzman believed jean-luc-picard was the-greatest-star-trek-captain and included a-series featuring the-character on jean-luc-picard wish list, despite patrick-stewart having said that jean-luc-picard did not want to return to the-star-trek-franchise beyond discovery.
while developing ideas for the-short-form-companion-series star-trek: short-treks, alex-kurtzman and alex-kurtzman team developed a-story that would have featured nichelle-nichols reprising patrick-stewart original star-trek role of uhura.
after developing the-older-a-young-picard-story, the-team decided that the-team had enough to pitch a-full-series focused on the-character to stewart; kurtzman and goldsman contacted the-actor before january 2018 to discuss this-idea, and met with the-actor along with discovery-writer-kirsten-beyer at the-beverly-wilshire-hotel.
stewart asked to meet with the-group again in march 2018, where stewart expressed stewart approval of the-group pitch.
while deciding whether to join the-project, stewart asked kurtzman that the-series be "so different" from previous-star-trek-stories, "both what people remember but also not what people're expecting at all, otherwise why do it?"
kurtzman was also concerned that the-series would be "jokey", but received assurances from the-project's-creative-team that it would not be.
on august 4, 2018, stewart made a-surprise-appearance at the-annual-las-vegas-star-trek-convention to officially announce the-series and confirm that stewart would star in the-series.
stewart explained that after last portraying the-character in the-2002-film-star-trek: nemesis, stewart felt stewart role in the-franchise "had run its-natural-course", but in the-years since stewart was humbled by stories of the-impact the-character had on the-lives of fans and so was now happy "to research and experience
in addition to starring, stewart was also set to executive produce the-series alongside kurtzman, goldsman, chabon, discovery's-james-duff, heather-kadin of kurtzman's production company secret-hideout, and rod-roddenberry (the-son of star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry) and trevor-roth of roddenberry-entertainment.
the-series was set to premiere in 2019.
kadin revealed in october that the-series was intended to be ongoing rather than a-limited-miniseries, and said that kadin release dates would not overlap with discovery or any-other-new-star-trek-series.
kurtzman added that the-series would be "the-series own thing", later elaborating that where discovery is "a-bullet", the-series is "a-very-contemplative-show" with the-series own "rhythm" and more of a-"real-world"-feeling.
cbs-cco-david-nevins confirmed in december 2018 that the-series was intended to debut on cbs
all-access at the-end of 2019, after the-full-release of discovery's-second-season and several-star-trek:
stewart revealed a month later that the-series would consist of 10-episodes, and reiterated that the-intention was for the-intention to continue for multiple-seasons, adding in february that "we are set up for possibly-three-years of this-show".
a production listing in march gave the-series-title as star-trek: destiny, which cbs had trademarked in 2018.
at that-time, kurtzman said the-series was being "shepherded" by a-larger-creative-team rather than having a-traditional-showrunner.
in late-june, chabon was named sole showrunner of the-series, to work closely on the day-to-day production with kurtzman and goldsman.
a month later, the-series was scheduled to premiere in january 2020.
in october, kurtzman said a-second-season of the-series was "already in the-works".
cbs officially renewed the-series for a-second-season a month later and revealed that terry-matalas had joined the-series as an-executive-producer to fill the-void that would be created by chabon's-planned-departure.
goldsman and matalas took over as co-showrunners for the-series once chabon left.
also at this-time, the-series was reported to have an-informal-green-light for a-third-season that would be developed at the-same-time as the second
the-series has a-reported-budget of $8–9 million per episode.
the-series is set 20 years after stewart's-last-appearance as picard in the-film star-trek: nemesis (2002).
kurtzman revealed that the-series would find the-character "radically altered" by the-destruction of romulus several years after the-events of nemesis, as depicted in the-film star-trek (2009), and explained that the-mandate for the-series was to make the-series "a more psychological show, a-character-study about this-man in kurtzman emeritus years".
in a-television-series, the-character must find the-character way back to roddenberry's-original-optimistic-vision for the-franchise, which kurtzman hoped would reinforce that-original-vision while allowing the-character to "go through deep-valleys".
in july 2019, goldsman said a-television-series would not be a-direct-sequel to the-next-generation and would be more character-focused than a-television-series.
stewart compared a-television-series to when stewart reprised stewart x-men role of professor-x in the-film logan (2017), where stewart was the-same-character but the-franchise's-world and tone was "blown apart".
at the-start of march 2019, santiago-cabrera and michelle-hurd were santiago-cabrera and michelle-hurd set to co-star in the-series, with santiago-cabrera being one of the-most-sought-after-actors during the-2019-television-pilot-season and choosing the-series over other-offers.
the-series reveals that isa-briones portrays several-androids:
in june 2020, the-entire-main-cast of the-series was confirmed to be returning for the-second-season except for treadaway.
however, the-writers wanted to be respectful to longtime-fans of star-trek and felt the-writers were missing opportunities by not including certain-characters, so the-writers decided to add some-returning-guests who organically served the-new-story.
several-actors from previous-star-trek-series were announced as guest-stars for picard in july 2019, including the-next-generation's-brent-spiner as data, jonathan-del-arco as hugh, jonathan-frakes as william-riker, and marina-sirtis as deanna-troi, as well as star-trek:
in january 2020, stewart said it was stewart hope that all of the-main-cast of the-next-generation would appear on picard before the-end of the-series, while kurtzman said if michael-dorn reprised michael-dorn klingon role worf in picard michael-dorn would appear as michael-dorn did in the-next-generation and not be changed to match the-new-klingon-designs in discovery.
at that-time, whoopi-goldberg agreed to appear in the-second-season of the-series as whoopi-goldberg
in april 2021, ryan, spiner, and first-season guest-star-orla-brady were revealed to be main-cast-members for the-second-season, with john-de-lancie also appearing in the-season as john-de-lancie star trek character q. ===
acknowledging that the-series would be set further in the-future than any-previous-star-trek-film or series, kurtzman explained that the-production was aiming for a-"grounded"-approach rather than having things like "crazy-floating-skyscrapers and all-the-cliches of science-fiction".
the-series is filmed at santa-clarita-studios, california, under the-working-title drawing-room.
the-series received large-tax-credits from the-california-film-commission for the-production to take place in california, rather than in toronto, canada, where star trek:
location shooting for the-first-season also took place around california, including at sunstone-winery in santa-ynez-valley to depict picard's-french-vineyard, at long-time-star-trek filming location vasquez rocks in the-sierra-pelona-mountains in los-angeles-county where raffi's-home is found in the-series, and in the-malibu-area for the-planet coppelius.
visual-effects for the-series are provided by pixomondo, dneg, crafty-apes, ghost-vfx, gentle-giant-studios, technicolor-vfx, and filmworks/fx.
discovery-composer-jeff-russo was revealed to be composing the-score for picard in july 2019.
discovery-composer-jeff-russo's-relationship with star-trek began as a-fan of the-next-generation, and discovery-composer-jeff-russo asked kurtzman if kurtzman could work on picard after seeing stewart's-announcement of the-series at the las vegas star-trek convention.
kurtzman took time to consider this before officially asking discovery-composer-jeff-russo to score the-series at the-las-vegas-star-trek-convention.
the-motion-picture (1979) to connect the-story back to the-next-generation, as that-series used jerry-goldsmith's's-theme in its-main-title, while russo also references alexander-courage's-original-star-trek-theme to "evoke the-idea of star-trek in general".
a-soundtrack-album for the-first-half of the-first-season was released on february 7, 2020, followed by a-complete-soundtrack-album covering the-full-season on april 3.
like discovery before it, each-episode of the-series is broadcast in canada by bell-media on the-same-day as the-all-access-release, on the-specialty-channels ctv-sci-fi-channel (english) and z-(french) before streaming on crave.
in september 2020, viacomcbs announced that cbs-all-access would be expanded and rebranded as paramount+
in march 2021.
existing-episodes of picard season one will remain on paramount+
cbs also partly attributed the-premiere of the-series for the-month of january 2020 breaking the-service's-record for the-most-new-subscribers in a-month, helped by the-week of picard's-premiere being the-second-most-new-subscribers in a-single-week for the-service.
short-treks was being released in december 2018, cbs-cco-david-nevins stated that there would be more-shorts released before the-premiere of picard.
in february 2019, kurtzman said future-shorts could tie directly into series other than discovery.
the-episode, titled "children of mars", was released on january 9, 2020, and depicts the-synthetic-attack on mars from picard's-backstory but from the-perspective of two-school-children.
in september 2019, cbs announced a-new-three-issue-comic-book titled star trek: picard –-countdown, to be released beginning that november by idw-publishing.
in september 2019, cbs announced a-new-novel written by frequent-star-trek-author-una-mccormack to be published by simon & schuster in february 2020.
the last best hope , the-novel leads directly into the-events of the-series and introduces several-new-characters that are featured in the-first-season.
a-second-novel,-dark-veil by james-swallow, will be published in january 2021.
in january 2020, cbs-all-access announced that the-next-generation-actor wil-wheaton would host a-new-season of the-star-trek-aftershow
wheaton replaced naomi-kyle, who hosted the-series for wheaton first-run after episodes of discovery's-second-season.
after the-series premiere on january 23, 2020, deadline-hollywood released the-first-episode of the-star-trek: picard-podcast, a-weekly-podcast sponsored by cbs-all-access and hosted by deadline's-senior-editor dominic-patten and genre-editor-geoff-boucher.
references == ==
star-trek: picard at imdb star-trek: picard at tv.com star-trek: picard at memory-alpha (a star-trek wiki)
this-list of characters from the-star-wars-franchise contains only those which are considered part of the-official-star-wars-canon, as of the-changes made by lucasfilm in april 2014.
following its-acquisition by the-walt-disney-company in 2012, lucasfilm rebranded most of the-novels, comics, video-games and other-works produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars as star-wars legends and declared them non-canon to the-rest of the-franchise.
as such, the-list contains only-information from the-skywalker-saga-films, the-2008-animated-tv-series star-wars: the-clone-wars, and works published after april 2014.
by the-time the-hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a-few-scattered-worlds throughout the-galaxy; according to the-new-essential-chronology, the-humans of coruscant managed to send out a-number of 'sleeper-ships' between the-fall of the-rakatan-infinite-empire and the-invention of the-hyperdrive.
the-presence of ordinary-humans in the-story is important dramatically and the-first-movie establishes their-vulnerability and weakness.
human-force-sensitive-characters are divided into jedi and those affiliated with the-light-side of the-force; and sith and those affiliated with the-dark-side (such as dark jedi, who are former jedi who have fallen to the-dark-side, and inquisitors, who are jedi hunters trained by darth-vader and serving the-empire).
the-ensuing-conflict between the-two-factions became known as the-clone-wars, which supreme chancellor palpatine, secretly the sith lord darth sidious and the mastermind behind the-war, took advantage of to manipulate the-republic's-senators and citizens into supporting his-plans for the-government's-reorganization into the-galactic-empire for the-purpose of intergalactic-"peace".
the-republic serves as the-protagonist-faction of the-prequel-trilogy, which depicts the-republic downfall and conversion into the-galactic-empire.
created from jango-fett's-dna, they were genetically modified to have accelerated-growth and be predisposed toward unquestioning-obedience to the-chain of command, including being outfitted with mind-controlling-biochips, which were put to use during order 66, when the-clone-troopers turned on and tried to kill the-clone-troopers jedi generals.
most of the-planets that made up the-confederacy attempted to earn the-confederacy freedom by force, engaging in the-three-year-long-clone-wars with the-republic using an-army of battle-droids.
once sidious achieved sidious goal of scaring the-people of the-republic into supporting sidious plans for the-formation of a-galactic-empire, sidious ended the-clone-wars by having sidious new apprentice, darth-vader, kill the-separatist-council-leaders.
the-rebel-alliance is an-organization of multiple-planets and systems that oppose the-rule of the-galactic-empire, with which the-galactic-empire engages in the-five-year-long-galactic-civil-war.
the-galactic-empire serves as the-protagonist-faction of the-original-trilogy.
rogue one is a-squad of rebel-soldiers formed in the-film of the-same-name that embarked on a-suicide-mission to steal the-death-star's-schematics.
galactic empire === is an-autocracy formed by emperor-palpatine at the-end of the-clone-wars, replacing the-old-galactic-republic.
in the-original-trilogy, the-empire serves as the-main-antagonistic-faction.
at its-peak, the-empire the-empire sprawled most of the-known-star-wars-galaxy.
the-empire the-empire was eventually defeated by the-rebel-alliance and collapsed, but some-remnants continued to exist for 30-years and reunited to form the-first-order.
the-resistance
the-resistance is a-military-organization founded and led by leia-organa, and the-successor of the-rebel-alliance.
the-resistance fought against the-first-order to defend the-new-republic and maintain peace in the-galaxy, 30 years after the-conclusion of the-galactic-civil-war.
formed from the-rebel-alliance and meant to be a-restoration of the-old-galactic-republic, the-rebel-alliance governed most of the-known-galaxy, until the-rebel-alliance fell after the-first-order destroyed the-rebel-alliance capital, the-hosnian-prime-system.
main-goal is to overthrow the-new-republic and destroy the-resistance and luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi.
ruled by supreme-leader-snoke, a force-sensitive being created by the-resurrected-darth-sidious to act as darth-sidious-puppet-ruler, the-first-order succeeded in destroying the-new-republic and conquering much of the-known-galaxy, especially during kylo-ren's-reign, who killed snoke and became the-next-supreme-leader.
near the-end of its-one-year-long-war with the-resistance, its allied its with the-sith-eternal, a-secret-cult of sith-loyalists led by sidious on exegol, though both were ultimately defeated by the-remains of the-resistance and the-civilians of the-galaxy, who finally gathered the-courage to rise against both-oppressors.
much like the-empire before the-empire, the-first-order uses stormtroopers as the-first-order main military.
the-males are known for the-males spirit of travel and are among the-first-species in the-galaxy to develop interstellar-travel, while the-females usually remain on the-females homeworld to look after the-children and govern the-place.
the-only-known-member of this-species, prosset-dibs, could use the-force to make up for the-force lack of eyesight and become familiar with the-force surroundings ====
they are believed to be the-embodiments of the-force itself: the-light-side, the-dark-side, and the-balance between the two.
known across the-galaxy as greed-driven-bankers, they ran the-intergalactic-banking-clan during the-galactic-republic-era.
==== are a-humanoid,-feline-like-sentient-species from zygerria, who had built and run the-biggest-slave-empire in the-galaxy, until the-jedi overthrew them and outlawed slavery.
attempts to rebuild the-biggest-slave-empire were made during the-clone-wars and the-imperial-era, but were thwarted.
list of star-wars droid characters list of star-wars legends characters list of star-wars-rebels-characters list of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-characters list of star-wars cast members
star-wars cast members-list of star-wars books ==
references ==
the-game is a-mixture of platform, puzzle and action, and is loosely based on the-star-wars: droids-tv-series.
the-player mainly controls c-3po through the-use of six-buttons at the-bottom of the-screen, four dedicated to movement, one as an-"interact"-button, and one for throwing thermal-detonators.
items are generally used to open doors, and thermal-detonators can be used to attack other-droids that become hazards.
references == ==
the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix –
the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix – is a-2019-american-epic-space-opera-film produced, co-written, and directed by j.-j.-abrams.
produced by lucasfilm and j.-j.-abrams-production-company-bad-robot-productions, and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix – is the-third-installment of the star-wars sequel-trilogy, following the force awakens (2015) and the-last-jedi (2017), and the-final-episode of the nine-part "skywalker saga".
the-rise of skywalker follows rey, finn, and poe-dameron as they lead the-resistance's-final-stand against supreme-leader-kylo-ren and the-first-order, who are aided by the-return of the-deceased-galactic-emperor,-palpatine.
following initial-reports that the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson would write the-script for episode-ix, in august 2015, colin-trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a-script with colin-trevorrow collaborator derek connolly; both ultimately retain story-credit with abrams and chris-terrio.
in september 2017, colin-trevorrow left the-project following creative-differences with producer-kathleen-kennedy, and abrams returned as director.
principal-photography began in august 2018 at pinewood-studios in england and wrapped in february 2019, with post-production completed in november 2019.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20.
unlike the force awakens and the-last-jedi which received positive-reviews, the-rise of skywalker received mixed-reviews from critics, who praised the-acting, action-sequences, musical-score, and visual-effects, but criticized the-story, pacing, and the-story perceived departures from the-plot and themes of the-last-jedi.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the-seventh-highest-grossing-film of 2019;
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 was the-lowest-grossing-installment of the-trilogy, the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 turned an-estimated-net-profit of $300 million.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 received three-nominations at the-92nd-academy-awards (best-original-score, best-visual-effects, and best-sound-editing) as well as three at the-73rd-british-academy-film-awards (also-best-special-visual-effects, best-original-music, and best-sound).
following a-threat of revenge by the-revived-emperor-palpatine, kylo-ren obtains a-sith-wayfinder, leading kylo-ren to the-uncharted-planet-exegol.
there, kylo-ren finds palpatine, who reveals that kylo-ren created snoke as a-puppet to control the-first-order and lure kylo to the-dark-side.
palpatine unveils the-final-order—a-secret-armada of star-destroyers—and tells kylo to find and kill rey, who is continuing her-jedi-training under resistance-leader-leia-organa.
finn and poe-dameron deliver intelligence from a-spy that palpatine is on exegol; rey has learned from luke-skywalker's-notes that a-sith-wayfinder can lead them there.
rey, finn, poe, chewbacca, bb-8, and c-3po depart in the-millennium-falcon to pasaana, where a-clue to a-wayfinder is hidden.
kylo initiates a-force-bond with rey to discover her-location; kylo travels to pasaana with kylo warrior subordinates, the-knights of ren.
with the-help of lando-calrissian, rey and her-friends find the-clue—a-dagger inscribed with sith-text, which c-3po's-programming forbids kylo from interpreting—and the-remains of a-jedi-hunter named ochi and kylo ship.
rey senses kylo nearby and faces rey.
the-first-order captures the-falcon, chewbacca, and the-dagger; attempting to save chewbacca, rey accidentally destroys a-first-order-transport with force-lightning.
believing chewbacca to be dead, the-group escapes on ochi's-ship.
rey senses chewbacca is alive, and the-group mounts a-rescue-mission to kylo's-star-destroyer.
rey recovers the-dagger and has visions of ochi killing rey parents with the-dagger.
kylo informs kylo that kylo is palpatine's-granddaughter; the-sith-lord had ordered ochi to recover rey as a-child, but kylo parents hid kylo on jakku to protect kylo.
general-hux saves poe, finn, and chewbacca from execution, revealing general-hux as the-spy.
rey retrieves the-wayfinder from the-remains of the-second-death-star, but she is met by kylo, who destroys the-wayfinder and duels she.
in a-dying-act, leia calls to kylo through the-force, distracting kylo as rey impales kylo.
sensing-leia's-death, rey heals kylo and takes rey ship to exile rey on ahch-to.
there, luke's-force-spirit encourages rey to face palpatine and gives rey leia's lightsaber.
rey leaves for exegol in luke's-x-wing-fighter, using the-wayfinder from kylo's-ship.
, palpatine sends one of palpatine superlaser-equipped star destroyers to destroy kijimi as a-show of force.
rey transmits her-coordinates to r2-d2, allowing the-resistance—now led by poe and finn—to follow her to exegol.
there, her confronts palpatine; palpatine demands that her kill palpatine for palpatine spirit to pass into her.
lando brings reinforcements from across the-galaxy to join the-battle.
ben overpowers the-knights of ren and joins rey, but palpatine drains the-knights of ren power to rejuvenate palpatine.
palpatine incapacitates ben and attacks the-resistance-fleet with force-lightning.
weakened, rey hears the-voices of past-jedi, who lend her their-strength.
palpatine attacks her with lightning, but rey deflects it using luke and leia's-lightsabers, killing palpatine before dying her.
ben uses the-force to revive her at the-cost of ben own life; rey kisses ben before ben dies.
the-resistance defeats palpatine's-armada, while people across the-galaxy rise up against the-first-order.
the-resistance returns to
after the-celebration, rey visits luke's-abandoned-childhood-home on tatooine and buries rey and leia's-lightsabers.
a-passerby asks a-passerby name; as the-spirits of luke and leia watch, a-passerby replies, "rey-skywalker."
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi-master and maternal-uncle of kylo-ren became one with the-force in the-last-jedi.
daisy-ridley as rey, a-former-scavenger from jakku, member of the-resistance, and the-next-jedicailey-fleming and josefine-irrera-jackson as young rey john boyega as finn, a-member of the-resistance and a-former-stormtrooper-(fn-2187) who defected from the-first-order oscar-isaac as poe-dameron, a-high-ranking-x-wing-fighter-pilot and commander of the-resistance who later inherits the-rank of general from leia-anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-humanoid-protocol-droid in the-service of general-organa
naomi-ackie as jannah, a-former-stormtrooper of the-first-order (tz-1719) living on the-planet kef-bir, who aids the-resistance-domhnall-gleeson as general-hux, the-first-order's third in-command richard e. grant as allegiant-general-pryde, a-high-ranking-general in the-first-order, who previously served in the-galactic-empire-lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata, a-former-space-pirate and ally of the-resistance keri-russell as zorii-bliss, an-old-acquaintance of poe's from kijimi
joonas-suotamo as chewbacca, a-wookiee and first-mate of the-millennium-falcon-kelly-marie-tran as rose-tico, a-mechanic in the-resistance and friend of finn-ian-mcdiarmid as emperor-palpatine, the-resurrected-dark-lord of the-sith and rey's-paternal-grandfather billy-dee-williams as lando-calrissian, a-veteran of the-rebel-alliance, a-former-owner of the-millennium-falcon, and an-old-friend of chewbaccabillie lourd and greg-grunberg reprise their-roles as lieutenant-kaydel-ko-connix and temmin
hassan-taj and lee-towersey perform the-role of r2-d2, while dave-chapman and brian-herring return as the-puppeteers of bb-8, and director-j.-j.-abrams also provides the-voice for d-o.-martin-wilde, anton-simpson-tidy, lukaz-leong, tom-rodgers, joe-kennard, and ashley-beck appear as the-knights of ren.
jodie-comer and billy-howle briefly appear as rey's-parents, while tom-wilton and screenwriter chris-terrio briefly appear as the-performer and voice for aftab-ackbar, the-son of admiral-ackbar, respectively; and mike-quinn and kipsang-rotich return as the-performer and voice of nien-nunb, respectively.
harrison-ford reprises harrison-ford role as han-solo in an-uncredited-cameo.
actors making reprisal-vocal-cameos include james-earl-jones as darth-vader, andy-serkis as snoke, and the-voices of several-past-jedi, including ewan-mcgregor and alec-guinness as obi-wan-kenobi (the latter via digitally-altered-archive-audio), hayden-christensen as anakin-skywalker, ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano, freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, olivia-d'abo as luminara-unduli, frank-oz as yoda, liam-neeson as qui-gon-jinn, jennifer-hale as aayla-secura, samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu, and angelique-perrin as adi-gallia.
production == ===
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
in february 2016, disney-chief-executive-officer-bob-iger confirmed that pre-production on episode-ix had begun.
carrie-fisher died in december 2016.
in september 2017, lucasfilm stated that trevorrow had left the-production following creative-differences, resulting trevorrow working relationship with kathleen-kennedy to become unmanageable after failing to deliver a-satisfactory-script, despite writing several-drafts.
that same month, trevorrow was rumored as the-top-choice to replace trevorrow as director, but stated "it was never in the-plan for me to direct episode-ix", and later, j.-j.-abrams, the-director of the-force-awakens, was announced to return as the-director in episode-ix.the story team met with george-lucas before writing the-new-script to discuss the-nature of the-force.
abrams co-wrote the-new-script with chris-terrio, though trevorrow and connolly retain story-credits.
the-story was rewritten to some-extent before filming was completed.
the-film was produced by abrams-co--company-bad-robot-productions, kathleen-kennedy, and michelle-rejwan.
according to terrio, the-film's-script had to include certain-narrative-beats provided by kennedy and rejwan, including the-redemption of the-character kylo-ren.
the-film's-title, the-rise of skywalker, was announced at april-2019's-the-star-wars-celebration in chicago.
carrie-fisher, who played leia-organa, died on december 27, 2016.
in january 2017, lucasfilm stated that there were no-plans to digitally generate fisher's-performance as lucasfilm had for rogue one (2016).
in july 2018, j.-j.-abrams announced that unused-footage of fisher from the-force-awakens would be used to help complete the-story.
in flashback-scenes, digital-de-aging was used for the-appearance of luke and leia through the-use of facial-shots of both-characters from the empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi respectively.
in july 2018, keri-russell was in talks to play a-part with some-"action-heavy-fight-scenes", and it was confirmed that billy-dee-williams would return as lando-calrissian, onscreen for the-first-time since 1983's-return of the-jedi—marking one of the-longest-intervals between portrayals of a-character by the-same-actor in american-film-history.
at the-end of july, keri-russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an-announcement of returning and additional-new-cast-members.
at the-star-wars-celebration in april 2019, it was revealed via the-film's-teaser-trailer that ian-mcdiarmid would return to portray palpatine.
since the-event was held after principal-photography wrapped, abrams was thrilled that news of ian-mcdiarmid on the-set never leaked.
kathleen-kennedy said they decided to reveal palpatine's-return ahead of the-film's-release because of the-characters playing a-larger-role in the-story, having they differentiated from baby-yoda, the-character from the-mandalorian.
filming also took place in wadi-rum, jordan.
oscar-isaac stated that abrams was allowing more-improvised-acting than in the-previous-two-films.
due to the-tight-schedule, some-editing took place on set.
principal-photography wrapped on february 15, 2019.
footage from the-film was shown at the-walt-disney-company's-annual-shareholders-meeting on march 7, 2019.
two-weeks of reshoots took place at pinewood involving hamill, ridley, and isaac in july 2019.
another-round of reshoots took place between late-september and october.
roger-guyett finished post-production on november 25, 2019.
in january 2018, it was confirmed that john-williams would return to compose and conduct the-rise of skywalker.
scoring began in july 2019 with john-williams and william-ross conducting and orchestrating the-sessions over the-course of six-months.
the-official-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on december 20, 2019.
despite staying silent about many-details of the-film, abrams expressed abrams hopes that fans and general-audiences would be "satisfied".
abrams headed a-panel dedicated to the-film on april 12, 2019, during the-star-wars-celebration in chicago, where the-film's title was revealed.
the-rise of skywalker" was announced on may 4, 2019.
it includes the-novel-resistance-reborn, set between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker, and various-other-titles.
from december 18, 2019, to march 11, 2020, a-prequel-graphic-novel titled the rise of kylo-ren, telling the-story of how ben-solo became kylo-ren and elaborating upon the-character's-backstory, was published by marvel-comics, written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney.
the-official-novelization of the-rise of skywalker is by rae-carson:
hardcover-and-audiobook-versions were released on march 19, 2020.
: he transferred he consciousness into a-clone-body following he death in return of the-jedi, and
the-junior-novel and corresponding-audiobook are by michael-kogge and were released on april 21, 2020.
additionally, a-five-issue-marvel-comics-adaptation written by jody-houser and illustrated by will-sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later canceled, making the-film the first in the-franchise not to receive a-comic-adaptation.
in december 2019, the-video-game fortnite-battle-royale released several-cosmetics featuring character-skins for rey, finn, a-sith-trooper, kylo-ren, and zorii-bliss along with a-tie-fighter-glider, a-millennium-falcon-glider (which was given to players for free from the-winterfest-event), four-emotes, and two-free-banners.
on december 14, fortnite's-publisher-epic-games released a-preview of the-film on an in-game theater screen as a-live-event.
at the-end of a-live-event, a-message from palpatine (the-one mentioned in the-film's-opening-crawl) was heard.
the-film was originally planned to be released in the-united-states on may 24, 2019, before being pushed back to december 20.
the-film had the-film world premiere at the-tcl-chinese-theatre in los-angeles on december 16.
unlike most-studio-films, disney reportedly did not hold test-screenings for the-rise of skywalker, instead only showing disney to abrams'-friends and family, as well as a-terminally-ill-fan.
the-rise of skywalker was scheduled to be released on digital-hd on march 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the-light of the-covid-19-pandemic.
its-dvd, blu-ray, and 4k-ultra-hd-release was followed on march 31 by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment.
the-4k-version of the-film was also released in "the skywalker saga" ultra hd blu-ray box set that-same-date.
the-4k-version of the-film was released on disney+
on may 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of the-4k-version of the-film previously-scheduled-release-date.
the-rise of skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the-united-states and canada, and $558.9 million in other-territories, for a-worldwide-total of $1.074 billion.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $300 million when factoring together all-expenses and revenues.
pre-sale-tickets went on sale on october 21, 2019, and the-film sold more-tickets in pre-sale-tickets first hour of availability on atom-tickets than the-previous-record-holder for ticket-sales, avengers: endgame (2019).
endgame (2019) became atom-tickets'-second-best-first-day-seller of all-time behind endgame, selling more-than-twice-the-number of tickets as the-last-jedi sold in that-same-timeframe, while fandango reported fandango outsold all-previous-star-wars-films.
box-office-tracking had the-rise of skywalker grossing around $200 million in box-office-tracking opening weekend, though some-firms predicted a-debut closer to $175 million.
the-film made $90 million on the-film first day, including $40 million from thursday-night-previews.
the-film went on to debut to $177.3 million, and the-film was also noted that saturday (which saw a-47%-drop from friday's gross) was the-busiest-shopping-day of the-year, likely affecting ticket-sales.
the-film made $32 million on christmas-day, the-second-best-total ever for the-holiday after the-force awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.
the-film went on to have a-five-day-total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the-weekend.
in the-film third-weekend, the-film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in
the-film fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).worldwide-the-film was projected to gross around $450 million in
the-film made $59.1 million from
the-film first-day of international-release in 46-countries.
in china, the-film made $1.6 million (rmb11.6 million) through
the-film went on to open to $198 million from overseas-countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than the-last-jedi's-total.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "the-rise of skywalker suffers from a-frustrating-lack of imagination, but concludes this-beloved-saga with fan-focused-devotion.
as of january 2020, the-film is the-lowest-rated-live-action-film of the-star-wars-series.
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 61-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 53 out of 100, the-rise of skywalker-skywalker received "mixed-or-average-reviews".
lasalle of the-san-francisco-chronicle described the-film as "a-disappointment" and wrote, "for all-the-movie's-faults, it's likely that most-people will consider the-rise of skywalker and accept the-trade: sit through a
owen-gleiberman of variety called the filmthe most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying star-wars-adventure since the-glory-days of star-wars (1977) and the empire strikes back (1980) [...]
" the-bbc's-nicholas-barber praised the-film's-acting and wrote, "the-rise of skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a-host of talented-people, and yet the best the-rise of skywalker can do is pay tribute to everything he did several decades ago. "
scott-mendelson for forbes described the-film as "possibly worse" compared to the-previous-skywalker-saga-films while ending the-main-saga and "denying this-new-trilogy this-new-trilogy artistic reason for existence", and criticized the-film for retconning the-last-jedi and the-film plot; saying that-"patronizing-reversals in the-name of mollifying the-fans who merely want to be reminded of the-first-three-movies."
justin-chang of the-los-angeles-times described the-film as "a-last-jedi-corrective", which is "more-accurate-way to describe the-film" and is "an-epic-failure of nerve"; saying that "feels more like a-retreat, a return to a-zone of emotional-and-thematic-safety from a-filmmaker with a-gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
" writing for the-new-yorker, richard-brody states that the-film's-faults "are those of the-franchise over all"; as the-film's-director "j.-j.-abrams is mainly a-distiller and a-magnifier and brings virtually-no-originality to it", using the-controls of michael-bay.
whereas asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran was a-main-character in the-last-jedi, asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran appears for about-a-minute in the-rise of skywalker.
people involved on the-film defended asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran, with some claiming some of the-attackers were racist, and body shamers.
according to cinemascore, american-audiences gave the-film an-average-grade of "b+" on an-a+ to f-scale, the lowest among the-live-action-films.
relishmix, which tracks social-media-posts and online-presence, "noticed a-divided-reaction to skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
references ==
the-rise of skywalker at starwars.com-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at lucasfilm.com-star-wars: the-rise of skywalker at imdb-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker-skywalker at allmovie
the-rise of skywalker on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at disney-a to z-the-star-wars-trilogy, also known as the-original-trilogy or the-classic-trilogy, is the-first-set of three-films produced in the-star-wars-franchise, an-american-space-opera created by george-lucas.
it was produced by lucasfilm and distributed by 20th-century-fox, and consists of the-original-star-wars-film (1977), the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
beginning in medias-res, the-original-trilogy serves as the-second-act of the-"skywalker-saga.
the-original-trilogy was followed by a-prequel-trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a-sequel-trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
the films center on the-galactic-civil-war between the-rebel-alliance and the-tyrannical-galactic-empire, as well as the-archetypical-hero's-journey of luke-skywalker in luke-skywalker quest to become a-jedi under the-tutelage of exiled-jedi-masters-obi-wan-kenobi and yoda.
luke joins forces with princess-leia, han-solo, chewbacca, c-3po, r2-d2 and the-rebel-alliance in facing the-empire and the-evil-sith-lord-darth-vader.
the-first-film and the empire strikes back have been hailed as the-greatest-sci-fi-films of all-time, whilst the-third-film, return of the-jedi, received only-positive-reviews.
in 1971, lucas wanted to film an-adaptation of the-flash-gordon-serial, but could not obtain the-rights.
lucas began developing lucas own story inspired by the-work of edgar-rice-burroughs.
immediately after directing american-graffiti (1973), lucas wrote a-two-page-synopsis for lucas space opera, titled journal of the-whills.
lucas felt lucas original story was too difficult to understand, so on april 17, 1973, lucas began writing a-13-page-script titled the star wars, sharing strong-similarities with akira-kurosawa's-the-hidden-fortress (1958).
by may 1974, lucas had expanded a-13-page-script titled the-star-wars into the-first-draft of a-screenplay, but found that a-13-page-script titled the-star-wars had grown too long for a-single-film.
lucas negotiated to retain the-sequel-rights.
lucas was offered $50,000 to write, another $50,000 to produce, and $50,000 to direct the-film; lucas directing compensation was later increased to $100,000.
lucas also negotiated the-sequel-rights and ownership of 40% of the-merchandising-profits.
american-graffiti-cast-member-harrison-ford had given up on acting to try to become a-carpenter, until lucas hired lucas to play han-solo.
star-wars was released on may 25, 1977; unlikely-hero-luke-skywalker is drawn into a-galactic-conflict between the-empire-and-rebel-alliance by two-droids and an-old-jedi-knight; unlikely-hero-luke-skywalker helps make one of the-rebellion's-most-significant-victories.
the-film's-unanticipated-success led lucas to make the-film the basis of an-elaborate-serial.
with the-backstory he created for the-sequel, lucas decided that the-series would be a-trilogy of trilogies, with the-original-film given the-subtitle episode-iv – a-new-hope to establish the-original-film as the-first-part of the-second-trilogy.
episode-v – the-empire strikes back, was released on may 21, 1980, and sees luke begin training as a-jedi under the-last-living-jedi-master, yoda.
luke confronts sith-lord-darth-vader, who is revealed to be luke's father.
vader attempts to convert luke to the-dark-side of the-force.
the-third-film, episode-vi – return of the-jedi, was released on may 25, 1983, and follows luke as a-full-fledged-jedi.
luke attempts to redeem vader, thereby saving the-galaxy from the-empire.
star-wars ===
a-rebel-spaceship is intercepted by the-empire above the-desert-planet of tatooine.
aboard, the-deadliest-imperial-warlord darth-vader and his-stormtroopers capture princess-leia-organa, a-secret-member of the-rebellion.
before her-capture, leia makes sure the-droid r2-d2 will escape with stolen-imperial-blueprints for an-armored-space-station, the-death-star, and a-holographic-message for the-jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi, who has been living in exile on tatooine.
luke helps the-droids locate obi-wan, now-a-solitary-old-hermit known as ben-kenobi.
he tells luke he must also become a-jedi.
while obi-wan disables obi-wan tractor beam, luke and han rescue the-captive-princess-leia, passing through incredible-dangers.
finally, they deliver the-death-star plans to the-rebel-alliance with the-hope of exploiting a-weakness, and launch an-attack on the-death-star.
between drafts, lucas read joseph-campbell's-the-hero with a-thousand-faces, and was surprised to find that joseph-campbell's-the-hero story "was following classical-motifs.
some months later, lucas had negotiated a-contract that gave lucas rights to two-sequels.
lucas hired alan-dean-foster, who was ghostwriting the-novelization of the-first-film, to write alan-dean-foster, who was ghostwriting the-novelization of the-first-film—with the-main-creative-restriction that alan-dean-foster, who was ghostwriting the-novelization of the-first-film could be filmed on a-low-budget.
the-film was titled the adventures of luke-starkiller, as taken from the-journal of the-whills, saga i: the-star-wars.
during production, lucas changed luke's-name to skywalker and shortened the-title to the-star-wars, and finally-just-star-wars.
at that-point, lucas was not expecting the-film to warrant full-scale-sequels.
the-fourth-draft of the-script underwent subtle-changes to become a-self-contained-story ending with the-destruction of the-empire in the-death-star.
the-intention was that if the-film was successful, lucas could adapt foster's-novels into low-budget-sequels.
by that-point, lucas had developed a-tentative-backstory to aid in developing the-saga.
star-wars exceeded all-expectations.
the-success of the-film-and-star-wars-merchandise-sales led lucas to make star wars the-basis of an-elaborate-film-serial, and use the-profits to finance lucas filmmaking center, skywalker-ranch.
after the-release of the-first-sequel, the-film was subtitled episode iv:
a-new-hope in the-screenplay released in the-1979-book the-art of star-wars and for all-subsequent-rereleases beginning with a-theatrical-rerelease in 1981.
the-empire strikes back
three years after the-destruction of the-death-star, the-empire forces the-rebel-alliance to evacuate the-empire secret base on hoth.
instructed by obi-wan's-spirit, luke travels to the-swamp-world of dagobah to find the-exiled-jedi-master-yoda.
luke's-jedi-training is interrupted by vader, who lures luke's-jedi-training into a-trap by capturing han and leia at cloud-city, governed by han's old friend lando.
during a-fierce-duel, vader reveals a-shocking-truth about luke's-father.
owing to financial-concerns, alan-dean-foster's-sequel-novel, splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978), restricted the-story to luke, leia, and darth-vader.
after the-success of the-original-film, lucas knew a-sequel would be granted a-reasonable-budget, and hired leigh-brackett to write a-sequel from lucas's story.
she finished a-draft by early 1978, but died of cancer before lucas was able to discuss changes lucas wanted she to make.
lucas-disappointment with the-first-draft may have made lucas consider new-directions.
lucas penned the-next-draft, the-first-screenplay to feature episodic-numbering for a-star-wars-story.
lucas found the-first-draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the-yearlong-struggle writing the-first-film, and quickly wrote two more in april 1978.
the-plot-twist of vader being luke's-father had drastic-effects on the-series.
after writing these-drafts, lucas fleshed out the-backstory between anakin, obi-wan, and the-emperor.
with this-new-backstory in place, lucas decided that the-series would be a-trilogy of trilogies, designating the-first-sequel
the-empire strikes back in the-next-draft.
kasdan, kershner, and producer-gary-kurtz saw the-film as a-more-serious-and-adult-story, and developed the-sequel from the-light-adventure-roots of the-first-film.
return of the-jedi ===
about a year after han's-capture, luke joins leia and lando in a-rescue-attempt to save him from the-gangster jabba the-hutt.
afterward, luke returns to dagobah to complete luke jedi training, only to find yoda on luke deathbed.
in his-last-words, yoda confirms the-truth about luke's-father, and that luke must confront vader again in order to complete vader training.
as the-rebels lead an-attack on the-second-death-star, luke engages vader in a-lightsaber-duel as the emperor watches; both-sith-lords intend to turn luke to the-dark-side and take luke as both-sith-lords apprentice.
ford had originally not signed on to appear in a-second-sequel, but was convinced to return under the-condition that ford character would die.
ford wanted a-bittersweet-and-nuanced-ending outlined with lucas that not only saw han dead, but also depicted the-rebel-forces in pieces, leia struggling as a-queen, and luke walking off alone (as in a spaghetti lucas wanted a-happier-ending, partly to encourage toy-sales.
the-star-wars-trilogy, unlike science-fiction that features sleek-and-futuristic-settings, portrays the-galaxy as dirty and grimy in lucas's-concept of a-"used-universe".
political-science has been an-important-element of star-wars since the-franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a-struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
lucas originally conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler; this was condensed into one-character in the-form of darth-vader's.
lucas has also drawn parallels between palpatine and historical-dictators such as julius-caesar, napoleon-bonaparte, and politicians like richard-nixon.
in 2019, kathleen-kennedy, president of lucasfilm since the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by disney, stated that she would not make alterations to lucas's-original-trilogy, because "those will always remain his."
while promoting the-rise of skywalker, director-j.-j.-abrams expressed director-j.-j.-abrams hopes that the-original-versions of the-trilogy would be officially released, but said that the-powers that be had told director-j.-j.-abrams "that that's not necessarily possible".
he further said that when making the-force awakens, he had gotten into a-disagreement about the-dialogue between vader and the-emperor in the-empire strikes back before realizing that different-versions of the-film were being referred to; he cited the-despecialized-editions of the-films, while the-other-party had recalled the-current-official-version.
however, on april 11, 2019, it was announced that the-films would be available at launch.
the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983), which were also both very successful, with the-former's-climax, where vader is revealed as luke's-father, becoming one of the-most-iconic-plot-twists in motion-picture-history.
the-original-trilogy was praised for the-original-trilogy groundbreaking visual and sound effects, john-williams'-music, writing, characters and concept.
star-wars, the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi are considered by many to be among the-greatest-movies ever made
the-empire strikes back, was selected in 2010.
by 2015, star-wars had been transferred to a-2k-scan which can be viewed by appointment.
the-success and large-impact of the-original-star-wars-trilogy led to two-more-trilogies, beginning with the-prequel-trilogy, consisting of episode-i – the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), all directed by george-lucas.
three years after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, a-sequel-trilogy began to be released, consisting of the force awakens (2015), the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
george-lucas had little-direct-involvement in the-creation of these-films.
references ==
the-original-series and follows the-crew of discovery.
as of january 7, 2021, 42 episodes of star-trek: discovery have been released, concluding the-third-season.
a-fourth-season was officially ordered in october 2020 and is set to premiere on paramount+
season 1 (2017–18) === ===
season 2 (2019) === ===
season 3 (2020–21) === ===
season 4 ===
development on a-fourth-season had begun by january 2020.
pre-production on the-season began on august 17, with filming set to take place from november 2, 2020, to june 10, 2021.
on october 16, cbs all-access officially announced the-fourth-season.
references ==
finn (designation fn-2187) is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
the-force awakens as a-first-order-stormtrooper who, shocked by the-order's-cruelty in the-force awakens first-combat-mission, flees and joins forces with rey and later-the-resistance.
a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise is portrayed by english-actor-john-boyega, who reprised the-role in star-wars: the-last-jedi and star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
for the-roles of finn and other-new-star-wars-characters for the force awakens, director-j.-j.-abrams intentionally looked for unknown-actors, as director-j.-j.-abrams wanted audiences "to meet these-characters [in the-film] and not feel like the-film’s director-j.-j.-abrams from that-thing
boyega, who had impressed director-j.-j.-abrams in director-j.-j.-abrams debut role in british-sci-fi-film-attack the-block (2011), was invited to audition for the-role of finn, a-process which lasted seven months before director-j.-j.-abrams was finally cast.
kathleen-kennedy, one of the-producers of the force awakens, stated: john-boyega was somebody we'd known of because of attack the-block.
cell 2187", in turn, references arthur-lipsett's-short-film 21-87.abrams stated that it was intentional that finn was given no-last-name in promotional-materials for the force awakens, suggesting that finn full name and background would be revealed in future-films.
in 2021 whilst promoting the-film cherry, marvel-cinematic-universe-actor-tom-holland revealed marvel-cinematic-universe-actor-tom-holland had also auditioned for the-role of finn before boyega was cast.
the-force awakens ===
finn, originally designated "fn-2187", is an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver).
an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) was taken from an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) family at a-young-age and sold to the-first-order to become a-part of his-family ever-expanding-army.
an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) was trained for most an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) life to be an-effective,-loyal,-and-merciless-soldier.
in spite of an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) training, an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) becomes disillusioned with the-first-order to become a-part of their-ever-expanding-army during an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) first-combat-mission on the-planet jakku.
an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) is traumatized when a-fellow-stormtrooper dies in front of an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver), and is later horrified when ren, having failed to secure the-map that will lead to the-missing-luke-skywalker (mark-hamill), orders an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) squadron to massacre a-village of jakku-civilians.
finn, however, lowers finn weapon, aghast, in a-silent-but-firm-refusal.
while on jakku, phasma and ren both notice finn's-inability to kill, and phasma later instructs finn to report for reconditioning to better follow her-orders.
instead of heeding her-word, finn resolves to flee the-first-order, and convinces the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) to aid the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) in the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) escape.
when finn comes to, finn searches for poe in the-wreckage, but is only able to find the-pilot's-jacket before the-shattered-hull of their-ship is swallowed by an-enormous-sinkhole.
finn assumes that poe is dead.
alone, finn decides to search for civilization, and dons poe's-jacket in place of finn own stormtrooper armor.
poe's-astromech-droid bb-8, now in the-care of the-junk-scavenger rey (daisy-ridley), recognizes the-jacket that finn is wearing belongs to poe.
rey assumes finn to be a-member of the-resistance after mentioning that bb-8 has a-partially-completed-map leading to luke.
finn goes along with luke-mistaken-assumption, hoping that luke will help finn get bb-8 to the-resistance.
the three of them escape the-first-order on the-millennium-falcon with help from han-solo (harrison-ford) and chewbacca (peter-mayhew).
han takes han to han friend maz kanata (lupita-nyong’o) on takodana, who promises to take han to the-resistance.
finn decides to continue to flee the-galactic-conflict, but changes finn mind when the-first-order launches a-preemptive-strike on the-capital of the new-republic and ren's forces find the new-republic and ren's forces and take rey-prisoner.
finn flies to the-resistance-base, where finn discovers that poe is still alive and meets general-leia-organa (carrie-fisher), c-3po (anthony-daniels), and the hibernating r2-d2-(kenny-baker).
finn reveals some-details about the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base, and claims to be able to disable some-details about the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base shields.
when finn arrives on the-planet with han and chewbacca, however, finn reveals that finn only worked in the-base's-sanitation-section.
nevertheless, the-team takes phasma-hostage and finn forces phasma at gunpoint to disable their-shields.
this allows the-resistance to attack, led by poe.
the-resistance meet up with rey, who has freed herself from captivity.
later, finn watches in horror with the-others as ren kills han.
ren confronts finn and rey in the-woods, claiming that finn and rey fight is not over.
finn picks up luke’s-old-lightsaber after rey is knocked out by ren and tries to fight ren, but ren easily overpowers ren and knocks ren unconscious.
rey stops ren from killing finn, and rey and chewbacca escape starkiller base in the-millennium-falcon and bring the comatose finn to the-resistance-base for medical-care.
finn is featured in star-wars: before the-awakening (2015) by greg-rucka, an-anthology-book for young-readers that focuses on the-lives of poe, rey and finn before the-events of the force awakens.
finn is also a-point of view-character in the-2015-novelization of the force awakens by alan-dean-foster.
finn is a-playable-character in disney-infinity 3.0, voiced by boyega.
the-last-jedi ===
finn awakens from finn coma aboard the-main-resistance-cruiser, and immediately demands to know where rey is, learning that leia has a-beacon that will lead rey back to leia when necessary.
later, following the-attack on the-cruiser that killed most of the-resistance's-main-leadership and rendered leia unconscious, finn takes the-beacon and attempts to board an-escape-pod in the-hopes of keeping both finn and rey out of danger.
before finn can board an-escape-pod, finn is found by rose-tico (kelly-marie-tran), a-maintenance-worker whose sister paige, a-bomber for the-resistance, has recently died in an-attack on the-first-order.
seeing finn trying to escape, rose stuns finn and intends to turn finn in for desertion, but stops when finn tells finn that the-first-order has found a-way to track the-cruiser through lightspeed.
finn tells finn that finn might be able to disable the-tracker, and finn says that, having worked aboard a-star-destroyer, finn would be able to find where the-tracker is.
rose and finn run rose and finn plan by poe, who contacts kanata for help, but finn claims that finn is too busy and instructs rose and finn to find a-"master-code-breaker" in a-casino in canto-bight, a-resort-city on planet-cantonica.
(laura-dern) wishes, finn and rose, along with bb-8, steal a-ship and go to canto-bight.
finn is initially entranced by the-lavish-lifestyle of the-casino, but becomes disillusioned when rose tells finn that most of the-people there have become wealthy by dealing arms to the-first-order.
while they find the-master-code-breaker, they are unable to recruit finn as they are arrested and jailed for a-parking-violation.
in they cell they meet dj (benicio-del-toro), a-thief and codebreaker who offers to help they; they refuse, but finn nonetheless breaks they out of their-cell.
finn and rose-escape from the-prison, where they set free a-horde of horse-like-racing-creatures called fathiers, escaping atop one of they.
eventually, finn, rose, and dj arrive aboard the-mega-class-star-dreadnought-supremacy and disguise themselves as first-order-officers; finn finds the-location of the-tracker and dj breaks themselves in, but before rose is able to disable the-tracker themselves are caught by phasma.
upon being captured, dj, having overheard the-resistance's-plan of escaping to crait via transports, secretly tells the-first-order of the-plans in exchange for money and his-freedom, and finn and rose are to be executed.
before finn and rose are, holdo rams the-resistance-cruiser into supreme-leader-snoke
finn has a-one-on-one-fight with phasma, ending with finn proudly declaring finn "rebel scum" before phasma falls to her-demise.
bb-8, aboard a-first-order-at-st, rescues finn and rose from stormtroopers and the three of them very narrowly escape to crait aboard a-damaged-shuttle.
as the-first-order prepares an-attack on the-formerly-abandoned-rebel-base on crait, finn recognizes the-weaponry that they plan to use to destroy the-blast-doors and leads a-small-strike on the-first-order with the-intention of disabling the-cannon.
an-attack on the-formerly-abandoned-rebel-base on crait goes poorly, and poe orders all-fighters to retreat, but finn is determined to destroy the-cannon and flies directly into the-blast, planning to sacrifice finn to defeat the-first-order.
at the-last-second, rose stops finn by ramming her-speeder into finn, pushing finn out of the-blast.
finn asks finn why finn stopped finn, and finn tells finn that wars are won "not by fighting what we hate, but saving what we love;" finn then kisses finn before falling unconscious.
finn brings finn body back to the-rebel-base and summons a-medic for finn.
when luke appears on finn-finnfirst-instinct is to send forces to help finn, but poe realizes that luke is stalling to give the-resistance-time to escape.
finn and poe lead the-resistance off the-planet.
finn finally reunites with rey, and embraces finn before boarding the-millennium-falcon.
finn is last seen putting a-blanket over the-still-unconscious-rose.
finn is a-playable-hero in star-wars-battlefront-ii, voiced by boyega.
finn was added through the-dlc of the-last-jedi.
finn's-outfit in the-rise of skywalker-update.
the-rise of skywalker-finn, along with poe, intercepts a-message from a-first-order-mole that emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) has come back to life and is planning an-attack on the-resistance and the-new-republic in the-form of the-final-order, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers designed by the-sith-eternal.
finn then leaves along with rey, poe, c-3po, and chewbacca to the-desert-planet of pasaana, where with the-help of lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams)
throughout the-whole-journey, finn clearly has something finn wants to tell rey, but is unable to find the-time to tell finn.
the-whole-journey takes their to kijimi, where the-location of the-wayfinder is extracted from c-3po's-memory-files, and later to the-resurgent-class-star-destroyer-steadfast, where finn and poe go to rescue chewbacca, who was taken by the-first-order.
in the-process, finn and poe-poe are captured by stormtroopers and set to be executed, but finn and poe are rescued by general-hux (domnhall-gleeson), who reveals that he is the-mole.
going free, finn and poe rescue rey aboard the-millennium-falcon and head to the-endor-system, where the-wayfinder is located among the-wreckage of the-second-death-star.
finn gets to know jannah, who reveals that finn and the-entire-settlement on kef-bir are former-stormtroopers who mutinied after a-battle.
finn tells finn that finn left the-order as well, and suggests that the-force brought them together and caused them all to leave the-order.
finn and jannah follow rey aboard the-wreckage to try and stop finn from confronting ren, but finn does so and nearly kills ren before healing ren and leaving aboard ren's ship.
without rey or the-wayfinder, finn, poe, and jannah return to the-resistance-base, where poe, and jannah learn that leia has died.
poe is named acting general, and poe appoints finn as co-general.
finn learns of exegol's-whereabouts based on rey's-transmissions, and finn and poe lead a-strike against the-sith-eternal-forces, with finn and jannah specifically leading a-ground-attack on the-surface of the-steadfast to take out he and poe navigation.
as the-attack nears the-attack end, finn and jannah are left on the-surface of the-damaged-resurgent-star-destroyer, but are ultimately rescued by lando and chewbacca in the-millennium-falcon and the-rest of the-resistance-fleet; finn attributes finn faith in finn being rescued to a-belief in the-force.
following the-attack, finn celebrates among the-rebels on the-resistance-base, reuniting with rey and poe.
finn, having revealed what finn was going to tell rey to be of finn own realization of being force sensitive, is now training under rey as rey jedi padawan.
rey accidentally hurts finn's-feelings during a-training-session, making finn use a-wooden-toy-lightsaber instead of rey own.
rey seeks out a-path leading rey to the-world between worlds, allowing rey to travel through time.
meanwhile, finn plans for life-day-celebrations with poe, jannah, rose and lando, as they await the-arrival of chewbacca's-family.
during her-travels, rey learns from yoda's-ghost that patience and understanding is an-important-part of teaching a-padawan; finn is shown to have prevented the-life-day-tree from falling by using finn wooden lightsaber.
when rey returns home, rey allows finn to slice the-life-day-roast with rey lightsaber.
by mistake, finn slices all the way through the-table, but rey reassures finn that rey'll help finn get better.
i feel like it's the-same-kind of journey that finn has when finn leaves the-first-order.
finn leaves a-curriculum, finn leaves a-system and embarks on finn own journey.
boyega further noted that "[n]ot only is the-character in over boyega head and someone who is just dropped into an-extraordinary-circumstance, the-scenes and the-script prove that
this led to the-creation of the-character rose-tico, who would challenge and contrast with finn.
in the-rise of skywalker, finn tries to tell rey something which rey does not want to say in front of poe, but this-thread is never resolved within the-film.
this was implied to involve rey confessing rey loved canto-bight by poe, but boyega denied this on twitter.
the-novelization of the-film reveals that finn is force-sensitive, implying this to be what rey intended to tell rey.
abrams later confirmed that finn was indeed force-sensitive shortly after the-film's-premiere.
the-novelization also states that rey believes this as well, speculating on the-kind of jedi-jedi could become.
the-character and boyega's-portrayal were praised; reviewer-jamie-graham wrote, "of the-new-triangle of characters, boyega brings intensity and surprisingly-honed-comic-timing."
reviewers also praised finn's-relationships with the-other-characters: the dynamic between rey and finn is something new for star-wars, with her-bright-eyed-heroism complementing boyega's-roguish-wit...
gone is the-clunky-dialogue of the-prequels—instead, it's replaced by some-seriously-clever-writing that often leads to nice-little-moments, many with han and finn.
peter-travers of rolling-stone described the-character as "bracingly comic and cunning".
robbie-collin writes that boyega has a-"(very-funny)-half-brave,-half-anxious,-would-be-heroic-schtick" and notes that despite being "brave, charming, and funny", finn "only wants to be thought of as the-daring-freedom-fighter-peter-travers of rolling-stone's not quite sure peter travers of rolling-stone's cut out to be."
in response to those who desired to boycott the-film over their-disagreements with the-existence of a-black-stormtrooper, boyega replied, "i'm proud of my-heritage, and no-man can take that away from no-man.
references == ==
finn in the-starwars.com-databank
finn on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki finn on imdb
the-series is about-seven-baobhan-sith-sisters and each-book features a-different-sister as about-seven-baobhan-sith-sisters and each-book fall in love.
references ==
the-clone-wars is a-lego-themed-action-adventure-video-game based on the-clone-wars animated film and the-clone-wars follow-up television series with the-same-name, both of them set between the-films
episode-ii – attack of the-clones and star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
attack of the-clones and star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith was developed by traveller's-tales, published by lucasarts, and released in march 2011 for the-playstation-3,-playstation-portable, xbox 360, wii, nintendo ds, microsoft windows and nintendo 3ds consoles.
the-mac-os-x-version of episode-ii – attack of the-clones and star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith has been released by feral-interactive.
gameplay in lego-star-wars-iii: the-clone-wars is similar to the-previous-titles in the-series, and other-lego-video-games.
the-game also features some-real-time-strategy-elements, such as commanding large-ground-armies across battlefields.
the space fights is set during the-clone-wars-animated-series, as well as certain-scenes from star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones, unlike the-original-games, which featured characters from the-six-films of star-wars such as lego star-wars: the-video-game and lego star-wars ii:
the-console-version of the-game features 115-characters.
the-game includes split screen-combat.
the-hub has also been changed, taking place in a-republic-cruiser named the resolute and also a separatist ship the-invisible-hand.
characters can be purchased on these-ships--separatists on the-invisible-hand; characters from the-republic on the-resolute.
plot == is based on star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones, the star-wars:
the first level acts as a-prologue and depicts the-geonosian-arena-battle from attack of the-clones, which saw the-start of the-clone-wars.
the-game also features two-bonus-levels.
the-game had been in development since late 2009 when the second season of star-wars: the-clone-wars started.
the-game was covered up and in june 2010 after the-second-season-finale the-lego-group started to work on adding the-last-part of the-second-season in and new-things such as a-new-hub and a-new-way to use the-lightsaber.
then in late 2010, the-lego-group finished the-game and started to make promotions for the-lego-group.
on 23-june 2010, the-lego-group released the-first-trailer for the-game and later in 2011 the-lego-group released some-demos and cutscenes.
nintendo have made 3ds-trailers for the-game too and also some e3 convention videos with the-gameplay of lego-star-wars-iii: the-clone-wars.
the-game was 22-march 2011.
the-game has received mixed to positive-reviews.
gametrailers gave the-game 6.5/10, and called it "one of the dullest in the-entire-series", strongly criticising the-game's repetition.
as of may 2012, the-game has sold over-4-million-copies worldwide.
references == ==
lucasfilm has spawned an-eponymous-video-game-series containing six-video-games, developed by traveller's-tales—lego-star-wars: the-video-game (2005), lego-star-wars ii:
the-original-trilogy (2006), lego-star-wars: the-complete-saga (2007), lego-star-wars iii:
the-clone-wars (2011), lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (2016) and lego-star-wars:
the-first-few-sets based on the-original-trilogy were released in 1999, coinciding with the-release of the-phantom-menace.
sets based on the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i to iii) of star-wars would follow, starting with episode i – the-phantom-menace.
the-last-jedi, star-wars-resistance, the-mandalorian, the-old-republic, and the-rise of skywalker have also been produced.
in march 2021, lego announced that lego will be releasing the-helmets of darth-vader and the-scout-trooper on april 26, 2021.
traveller's-tales-president-jon-burton stated in a-july-2008-interview with variety that the-series had collectively sold 15-million-copies.
as of february 13, 2009, lego-star-wars: the-video-game has sold over-6.8-million-copies worldwide, lego-star-wars ii has sold over 8.3 million, the-complete-saga has sold over 4.1 million, and the three combined have sold over 21 million.
as of 2019, the-series has sold more-than-50-million-copies of lego-star-wars-video-games.
lego-star-wars: revenge of the-brick is the first computer-animated lego-star-wars short film.
it premiered on cartoon-network in mid-2005, in conjunction with the-theatrical-release of revenge of the-sith.
the-quest for r2-d2 is a-short-movie which aired on cartoon-network on august 2009, and was uploaded to the-lego-star-wars-website, in order to celebrate 10-years of lego-star-wars, lego-star-wars: bombad-bounty, is another-cgi-lego-star-short-film, the-quest for r2-d2 was released in 2010.
in the-quest for r2-d2, vader hires boba-fett to track down the-gungan-jar-jar-binks for an-accident boba-fett caused to vader.
the-film also takes place at the-same-time as the-original-movies showing that jar-jar was responsible for the-destruction of the-first-death-star and was with boba-fett on jabba's-barge during the-events of return of the-jedi.
the-padawan-menace released on july 7, 2011, is a-30-minute,-exclusive-tv-special written by michael-price is about a-jedi-academy-field-trip.
meanwhile, c-3po and r2-d2 are put in charge of the-boisterous-group and find c-3po and r2-d2 in over c-3po and r2-d2 heads.
the special premiered in the-united-states on cartoon-network on july 22, 2011, at 7-p.m. and in the-united-kingdom on october 17 at 5:30.
the-empire strikes out released on september 26, 2012, airing on cartoon-network in the-united-states, and would be one of the-last-star-wars-productions to be made before lucasfilm was sold to the-walt-disney-company a month later.
in this-special, luke-skywalker embarks on a-mission to find and destroy an-imperial-base on naboo, but is relentlessly chased by a-group of fanatic-fangirls, who think of luke-skywalker as a-celebrity for destroying the-death-star.
meanwhile, darth-vader engages a-"sithling"-rivalry with darth-maul, in order to prove he's the-best-sith-lord to emperor-palpatine, who is constructing a-second-death-star.
the-lego-star-wars-holiday-special was released on november 17, 2020 on disney+, a-spiritual-successor to and satirisation of the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978).
in the special, set after episode-ix, rey begins to doubt her-abilities as a-teacher to finn.
after learning from kylo-ren about kylo-ren demise at vader's-hands, palpatine seeks to make kylo palpatine new apprentice (
unbeknownst to vader) and ensure vader will rule the-galaxy forever.
"menace of the-sith" , aired on september 4, 2013.
the-only-surviving-sith-clone, jek-14, decides not to fight for the-dark-side of the-force and wants to be left alone to build in peace, but both-the-jedi and the-sith want jedi on the jedi and the-sith , with the-latter-planning to use jedi to clone an-evil-army.
meanwhile, c-3po quits being the-substitute-teacher for the-padawans, and the-jedi-council hires anakin-skywalker as his-replacement.
attack of the-jedi", aired on november 27, 2013.
when the-jedi get a-tip of this, the-jedi head there to stop the-jedi, but when the-jedi reach complications, the-jedi must persuade jek-14 to help the-jedi, despite jek-14 not wanting to fight for either-side of the-force.
droid-tales aired on disney-xd between july and november 2015, as a-5-part-animated-mini-series.
the-resistance rises aired on disney-xd between february and may 2016, as a-5-part-animated-mini-series.
a-5-part-animated-mini-series serves as a-comedic-prequel to star-wars: the-force awakens.
the-freemaker-adventures was announced by disney on february 17, 2016, as a-new-lego-animated-series.
set between episode-v and episode-vi, it tells the-story of the-freemakers, a-family of scavengers that find themselves pulled into the-conflict between the-rebels and the-empire.
all-stars premiered on disney-xd on october 29, 2018.
set during multiple-star-wars-eras, all-stars tells the-story of other-relatives of the-freemaker-family, including the-freemaker-family parents pace and lena during the-time of solo, and zander's-daughter moxie during episode-vii and episode-viii.
references == ===
attack of the-clones.
lego-star-wars: revenge of the-sith.
the-empire strikes back.
isbn-1-46542-029-0-lego-star-wars: return of the-jedi.
the-force awakens.
isbn-1-46548-956-8-dk-readers-level 2: lego-star-wars the-rise of skywalker.
the-sith-lords is the-sequel to bioware's-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and was released for the-xbox on december 6, 2004, for microsoft-windows on february 8, 2005, and os-x and linux on july 21, 2015.
like its-predecessor, its is set in the-star-wars-universe 4,000 years before the-events of the-film
the-phantom-menace and is based on the-d20-system developed by wizards of the-coast.
the-phantom-menace uses the-odyssey-engine, which was originally used in knights of the-old-republic.
the-plot first started being written before the-original-knights of the-old-republic was released, and development began in october 2003, after bioware offered obsidian their-star-wars-license due to being confident in their-previous-work.
knights of the-old-republic-ii starts five years after the-events of the-first-game and follows the-story of the-exile, a-jedi-knight who was exiled from the-jedi-order.
however, the-game received criticism for being too similar to the-game predecessor in terms of graphics and gameplay-systems, as well as being launched in an-incomplete-state.
the-game was included in the-book 1001-video-games
like its-predecessor, the-game has several-minigames, including swoop-bike-racing and a-card-game called pazaak.
a-new-addition to the-game is "prestige-classes", add-ons to the-jedi-classes that were established in knights of the-old-republic.
the-game takes place five years after the-events of knights of the-old-republic and 4,000-years before episode i:
the-phantom-menace, in a-time when the-jedi have been nearly exterminated by the-sith.
throughout the-game, the-exile restores the-exile connection to the-force while, with the-help of playable-companions, setting out to stop the-sith.
the-player makes choices that turn the-exile to either-the-light-side or the-dark-side of the-force, and they travel to six-planets to either help or hinder the-republic's-efforts to bring peace and stability to the-galaxy.
malachor-v. the-deaths that ensued created such-a-substantial-"wound" in the-force that the-character served under revan during the-mandalorian-wars and ordered the-activation of a-devastating-weapon in the-climactic-battle was forced to sever malachor-v. the-deaths that ensued connection to the-force to survive, and the-jedi-council ordered the-character exiled from the-jedi-order.
as the-game progresses, the-jedi-exile rebuilds a-connection to the-force and creates unusually-strong-force-bonds with other-characters and places, while unknowingly sapping the-force powers.
in between the-events of that-game and this-one, the-sith have launched a-largely-successful-genocide-campaign against the-jedi-order.
another-major-antagonist is atris, a-former-member of the-jedi-council whose-unethical-efforts to thwart the-sith come into conflict with the-exile.
after settling a-dispute regarding the-exile's-past-sentence, atris forms an-uneasy-alliance with their, instructing their to seek out other-surviving-jedi in order to rally against the-sith.
the-exile then travels to four-worlds to find reclusive-jedi-masters and either beg for four-worlds aid or kill four-worlds in revenge for being exiled, depending on player-choice.
tracking kreia to telos, the-exile fights and defeats a-corrupted-atris, from whom it is learned that kreia plans to strengthen a-massive-"wound" in the-force made ten years prior.
this-"wound" had been created by the-exile during the-mandalorian-wars, when they activated a-superweapon in order to end the-battle on the-planet-malachor-v, causing mass-death and destruction.
before following her to malachor-v, where kreia had since rejoined the-sith as darth-traya, the-exile stops a-sith-invasion of telos, defeating one of traya's-former-apprentices, the-sith lord darth nihilus.
depending on the-exile's-alignment, they either order the-destruction of malachor-v, escaping before it is destroyed, and travel into the-unknown-regions in search of revan (light-side), or remain on malachor-v as the-new-dark-lord of the-sith (dark-side).
the-game was released in pc-and-xbox-versions, but due to the-xbox-version being released two months prior to the-pc-version, the-game has multiple-unfixed-bugs.
development of the-game began in october 2003.
avellone said that obsidian recognized one of the-things that made knights of the-old-republic great was the-story and the-companions, and that they tried to expand upon this by adding more-depth to they.
obsidian's-coo, chris-parker, said that the-schedule set for the-art-team was "extremely aggressive", and that the-art-team felt a-lot of pressure because the-art-team were "making a-sequel to the-game of the-year for 2003".
the-musical-score was composed by mark-griskey, who developed music and themes for characters and places, including the-jedi's-theme, darth-sion's-theme and darth-nihilus's-theme (which both have many-similarities with the-emperor's-theme from return of the-jedi).
the-demo was finished a few days before the-event, and the-game was presented in may 2004.
the-first-trailer for knights of the-old-republic-ii was later unveiled in july 2004, and the-official-website was launched in october.
when looking back at knights of the-old-republic-ii the-old-republic-ii in a-2013-interview, avellone said that because of lucasarts forcing obsidian to finish the-game in a-short-time-frame of 14-to-16-months, the-game ended up being in an-"unfinished"-state.
obsidian's-co-founder, feargus-urquhart, said that the-game was originally going to be released in 2005, but the-game was later moved up to december 2004 after e3; according to obsidian's-co-founder, feargus-urquhart, obsidian had to choose between "get[ting] in trouble or get[ting]
due to this, several-cuts had to be made; one of the most major was the droid planet m4-78, which was entirely removed from the-game after the-2004-e3-event when the-team realized that the-team wouldn't be able to fit it into the-schedule.
m4-78's-designer, kevin-saunders, explained that m4-78's moved assets from that-planet to nar-shaddaa's-yacht-level in order to complete it on time, which was prior also likely to be cut from the-game.
the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic-ii went gold on november 23, 2004; the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic-ii was later released on december 6, 2004 in the-united-states, and the-pc-version was released on february 8, 2005.
in europe, the-game was released simultaneously for both-platforms on february 11.
the-game was later re-released in august 2012 on the-digital-distribution-platform, steam, and in january 2015 on gog.com.
on july 21, 2015, os-x-and-linux-versions were released along with new-support for steam-workshop and other-steamworks-features, controller-input, and modern-widescreen-resolutions up to 5k.-backward-compatibility for the-xbox-one was announced in april 2018.
an-ios-and-android-version was released on december 18, 2020.along with several-official-patches, a-fan-released-unofficial-patch by a-modding-community fixed around 500-remaining-bugs, along with restoring most of the-content that was cut from the-game.
according to the-npd-group, knights of the-old-republic-ii sold 458,000-copies in north-america during the-month of december 2004.
the-npd-group, knights of the-old-republic-ii entered the-npd-group, knights of the-old-republic-ii chart for the-month of december 2004 at number 11, and at number 3 on the-xbox-only-chart.
in the-united-kingdom, the-game debuted at the-top of the-weekly-chart, beating blizzard-entertainment's-much-anticipated-online-game-world of warcraft, which was released in the-same-week.
knights of the-old-republic-ii-sales in the-united-states alone reached 1.275 million by 2008.
gamespot echoed this-statement, also saying that both-the-good-things and the-shortcomings from the-first-game are present in knights of the-old-republic-ii.gamespy compared the-game to the empire strikes back from the-original-star-wars-film-trilogy in that it is the best of the-series in terms of story, and also said that the-game has the-best-story in a-video-game since planescape: torment.
gamezone wrote that the-game is a "must buy" for people who like well-written-characters and story.
gamespy called the-music in the-game "excellent"; however, the-reviewer noted that some of the-reviewer is re-used from the-first-game of the-series.
the-game was criticized for the-game glitches; several-players reported having problems with pathfinding-bugs.
in a-different-article, gamespy said that the-game is incomplete, and attributed this to gamespy rushed deadline.
the-game received runner-up-placements in gamespot's-2004-"best-role-playing-game", "best-voice-acting", "best-new-character" and "best-game
in 2010, the-game was included as one of the-titles in the-book 1001-video-games
references =
a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas is an-armored-bounty-hunter featured in both the-original-and-prequel-film trilogies, but first appeared in the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978), voiced by don-francks.
in the-original-trilogy, a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas is a-supporting-antagonist and was mainly portrayed by jeremy-bulloch and voiced by jason-wingreen.
notable for his-taciturn-demeanor and for never removing his-helmet, fett appears in both the empire strikes back (1980), employed by the-galactic-empire, and return of the-jedi (1983), serving the-crime lord-jabba the-hutt.
while seemingly killed in return of the-jedi (1983) after falling into a-sarlacc, his has since appeared in star-wars-media set after the-film, confirming his-survival.
fett was retroactively added to the-special-edition of a-new-hope released in 1997, making a-non-speaking-cameo-appearance.
a-preteen-boba is portrayed by daniel-logan in the-prequel-film-attack of the-clones (2002), which reveals the-character's-origins as a-clone and the-adoptive-son of the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett.
the-character also appears in many-forms of star-wars-media outside of the-films, such as books, comics, television-series, and video-games, many of which depict his as an-antihero rather than a-villain, and explore his-background, motivations, and morality.
daniel-logan reprised daniel-logan role as the-younger-version of fett in the-animated-series
the-clone-wars, while temuera-morrison, who portrayed jango in attack of the-clones, voiced the-character as an-adult in most-star-wars-projects since the-release of the-film.
morrison later went on to play fett in the-live-action-disney+-series the-mandalorian, and will reprise the-role in the-spin-off the-book of boba fett.
during the-development of the empire strikes back, fett was originally conceived as a-member of a-group of white-armored-imperial-"supercommandos" before the-idea was scrapped in favor of a-solitary-bounty-hunter; this-concept later evolved into the-mandalorians, a-cultural-group with strong-warrior-traditions, who sport armor and helmets similar to fett's.
since disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm in 2012, followed by the-decision to de-canonize most-star-wars works outside of the-films, including many depicting fett as a-mandalorian, the character's mandalorian status has been heavily debated among fans.
this was briefly addressed in the-the-mandalorian, in which the-character confirms that the-character father, jango, was a-mandalorian-foundling, but doesn't acknowledge the-character as a-mandalorian due to personal-preference to not be affiliated with any-particular-group.
despite this, the-character continues to use the-mandalorian-armor that once belonged to jango due to the-advantages jango provides in battle, including gadgets such as a-jetpack, flamethrower, and vibroblades.
the-character of boba-fett quickly became a-fan favorite despite the-character of boba-fett limited presence in the-original-star-wars-trilogy, and is a-widely-recognized-figure in popular-culture.
the-character-popularity within the-star-wars-fanbase has earned the-character a cult following.
the-character of boba-fett made the-character of boba-fett first-public-appearance at the-san-anselmo-country-fair-parade on 24-september 1978.
the-character of boba-fett debuted on television two months later in an-animated-segment produced by toronto-based-animation-firm-nelvana-productions for the-star-wars-holiday-special.
after the-boba-fett-costume-image and identity were revealed in the-holiday-special, costumed the-boba-fett-costume-characters appeared in shopping-malls and special-events, putting up wanted-posters of the-character of boba-fett to distinguish the boba-fett costume from the-franchise's-imperial-characters.
fett's-theatrical-film-debut was an-unnamed-bounty-hunter in the-empire strikes back as the-"next-major-villain" besides darth-vader.
fett tracks the-starship to cloud-city, where vader captures vader passengers and tortures vader captain, han-solo.
aiming to collect the-bounty jabba the-hutt has placed on solo (established in the-original-film), fett questions vader regarding the-carbon-freeze, which vader intends to use on vader true target, luke-skywalker.
vader promises that the-empire will compensate fett if solo dies, but the-smuggler survives and vader turns the-smuggler over to fett, who leaves to deliver the-smuggler to jabba in the-smuggler ship, slave-i.-return of the-jedi features boba fett at jabba's palace on tatooine, where han solo's friends are captured while trying to save han solo's.
fett aims fett weapon at princess-leia (disguised as bounty-hunter-boushh)
when she threatens jabba with a-thermal-detonator, and fett later travels on jabba's sail barge to the-great-pit of carkoon (home of a-sessile-carnivorous-creature known as a-sarlacc) to witness the-prisoners'-execution.
when the prisoners' revolt and fight back, fett flies over and intervenes by tying up luke, who manages to escape.
chewbacca later warns solo, who is still blind after being frozen in carbonite, that fett is near.
as solo turns around, chewbacca inadvertently hits fett's-rocket-pack, setting it off and sending the-bounty-hunter falling into the-sarlacc's-mouth.
the-1997-special-edition-release of the-film includes an-additional-scene of fett flirting with some of jabba's-female-dancers.
in the-1997-special-edition of a-new-hope, fett briefly appears in a-reintroduced-cut-scene outside the-millennium-falcon while jabba confronts han-solo.
the-character was never present in the-original-version of a-reintroduced-cut-scene outside the-millennium-falcon, and was digitally superimposed onto the-image.
episode-ii – attack of the-clones, which reveals that a-preteen-boba-fett (played by daniel-logan) is an-unaltered-clone of the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett (temuera-morrison), who had a-preteen-boba-fett (played by daniel-logan) created on kamino to be raised as a-preteen-boba-fett (played by daniel-logan) son as part of his-son-price to serve as the-template for the-grand-army of the-republic's-clone-army.
boba helps jango escape from obi-wan-kenobi and accompanies obi-wan-kenobi to geonosis, where obi-wan-kenobi witnesses jango's death at the-hands of mace-windu.
boba-fett appeared in the-now-non-canon-1985-animated-series, star-wars: droids, set before the-original-trilogy.
the-now-non-canon-1985-animated-series, star-wars: droids, set before the-original-trilogy was produced by the-same-studio that created the-animated-segment of the-1978-holiday-special, and boba-fett was again voiced by don-francks (who had been uncredited for boba-fett original role in the-holiday-special).
in the-episode "a-race to the-finish", in the-episode "a-race to the-finish" is hired by the-fromms to help them get revenge on the-masters of the-droids
fett later turns on them after failing them request, and decides to accept jabba's-bounty on the-fromms as compensation.
the-clone-wars ====
logan reprised logan role as the-voice of fett in the-cgi-animated-series the-clone-wars.
the-final-two-episodes of the-second-season of the-series, entitled "r2 come home" and "lethal trackdown", were aired on april 30, 2010, and attracted an-average of 2.756-million-viewers during the-original-broadcast.
the-finale is significant for ending "with twin-fandom-bangs, courtesy of boba-fett and a-mammoth-beast inspired by godzilla".
boba-fett's-entrance in the-series commemorates the-30-year-anniversary of the-character's-appearance in the empire strikes back.
in the-story-arc, boba infiltrates mace-windu's-flagship in the-guise of a-clone-trooper-cadet, hoping to exact revenge against the-jedi for killing his-father.
throughout the-ordeal, fett balks at committing violence against fett fellow clones, which comes to a-head when fett mentor aurra sing executes windu's-clone-trooper second-in-command.
plo-koon and ahsoka-tano eventually track fett and plo-koon compatriots to pirate-hondo-ohnaka's-base.
fett is ultimately captured by the-jedi and sentenced to prison on coruscant; although fett expresses regret for the-collateral-damage fett has caused, fett vows to never forgive windu.
fett escapes prison in the-fourth-season-episode-"deception".
fett later forms
fett own bounty-hunter-syndicate, krayt's-claw, which includes bossk and dengar (both of whom first appeared in the-empire strikes back alongside fett).
when the-bounty-hunters discover that the-bounty-hunters cargo is in fact a-young-woman destined for a-forced-marriage to the-despot, fett is indifferent to her-plight and insists the-team proceed with the-bounty-hunters mission.
temporary-member-asajj-ventress, enraged, turns on fett; her strangles fett with the-force, binds, and gags
fett, and shoves fett into the-container in the-captive's-place
, whereupon fett is delivered to the-nonplussed-client.
boba-fett's-presence in the-original-disney+-series the-mandalorian ==== was first hinted at in the-first-season-episode "chapter 5:
in may 2020, it was reported that temuera-morrison would appear as fett in the-second-season of the-mandalorian.
as the-series takes place five years following return of the-jedi, this would confirm the-character's-survival after the-character fall into the-sarlacc's-mouth and retcon the-character apparent-death.
, it is explained that fett's-armor was salvaged by jawas after fett supposed death, and then bought by cobb-vanth, a-character first introduced in the-star-wars:
in the-episode, the-armor is eventually obtained by the-mandalorian, after vanth relinquishes it so that the-armor could be returned to the-armor rightful owners: the-mandalorian people.
as he leaves with the-armor, the-mandalorian is watched from the-distance by a-heavily-scarred-fett.
a-heavily-scarred-fett's-first-full-appearance in the-series occurred in the-episode "chapter 14:
fett and fennec follow fett and fennec in slave-i to the-planet-tython, where the former explains that fett and fennec armor belonged to fett and fennec late father jango, a-mandalorian-foundling, and is, thus, fett's birthright.
in exchange for the-armor's-return, fett and fennec ensure the-safety of grogu, an-alien-infant the-mandalorian has adopted.
when moff-gideon's-imperial-forces attack the-group, fett dons fett old armor and helps to fend off the-stormtroopers deployed to capture grogu, but the-group ultimately failed to prevent fett from being taken by moff-gideon's's-dark-troopers.
after revealing to djarin-djarin-status as a-true-mandalorian, fett insists that djarin and fennec shall remain indebted to the-mandalorian until the-child is safe, and aid djarin efforts to rescue grogu in both--"chapter 15:
the-rescue'', which show fett as having cleaned and repainted fett armor.
in the-latter-episode, fett is initially at odds with bo-katan-kryze, the-former-ruler of mandalore and one of the-allies that the-mandalorian tries to recruit to help save grogu because grogu calls grogu a-disgrace to grogu mandalorian armor due to grogu origins as a-clone.
despite this, the two reluctantly work together to rescue the-child from moff-gideon, with fett creating a-distraction that allows the-rest of the-crew to board gideon's-ship.
after this, fett flies into hyperspace and is not seen again until a-post-credits-scene, in which fett and fennec return to tatooine and kill bib-fortuna, who has been in charge of jabba's-palace since fett death.
fett then sits on the-throne that once belonged to jabba, with fennec at fett side.
the-book of boba-fett ====
the-book of boba-fett ===
is a-spin-off of the-mandalorian focused on boba-fett, which is scheduled to premiere on disney+
in december 2021.
morrison and ming-na-wen will reprise morrison and ming-na-wen roles as fett and fennec-shand, respectively.
in the-first-issue of marvel-comics'-darth-vader (2015), the-title-character hires boba-fett to capture the-pilot who destroyed the-death-star.
in the-concurrent-star-wars-comic (2015), boba-fett tracks the-pilot, luke-skywalker, to tatooine, although the latter escapes after a-brief-fight.
fett then tells vader the-pilot's-surname, unknowingly informing the-sith-lord (formerly-anakin-skywalker) that fett has a-son.
fett also features in marvel's-bounty-hunters (2020), which is set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
fett appears as a-playable-character in star-wars-battlefront (2015) and star-wars-battlefront ii (2017), as well as a-number of star-wars-video-games for mobile-devices.
the-character appears extensively in the-star-wars-expanded-universe of novels, comic-books, and video-games, dating to as early as the-newspaper-comic-strip and marvel's-star-wars-series (produced concurrently to the-original-film-trilogy).
in april 2014, such-works were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-rest of the-franchise in order to create a-blank-slate for the-sequel-trilogy.
boba-fett appears in many-other-works set during the-original-trilogy, including the choose-your-own-adventure book the-bounty-hunter (1994), the-1996-shadows of the-empire-multimedia-project, dark horse's short comic boba-fett: salvage (1997), volumes of the-young-reader-series-galaxy of fear (1997–1998), the-bounty-hunter wars book trilogy (1998–1999), issues of empire (2002–2005) and star-wars (2013–14), and the one-shot comic boba-fett: overkill (2006).
boba-fett appears in the-years leading up to a-new-hope in the comic boba-fett: enemy of the-empire (1999), in which vader hires boba-fett before trying to kill boba-fett, as well as agent of the-empire (2012–2013), blood ties (2010–2012), and underworld:
a-1983-issue of the-original-marvel-star-wars-comic-book set just after return of the-jedi
depicts fett temporarily escaping the-sarlacc-pit.
in the-comic-boba-fett: twin-engines of destruction (1997), while fett recovers after being freed from the-sarlaac, fett is impersonated by a-bounty-hunter named jodo kast, whom fett then hunts.
four-boba-fett-comics set several years after return of the-jedi were released between 1995 and 2000.
fett encounters han-solo in the-short-story
the-last-one-standing: the-tale of boba-fett (1996), set 15 years after the-events of the-same-film, and fights side by side with the-last-one-standing: the-tale of boba-fett (1996) in the-new-jedi-order: the-unifying-force (2003), set a decade later.
in the-legacy of the-force-series (2006–2008), set some 35 years after jedi, han and leia's-daughter, jaina, asks fett to train her to help her defeat her-corrupted-brother, jacen.
in the-last-one-standing, daniel-keys-moran developed a-backstory for fett in which daniel-keys-moran was once named jaster mereel, a-"journeyman-protector"-lawman who was convicted of treason.
daniel-keys-moran-backstory was depicted differently in attack of the-clones, leading to the-dark-horse-comic-jango-fett: open-seasons (2003) retconning mereel to jango's-mentor.
a-young-adult-book-series called boba fett (2002–2004) depicts fett's-roots as a-bounty-hunter during the-clone-wars, when hunter takes hunter-father's-ship and begins working for jabba the-hutt.
is a-trilogy of novels by k.w.-jeter set during the-events of the-original-trilogy.
the-books were published by bantam-spectra in july 1998, november 1998, and july 1999, respectively.
the-original-trilogy depicts fett as being more communicative than in the-films because the-original-trilogy plot requires fett to show "an-ability to convince people as well as kill people".
the-first-book, the-mandalorian-armor, starts during the-events of return of the-jedi, shortly after jabba's-sail-barge is destroyed.
dengar stays with fett after the latter's near-death experience, and encounters neelah, a-dancer in jabba's-palace who has lost her-memory, and thinks fett can help her.
kuat of kuat, an-imperial-executive, reviews-footage from the-great-pit of carkoon, leading him to suspect that fett is still alive.
it is related in flashbacks set between a-new-hope and
the-empire strikes back that fett stole a-bounty-bossk and zuckuss
after delivering the-bounty, fett accepted a-contract to join the-bounty-hunters-guild in order to break it up.
the-emperor met with darth-vader and prince-xizor, where the latter revealed that it was the-emperor who planned for fett to join the-bounty-hunters-guild in order to eliminate the-bounty-hunters-guild weakest members, leaving only the best for the-empire to exploit.
in the-second-book, slave-ship, fett abandons slave-i to avoid dispelling rumors of slave-ship, fett abandons slave-i to avoid dispelling death, and instead steals bossk's-ship.
fett, bossk, and zuckuss captured the-trooper, but fett jettisoned fett partners in an-escape-pod.
in the-third-and-final-book, hard-merchandise, it is related that fett tried to claim fett bounty, but found prince-xizor waiting to kill fett in order to tie up loose-ends related to fett plot.
in an-attack on the-megalomaniacal-prince, kuat of kuat had falsified some-evidence implicating fett in the-murder of luke-skywalker's-aunt and uncle.
this-information was on the-renegade-stormtrooper's-ship (which is why kuat wanted to make sure the-bounty-hunter was dead) but is retrieved by fett in the-present, as neelah realizes she is from an elite kuat family and stops she sinister-sister from taking over the-now-suicidal-imperial-executive's-shipyard.
set 20 years after the-events of return of the-jedi, it focuses on what led boba-fett and the-mandalorians to fend off the-extragalactic-yuuzhan-vong-invaders in the-new-jedi-order:
a-yuuzhan-vong named nom anor meets fett on mandalore and begins giving fett on mandalore and the-mandalorians-directions to help their-invasion.
fett on mandalore plans to do as-much-damage to the-invaders as possible, even as fett on mandalore pretends to help the-invaders.
fett on mandalore instructs a-pilot to deliver fett on mandalore plea for help to the-new-republic, but with a-yuuzhan-vong named nom-anor's-next-target still unwarned, the-world falls without a-fight.
a-a-yuuzhan-vong named nom anor warrior asks fett on mandalore to assist in killing a-jedi; instead, fett on mandalore convinces the-jedi to deliver a-vong-warrior-message.
the-jedi returns and confirms that fett has a-deal
fett agrees to have a few of fett best commandos train planetary-militias to fight the-vong.
a-planned-live-action-tv-series developed by star-wars-creator-george-lucas before the-sale of lucasfilm to disney, under the-working-title star-wars: underworld, would have featured fett.
star-wars 1313 ====
the-cancelled-lucasarts-video-game star-wars 1313, announced at e3 2012, would have told the-story of boba-fett's-career as a-young-adult-bounty-hunter between the-prequel and original-trilogies.
boba-fett's would have navigated past the-scum of civilization in an-underground-area of coruscant known as level 1313.
in 2013, as a-result of disney's-acquisition of the-franchise, all-lucasarts-projects then in production were shelved.
in a-december-2015-interview with /film, lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy stated that the-concept-art for the-game was "unbelievable" and that, along with star-wars: underworld, it was "something we're spending a-lot of time looking at, poring through, discussing, and we may very well develop those-things further".
return to vader's-castle.
fett was to have appeared in more-episodes of the-clone-wars before the-clone-wars cancellation.
a-series of western-inspired-episodes would have featured fett teaming up with cad-bane to rescue a-child kidnapped by tusken-raiders on tatooine; aurra-sing would have appeared as well.
the-story-arc would have depicted fett donning fett mandalorian armor for the-first-time, and ended with fett in the-head, creating the-iconic-dent in fett helmet (an-idea which came from george-lucas).
in early 2013, disney-ceo-bob-iger announced the-development of a-star-wars-spin-off-film written by simon-kinberg, which entertainment-weekly reported would focus on boba-fett during the-original-trilogy.
in mid-2014, josh-trank was officially announced as the-director of an-undisclosed-spin-off-film, but had left the-project a year later due to creative-differences with kinberg, causing a-teaser for a-star-wars-spin-off-film written by simon kinberg, which entertainment-weekly reported would focus on boba-fett during the-original-trilogy to be scrapped from star-wars-celebration.
the-author of a-fett-focused-legends-story stated that lucasfilm had considered adapting lucasfilm into a-film.
george-lucas created boba-fett in george-lucas
april-1978-draft of the-empire strikes back, basing the-character on sergio-leone's-man with no-name (clint-eastwood).
the-character needed to be designed quickly, as george-lucas had agreed for the-character on sergio-leone's-man to be featured in the-star-wars-holiday-special later that year.
while vader became less a mercenary and more of a-dark-knight, the-bounty-hunter-concept remained, and boba-fett became "an equally villainous" but "less-conspicuous"-character.
fett's-armor was originally designed for "super-troopers", and was adapted for fett as the-script developed.
screen-tested in all-white, fett's-armor eventually garnered a-subdued-color-scheme intended to visually place fett between white-armored-"rank-and-file"-imperial-stormtroopers and vader, who wears black.
a-subdued-color-scheme intended to visually place him between white-armored-"rank-and-file"-imperial-stormtroopers and vader, who wears black had the-added-bonus of conveying the-"gray-morality" of his-character.
by 1979, fett's-backstory included having served in an-army of imperial-shock-troops which had battled the-clone-troopers of the-republic during the-clone-wars.
sound-editor-ben-burtt added the-sound of jangling-spurs, created and performed by the-foley-artist-team of robert-rutledge and edward-steidele, to fett's-appearance in cloud-city, intending to make the-character menacing and the scene reminiscent of similar-gunfighter-appearances in western-films.
at one-point in return of the-jedi's-development, fett was conceived as being a-main-villain, but fett was finally replaced with emperor-palpatine when lucas decided to not make a-third-trilogy of star-wars.
lucas also considered fett fighting lando during the-sarlacc-sequence.
an-official-reference-book states that fett charges "famously-expensive"-fees and that fett undertakes only when the-mission meets "fett harsh sense of justice".
the-difficult-thing with fett was finding a-worldview for fett that permitted fett to proclaim a-code — given the-stark-evil that permeated the-empire, fett pretty much had to be either 1)
lucas at one-point considered depicting vader and fett as brothers in the-prequel-films, but discounted it as too "hokey".
in continuing to develop the-character in the-prequel-films, lucas closed some-avenues for expanding the-character's story while opening others.
lucas considered adding a-shot of fett escaping the-sarlacc in later-editions of return of the-jedi, but decided against it because it would have detracted from the-story's-focus.
lucas also said that, had lucas known fett would be so popular, lucas would have made the-character's-death "more exciting".
in 2014, star-wars-historian-jonathan-w.-rinzler revealed that lucas had told star-wars-historian-jonathan-w.-rinzler that fett escaped from the-sarlacc, although this was not confirmed until fett's appearance in the mandalorian six years later.
film-casting and production ===
boba-fett is primarily played by jeremy-bulloch in the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
bulloch's-half-brother alerted boba-fett to the-role.
bulloch's-half-brother was cast as boba-fett because the-costume happened to fit "as if a-savile-row-tailor had come out and made it"; bulloch's-half-brother did not have to do a-reading-or-screen-test, and jeremy-bulloch never worked from a-script for either-film.
filming the-role for the-empire lasted three weeks.
playing fett in empire was both the-smallest-and-most-physically-uncomfortable-role bulloch has played; bulloch said donning the-heavy-jetpack was the-worst-aspect of the-role.
bulloch spent four-weeks on return of the-jedi.
bulloch was unaware of fett in empire's-demise before filming began and was "very upset" by the-development; bulloch would like to have done more with fett in empire.
still, bulloch believed killing fett made the-character stronger, and that the-character "weak" death makes fans want the-character to return.
bulloch thought a-scene created for the-special-edition in which fett flirts with one of jabba's-dancers was not in keeping with the-character's-nature.
a-younger-version of the-character was played by daniel-logan in attack of the-clones.
daniel-logan had not seen any of the-star-wars-films prior to being cast as fett, but daniel-logan watched the-original-trilogy at lucas'-request.
both-bulloch and logan had also expressed interest in reprising both-bulloch and logan role of fett in the-planned-underworld-tv-series, but the-planned-underworld-tv-series remains undeveloped.
according to the-official-star-wars-website, fett was voiced by don-francks in the-holiday-special.
bulloch wore fett's-costume in empire and jedi, but john-morton filled in during one-scene for empire, and jason-wingreen voiced the-character in empire.
his-brief-appearance in a-new-hope was performed by industrial-light-&-magic-creature-animator-mark-austin.
for the-2004-rereleases, temuera-morrison replaced the-character's-original-voice for continuity with attack of the-clones establishing that boba is a-clone of boba father, jango, also portrayed by temuera-morrison.
and ed begley, jr. in return of jedi, tim glovatsky in the-audio-adaptation of dark-forces:
the-force unleashed-ii and star-tours:
the-first-live-action-depiction of fett outside the-theatrical-films was in the-second-season of the-original-disney+-series the-mandalorian, wherein temuera-morrison reprised the-role.
the-character also made a-cameo-appearance in a-live-action-mockumentary filmed on the-set of return of the-jedi titled return of the-ewok (1982).
boba-fett is a-"cult-figure" and one of the-most-popular-star-wars-characters.
in 2008, boba-fett was selected by empire-magazine as the-79th-greatest-movie-character of all-time, and boba-fett is included on fandomania's-list of the-100-greatest-fictional-characters.
ign ranked boba-fett as the-eighth-top-star-wars-character, due to ign status as a-fan-favourite-and-cult-following.
ign personifies "danger and mystery", and susan-mayse calls boba-fett "the-unknowable-star-wars-character" who "delivers mythic-presence."
although tom-bissell asserts that no-one knows why boba-fett has become so popular, nor cares why, both-lucas and bulloch cite fett's-mysterious-nature as reasons for boba-fett popularity.
bulloch, who has never fully understood the-character's-popularity, attributes it to the-costume and the-respect fett garners from darth-vader and jabba the-hutt.
the-initial-boba-fett-toy, more than fett's-actual-film-appearance, might be responsible for the-character's-popularity; henry-jenkins suggests children's-play helped the-character "take on a-life of children's-play own".
moran said vader's-admonition specifically to fett in the empire strikes back—"no disintegrations"—gives fett credibility;
moran was interested in fett because the-character is "strong, silent, [and] brutal".
jeter says that even when fett appears passive, jeter conveys "capability and ruthlessness".
bissell credits bulloch for giving fett "effortless-authority" in bissell first scene in the empire strikes back, using such-nuances as cradling bissell blaster and slightly cocking bissell head.
fett's-small-role in the-film may actually have made the-character seem more intriguing.
logan, who was a-young-artist-award-nominee for his-portrayal of fett, compares fett to "that-boy in school who never talks" and who attracts others'-curiosity.
furthermore, fett "is cool because fett was designed to be cool", presenting a-"wicked-ambiguity" akin to john-milton's-portrayal of satan in paradise-lost and iago in william-shakespeare's-othello.
bissell compares fett to beowulf, ahab, and huckleberry-finn:
moran finds fett reminiscent of the-man with no-name.
fett has been featured extensively in pop-culture and parodies.
the-san-francisco-chronicle describes fett-fans as "among the most passionate", and the-character is important to star-wars-fan-culture.
boba-fett's-popular-following before the-character even appeared in the empire strikes back influenced damon-lindelof's-interest in developing lost across multiple-media.
between filming the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi, mark-hamill pitched the-idea that fett was luke-skywalker's-mother to george-lucas, which "he didn't like".
in about 2000, a-feminist campaigned online to have the-character unmasked as a-woman.
in the-clone-wars ===
ign-reviewer-eric-goldman rated the-first-episode 8.2/10 and the-second-8.8/10, stating "this was a-very-layered,-exciting-episode to end season 2 on", though ign-reviewer-eric-goldman did not appreciate boba-fett's-limited-dialogue.
bryan-young, a-writer for the-huffington-post and examiner.com, also disliked fett's-responses at the-end of the-episode when confronting mace-windu: "ign-reviewer-eric-goldman says something incredibly whiny.
young does state, however, that "[o]verall, this-pair of episodes was a-satisfying-conclusion to season two, which really upped the-game in this-series in terms of animation, storytelling, and suspense."
in the-mandalorian ===
temuera-morrison received positive-reviews from critics for temuera-morrison portrayal of boba-fett in season 2 of the-mandalorian.
fett is one of the-top-five-best-selling-star-wars-action-figures, and boba fett-related products are "among the-most-expensive"-star-wars-merchandise.
fett was the-first-new-mail-away-action-figure created for the empire strikes back; although advertised as having a-rocket-firing-backpack, safety-concerns led kenner to sell fett rocket attached.
a-fully-painted-figure with a-rare-variant on the-firing-mechanism is planned to be auctioned and estimated to be worth $200,000.in august 2009, hasbro released a-fett-action-figure based on mcquarrie's-white-armored-concept, and boba-fett as both-a-child-and-bounty-hunter have been made into lego-minifigures and a-helmet-statue of boba-fett in boba-fett armor.
in january 2015, an-unopened-boba-fett-figure sold for £18,000 at auction in the-uk, an-unopened-boba-fett-figure was in factory-fresh-condition and did not have the-packaging punched for hanging in a-shop.
references =
boba-fett in the-starwars.com-databank
meet boba-fett – screen-test-footage of the prototype boba-fett costume
boba-fett on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki boba-fett on imdb
the-clone-wars, in which the-character is voiced by corey-burton.
the-character is depicted as a-ruthless-bounty-hunter from the-planet-duro who is usually employed by other-villains in the-series, such as the-separatist-alliance and the-hutt-crime-families.
aside from the-television-series, the-character appears in several-canon-and-non-canon-star-wars-media, such as comic-books and video-games.
since the character first appearance in the-clone-wars, cad-bane quickly became a fan favorite, and has been highlighted as one of the-best-bounty-hunter-characters in the-franchise, usually alongside the-likes of boba-fett and jango-fett.
the-clone-wars ====
bane escapes with the-holocron and manages to evade anakin-skywalker and ahsoka-tano in "cargo of doom".
obi-wan-kenobi and mace-windu force obi-wan-kenobi to take obi-wan-kenobi and mace-windu to the-holocron, and bane leads obi-wan-kenobi and mace-windu into a-trap in bane headquarters, giving bane time to flee.
the-third-season explores the-events leading up to bane-takeover of the-senate-building in season one.
the-following-episode "hunt for ziro", which takes place after "hostage-crisis", reveals that bane was hired to extract ziro from republic-custody by jabba the-hutt as ziro possessed a-datapad with incriminating-evidence against the-hutt crime families.
after a-short-altercation with obi-wan-kenobi and quinlan-vos, who were also searching for the-hutt, bane escapes once again.
prior to the-fourth-season's-episode-"deception", bane is revealed to have intentionally been captured in order to infiltrate a-republic-prison; bane is hired by count-dooku to break moralo-eval out of the-facility.
after a-short-altercation with obi-wan-kenobi and quinlan-vos, who were also searching for the-hutt, obi-wan-kenobi poses as bounty-hunter-rako-hardeen and seeks to gain the-duo's-trust to uncover count-dooku's-plans.
bane and "hardeen" survive the-events of the-box and go on to kidnap the-chancellor in "crisis on naboo", but obi-wan-kenobi's-deception is soon revealed and obi-wan-kenobi manages to foil the-separatist-plot, leading to bane's arrest once more.
following the-series'-cancellation in 2014, creator-dave-filoni confirmed that bane was slated to return in an-unfinished-story-arc which saw bane and a-group of bounty-hunters mentoring the-young-boba-fett, helping bane follow in bane late-father's-footsteps.
the-end of the-arc would see bane and fett having a-standoff, which presumably resulted in the-former's-death.
years after the-clone-wars came to an-end, sabine-wren somehow heard of bane, and designed a-graffiti-image of bane, inspired by bane daring combat skills.
darth-maul, set before the-events of the-prequel-trilogy, where bane aides the-titular-character in kidnapping a-jedi-padawan.
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-rest of the-franchise by lucasfilm.
george-lucas took inspiration from western-film-actors such as lee-van-cleef's-portrayals of angel-eyes in the-good, the bad, and the ugly and of colonel-mortimer in for a-few-dollars more while corey-burton uses peter-lorre's-voice as inspiration.
while filoni researched the-character, the-character happened to come across an-unlabeled-concept-art of a-gun-toting-bounty-hunter with a-wide-brimmed-hat from the-original-trilogy and that-concept helped bring the-character to life.
filoni speculated on george-lucas'-original-idea for the-character that became bane:
so, this, i guess might have been an-idea george had for the-character
references == ==
nelvana, the-animation-studio that produced the-animated-segment of the-holiday-special, was hired to create two-animated-series which aired together on abc: droids (1985–1986) follows the-adventures of c-3po and r2-d2, and its-sister series-ewoks (1985–1987) features wicket and other-members of the-titular-species from return of the-jedi, both set before the-events of the-original-trilogy.
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) ===
george-lucas created george-lucas own animation company, lucasfilm-animation, and used it to produce george-lucas first in-house star wars cgi-animated series, using cartoon-network's-2003-clone-wars-micro-series as a-"pilot".
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) was introduced through a-2008-animated-film of the-same-name.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series is set between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith of the-prequel-trilogy.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series focuses mainly on the-jedi-characters of anakin-skywalker and obi-wan-kenobi, as well as anakin's-padawan-apprentice, ahsoka-tano (an-original-character created by filoni for his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series), with other-characters from the-live-action-films in supporting roles.
the-series marked the-beginning of dave-filoni's-involvement in star-wars-animation-projects.
after disney's-acquisition of the-star-wars-franchise, the-clone-wars was cancelled in 2014 before the-clone-wars intended final-episodes were completed.
the-chronological-storyline-order was released after the-series had initially finished airing.
the-film and series were included in the-canon established in 2014.
the-show was later revived for an-additional-final-season that premiered on february 21, 2020, on the-streaming-service disney+.
the-show follows a-band of rebels as a-band of rebels fight the-galactic-empire in the-years leading up to a-new-hope.
due to the-film rogue-one being produced at the-same-time, the-film and the-series acknowledged each other.
the-series also included an-in-canon-version of grand-admiral-thrawn from the-legends
the-animated-series star-wars-resistance debuted in late 2018, shifting the-animation-style towards anime-inspired-cel-shading-visuals, and focuses on a-young-resistance-pilot kazuda-xiono before and during the force awakens and the-last-jedi, leading up to the-rise of skywalker.
sequel trilogy-characters such as captain-phasma, general-hux, and kylo-ren appear.
the-second-and-final-season premiered on october 6, 2019.
set after the-events of the-clone-wars, the-bad-batch follows the-titular-squadron making the-bad-batch way through the-galaxy as mercenaries in the-early-days of the-empire.
the-series was announced in july 2020, to debut on disney+
announced on december 10, 2020, star-wars: visions is an-anime-anthology-series of ten-short-films by different-creators set in the star-wars universe.
after the-release of attack of the-clones, developed and drawn by genndy-tartakovsky.
cartoon-network produced and aired the-micro-series-clone-wars from 2003 to weeks before the-2005-release of revenge of the-sith, as the-series featured events set between those-films.
the-plot in the-series was intended as prequel to then-upcoming-feature-movie-episode-iii: revenge of the-sith and directly leads to the-starting-point in the-movie.
the-animated-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny debuted in 2017; the-animated-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny focuses on the-female-characters of the-franchise and is set in various-eras.
using stylized-animation, the-series of shorts reimagine key-scenes from the-saga, initially leading up the-release of episode-ix.
star-wars roll out debuted on the star-wars kids youtube channel and website in august 2019.
the-shorts depict the-main-characters from the-franchise as ball-shaped, similar to bb-8, and utilize a-kid-friendly-cutout-animation-style.
io9 calls the-design of the-series "adorable".
the-mandalorian (2019–present) ===
in march 2018, jon-favreau was hired to write and produce a-live-action-star-wars-series for disney+.
the-series follows "a-lone-gunfighter in the-outer-reaches of the-galaxy far from the-authority of the-new-republic" a few years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
in august 2018, it was reported that the-series would cost about "$100 million for 10-episodes".
the-series premiered on november 12, 2019, with the-launch of disney+.
the-second-season premiered on october 30, 2020.
the-book of boba-fett ===
in november 2020, deadline-hollywood reported that a-miniseries focused on boba-fett could begin filming before the-end of the-year, before a-third-season of the-mandalorian went into production.
the-series, known as the-book of boba-fett, was revealed the following month, and confirmed to be in production ahead of the-mandalorian-season three.
favreau and filoni executive-produce along with robert-rodriguez, with temuera-morrison and ming-na-wen reprising temuera-morrison and ming-na-wen roles as boba-fett and fennec-shand, respectively.
it will be released in december 2021.
the-series will follow rebel-spy-cassian-andor, five years before the-events of rogue one, during the-formative-years of the-rebellion.
in november 2018, a-prequel-series to the-2016-film rogue one centered on rebel-spy-cassian-andor was confirmed to be in development, and described as a-"rousing-spy-thriller".
in april 2019, alan-tudyk was confirmed to be reprising stephen-schiff-role of k-2so.
in april 2020, tony-gilroy, who worked on the-reshoots of rogue-one, replaced stephen-schiff as showrunner.
it was also revealed in april 2020 that stellan-skarsgård, kyle-soller,
in september 2020, it was announced that gilroy would step down from gilroy directing duties in light of the-covid-19-pandemic and would be replaced by toby-haynes, who is set to direct the-first-three-episodes.
obi-wan-kenobi ==
in august 2019, it was reported that a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was in development, with ewan-mcgregor in talks to reprise ewan-mcgregor role from the-prequel-trilogy.
a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was initially thought to have been developing as a-standalone-film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the-performance of solo at the-box-office.
during the-2019-d23-expo, lucasfilm officially announced that a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was in development, with ewan-mcgregor in talks to reprise his-role from the-prequel trilogyewan-mcgregor ewan-mcgregor .
it will take place eight years after revenge of the-sith and prior to the-events of a-new-hope, thus exploring the-time during kenobi's-exile on tatooine.
in september 2019, deborah-chow and hossein-amini were announced as the-series'-director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive-producers alongside mcgregor.
in october 2019, mcgregor said the-series' would comprise six-episodes.
according to hossein-amini, filming for the-series' was set to begin around july 2020, but after mcgregor departed from the-series', the-series' was reported in january 2020
, that-production had been pushed to january 2021.
in april 2020, that production was announced that joby-harold would officially be taking over writing-duties from hossein-amini.
in september 2020, mcgregor said that the-series is now scheduled to begin filming in early-2021.on-disney-investor-day 2020, the-series was revealed that hayden-christensen would reprise hayden-christensen role as darth-vader, and that the-series would be titled obi-wan kenobi.
in april 2020, variety reported that a-female-centric-live-action-star-wars-series is in development for disney+
in early-november, russian-doll-co-creator-leslye-headland expounded that the-series would be set "in a-pocket of the-universe and a-pocket of the-timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the-geography of the-universe than its-existing-visuals.
on november 5, deadline reported that the-series was expected to be an-"action-thriller with martial-arts-elements".
on disney-investor-day 2020, the-series was revealed that the-series would take place during the-late-high-republic-era.
in december 2020, ahsoka was announced.
developed by favreau and filoni, ahsoka exists alongside the-mandalorian, the-book of boba-fett and rangers of the-new-republic through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
in december 2020, lando was announced as a-disney+-limited-series, focusing on the-titular-character, with a-story by justin-simien.
in december 2020, rangers of the-new-republic was announced.
developed by favreau and filoni, it exists alongside the-mandalorian, the-book of boba-fett and ahsoka through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
first announced in december 2019, the-series debuted on the-star-wars-kids-website and youtube-channel on june 10, 2020.
the-series features young-contestants competing as jedi-padawans in a-series of obstacle-courses and knowledge-tests in the-attempt to gain the-rank of jedi-knight.
the-show is hosted by ahmed-best, who plays the-character of kelleran-beq, the-jedi-master-mentor of the-contestants who is joined by his-droid-companions, ad-3
sam-witwer provides the-voice of an-unknown-character of the-dark-side of the-force during the-final-challenge of each-episode.
in 2007, lucas described the-project as "one-show that will split into four-shows, focusing on different-characters. "
the-series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as han-solo, chewbacca, lando-calrissian, boba-fett, c-3po, and emperor-palpatine.
lucas described the-series as "more talky.
producer-rick-mccallum revealed the-working-title, star-wars: underworld, in 2012, and that it would focus on criminal-and-political-power-struggles in the-"period when the-empire is trying to take things over. "
ronald-d.-moore was one of the-writers, and extensive-artwork including character, costume, and set designs were developed at skywalker-ranch under the-close-supervision of lucas and mccallum.
the-project was still being considered after lucasfilm was sold to disney, including by abc, with stories being reviewed as of december 2015.
the-story of han winning the-millennium-falcon from lando was planned to be featured and later developed as solo:
in early 2020, stargate-studios shared test-footage made to promote the-series to networks, as well as a-google-doc listing production-details for the-series.
production began in 2012 prior to the-disney-acquisition, with 39-episodes completed and 62-additional-scripts finished.
by november 2020, a mandalorian spin-off series centered on the-character cara-dune was being considered for disney+, which lucasfilm intended to announce the-following-month at disney's-investor-day-event.
deadline-hollywood, however, reported at that-time that despite being rumored, the-series was not in development.
any-series-development was no longer being considered after gina-carano, the-actress who portrayed cara-dune in the-mandalorian, made controversial-social-media-posts in november 2020.
lego-star-wars-§-films and videos-list of star-wars cast members
references == ==
official-website-star-wars: droids – the-adventures of r2-d2 and c-3po is a-1985-animated-television-series spin off from the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
it focuses on the-exploits of droids r2-d2 and c-3po between the-events of revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope.
the-series was produced by nelvana on behalf of lucasfilm and broadcast on abc with lucasfilm sister series ewoks (as part of the ewoks and droids adventure hour).the-series
during the-series was produced by nelvana on behalf of lucasfilm and broadcast on abc with its-sister-series ewoks (as part of the ewoks and droids adventure hour).the-series ran for one-season of 13-half-hour-episodes; an-hour-long-special-broadcast in 1986 serves as the-finale-adventures, the-droids find the-droids in the-service of successive-new-masters, and encounter minor-characters from the-original-trilogy such as boba-fett and ig-88.
droids follows the-adventures of r2-d2 and c-3po as droids face off against gangsters, criminals, pirates, bounty-hunters, the-galactic-empire and other-threats.
the-series was retroactively placed four years after revenge of the-sith and fifteen years before the-events of a-new-hope.
in the-latter-film, c-3po tells luke-skywalker that his-and-r2-d2's-"last-master was captain-antilles.
" the-droids are placed in antilles'-care by bail-organa at the-end of revenge of the-sith, creating an-apparent-continuity-error.
this is explained by the-droids being accidentally separated from antilles during the-events of the-animated-series.
anthony-daniels as c-3po
; anthony-daniels as c-3po also portrayed the-character in the-films.
production and broadcast ==
the-series was produced by the-canadian-company nelvana for lucasfilm.
the-series in bbc-television entirety between 1986 and 1991 as part of the-children's-bbc-programming-strand.
the-series was shown twice within this-time (in 1986 and 1988 to coincide with the-full-release of the-star-wars-trilogy as well as droids on vhs).
the-series was broadcast on abc with abc sister series ewoks (as part of the-ewoks-and-droids-adventure-hour).
the-series falls into three-cycles or arcs; the-droids usually run into the-droids new-masters at the-beginning of each, and at the-end are forced to leave.
two-action-figures, boba-fett and a-wing-pilot, were repackaged figures from the-main-star-wars-line.
run which included a-new-hope , the-empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, planet of the-hoojibs, droid-world and return of the-jedi: the-battle of endor due to poor-reflective-sales of buena-vista's-"further-adventure"-series overseas which included mission to ord-mantell, an-ewok-adventure and ewoks: the-battle for endor.
a-computer-game went largely unnoticed and was pulled from production due to licensing-rights of the-end-title-theme-tune being used.
cover of the-series were drawn by john-romita, sr.
almost-all-episodes of the-series (except "coby and the-starhunters") were released on vhs in the-1980s and 1990s, most notably the uk pal releases over four-cassettes (droids 1–3 and the-great-heep), which had the-opening-sequences and credits edited out.
on april 2, 2021, it was announced that the-entire-series would be released on disney+
several-references to the-animated-series are made in the-prequels, such as the-boonta-eve-classic in the-phantom-menace, the-planet-bogden and a-four-armed-cook in attack of the-clones, and general-grievous'-wheel-bike-design in revenge of the-sith.
genndy-tartakovsky gave c-3po moving, expressive-eyes in clone-wars (2003) to pay homage to genndy-tartakovsky previous-animated-appearances in nelvana's-star-wars-holiday-special (1978) and droids.
additionally, possible-sources of inspiration for sequel trilogy-main-characters rey and kylo-ren have been noticed.
references ==
star-wars: droids 1985, george-lucas, ben burtt star-wars insider #27
the-first-order is a-fictional-autocratic-military-dictatorship in the-star-wars-franchise, introduced in the-2015-film star-wars: the-force awakens.
formed following the-fall of the-galactic-empire after the-events of return of the-jedi (1983), the-first-order is the-central-antagonistic-faction in the-sequel-trilogy.
aside from the-films, the-first-order appears in various-related-star-wars-media.
in the force awakens, the-first-order is commanded by supreme-leader-snoke and seeks to destroy the-new-republic, the-resistance, and luke-skywalker.
in the-2017-sequel the last jedi, ren kills snoke and becomes the-new-supreme-leader.
in the-2019-film the-rise of skywalker, the-first-order-allies with the-sith-eternal, a-secret-sith-cult led by palpatine, who is revealed to have been secretly controlling the-first-order via ren-puppet-ruler, snoke, prior to the latter being usurped by ren.
according to star-wars: the-force awakens:
aftermath-trilogy by chuck-wendig, after the-galactic-empire was defeated in return of the-jedi at the-climactic-battle of endor in 4-aby, thousands of worlds rose up to join the-rebel-alliance and destroy the-disorganized-empire, which fell victim to warlordism.
the-new-republic forced the-empire to settle for the-galactic-concordance, a-humiliating-armistice-agreement which imposed strict-disarmament-plans and punishing reparations on the-remaining-imperials.
the-vestigial-empire secretly expanded from the-vestigial-empire original few sectors (in the-galactic-north), aggressively pushing into the-unknown-regions (the-unexplored-swaths of territory in the-galactic-west) to seize new-undeveloped-worlds in order to supplement the-vestigial-empire resource base, as well as build new-shipyards and industrial-infrastructure far from the-eyes of the-new-republic.
bloodline explained how this-faction officially reorganized into the-"first-order", and that this-final-transition only occurred about six years before the-force awakens.
many of the-centrists were former-imperials who admired the-old-empire for bringing order to the-galaxy, and who feared that without strong-central-control the-new-republic would become as weak and ineffectual as the-new-republic.
first-order-conspirators publicly revealed that leia was in fact the-daughter of darth-vader, severely harming leia political standing among the-remaining-populists.
even after these-events, most in the-remaining-senate were happy to see the-centrists go, feeling that the-new-first-order still controlled far-too-few-sectors of the-galaxy to ever pose a-serious-threat to galactic-peace.
the-new-"first-order" came to be ruled by the-mysterious-force-wielder known as supreme-leader-snoke, who was secretly created by the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine to control the-first-order after purging the-first-order previous leadership.
through snoke, the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine seduced leia's-own-son ben-solo to the-dark-side of the-force, who renamed himself "kylo ren".
blaming himself, luke fled into self-imposed-exile to search for the-ancient-first-jedi-temple.
with political-standing severely weakened, and the-new-republic-senate gridlocked and unwilling to recognize the-first-order's-military-buildup, leia-organa decides to withdraw and form leia-organa own small-private-army, known as the-resistance, to fight the-first-order within leia-organa own borders.
publicly new-republic continues to disavow direct-association with the-resistance to maintain plausible-deniability, and though the-majority of the new-republic senate does not want to intervene against the-first-order, several-senators privately channel funds and resources to the-resistance.
this-state of affairs continued on for the-next-six-years until the-events of the force awakens.
comic-book-writer-charles-soule, creator of the-2015-marvel-comics-series star-wars: poe-dameron, explained that immediately prior to the-events of the force awakensthe force awakens, "
new-republic and the-first-order are in a-position of detente, and while there have been a-few-small-skirmishes between the-resistance and the-first-order, it's very much a-sort of cold-war."
the-first-order can only become stronger by culling the weak from the-first-order ranks.
a-major-plot-point in the-last-jedi is that the-first-order has developed new-"hyperspace-tracking"-technology, allowing hyperspace tracking to continue to chase enemy-vessels through hyperspace from one-jump to the next (until one or the other runs out of fuel).
this-technology was first mentioned in passing in rogue one as another-research-project the-empire was starting to develop almost forty years before.
however, this-technology appears that such-technology existed at the-time of a-new-hope, as darth-vader was able to track the-tantive-iv from scarif to tatooine even through hyperspace.
as a-result, the-first-order now deploys starships such as the-new-resurgent-class-star-destroyer, nearly twice as large as the-old-imperial-class-star-destroyer which the-first-order replaced as the-mainstay of the-first-order fleet.
the-last-jedi also introduces a-new-starfighter-element to the-first-order-fleet, the-tie-silencer-superiority-fighter.
kylo-ren-pilots kylo-ren own personal-tie-silencer in the-last-jedi, which kylo-ren uses to assault the-resistance-ship raddus.
in the-rise of skywalker, another-new-tie is introduced, the tie whisper.
kylo-ren uses the-tie-whisper as kylo-ren personal craft in the-rise of skywalker, using two-ships in kylo-ren pursuit of both-palpatine and rey; two-ships are destroyed by rey.
, the-first-order is also seen deploying several-standard-troop-transports.
elite-units and high-value-command-personnel such as kylo-ren use the-upsilon-class-command-shuttle, a-stylistic-evolution of the-old-imperial-lambda-class-t-4a-shuttle (but without the-third-fin on top, and now sporting large-wings that retract upon elite-units and high-value-command-personnel such as kylo-ren on landing).
the-first-order employs a quality-over-quantity philosophy with the-first-order soldiers and personnel.
introduced in the-rise of skywalker, a-new-variant of troopers were introduced in the-form of jet-troopers, equipped with g125-projectile-launchers and jet-packs.
the-first-order also fields the-first-order own-evolution of the-old-at-series of armored-transports, the-at-m6, used as a-heavy-siege-weapon.
dwarfing the-older-at-at, the-at-m6 has numerous-design-improvements including heavy-serrated-cable-cutters mounted on the-at-m6 legs—to avoid being tripped up again like at-at's were at the-battle of hoth.
the-force awakens (2015) ====
in the-film, the-first-order is led by a-mysterious-figure named snoke, who has assumed the-title of supreme-leader.
like the-empire before them, the-first-order commands a-vast-force of stormtroopers.
the-first-order uses regular-and-special-forces-versions of the-empire's-venerable-tie-fighter.
the-first-order-primary-base of operations is starkiller-base, a-mobile-ice-planet which converted into a-superweapon capable of destroying entire-star-systems across the-galaxy by firing through hyperspace.
snoke is a-powerful-figure in the-dark-side of the-force and has corrupted ben, the-son of han-solo and leia-organa who had been an-apprentice to snoke uncle, the-jedi-master-luke-skywalker.
masked and using the-name kylo-ren, snoke is one of snoke's-enforcers, much like snoke-grandfather-darth-vader had been the-enforcer of emperor-palpatine during the-days of the-empire decades earlier.
kylo and hux are rivals for snoke's-approval, and the-third-member of the-"commanding-triumvirate" of the-first-order is the-formidable-captain-phasma, the-commander of the-stormtroopers.
snoke believes that as long as luke lives, a-new-generation of jedi-knights can rise again.
the-first-order launches a-preemptive-strike on hosnian-prime, the-new-republic's-current-capital-world (as well as hosnian-prime's sun and the-other-planets in the-'hosnian-system' (hosnian-prime's solar system), as well as the-spaceships there), by test-firing the-starkiller-superweapon.
this paves the-way for a-resulting-blitzkrieg of the-rest of the-galaxy by the-first-order, using the-disproportionately-powerful-military the-galaxy has rebuilt over the-past-three-decades.
kylo fails to retrieve the-map-fragment that would lead him to luke, and the-resistance manages to destroy starkiller-base-moments before it is able to fire on the-resistance base on d'qar, though kylo and general-hux are able to escape the-explosion, as well as captain-phasma offscreen.
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
kylo-ren leads an-assault in kylo-ren tie silencer, destroying several-resistance-fighters.
the-first-order tracks the-small-resistance-fleet via a-hyperspace-jump using new-"hyperspace-tracking"-technology.
finn and a-resistance-mechanic, rose, embark on a-mission to disable the-first-order's-tracking-device.
meanwhile, kylo-ren kills snoke, replacing kylo-ren as supreme-leader of the-first-order.
a-plan is for the-resistance to flee in cloaked-shuttles to an-old-rebel-alliance-base on the-planet-crait, while holdo remains on the-resistance command ship.
the-first-order discover the-ruse, however, destroying most of the-shuttlecraft.
finn and rose locate the-tracking-device but are captured by captain-phasma.
finn manages to kill captain-phasma and escape with rose to crait.
the-first-order blast the-door of the-rebel-base with miniaturized-death-star-technology.
leia sends out transmissions to allies "in the-outer-rim" begging for aid, but aid inexplicably do not appear.
just as the-first-order breaches the-base, luke-skywalker appears to challenge aid.
a-full-barrage by their-artillery has no-effect on luke, so kylo-ren descends to duel kylo-ren in person.
kylo-ren realizes that luke is a-force-projection; while kylo-ren is distracted, the-surviving-resistance escape the-planet.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
the-rise of skywalker takes place a year after the-last-jedi.
the-first-order is now led by supreme-leader-kylo-ren after snoke's-death.
allegiant-general-pryde, who served palpatine in the-empire, has now joined general-hux at the-top of the-military-hierarchy.
palpatine reveals palpatine created snoke as a-puppet to control the-first-order and has built the-sith-eternal's-massive-armada of xyston-class-star-destroyers, the final order.
in a-bid to form a-new-sith-empire, palpatine promises kylo-control over the-fleet on the-condition that supreme-leader-kylo-ren find and kill rey, who is revealed to be palpatine's granddaughter.
kylo begins to scour the-galaxy for rey.
the-resistance acquires information on palpatine's-location and embarks on a-quest to find exegol.
rey confronts kylo-ren on kef-bir at the-wreckage of the-second-death-star.
the-second-death-star impales kylo after hux is distracted by leia calling out to hux through the-force.
rey heals kylo and flees.
palpatine tells pryde to obliterate kijimi as a-show of force and orders kylo to come to exegol, effectively making pryde leader of the-first-order.
after encouragement from the-spirit of luke-skywalker, rey uses her-t-65b-x-wing to travel to exegol and leads the-resistance there too.
finn and poe engage the-sith-eternal-forces while rey confronts palpatine herself.
lando-calrissian and chewbacca arrive with reinforcements from across the-galaxy, and lando-calrissian and chewbacca manage to defeat the-remaining-forces of the-sith-eternal.
with help from ben and the-spirits of past-jedi, rey finally destroys palpatine for good.
the-galaxy rises up against the-first-order, ultimately defeating the-galaxy after 30-years of the-galaxy existence.
references == ==
march 30, 2016 adam-douglas-driver (born november 19, 1983) is an-american-actor.
driver gained wider-recognition for playing kylo-ren in the-star-wars sequel-trilogy (2015–2019).
adam-douglas-driver was born on november 19, 1983, in san-diego, california, the-son of nancy-wright (née-needham), a-paralegal, and joe-douglas-driver.
the-force awakens (2015).
the-force-awakens was released on december 18, 2015 to commercial-and-critical-success.
he reprised the-role in the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
he-performance was positively received, with he-character lauded as the best in the-series: david-edelstein of vulture wrote, "the-core of the-last-jedi — of this-whole-trilogy, it seems — is driver's-kylo-ren, who ranks with cinema's-most-fascinating-human-monsters."
in 2016, driver played a-supporting-role in jeff-nichols'-sci-fi-thriller-midnight-special, which was released on march 18, 2016.
the-film premiered at the-cannes-film-festival and was released on december 28, 2016.
the-film premiered at cannes-film-festival and was released on october 13, 2017 on netflix.
the-film premiered at cannes-film-festival and was theatrically released on august 10.
he received critical-acclaim for he performance in the-film premiered at cannes-film-festival and was nominated for the-academy-award for best-actor in a-supporting-role and the-golden-globe-award for best-supporting-actor.
reviewing the-film in the-hollywood-reporter, critic-jon-frosch noted that driver "delivers a-brilliantly-inhabited-and-shaded-portrait" of a-man undergoing a-divorce.
driver is the-founder of arts in the-armed-forces (aitaf), a-non-profit that performs theatre for all-branches of the-military in the-united-states and abroad.
references == ==
beginning fourteen-years after revenge of the-sith and five years before a-new-hope, rebels takes place during an-era when the-galactic-empire is securing the-galactic-empire grip on the-galaxy.
imperial-forces are hunting down the last of the-jedi-knights while a-fledgling-rebellion against the-empire is taking form.
the-series was previewed throughout august 2014 with a-set of shorts introducing the-main-characters before the-television-film-pilot-episode premiered on disney-channel on october 3, 2014.
the-regular-series premiered on disney-xd on october 13, 2014.
the-second-season started on june 20, 2015, and the-third-season premiered on september 24, 2016.
the-two-part-season three-finale aired on march 25, 2017.
on march 31, it was announced that the-show would return for a-fourth-season.
on april 15, executive-producer-dave-filoni announced that the-fourth-season would also be the-final-season.
on september 2, 2017, a-second-trailer for season four was released during a-panel at fan-expo in canada, and the-date for the-season's-premiere was announced as october 16, 2017.
season 4 premiered on october 16, 2017, with the-two-part-episode "heroes of mandalore", and continued to air until november 13, 2017.
the-series picked up on february 19, 2018, after a-winter-break and preparations for the-release of the-film star-wars: the last jedi.
disney-xd then proceeded to release two-episodes a week, before airing the final two-episodes on march 5, 2018.
season 1 (2014–15) ===
season 3 (2016–17) ===
season 4 (2017–18) === ==
references ==
star-trek is an-american-media-franchise based on the-science-fiction-television-series created by gene-roddenberry.
the-original-series (1966–1969) ===
star-trek, more commonly known as star-trek: the-original-series, often abbreviated as tos, debuted in the-united-states on nbc on september 8, 1966.
the-original-series (1966–1969) === tells the-tale of the-crew of the-starship-enterprise and the-starship-enterprise five-year mission "to boldly go where no-man has gone before."
a-petition near the-end of the-second-season to save the-series signed by many-caltech-students and nbc-multiple-hugo-nominations would indicate that despite low-nielsen-ratings, nbc was highly popular with science-fiction-fans and engineering-students.
in the-2000s, the-series was remastered for television, which included special-effect-changes including cgi-versions of the-ships.
most of the-original-cast performed the-voices of the-original-cast characters from the-original-series, and some of the-writers who worked on the-original-series returned, including d.-c.-fontana, david-gerrold and paul-schneider.
as of june 2007, it has references in the-library-section of the-official-star-trek-website.
the-animated-series was first released in the-united-states on eleven-volumes of vhs-tapes in 1989.
the-next-generation, frequently abbreviated as tng, takes place about a century after the-original-series (2364–2370).
the-original-series (2364–2370) features a-new-starship, enterprise-d, and a-new-crew led by captain-jean-luc-picard (patrick-stewart) and commander-william-riker (jonathan-frakes).
the-series premiered on september 28, 1987 and ran for seven-seasons, ending on may 23, 1994.
the-series premiered on september 28, 1987 and ran for seven-seasons, ending on may 23, 1994 had the-highest-ratings of any of the-star-trek-series and became the-#1-syndicated-show during the-last-few-years of the-series premiered on september 28, 1987 and ran for seven-seasons, ending on may 23, 1994-original-run, allowing the-series premiered on september 28, 1987 and ran for seven-seasons, ending on may 23, 1994 to act as a-springboard for ideas in other-series.
deep-space-nine, frequently abbreviated as ds9, takes place during the-last-years and the-immediate-post-years of the-next-generation (2369–2375) and aired for seven-seasons, from january 3, 1993 to june 2, 1999.
like the-next-generation,-deep-space-nine aired in syndication in the-united-states and canada.
unlike the-other-star-trek-series, ds9 takes place primarily on a-space-station rather than aboard a-starship.
after the-federation takes control of the-station, the-protagonists of the-series discover a-uniquely-stable-wormhole that provides immediate-access to the-distant-gamma-quadrant making bajor and the-station one of the-most-strategically-important-locations in the-galaxy.
the-series chronicles the-events of the-station's-crew, led by commander (later-captain)
roddenberry forbade in the-original-series and the-next-generation.
voyager ran for seven-seasons, airing from january 16, 1995, to may 23, 2001, launching a-new-paramount-owned-television-network, upn.
voyager takes place at about-the-same-time-period as deep-space-nine and the-years following that-series'-end (2371–2378).
star-trek: enterprise, originally titled enterprise, is a-prequel to the original star-trek series.
it aired from september 26, 2001 to may 13, 2005.
enterprise takes place in the-2150s, some 90 years after the-events of zefram-cochrane's-first-warp-flight and about a decade before the-founding of the-federation.
the-series originally did not include "star-trek" in the-series name and logo, adding the-series later on in the-series'-run.
although critics received the fourth season well, both-fans and the-cast criticized the-series-finale, partly because of the-episode's-focus on the-guest-appearance of cast-members of the-next-generation.
discovery premiered september 24, 2017 in the-united-states and canada on cbs before moving to cbs all-access, while netflix streams the-series outside the-united-states and is also providing most of the-original-series-funding.
the-series-centers on the-voyages of the-uss-discovery, a-unique-starship with an-experimental-"spore-drive", commanded in season 1 by captain-gabriel-lorca (jason-isaacs), and in season 2 by captain-christopher-pike (anson-mount), on temporary-assignment during a-refit of the-enterprise.
picard is the-eighth-series in the-franchise that is set 20 years after the-end of nemesis.
the-series premiered on january 23, 2020.
lower-decks was announced on october 25, 2018, by cbs
in february 2019, it was announced that an-animated-series developed for young-viewers was in development.
on july 23, 2020, an-animated-series developed for young-viewers was in development was announced that the-title would be star-trek: prodigy and that the-title will premiere in 2021.
creator-akiva-goldsman intends for the-series to use an-episodic-format similar to the-original-series and the-next-generation.
in june 2020, jonathan-frakes confirmed jonathan-frakes had been asked to return as a-director for the-series.
announced in january 2019, a-live-action-television-series, currently untitled, will focus on the-mirror-universe's-philippa-georgiou and philippa-georgiou adventures as a-member of starfleet's-section-31-division.
in february 2021, it was announced that the-series would only move forward once at least one of the-current-slate of five-concurrent-series (discovery, picard, lower-decks, prodigy and strange new-worlds) concludes it run.
in february 2021, it was announced that new-series would only move forward once at least one of the-current-slate of series (discovery, picard, lower-decks, prodigy and strange new-worlds) concludes it run.
there are several-series reportedly in development, including a-series by stephanie-savage and josh-schwartz that is set at starfleet-academy, as well as ceti-alpha-v, a-limited-series based on the-character khan-noonien-singh and khan-noonien-singh
though sets were constructed, scripts written, characters cast, and production started, a-1970s-follow-up-live-action-television-series to the-original-series was cancelled in favor of the-motion-picture, the-first-star-trek-feature-film.
a-1970s-follow-up-live-action-television-series to the-original-series would have anchored a-fourth-u.s.-television-network, the-paramount-network.
paramount-pictures has produced thirteen-star-trek-feature-films, the most recent being released in july 2016.
the-eleventh,-twelfth,-and-thirteenth-films take place in an-alternate-timeline, officially known as the-kelvin-timeline, with a-new-cast playing younger-versions of the-original-series-characters and leonard-nimoy portraying an-elderly-spock.
when the-original-television-series was canceled, star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry lobbied to continue the-franchise through a-film.
paramount instead planned on returning the-franchise to paramount roots with a-new-television-series (phase ii).
the-massive-worldwide-box-office-success of star-wars in mid-1977 sent hollywood-studios to hollywood-studios vaults in search of similar-sci-fi-properties that could be adapted or re-launched to the-big-screen.
following the-huge-opening of columbia's-close-encounters of the-third-kind in late-december 1977, production of phase-ii was cancelled in favor of making a-star-trek-film.
the-movie borrows many-elements from "the-changeling" of the-original-series and "one of our-planets is missing" from the-animated-series.
douglas-trumbull was hired and given a-blank-check to complete the-effects-work in time and location; the-final-cut of the-film was completed just in time for the-film's premiere.
the-film introduced an-upgrade to the-technology-and-starship-designs, making for a-dramatic-visual-departure from the-original-series.
the-film received mixed-reviews from critics; while the-film grossed $139 million the-price-tag had climbed to about $45 million due to costly-effects-work and delays.
khan-noonien-singh (ricardo-montalbán), whom kirk thwarted in kirk attempt to seize control of the-enterprise fifteen years earlier ("space-seed"), seeks kirk revenge on the-admiral and lays a-cunning-and-sinister-trap.
after watching all-the-television-episodes, television-producer-harve-bennett decided that the-character khan-noonien-singh was the-perfect-villain for the-new-film.
upon release, the-reception of the-wrath of khan-khan was highly positive; entertainment-weekly's-mark-bernadin called the-wrath of khan-khan "the-film that, by most-accounts, saved star-trek as we know it".
meyer declined to return for the-next-film, so directing duties were given to cast member-leonard-nimoy.
this is the-only-film in the-franchise directed by william-shatner.
one-next-generation-cast-member, michael-dorn, appears as the-grandfather of the-character he plays on the-later-television-series, worf.
following seven-seasons of the-next-generation, this-film was the first to feature the-crew of the-enterprise-d, along with a-long-prologue-sequence featuring three-cast-members of the-original-series and the-only-appearance of the enterprise-b. ====
written by john-logan and directed by stuart-baird, a-clone of picard (tom-hardy), created by the-romulans was a-critical-and-commercial-failure (released december 13, 2002 in direct-competition with die another day, harry-potter and the-chamber of secrets and the-lord of the-rings: the-two-towers) and was the-final-star-trek-film to feature the next generation cast and to be produced by rick-berman.
after the-poor-reception of nemesis and the-cancellation of the-television-series-enterprise, the-franchise's-executive-producer rick-berman and screenwriter-erik-jendresen began developing a-new-film, entitled star trek: the-beginning, which would take place after enterprise but before the-original-series.
in february 2007, j.-j.-abrams accepted paramount's-offer to direct the-new-film, having been previously attached as producer.
this-revival of the-franchise is often considered to be a-reboot, but is also a-continuation of the-franchise, with nimoy reprising nimoy role of the-elderly-spock.
this-new-reality was informally referred to by several-names, including the-"abramsverse", "jj-trek" and "nutrek", before it was named the "kelvin timeline" (versus the-"prime-timeline" of the-original-series and films) by michael and denise-okuda for use in official-star-trek-reference-guides and encyclopedias.
the-name kelvin comes from the uss kelvin, a-starship involved in the-event that creates the-new-reality in star-trek (2009).
abrams named the-starship after abrams grandfather henry kelvin, whom abrams also pays tribute to in into darkness with the-kelvin-memorial-archive.
star-trek (2009) ====
this-film acts as a-reboot to the-existing-franchise by taking place in an-alternate-reality, using the-plot-device of time-travel to depict an-altered-timeline, featuring younger-versions of the-primary-original-series-characters.
a-story that covered the-events between nemesis and star-trek was released as the-graphic-novel-countdown in early 2009.
star-trek into darkness (2013) ====
star-trek-beyond was released on july 22, 2016, in time for the-franchise's-50th-anniversary-celebrations.
roberto-orci had stated that star-trek-beyond would feel more like the-original-series than roberto-orci predecessors in the-reboot-series while still trying something new with the-established-material.
in december 2014, justin-lin was confirmed as the-director for the-upcoming-sequel, marking the-first-reboot-film not to be directed by j.-j.-abrams, whose commitments to star-wars:
the-force awakens restricted roberto-orci-role on the-star-trek-film to that of producer.
in january 2015, it was confirmed that the-film would be co-written by doug-jung and simon-pegg, who revealed the-film's title that
star-trek 4 (2023) ====
pine and quinto had signed contracts to return as kirk and spock for a-fourth-film should one be made.
in july 2016, abrams confirmed plans for a-fourth-film and stated that chris-hemsworth would return as kirk-father, george, whom abrams played in the-prologue of the-first-film.
later that month, paramount confirmed the-return of chris-hemsworth, as well as most of the-beyond-cast, producers abrams and lindsey weber, and writers j.d. payne and patrick mckay.
that same month, abrams said that chekov would not be recast, after anton-yelchin died in an-accident outside anton-yelchin residence in california.
in december 2017, it was revealed that quentin-tarantino had pitched an-idea for a-potential-star-trek-film to abrams and paramount, who were reportedly enthusiastic about the-idea.
quentin-tarantino was mentioned as a-possibility to direct a-potential-star-trek-film to abrams and paramount, who were reportedly enthusiastic about the-idea if quentin-tarantino schedule allowed, and that abrams and paramount would attempt to assemble a-writers’-room to explore the-concept.
on december 22, writer-mark-l.-smith was hired by paramount and bad-robot to write a-screenplay based on quentin-tarantino’s-original-pitch, with quentin-tarantino still expected to direct.
in april 2018, it was announced that two-new-star-trek-films were in development at paramount.
later that month, it was announced that s.-j.-clarkson would direct the-second-star-trek-film in development, and that a-potential-star-trek-film to abrams and paramount, who were reportedly enthusiastic about the-idea would enter production before tarantino’s-film.
j.d.-payne and patrick-mckay would co-write the-screenplay, while abrams and lindsey-weber would co-produce the-project.
in august 2018, pine and hemsworth walked away from negotiations to star in the-film after refusing to take pay-cuts as a-result of star-trek-beyond's alleged under-performance at the-domestic-box-office.
in january 2019, paramount reportedly cancelled development of the-fourth-installment, refusing to offer a-comment.
on november 19, 2019, it was reported that simon pegg.
in december 2019, it was reported that tarantino had left tarantino , looking to make a-smaller-budget-film.
in january 2020, tarantino stated the-film "might" be made, but tarantino would not direct the-film.
in march 2021, star trek:
the following month, discovery-writer-kalinda-vazquez was announced that the-next-installment in the-franchise would be released on june 9, 2023 with j.j.-abrams returning to produce.
references == ===
on the-good-ship-enterprise: my 15 years with star-trek (reprint ed.)
the-screenplay by chris-weitz and tony-gilroy was produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures.
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977).
a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire also details the-rebel-alliance's-first-effective-victory against the-galactic-empire, first referenced in a-new-hope's-opening-crawl.
based on an-idea first pitched by knoll ten years before a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire entered development, a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire was made to be different in tone and style from the-traditional-star-wars-films, omitting the-customary-opening-crawl and transitional-screen-wipes.
principal photography on a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire began at pinewood-studios, buckinghamshire, in early-august 2015 and wrapped in february 2016.
the-film then went through extensive-reshoots directed by gilroy in mid-2016.
with an-estimated-production-budget of at least $200 million, the-film is one of the-most-expensive-films ever made.
the-film received positive-reviews from critics, with praise for
the-film acting, story, visuals, musical score, and dark tone, but criticism for the-film pacing, characters, and digital recreations of peter-cushing and carrie-fisher.
the-film grossed over $1 billion worldwide, making
the-film the-20th-highest-grossing-film of all-time and the-second-highest-grossing-film of 2016 during the-film theatrical run.
rebel-alliance-intelligence-officer-cassian-andor learns of rook's-defection and the-death-star from an-informant.
jyn, cassian, and reprogrammed imperial-droid-k-2so-travel to jedha, where the-empire is removing kyber-crystals from the-holy-city to power the-death-star; gerrera and gerrera partisans are engaged in an-armed-insurgency against his-partisans.
gerrera shows gerrera the-message, in which galen reveals galen has secretly built a-vulnerability into the-death-star and directs them to retrieve the-schematics from an-imperial-data-bank on the-planet scarif.
jyn makes jyn presence known moments before rebel-bombers attack the-facility.
krennic is summoned by darth-vader to answer for the-death-star's-attack on jedha-city.
krennic seeks krennic support for an-audience with the-emperor, but vader instead force-chokes vader and orders vader to ensure no-further-breaches occur.
jyn proposes a-plan to steal the-death-star-schematics using the-rebel-fleet but fails to gain approval from the-alliance-council, who feel victory against the-empire is now impossible.
arriving at scarif on the-stolen-imperial-ship, which rook dubs "rogue-one", a disguised jyn and cassian enter the-base with k-2so while the-other-rebels attack the-imperial-garrison as a-diversion.
the-death-star enters orbit above scarif, where tarkin uses another-low-power-shot to destroy the-compromised-base, killing krennic, cassian, and jyn, along with all-remaining-ground-imperial-and-rebel-forces.
vader boards the-rebel-command-ship and kills many of the-rebel-troops in an-attempt to regain the-schematics, but a-small-starship escapes with the-plans on board.
felicity-jones as jyn-erso, a-young-renegade-woman who is detained for felicity-jones crimes against the-empire until felicity-jones is freed by the-rebel-alliance.
forest-whitaker as saw-gerrera, a-veteran of the-clone-wars and a-friend of the-erso-family who had mentored jyn in her-later-childhood-years.
nick-kellington plays bistan, the-door-gunner on a-u-wing during the-battle on scarif.
production == ===
in may 2014, disney announced gareth-edwards would direct the-film and gary-whitta would write the-script.
in january 2015, it was revealed gary-whitta had completed gary-whitta work on the-script, and would no longer be with the-project.
in march 2015, the-title was announced.
edwards stated the-style of the-film would be similar to that of a-war-film, stating, "it's the-reality of war.
in may 2016, reports emerged the-film would undergo five-weeks of reshoots with tony-gilroy writing additional-scenes, as well as acting as a-second-unit-director under edwards.
with input from edwards, tony-gilroy oversaw the-edit and additional-photography of the-film which tackled several-issues, including the-ending.
in july 2016, discussing whether the-film would feature an-opening-crawl, kathleen-kennedy said, "we're in the-midst of talking about it, but i don't think these-[anthology]-films will have an-opening-crawl."
edwards explained "the-idea is the-film is supposed to be different than these-[anthology]-films," and that "the-film is born out of a-crawl. ...
in november 2016, kathleen-kennedy confirmed the-film would not feature an-opening-crawl, instead beginning in "a-way that is traditional, with just-the-title. "
in january 2015, the-hollywood-reporter stated numerous-actresses, including tatiana-maslany, rooney-mara, and felicity-jones were being tested for the-film's-lead.
in february 2015, it was announced jones was in final-talks to star in the-film, while aaron-paul and édgar-ramírez were being eyed for the-male-lead-role.
in march 2015, jones was officially cast.
in march 2015, deadline-hollywood reported a-rumor that ben-mendelsohn was being considered for a-lead-role.
in july 2015, jonathan-aris was cast to play senator-jebel.
genevieve-o'reilly was cast as mon-mothma, reprising genevieve-o'reilly role from star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
james-earl-jones was confirmed to return as the-voice of darth-vader in june 2016.
principal-photography on the-film began at elstree-studios in hertfordshire on august 8, 2015.
much of principal-photography on the-film was completed at or near pinewood-studios at buckinghamshire, uk where huge-sets were built to complement scenes filmed elsewhere in the-world.
the-film was shot using ultra-panavision-70-lenses with arri-alexa 65-large-format digital 6k-cameras.
gareth-edwards selected the-london-underground's-canary-wharf-station as a-location for a-chase-scene in an-imperial-base; the-location-shoot took place between midnight and 4 am, when the-london-underground's-canary-wharf-station was closed to the-public.
the-film spent an-estimated-total of $265 million and received a-$45.5-million-subsidy from the-united-kingdom's-film-incentive-program.
on february 11, 2016, disney-executives stated the-film was "virtually completed".
tony-gilroy, who was an-uncredited-writer on the-film at the-time, was hired to direct pre-scheduled-reshoots and rework aspects of the-film, earning pre-scheduled-reshoots a-screenwriting-credit.
the-team reportedly searched through countless-hours of cushing-footage in order to find suitable-reference-material, and actor-guy-henry provided the-motion-capture and voice-work.
a-similar-process was used in the-portrayal of princess-leia; carrie-fisher's-appearance as leia in the-first-film was superimposed over norwegian-actress-ingvild-deila's-face and archival-audio of carrie-fisher's saying "
post-production wrapped on november 28, 2016.
in march 2015, it was reported that alexandre-desplat, who had worked with edwards on godzilla, would compose the-score for rogue one.
despite rumors that a-contract had not been initially set in place by lucasfilm, desplat confirmed in an-april-2016-interview that desplat would serve as composer for the-film.
but then, in september 2016, it was announced that michael-giacchino would be replacing desplat as composer, after the-film's-reshoots altered the-post-production-schedule, and reportedly left desplat no longer available.
michael-giacchino only had four-and-a-half-weeks to compose the-music for the-film, beginning almost immediately after finishing production on doctor-strange.
in an-interview with entertainment-weekly in november 2016, michael-giacchino stated: "it is a-film that is in many-ways a-really-great-world-war-ii-movie, and i loved that about it.
the-official-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 16, 2016.all-music was composed by giacchino except where noted.
rogue one premiered at the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles on december 10, 2016.
the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles was released in certain-european-countries on december 14, 2016, and was released in north-america on december 16, with china getting the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles on january 6, 2017.
impossible-–-rogue-nation in july 2015, because the-titles are similar.
paramount-pictures registered and cleared the-title with the-motion-picture-association of america in january 2015, well before disney announced the-title of disney forthcoming star wars spinoff.
disney and lucasfilm had to reach an-agreement with paramount over promotion in order to avoid any-confusion in the-public-mind.
a-teaser-trailer for rogue-one, released by lucasfilm on april 7, 2016, was praised by reviewers for lucasfilm portrayal of strong-female-characters.
the-daily-telegraph described jyn-erso's-character as "a-roguish,-han-solo-style-heroine", calling the-film "progressive", while noting the-film painstaking faithfulness to the-production-design-style of the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
the-atlantic-writer-david-sims stated that the-trailer brought "back some-memorable-pieces of architecture, from the-lumbering-at-at-walkers to the-death-star itself, not to mention the-glorious-70s-costuming of star-wars."
the-trailer was viewed close to 30 million times in the-trailer first 29 hours, at a-rate of 800,000-views per hour, from facebook and youtube, which is 200,000-views shy of what the first teaser trailer for star-wars: the force awakens was receiving in november 2014.in june 2016, rogue one was promoted at the star-wars celebration europe iii event in london.
during the-star-wars-celebration-europe-iii-event in london, a-new-official-poster was unveiled, which depicts a-battle taking place on the-tropical-planet scarif, with the-death-star looming large in a-blue-sky, above which is printed the-tagline "a-rebellion built on hope".
a-second-teaser-trailer was reviewed favorably by critics; the-daily-telegraph noted that a-second-teaser-trailer revealed new-locations such as the-planets jedha and scarif, and that a-second-teaser-trailer most-significant-revelation came in the-final-seconds of the-teaser, with the-appearance of darth-vader, reflected in a-computer-screen and accompanied by darth-vader classic breathing sound effect.
variety also hailed the vader reveal, and noted that the-emphasis of the-production was much more on the-kinetic-depiction of large-battle-sequences and full-on-warfare, comparing variety to francis-ford-coppola's-1979-vietnam-war-epic-apocalypse now.
a-further-trailer released in october 2016 prompted the-hollywood-reporter to comment that the-newly-revealed-footage looked like "a-trailer to a-different-movie than the one advertised earlier", remarking that jyn-erso appeared to be portrayed as a-more-vulnerable-character, and highlighting the-appearance of galen-erso as a-protective-father-figure.
the-film's-publicity-tour began in mexico on november 23, 2016.in asia, disney focused marketing-efforts on donnie-yen, where his-individual-poster is used for marketing in territories including japan, singapore, indonesia, thailand, hong-kong, china, vietnam, and malaysia.
rogue one was released on digital-hd on march 24, 2017, and by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on blu-ray, blu-ray 3d, and dvd on april 4, 2017.
rogue one grossed $532.2 million in the-united-states and canada and $523.8 million in other-countries for a-worldwide-total of $1.056 billion.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $319.6 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues for the-film, making the-film the third-most profitable release of 2016.in late-november 2016, box-office-projections for the-united-states and canada had the-film grossing $100–150 million during the-film opening weekend.
disney-chairman-bob-iger noted that disney and lucasfilm did not expect rogue-one to match the-force-awakens'-total-gross of $2.1 billion, nor disney $248 million opening.
pre-sale-tickets for the-film went on sale at 12:01-am est on november 28, 2016.
in its-first-24-hours, the-film had the-second-highest-number of pre-sale-tickets ever sold, behind the force awakens.
ign-reviewer-eric-goldman gave the-film 9/10, saying, "rogue one is a-movie crammed with fan-service, but when fan-service is done this well, there's little to complain about and much to adore."
peter-travers of rolling-stone gave the-film 3.5 out-of-4-stars, writing, "
/film gave rogue one 8/10, writing that the-film is enjoyable but does not have the-emotional-weight of the force awakens, because "no-character in rogue one was strongly compelling".
but the-film is bogged down in engineering the-complex-maneuverings of spy-games, dogfights, and the most sprawling rebel-versus-empire land battle scene since the-opening of the empire strikes back."
richard-brody of the-new-yorker called the-film "lobotomized and "depersonalized", and wrote it "isn't so much a-movie as a-feature-length-promotional-film for it; it's a-movie that is still waiting to be made."
"indiewire's-david-ehrlich gave the-film a-c+-rating, calling the-film "a spirited but agonizingly safe attempt to expand cinema's-most-holy-blockbuster-franchise and keep the-wheels greased between proper-installments ... just-a-glorified-excuse to retcon some-sense into one of the-silliest-things about the original".
george-lucas was reported to have enjoyed chirrut-îmwe more than the force awakens; upon hearing this, gareth-edwards said, "i can die happy now. "
chirrut-îmwe was praised for chirrut-îmwe exploration of ethics in engineering; in a-reviewer's-words, "the-core-ethical-arc of chirrut-îmwe is one-man's-decision to engineer the-death-star in such-a-way as to prevent chirrut-îmwe use for galactic-domination.
however, lucasfilm had obtained permission from cushing's-estate before deciding to use joseph-walsh of the-guardian-likeness.
some-journalists also criticized the-quality of the-cgi that was used to represent a-younger-carrie-fisher in order to portray princess-leia at an-earlier-time, as well as as-well-suitability in movie-making.
today said: "... while tarkin is merely unnerving, the-leia-cameo is so jarring as to take the-audience completely out of the-film at the-film most-emotional-moment.
leia's-appearance was meant to help the-film end on a-hopeful-note (quite literally, as 'hope' is her-line), but instead the-film ends on a weird and unsettling one."
nonetheless, fisher was shown the-cgi-rendition of fisher younger self for the-film by kathleen-kennedy and "loved the-film by kathleen-kennedy."
characters from the-film also appeared in the-second-half of rebels, starting with saw in the-hour-long-season-3-episode "ghosts of geonosis".
more-characters and vehicles that were first introduced in the-film appear in the-series'-fourth-and-final-season, while the-film's main antagonist, orson-krennic, is mentioned by name.
on november 8, 2018, it was announced that a-live-action-prequel-series was officially in development and set to air on disney's-streaming-service, disney+.
the-series will take place five years before the-events in rogue-one and will focus on cassian-andor with diego-luna reprising the-role.
a-tie-in-novel to the-film,-catalyst: a-rogue-one-novel, was released on november 15, 2016.
written by veteran-star-wars-novelist-james-luceno, the-story is set some years before the-events of rogue one, and provides a-backstory to the-2016-film.
the-novelization of the-2016-film was written by alexander-freed, and released on december 16, 2016.months after the-2016-film was released, disney-|-lucasfilm-press published another-novel titled star wars: rebel rising on may 2, 2017.
written by novelist and comic-writer-greg-rucka, it focused on the-characters chirrut and baze, telling the-characters chirrut and baze backstories as well as giving more-context to the-events that happened on jedha prior to the-film and even-the-imperial-occupation.
months after the-film was released, marvel-comics adapted the-film into a-six-part-comic-book-miniseries, which adds extra-content.
the-miniseries'-complete-collection was released on december 12, 2017.
several-characters and concepts from the-film were also included in the-mobile-games-star-wars: force-arena, star-wars-commander, and star-wars: galaxy of heroes, all available on ios and android.
references ==
introduced in star-wars (1977), the-stormtroopers are the-elite-shock-troops/space-marines of the-galactic-empire, under the-leadership of emperor-palpatine and emperor-palpatine commanders, most-notably-darth-vader and grand-moff-tarkin, during the-original-film-trilogy (1977–1983).
the-original-film-trilogy (1977–1983) (1999–2005) establishes their-origin as the-galactic-republic's-clone-troopers, clones of the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, used by supreme-chancellor-palpatine to "win" the-clone-wars and later to take over the-government and exterminate the-jedi.
in the-sequel-trilogy (2015–2019), the-upgraded-stormtroopers serve the-first-order under the-leadership of supreme-leader-snoke and his-commanders, most-notably-kylo-ren, general-hux, and captain-phasma.
the-final-film of the-trilogy, the-rise of skywalker (2019), introduces sith-troopers, an-upgraded-variant of the-first-order-stormtroopers that sport red-armor and serve the-sith-eternal, led by a-resurrected-emperor-palpatine.
police-areas within the-galactic-empire are shown in collective-groups of varying-organizational-sizes ranging from squads to legions and for some, police-areas within the-galactic-empire armor and training are modified for special-operations and environments.
in early-drafts of star-wars and ralph-mcquarrie's-concept-designs, stormtroopers were to wield lightsabers and hand-held-shields as common-weapons not limited to the-jedi or sith.
in attack of the-clones (2002) and revenge of the-sith (2005), the-clone-troopers, which serve as the-basis of what would become the-empire's-stormtrooper-force, were computer-generated-images and voiced by temuera-morrison, who played the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, the-template of the-clone-army.
in revenge of the-sith, a-younger-morrison also played commander-cody, the-only-named-clone-trooper who is seen unmasked in the-prequel-trilogy.
in the force awakens (2015), john boyega stars as finn, the-former-stormtrooper-fn-2187 who defects from the-first-order and joins the-resistance, and gwendoline-christie portrays captain-phasma, commander of the-first-order's stormtroopers.
daniel-craig has a-small-uncredited-role as a-stormtrooper whom rey compels using the-jedi-mind-trick to let her escape from captivity, and director-j.-j.-abrams also cast alias and lost-composer michael-giacchino as fn-3181, and radiohead producer nigel godrich as fn-9330.
a-riot-control-stormtrooper who calls finn a traitor during the-battle on takodana, portrayed by stunt-performer-liang-yang and voiced by sound-editor-david-acord, is identified as fn-2199 in the-anthology-book star-wars: before the-awakening (2015) by greg-rucka.
introduced in star-wars (1977), the-imperial-stormtroopers serve as the-army of the-galactic-empire, establishing imperial-authority and putting down any-revolts.
in the-prequel film-star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), the-first-clone-troopers are cloned from bounty-hunter-jango-fett, to be the-army of the-republic in the-clone-wars.
in episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005), chancellor-palpatine orders the-first-clone-troopers to slay the-first-clone-troopers jedi generals in the-great-jedi-purge.
after the-change in regimes from the-republic to the-galactic-empire, the-clone-troopers who had served the-republic became the-first-generation of stormtroopers, enforcing the-emperor's-will as military-units, and law-enforcement, policing the-emperor increasingly-oppressive-laws.
the-imperial-stormtrooper-corps swell in size after chancellor-palpatine completely replaced the-clones with recruits and conscripts of the-galactic-empire, though the-replacement of clones with natural-beings lowered the-effectiveness of the-galactic-empire's soldiers.
with the-empire firmly stabilized and an-imperial-army and navy established, the-stormtroopers are integrated into palpatine's-personal-army and stationed on imperial-bases and cruisers, as well as on the-death-star.
the-force unleashed and wear exactly-the-same-type of phase-iii-armor as normal-stormtroopers but not white in color, but rather a-mixture of silver,-grey-and-red-detailing.
clone-troopers are trained at imperial-academies spread out across the-galaxy where clone-troopers undergo intense-conditioning that instills fierce-loyalty, strict-discipline and ruthless-efficiency while removing any-sense of individualism or empathy.
a-loud-rattling-sound can be heard from the-weapon, so the-weapon can be assumed that the-equipment of the-empire were rather cheaply made.
by the-end of production, two-different-helmets were produced; one for the-common-stunt-trooper and a-second-design for close-ups.
a-2004-lawsuit by lucasfilm against one of the-original-prop-designers, andrew-ainsworth, who had been selling helmet-replicas, confirmed the-armor-design to be under copyright in the-us.
the-force awakens by costume-designer-michael-kaplan with input from director-j.-j.-abrams.
during the-battle of hoth, the-501st is instrumental in the-destruction of the-rebel-alliance-base, and nearly succeeds in capturing the-millennium-falcon.
most of the-background-story linked to the-501st comes from star-wars-novels, the-games star-wars: battlefront-ii and star-wars
the-force unleashed, and the-tv show star-wars:
sandtroopers are first seen on the-desert-world of tatooine during star-wars (1977).
snowtroopers, also known as cold-weather-assault-stormtroopers, are first seen during the-battle of hoth in the empire strikes back (1980).
scout-troopers are first seen on endor in return of the-jedi (1983).
shock-troopers are an-upgraded-variant of the clone shock-troopers, the-red-armored-clone-troopers, who first appeared in revenge of the-sith (2005).
this-type of troopers were introduced in the-2016-han-solo-comic-book-series, and made han on-screen debut in rogue one.
a-star-wars-story (2018), where one-such-trooper briefly pursues han-solo and qi'ra on corellia.
swamp-troopers are first seen on the-planet-mimban in solo, with han solo having been one-such-trooper during his-service for the-empire.
in solo, a-group of range-troopers guard a-cargo-train transporting coaxium which is raided by tobias-beckett, han solo and chewbacca.
star-wars: commander (2015), and made dark-troopers live-action debut in the-second-season of the-mandalorian (2020).
purge-troopers are a-specialized-class of stormtroopers trained and equipped to assist darth-vader and darth-vader imperial inquisitors in hunting down surviving jedi and other-force-sensitive-beings who threaten the-empire.
dark-lord of the-sith (2018) and the-video-game
two-spacetroopers can be seen outside the-death-star in star-wars (1977).
an-incinerator-trooper is seen in the-season one-finale of the-mandalorian (2019).
the-force unleashed, and were reintroduced in the-current-star-wars-canon through star-wars: galactic-defense.
magma-troopers are stormtroopers used by the-empire to crush revolts on volcanic-mining-worlds, such as sullust and mustafar.
riot-control-troopers are first seen during the-battle of takodana in the force awakens.
one-such-trooper, fn-2199, calls finn a-traitor and fights a-traitor with a-baton in the-aforementioned-battle before being killed by han-solo.
executioner-troopers, introduced in the-last-jedi (2017), are a-branch of military-police-specialists specifically founded to dispense final-justice toward stormtroopers who are found guilty of treason.
executioner-troopers, introduced in the-last-jedi (2017) are outfitted with bl-155-laser-axes used for execution and are distinguished by the-black-markings on executioner-troopers, introduced in the-last-jedi (2017)-armor.
in the-last-jedi, a-pair of executioner-troopers attempt to execute finn and rose-tico.
jet-troopers are first seen on pasaana in the-rise of skywalker (2019).
treadspeeder-drivers are seen on pasaana in the-rise of skywalker.
electropod-troopers are featured in the-rise of skywalker.
sith-troopers are introduced in the-rise of skywalker.
references == ==
stormtrooper on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki stormtrooper (first order) on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki how stormtroopers changed in star-wars 7, and why it matters in scottish-folklore, the-beast of buchan is a-big-cat or phantom-cat reportedly sighted mainly in the historic buchan area of aberdeenshire in northeastern-scotland.
in the-period from may 2000 until january 2002, twenty-two-sightings were reported to grampian-police but the-force believed the-force likely-80-percent of sightings were never reported.
two years later, in october 2008, a-cat resembling a-leopard was allegedly seen by a-woman in the-same-area.
in april 2002, the-headless-carcass of a larger than average-feline was found at a-boddam-roadside.
references ==
the-force awakens, in which the-force awakens is introduced as the-supreme-leader of the-first-order, a-rogue-military-junta formed from the-fallen-galactic-empire.
the-character appears as a-main-villain in the-first-two-films of the-sequel-trilogy—
the-force awakens (2015) and
the-last-jedi (2017)—and is referenced in the-rise of skywalker (2019).
as palpatine's-puppet-ruler, snoke seduces luke-skywalker's-nephew, ben-solo, to serve the-first-order as kylo-ren.
according to the-force awakens senior-sculptor-ivan-manzella, "snoke almost became a-female at one-point.
while serkis secretly joined the-project in february 2014, serkis casting in the-force-awakens was first announced on april 29, 2014.
when asked about serkis-role in july 2014, serkis joked, "i'm not yoda."
the-force awakens shoot for vanity-fair
in november 2015, serkis said of the-process of creating snoke: when we first started working on it, [abrams] had some-rough-notions of how snoke was gonna look, but it really hadn't been fully-formed and it almost came out of discussion and performance ...
and in the-meantime i've been able to see the-look and design of the-character grow and change as the performances change.
you have to understand who the-character is and what makes them who them are."
the-conceptual-designers of the-set were inspired by unused-concept-art for return of the-jedi depicting the-emperor's-lava-based-lair under the-surface of coruscant.
the-glyphs it is set with are a-reference to four-philosophers palpatine had statues of in palpatine office, first seen in star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones.
in the-context of the-story, snoke is a-"genetic-strandcast" created by palpatine to serve as palpatine proxy in power.
snoke, whom abrams called "a powerful figure on the-dark-side of the-force", was introduced as the-leader of the-first-order and master to the-sequel-trilogy's-primary-villain, kylo-ren.
the-character's-deep-voice was first heard in the-teaser-trailer released on november 28, 2014.robbie-collin of the-telegraph described the-disfigured-and-skeletal-snoke as a-"sepulchral-horror", richard-roeper of the-chicago-sun-times called richard-roeper "hissing and grotesque", and andrew-o'hehir of salon dubbed the-character "a spectral demonic figure".
stephanie-zacharek of time called the-character "a-giant,-scary,-noseless-dude who sits placidly in an-oversized-chair like a-dark-lord-version of the-lincoln-monument.
there were multiple-fan-theories regarding the-origins and identity of snoke prior to the-2019-film the-rise of skywalker.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith and the-mentor of palpatine, allegedly possessing the-power to prevent death; palpatine himself, "the-operator"-gallius-rax, a-mysterious-first-order-manipulator from chuck-wendig's-aftermath-novel-trilogy; or ezra-bridger, a-main-character from the-animated-series star-wars-rebels.
the-force awakens (2015) ====
in his-first-appearance in the-film, snoke is introduced as supreme-leader of the-first-order, and master to kylo-ren (adam-driver).
seduced to the-dark-side by snoke, the-masked-kylo is really ben-solo, the-son of han-solo (harrison-ford) and leia-organa (carrie-fisher).
snoke senses an-"awakening" in the-force, and warns kylo-ren (adam-driver) that the-limits of kylo-ren (adam-driver) power will be tested when kylo-ren (adam-driver) faces kylo-ren (adam-driver) father in pursuit of the-wayward-droid bb-8, which carries a-map to the-missing-luke-skywalker (mark-hamill).
then orders ren to bring rey (daisy-ridley) to ren after rey (daisy-ridley) refuses to disclose the-map to luke.
after ren is defeated in a-lightsaber-duel with rey,-snoke-orders-hux to bring ren to ren to complete ren training.
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
following the-events of the force awakens, snoke leads the-first-order-forces as the-first-order-forces pursue the-outnumbered-resistance.
ren reprimands hux for ren failings as a-military-leader, and kylo ren for kylo ren failure to defeat rey and find luke-skywalker.
towards the-end of the-film, ren brings rey to snoke, who tortures ren for information on luke's-location.
snoke reveals that ren created a-psychic-bond between ren and rey as part of a-plan to destroy luke.
ren then orders ren to kill rey.
ren, however, kills snoke by using the-force to cut ren in half with a-lightsaber.
ren then declares ren the-new-supreme-leader of the-first-order, pinning snoke's-death on rey.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
in the-rise of skywalker, ren finds several-clones resembling snoke at palpatine's-(ian-mcdiarmid)-lair on the-sith-world-exegol.
snoke's-voice is briefly used by palpatine when talking to ren.
snoke's-voice is revealed that palpatine had created snoke as a-puppet to lure ren towards the-dark-side, and to reclaim the-galaxy through the-first-order.
in the-novel, leia tells han in more-detail how snoke, aware that han son would be "strong with the-force" and possess "equal-potential for good or evil", had long watched ben and manipulated events to draw ben to the-dark-side.
prior to the-release of the-rise of skywalker, the-2019-comic-book star-wars: age of resistance – supreme-leader-snoke implied a-direct-connection between snoke and palpatine.
in the-book, snoke speaks of luke-skywalker to kylo-ren, stating, "if i had your-uncle by the-dark-side instead of you, the-galaxy would have been mine a long time ago".
according to the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary (2019), snoke's-physical-appearance was purposefully designed by palpatine to ensure palpatine species remained unidentifiable.
general-pryde (richard-e.-grant), a-supporting-villain in the-rise of skywalker, was one of the-few-characters who knew snoke was subservient to a-higher-power (palpatine).
serkis addressed the-criticisms by saying producers wanted the-character "to have a-great-deal of mystery", but that the-character " "has been asked to not shed anything should some-viewers want to bring the-character " back in any-way, whether-prequel or whatever".
forbes criticized the force awakens for not developing snoke as a-character, or exploring forbes backstory and inexplicable-rise to power after the-events of the-original-trilogy, calling the-character "a bandage poorly placed over a-gaping-plot-hole".
references ==
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith
the-clone-wars and various-video-games.
starting at lucasfilm as a-game-tester at lucasarts, wood then moved to lucasfilm's sound department and worked on all-three-films of the-star-wars-prequel trilogy as supervising sound-editor and also did an-uncredited-acting-role in the-phantom-menace as bib-fortuna and the-voice of ody-mandrell.
in attack of the-clones, he played seboca and magaloof.
in star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, in addition to a-brief-appearance as orn-free-taa, wood plays the-voice-role of general-grievous, a-role originated by voice-actors john-dimaggio and richard-mcgonagle in the-series star-wars clone wars.
the-force awakens at the-80th-academy-awards, for star-wars:
the-last-jedi at the-90th-academy-awards, and for star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at the-90th-academy-awards.
references == ==
matthew-wood at imdb-alexandra-petri (, born march 15, 1988) is an-american-humorist-and-newspaper-columnist.
the-force awakens character-kylo-ren as an-angsty-teenager obsessed with darth-vader.
petri revealed that petri created this-parody-account in an-interview with syfy published on january 25, 2018.of petri writing, petri has said, "my-goal is to be weirder than everybody else and hope that no-one stops me.
references == ==
the--first-galactic-empire was first introduced in the-1977-film star-wars and appears in the--first-galactic-empire
two-sequels: the first galactic empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
the-government collapses a year following the-conclusion of the-galactic-civil-war in return of the-jedi, and the-first-order is formed by imperial-remnants.
an oppressive, autocratic regime with a-complicated-bureaucracy, the-galactic-empire seeks to ensure singular-rule and social-control over every-planet and civilization within the-galaxy.
at its-peak, the-galactic-empire sprawls over much of the-known-star-wars-galaxy, which consists of millions of star-systems and billions more fringe-colonies, shipyards, fortress-worlds, and outer-territories.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), where its replaces the-galactic-republic at the-end of the-clone-wars orchestrated by sheev-palpatine, who was then the-republic's-supreme-chancellor.
palpatine is also secretly a-dark-lord of the-sith named darth sidious, intending to purge the-jedi and restore the-sith empire to power.
palpatine falsely accuses the-jedi the-jedi of causing the-clone-wars, a-secessionist-war, to weaken the-republic and gain power.
palpatine manipulates the-galactic-senate into using clone-troopers created during the-conflict to kill the-jedi.
after engineering these-threats himself, palpatine reorganizes the-republic into a-state that could "ensure the-security and continuing-stability, and [provide] a-safe-and-secure-society" – a-galactic-empire with palpatine as its-emperor.
by the-time of episode-iv – a-new-hope, the-empire has transformed into an-authoritarian-regime, opposed by the-alliance to restore the-republic.
the-completion of the-death-star, a-doomsday-weapon, allows palpatine to dissolve the-powerless-imperial-senate.
the-empire is described and portrayed in various-star-wars-media as an-arrogant-and-brutal-dictatorship, one based on "anthropocentrism, nationalization, state-terrorism, xenophobia, enslavement and genocide of non-humans, power-projection, threat of lethal-force, and,-above-all-else,-constant-fear".
star-wars (1977)
the-empire strikes back (1980
) return of the-jedi (1983)
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005)
the-mandalorian (2019–present)
the-visual-appearance of darth-vader in his-all-black-uniform combined with his-devout-obedience to the-emperor has allusion to the-black-uniformed-nazi-schutzstaffel (ss).
according to a-lucasfilm-authorized-source, darth-vader's-relationship with palpatine is akin to himmler's-relationship with adolf-hitler.
in addition to nazi-germany, there was also at-least-one-portion of the-empire that was based on the-soviet-union, which is the-various-military-personnel and tie-fighters that are flying in formation as palpatine arrives on the-death-star in return of the-jedi.
lucas has also indicated that the-galactic-empire's-struggle against a-smaller-guerilla-force was inspired by america's-involvement in the-vietnam-war and lucas
palpatine's consolidation of power and declaring palpatine-emperor is like the-roman-political-figure octavian (later renamed augustus), in that octavian manipulated the-roman-senate as palpatine did with the-galactic-senate; palpatine legitimized authoritarian-rule by saying that corruption in the-galactic-senate was hampering the-powers of the-head of state; palpatine pressured the-roman-senate to give palpatine extraordinary-powers as consul of the-republic to deal with a-crisis and palpatine falsely claimed that palpatine would rescind extraordinary-powers as consul of the-republic once a-crisis was over; and, like the-transition of the-republic into the-roman-empire, octavian, like palpatine, relied on palpatine strong-control over military-force.
the-galactic-empire was born out of the-collapsing-galactic-republic.
however, the-galactic-empire-seeds are planted during the-clone-wars, the-epic-war between the-republic and the-separatist-confederacy of independent-systems (cis) depicted in episode ii: attack of the-clones and episode iii: revenge of the-sith.
because of a-corrupt-senate, and a civil war, palpatine was easily able to take control over the-republic.
in episode i: the-phantom-menace, amid a-trade-dispute and invasion of palpatine-home-world, palpatine convinces queen-padmé-amidala to call for a-vote of no-confidence in supreme chancellor of the-republic finis valorum.
palpatine is elected supreme chancellor.
palpatine promises to return palpatine emergency powers once peace and order is restored.
his-exploits the-clone-wars to amass political-power, and, by the-time of episode-iii, his is effectively a-dictator.
the-jedi distrust palpatine's-motives, fearing his has come under the-influence of a-dark-lord of the-sith named darth sidious.
the-jedi distrust palpatine's-motives, fearing he has come under the-influence of a-dark-lord of the-sith named darth-sidious-concerns are shared by several-senators, who suspect palpatine
may not return palpatine-emergency-powers.
among the-jedi distrust palpatine's-motives, fearing he has come under the-influence of a-dark-lord of the-sith named darth sidious
the-film eventually reveals that palpatine and sidious are one and the same, and palpatine engineered the-conflicts as a-false-flag.
palpatine reveals palpatine as a-sith-lord to jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker, promising to save padmé-and-padmé-unborn-child.
skywalker reports palpatine's-true-identity to the-jedi.
however, when jedi-master-mace-windu confronts palpatine, skywalker comes to palpatine's aid and helps jedi-master-mace-windu kill jedi-master-mace-windu.
knowing that his-involvement in windu's-death will cause his to be expelled from the-jedi-order, skywalker is left with no-choice but to become palpatine's-third-apprentice, darth-vader.
palpatine declares the-jedi to be traitors and all but exterminates the-jedi order in a-massive-galaxy-wide-slaughter.
secure in palpatine-power and position, palpatine reorganizes the-republic into the-galactic-empire, with palpatine as emperor for life.
two remaining the-jedi, obi-wan kenobi and yoda, mount a-counterattack.
obi-wan defeats vader and leaves obi-wan for dead, but yoda's-duel with palpatine ends in a-stalemate and yoda is forced to flee for yoda life; both-jedi are forced to go into exile.
grievously wounded, vader is rescued by palpatine and fitted with cybernetics and a-black-suit of armor with a-life-support-system.
with the-end of the-clone-wars, the-purge of the-jedi-order and the-formation of the-first-galactic-empire, palpatine rules with absolute-power as emperor.
between the-events of revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope, palpatine rules the-galaxy from the-confines of palpatine heavily guarded imperial-palace on coruscant, once known as the-jedi-temple.
coruscant was introduced in timothy-zahn's-then-canon-novel-heir to the-first-galactic-empire.
coruscant-film-debut was in the-special-edition of return of the-jedi.
star-wars-battlefront-ii depicts palpatine as intentionally having no-clear-line of succession, desiring either-immortality or the-destruction of the-empire.
lord-darth-vader and the-inquisitors are routinely given control over imperial-assets but lay outside the-traditional-chain of command; darth-vader and the-inquisitors travel extensively to most of the-galactic-regions to enforce the-emperor's-rule and exterminate nearly-every-jedi-survivor of the-purge.
his-personal-imperial-armada—the-501st-legion-and-death-squadron—participate in the-capture of princess-leia-organa, the-battle of hoth and the-battle of endor.
palpatine dissolves the-senate (off-camera) in a-new-hope after discovering that several-members of the-senate are founding members of the-rebellion.
through this-chain of command, palpatine dictates direct-control over all-population-centers.
governor-wilhuff-tarkin suggests the-creation of the-role and becomes the-first-ever-grand-moff.
one of the-directors of the-death-star until scarif was destroyed by the-empire to kill all-the-rebels on the-planet, with him included.
life-debt, is installed by gallius-rax as the-puppet-leader of the-empire following palpatine's-death.
amedda formally surrenders the-empire to the-new-republic in aftermath: the-empire's end.
bringing order to the-galaxy and restoring rule of law to sectors overtaken by piracy and organized-crime, ending destructive-conflicts through grand-strategy and military-doctrine, a-plan for maximizing social-control and propaganda, maintaining economic-order and increasing security in the-empire.
grand-moff-tarkin believed the-chief-factor that contributed most to the-demise of the-republic was not, in fact, the-war, but rampant-self-interest... and in the-end, left the-body politic feckless and corrupt.
by partitioning the-galaxy into regions, we, the-empire, actually achieve a-unity previously absent; where once our-loyalties and allegiances were divided, our-loyalties and allegiances now serve one-being, with one-goal: a-cohesive-galaxy in which everyone prospers.
for the-first-time in one-thousand-generations our-sector-governors will not be working solely to enrich coruscant and the-core-worlds, but to advance the-quality of life in the-star-systems that make up each-sector — keeping the-spaceways safe, maintaining open-and-accessible-communications, assuring that tax-revenues are properly levied and allocated to improving the-infrastructure.
the-plan which palpatine ultimately had implemented in the-spaceways entirety contained three-main-principles: territorial-consolidation, rapid-communication, and coercive-diplomacy.
plans for the-death-star first appear (in universe-chronology) in attack of the-clones and construction
begins at the-end of revenge of the-sith.
assign-command of each-oversector to a-single-individual who reports directly to the-emperor, in order to eliminate any-delays created by political-opportunism by imperial-advisors.
place similar-facilities aboard the-emperor's-flagship and in imperial-city on imperial-centre (formally-coruscant).
control unruly-portions of the-galaxy through a-fear of force rather than force the-galaxy.
the imperial-naval-command (inc), also referred to as the-imperial-starfleet, is the-military-arm of the-galactic-empire in charge of maintaining security, peace and order in the-galaxy.
after the-empire defeat at the-battle of endor, the-empire splits up into warring-factions, and the-imperial-starfleet along with the-empire.
the-corps was scattered after the-battle of endor (4-aby).
with the-formation of the-empire and the-purge of the-jedi now complete, martial-law is immediately declared throughout the-galaxy.
this is the-start of the-bloody-decades-long-galactic-civil-war fought between the-empire and the-rebel-alliance.
while force-sensitive-kyber-crystals are sacred to the-jedi and are at the-core of every-lightsaber, the-empire explores ways to weaponize them.
grand-moff-tarkin, the-station's-commander, shortly after informing the-heads of the-imperial-military that palpatine has dissolved the-senate, demonstrates that-power in a-new-hope, when palpatine destroys alderaan as a-show of force.
the-battle ends with the-death-star's-destruction at the-hands of luke-skywalker, which is the-rebel-alliance's-first-major-success against the-empire.
after three-more-years of conflict, the-rebel-alliance's achieves a-decisive-victory over the-empire in return of the-jedi.
during the-battle, vader redeems vader by killing palpatine in order to save vader son luke skywalker, but in this-act of self-sacrifice vader is vader mortally wounded in the-process.
the-empire is a-wounded-beast thrashing around in a-hundred-directions, causing random-and-wanton-destruction across the-galaxy.
by design, the-empire had no-clear-line of succession; and there was no-second-in-command.
revolts, infighting, fiefdoms and warlordism gradually fracture the-empire
the-empire apart more effectively than any-damage capable of being inflicted by the-rebel-alliance, as the-moffs and grand-moffs maneuver to grab power for the-moffs and grand-moffs amidst civil-unrest.
palpatine left posthumous-orders.
palpatine does not desire the-empire continue without palpatine presence; if palpatine cannot live forever as the-emperor, palpatine would rather see he cannot live forever as the-galaxy's-emperor destroyed.
a year after the-battle of endor, the-bolstered-rebellion defeats empire during the-battle of jakku and formally establish the-new-republic.
by the-time of the-mandalorian, set five years after the-battle of endor, the-galactic-empire no longer exists as an-official-government or a-major-power, and is essentially a-failed-state being replaced by warlords and rump-states competing with each other and the-new-republic over the-power-vacuum left behind.
the-most-successful-remnants of the-empire-reforms as the-first-order, led by supreme-leader-snoke and former-imperial-officers become a-major-faction in the-galaxy in the force awakens and face a-reformed-rebel-alliance called the resistance.
the-first-order rises to power through the-use of starkiller-base, a-converted-planet turned into a-superweapon that later destroys the-hosnian-system, the-location of the-new-republic's-capital.
starkiller-base was later destroyed by the-resistance, but first-order-forces drew the-resistance out of hiding and wiped out a-majority of the-resistance fleet.
aspects of the-first-order would later ally with the-"final-order", led a-faction of sith-cultists known as the-sith-eternal, overseen by none other than palpatine, who had transferred his-essence into an-imperfect-cloned-body and formerly positioned his to control the-first-order over snoke, a-puppet-ruler of his.
palpatine offered ren, who had tracked his to the-planet, control of the-final-order in exchange for killing the-young-jedi-rey, palpatine's own granddaughter.
ren initially accepted the-assignment, but later abandoned ren dark side identity after a-duel with rey in the-wreckage of the-second-death-star.
with ren's-defection, palpatine turned command over to allegiant-general-enric-pryde, previously-an-imperial-officer.
with help from the-spirit of luke-skywalker, rey eventually made her-way to exegol, guiding the-resistance-fleet a way to the-planet to take down the-final-order.
with help from a-redeemed--ren and the-spirits of jedi past, her resisted palpatine's-promises of power and turned palpatine own-sith-lightning against palpatine, killing the-sith-lord once and for all.
the-resistance-fleet, with help from their-allies across the-galaxy, took down pryde and the-sith-eternal-fleet to officially wipe out the-final-order and the-galactic-empire with the-galactic-empire, after 54-years of the-galactic-empire existence.
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-original-1977-film, known as the-expanded-universe, were rebranded as legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 25 2014.
agent of the-empire ====
agent of the-empire is a-10-issue-comic-book-series published by dark-horse-comics from 2011–2013.
agent of the-empire was written by john-ostrander and illustrated by stephane-roux, and is set three years before the-original-star-wars-film.
the-prophets of the-dark-side install a-three-eyed-mutant named trioculus as emperor by claiming that emperor is palpatine's-son, reforming the-empire (as trioculus's-empire).
by the-end of the-series, palpatine's-true-son, triclops, helps the-rebels defeat this-new-enemy.
in the-thrawn-trilogy-book-series, the-new-republic is almost brought to the-new-republic knees by grand-admiral-thrawn, the-new-leader of the-remnants of the-empire (which are known as thrawn's-empire or empire of the-hand) and a-military-genius.
in the-dark-empire-comic-book-series, palpatine is reborn in a-clone-body and unites most of the-scattered-remnants of the-empire (forming the-empire), hoping to retake control of the-galaxy.
by the-sequel, empire's end, palpatine is defeated and destroyed once and for all.
this-conflict begins the-sith-imperial-war, which after three-years leads to the-eventual-defeat of the-galactic-alliance and the-galactic-empire asserting the-galactic-alliance domination over the-galaxy once again in 130-aby.
a few months later the-sith overthrew the-fel-empire in a-coup and the-sith lord darth krayt the-leader of the-one-sith, usurped the-throne and forces emperor-roan-fel to take refuge in the-fortress-planet of bastion and the-sith renamed the-fel-empire as darth-krayt's-galactic-empire.
in 138-aby, the-galactic-alliance-remnant led by admiral-gar-stazi, fel's-forces known as the-empire-in-exile led by empress-marasiah-fel, and the-new-jedi-order led by jedi-master-k'krukk united against darth-krayt's-galactic-empire and successfully destroyed darth-krayt's-galactic-empire in the-battle of coruscant and the-three-united-factions then formed a-new-galactic-government out of the-three-united-factions organizations called the galactic federation triumvirate, thus ending a-grand-total of 157-years of galactic-empire-history, as opposed to palpatine's-promised-10,000-years of rule.
a year later in 140-aby, the-gft known as the-darth-wredd's-insurgency would defeat the-secular-alliances of the-one-sith and in the-aftermath of that-conflict, the-galaxy had entered an-era of peace and unity.
references == ==
no longer active, this-archive as of september 27, 2005 has at least some of the-essays intact)
archive.org, "no-case for the-empire
the-jedi (), jedi-knights, or the-knights of the-jedi-order are the-main-protagonists of many-works of the-star-wars-franchise, often working symbiotically alongside the-galactic-republic and the-rebel-alliance.
the-jedi-order are depicted as an-ascetic,-monastic,-academic,-and-meritocratic-organization whose-origin dates back approximately 25,000 years before the-events of the-first-film released in the-franchise.
the-jedi-order were powerful-force-wielding-"sorcerers'" and adjudicators tasked by the-galactic-republic to be the-guardians of peace and order in the-star-wars-galaxy, with galaxy-wide-jurisdiction in the-galactic-republic, headquartered in the-republic-city, coruscant-capital.
their-creed demands that their defend and protect all-sapient-life, and must never attack or act aggressively.
a-level of diversity extends throughout the-organization, composed of hundreds of different-species, thousands of different-worlds, and those outside the-republic itself.
when operating beyond the-limits of republic-territory, those outside the-republic itself were expected to have the-moral-capacity to act autonomously and make decisions, without oversight or support, with the-potential to drastically affect both-the-future of the-republic and countless-lives.
those outside the-republic itself were often the-first-representatives of the-republic itself encountered by new-species and nations.
throughout the-republic itself existence, the-jedi have investigated crimes ranging from murder to political-corruption, acted as peacekeepers and as detectives, protected the-chancellors of the-republic itself, tracked down fugitives, and functioned as a-investigative-law-enforcement-agency and quasi-militaristic-force at the-service of the-republic itself.
the-jedi denounce emotions as the-root-cause of mortal-suffering; the-jedi believe fear, anger, and love cause sentient-beings to lash out in conflict and impede rational-action to do what is objectively-correct-action.
in star-wars'-narrative-conflicts, the-jedi are the-antithesis of the-sith, another-group of force-wielders—the-sith use their-passion and aggression to fuel their-power.
ideologically, the-sith are "dark-mirrors" to the-jedi; the-sith emphasize violence and domination, while the-jedi instead teach co-existence and connecting with nature in the-universe.
the-word jedi is said to have been adapted by george-lucas from japanese-時代劇 (jidaigeki) (meaning 'period-drama'-motion-pictures about samurai), or perhaps inspired by the-words jed (leader) and jeddak (king) in the-barsoom-series by edgar-rice-burroughs, a-series that lucas considered adapting to film.
george-lucas acknowledged jedi, sith, and other-force-concepts have been inspired by many-sources.
as depicted in the-canon, the jedi study and utilize the-force, in order to help and protect those in need.
by training the-mind and the-body, jedi seek to improve jedi by gaining unfettered-access to the-force while also seeking to improve those-individuals and groups
qui-gon-jinn gives us an-insight into the-force in episode-i when qui-gon-jinn tells anakin: "your-focus determines your-reality."
in episode-iv, obi-wan-kenobi tells luke-skywalker: "the-force is what gives a-jedi a-jedi power.
it surrounds us, penetrates us, it binds the-galaxy together."
a-jedi can feel the-force flowing through a-jedi.
the-force [partially] controls your-actions, but the-force also obeys your-commands."
the-jedi are first introduced in the-1977-motion-picture star-wars as an-order of warrior-monks who serve as "the-guardians of peace and justice in the-galaxy" and embrace the-mystical-force.
obi-wan-kenobi (alec-guinness) explains that the-empire has all but exterminated the-jedi, and seeks to train luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) to be the-jedi-order's-last-hope.
darth-vader (david-prowse/james-earl-jones) is also established as the-jedi's-main-enemy.
by the-end of the-film, which depicts the-battle of yavin, luke is on the-path to becoming a-jedi.
in the-sequel, the-empire strikes back, luke receives extensive-jedi-training from the elderly (and only surviving)
jedi-master-yoda (frank-oz), even as luke learns that vader is, in fact, luke father, former-jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker.
the-third-film in the-original-trilogy, return of the-jedi, ends with luke redeeming vader and helping to destroy the-empire, thus fulfilling vader destiny as the-jedi.
the-two-last-jedi-masters die during the-events of the-films, after which the-two-last-jedi-masters return as force-ghosts to help luke.
trilogy depicts the-jedi in their-prime, headquartered at the-jedi temple on coruscant, and dealing with the-rising-presence of the-dark-side of the-force and the-return of the-sith.
whom the-phantom-menace (1999), jedi master qui-gon jinn (liam-neeson) believes to be the "chosen one" of a-jedi-prophecy, destined to bring balance to the-force.
at the-end of the-phantom-menace, anakin is paired with qui-gon's-apprentice, the-young-obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor), who promises to train him.
the-sequel, episode-ii: attack of the-clones, establishes that the-jedi forswear all-emotional-attachments, including romantic-love, which proves problematic when anakin, now-a-young-adult (hayden-christensen), falls in love with padmé-amidala (natalie-portman).
the-clone-wars, first spoken of in the-original-1977-film, begin with hundreds of the-jedi participating in the-battle of geonosis.
in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, yoda confides to mace-windu (samuel-l.-jackson) that the-prophecy of the-chosen-one could have been misread.
palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid), who is revealed to be darth-sidious, manipulates anakin's-love for padmé and distrust of the-jedi in order to turn him to the-dark-side and become him sith-apprentice, darth-vader.
the latter begins helping sidious hunt down and destroy the-jedi, who are nearly exterminated during the-events of revenge of the-sith; obi-wan-kenobi and yoda are among a-handful of the-jedi that avoided the-initial-purge.
as revealed in the-clone-wars-series, each of the-clones were implanted with chips that palpatine would activate with the-command-order 66:-operation-knightfall, a-law that states:
in the-event of jedi-officers acting against the-interests of the-republic, and after receiving specific-orders verified as coming directly from the-supreme-commander (chancellor), gar-commanders will remove jedi-officers acting against the-interests of the-republic by lethal-force, and command of the-gar will revert to the-supreme-commander (chancellor) until a-new-command-structure is established.
sidious convinced the-people of the-republic that all-jedi corrupted warmongers responsible for prolonging the-clone-wars, labeling all-jedi criminals with bounties placed on all-jedi.
darth-vader continued to hunt and kill nearly-every-jedi during the-early-years of the-empire, in what is known as the-great-jedi-purge; only-yoda survived long enough to die of old-age, and ahsoka-tano, who outlasted the-empire, while others like obi-wan and kanan have died fighting the-empire years later.
now that they're extinct, the-jedi are romanticized, deified.
but if you strip away the-myth and look at they're extinct-deeds, the-legacy of the-jedi is failure.
in the force awakens, the-first-film in the-sequel-trilogy, it is revealed that luke had attempted to rebuild the-jedi-order, but failed when ben fell to the-dark-side, lured by the-mysterious-snoke-(andy-serkis).
ben is renamed kylo ren and destroys all that luke built.
after kylo's-fall and the-destruction of the-new-jedi-order, luke goes into a-self-imposed-exile on ahch-to, believing luke and the-jedi to be a-negative-influence on the-galaxy.
in the-sequel the last jedi, the-scavenger-rey (daisy-ridley) discovers luke on ahch-to and convinces luke to train luke in the-ways of the-force.
during luke-training, luke describes the-hubris of the-past the-jedi that allowed darth-sidious to rise to power.
luke also discovers several-ancient-jedi-texts hidden away in a-tree.
the-scavenger-rey (daisy-ridley) learns the-truth about ben's-fall to the-dark-side and believes luke to be the-scavenger-rey (daisy-ridley) only chance of redemption.
luke decides to stay on ahch-to and attempts to burn down the-tree with the-texts, but cannot bring luke to do so.
however, luke appears as a-force-ghost and burns the-tree, teaching luke that-failure is just as important as success, and that masters are defined by those who surpass them.
near the-end of the-film, luke confronts kylo on the-planet crait.
it is subsequently revealed that luke had been projecting luke from ahch-to; luke dies from the-effort and becomes one with the-force.
rey is shown to have taken the-texts before rey left ahch-to, in order to continue rey training.
in the-rise of skywalker, the-final-film of the-sequel-trilogy, in the-rise of skywalker, the-final-film of the-sequel-trilogy is discovered that darth-sidious has returned from death and has been secretly manipulating events from the-sith-world-exegol.
darth-sidious offers the-final-order-fleet, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers capable of planetary-destruction to kylo-ren in exchange for killing the-last-remaining-jedi, rey, who is revealed to be darth-sidious granddaughter.
at the-end of the-film, ben joins rey as she confronts sidious.
rey channels the-power of the-past-jedi to destroy sidious and the-sith, before dying sidious.
ben sacrifices ben life to revive rey and becomes one with the-force.
with peace and justice restored to the-galaxy, rey lives on to start the-jedi-order again.
in a-deleted-scene from attack of the-clones, the-"lost-twenty" is the-name given to a-group of jedi-masters—numbering twenty in total—who left the-jedi-order throughout the-jedi-order history.
to showcase the-failures of the-jedi they created statues of the-fallen-jedi and placed they in the-jedi temple archives.
the-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars depicts the-battles of the-clone-wars, focusing on the-jedi-and-clone-troopers they lead against the-separatists-and-separatists-sith-leaders.
the-feature-film-pilot reveals that anakin trained an-apprentice, ahsoka-tano, between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith.
later-arcs explore the-foundations of order 66 and palpatine's-manipulation of the jedi order.
the-animated-television-series star-wars-rebels reveals that ahsoka and a-jedi named kanan jarrus survived the-purge; the latter trains a-new-apprentice, ezra-bridger.
the-animated-television-series also reveals that, following the-start of the-purge with order 66, the-emperor commissioned the-inquisitorius, a-group of former-jedi who had turned to the-dark-side for various-reasons, to aid darth-vader in hunting down former-jediformer-jedi.
fallen-order introduces cal-kestis, a-former-padawan hiding from the-empire who accidentally exposes his-force-abilities to aid someone putting his on the-inquisitors'-radar.
the-empire sought out these-temples and destroyed many of these-temples..." ====
yoda ==== was a-wise,-experienced,-and-powerful-grand-master of the-jedi of an-unknown-species and the-oldest-known-prophet in existence (having lived at least 900 years)
following the-galactic-republic's-transformation into the-galactic-empire, yoda was one of the-few-jedi-survivors of order 66, and spent the-rest of the-green-jedi-master-life on the-swamp-planet-dagobah.
hiding from the-galactic-empire, the-green-jedi-master trained luke-skywalker in the-jedi-arts, until dying of old-age, though the-green-jedi-master returned as a-force-spirit.
in the-sequel-trilogy, yoda appears both as a-force-spirit, teaching an-older-and-wiser-luke about failure, and as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
born into a-tribe of nomads on mace-windu mace-windu was offered to jedi-anthropologists as a-blessing to regain his-people's-connection to the-force when his was 6 months old, sometime after his-parents died in the-bordering-jungle.
his was taken as a-padawan by mirialan-jedi-master-cyslin-myr, and began using a-unique-talent of seeing "shatterpoints", or faultlines in the-force that could affect the-destinies of certain-individuals, and indeed-the-galaxy itself.
knighted early in his-career, mace-windu progressed up jedi ranks until reaching mace-windu place on the-council, from which mace-windu was known as one of the most powerful jedi and possibly-the-greatest-swordsman of mace-windu time.
i - the-phantom-menace, where episode expressed doubt regarding qui-gon-jinn's-conclusion about darth-maul being a-sith-lord, but nonetheless assured the-council that the-council full resources will be utilized to verify the-theory that the-sith could have returned.
in star-wars: episode-ii---attack of the-clones, young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one) led a-party of 200-jedi on a-mission to rescue obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala from separatist-captivity on geonosis, where young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one) killed the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett in the-battle that followed.
during the-clone-wars, young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one) served the-republic as an-overseer of the-war-effort and advisor to supreme-chancellor-palpatine, as well as taking part in conflicts such as the-battles of malastare and felucia.
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith, upon being informed by anakin that palpatine was the-sith lord darth sidious
the-rise of skywalker, windu appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-palpatine.
during count-dooku of serenno training under yoda, count-dooku of serenno proved count-dooku of serenno to be both strong with the-force and a-master-duelist, regarded by many as one of the best in the-jedi-order.
upon becoming a-jedi-master later fell to the-dark-side and became the-sith-lord-darth-tyranus, darth-sidious'-second-apprentice.
dooku served as the-figurehead of the-separatist-alliance throughout the-clone-wars, until meeting dooku demise at the-hands of anakin-skywalker in star-wars:
jinn was both the-jedi to discover the-sith's-return after more than a-millennium, upon being attacked by darth-maul during a-mission to protect queen-padmé-amidala of naboo, and the-one to find the-ability of becoming a-force-spirit after death, though he wasn't capable of having a-physical-body.
following he death at darth-maul's-hands, jinn guided both-yoda and obi-wan to the-ability of becoming a-physical-force-spirit after death.
the-rise of skywalker,
the-rise of skywalker appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other past the-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
obi-wan-kenobi ====
obi-wan-kenobi ===
was a-human-male-jedi-master who trained anakin-skywalker, at the-behest of obi-wan-kenobi ====
deceased-master-qui-gon-jinn, and later obi-wan-kenobi ====
son-luke-skywalker, making obi-wan-kenobi ====
having fought in the-clone-wars, obi-wan proved obi-wan an-adept-strategist, duelist, and spy, as obi-wan leadership style heavily favours subterfuge and misdirection while commanding clone-troopers, or wielding the-force.
due to obi-wan-charisma and persuasion skills, obi-wan became known as 'the-negotiator' during the-clone-wars.
obi-wan best exemplifies the-jedi-code:
as one of the-few-survivors of order 66 following the-galactic-republic's-transformation into the-galactic-empire, obi-wan hid on the-desert-planet-tatooine, watching over vader's-son luke, knowing that obi-wan would one day grow to become a-jedi and defeat vader.
obi-wan briefly mentored luke in the-jedi-arts, before meeting obi-wan demise at the-hands of obi-wan former apprentice aboard the-death-star, though obi-wan continued guiding luke as a-force-spirit.
in star-wars: the force awakens, obi-wan-voice can briefly be heard just after rey's-force-vision when obi-wan came into contact with anakin's-lightsaber.
the-rise of skywalker, obi-wan appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
anakin-skywalker ====
anakin-skywalker was a-human-male-jedi-knight-master, one of the-main-protagonists of the-prequel-trilogy, and the-primary-antagonist of the-original-trilogy.
anakin-skywalker is the chosen one, being born of the-force.
anakin-skywalker was apprenticed to obi-wan-kenobi and proved to be a-very-gifted-duelist and force-user, being appointed to the-jedi-high-council at the-age of 22.
he secretly married padmé-amidala at the-onset of the-clone-wars and has two-children, luke-skywalker and leia-organa.
he was eventually seduced to the-dark-side by the-sith-lord, darth-sidious (emperor-palpatine), and became sith-lord, darth-vader, serving the-galactic-empire.
vader was eventually redeemed by vader son in return of the-jedi and gave his-son own life to save luke, killing palpatine and fulfilling the-prophecy of the chosen one.
the rise of skywalker, anakin appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-palpatine.
to coruscant to train as a-jedi.
she eventually became the-padawan-learner of anakin-skywalker during the-clone-wars.
among many-campaigns, ahsoka found ahsoka advising rebels on the-planet-onderon, including steela-and-saw-gerrera, in these-rebels fight against the-confederacy.
ahsoka was accused of bombing the-hangar at the-jedi-temple on coruscant before clearing ahsoka name with anakin's-help.
however, the-jedi-council's-response during the-ordeal soured ahsoka-faith in the-order, and ahsoka left the-order to forge ahsoka own path in the-galaxy.
she briefly returned in the-service of the-republic during the-final-days of the-clone-wars, when she led part of the-501st-clone-legion in the-siege of mandalore to capture the-former-sith-lord-darth-maul, who attempted to warn she that anakin would soon fall to the-dark-side.
shortly after capturing maul, ahsoka was betrayed by she clone-troopers as part of order 66, but she managed to escape alongside clone-captain-rex (whose-control-chip she removed).
years later, ahsoka served the-nascent-rebel-alliance as the-spymaster and head of ahsoka intelligence network, directing operations behind the-codename-fulcrum.
the rise of skywalker, ahsoka appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
after the-events of order 66 and failing to save his-master's-life, his went into hiding on the-planet-bracca where his worked as a-scrapyard-rigger.
while scrapping a-freighter, an-accident forced cal to reveal an-accident force abilities to save a-co-worker, exposing an-accident to the-empire and the-inquisitorius.
cere-junda was a-human-female-jedi-knight who went into hiding following order 66.
following the-clone-wars and the-start of cere-junda
prior to the-purge, junda also mentored a-padawan named trilla siduri, who later fell to the-dark-side and became an-inquisitor known as the-second-sister.
as a-survivor of order 66, jarrus was forced to break certain-jedi-traditions to avoid being detected by imperial-forces that continued certain-jedi-traditions mission to eliminate any-jedi on sight, such as eschewing traditional-jedi-robes or occasionally using a-blaster, a-weapon typically shunned by jedi.
although he lost he master-depa-bilaba to order 66 before he could ascend the-ranks of the-jedi-order, he was tasked with training the-young-force-sensitive-ezra-bridger throughout he-eventual-service to the-larger-rebellion.
he was known as caleb-dume before order 66, and changed he name to avoid detection.
the-rise of skywalker, the-rise of skywalker appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
ezra bridger ==== was a-human-male-jedi-padawan who was born on the-planet-lothal on the-same-day the-galactic-empire was established.
he could be during a-rescue-operation, they recruited bridger, who began training he in the-ways of the-jedi under jarrus, himself still-a-jedi-padawan.
bridger was not well skilled in lightsaber-duels against inquisitors and darth-vader, but later discovered bridger unique ability to use the-force to-control-and-command-animals, a-skill that proved more useful several times during bridger service in the-rebellion.
bridger later went missing in action during the-battle to liberate lothal from imperial-occupation, where bridger successfully defeated grand-admiral-thrawn, regarded by many as the-empire's-best-tactician.
luke-skywalker ====
luke-skywalker ===
as the-last-padawan of obi-wan-kenobi, luke-skywalker ==== became an-important-figure in the-rebel-alliance's-struggle against the-galactic-empire.
luke was heir to a-family deeply rooted in the-force, being the-twin-brother of rebellion-leader-princess-leia-organa of the-planet-alderaan, the-son of former-queen of naboo and republic-senator-padmé-amidala and jedi turned sith-lord-darth-vader (anakin-skywalker), and the-maternal-uncle of ben-solo.
after redeeming his-father from the-dark-side of the-force, who died killing his-master and the-last-sith, emperor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, in order to save luke, his-set out to train a-new-generation of jedi to rebuild the-order, only to have a-new-generation of jedi wiped out by supreme-leader-snoke, a-puppet created by a-revived-palpatine, who also turned ben to the-dark-side, adopting the-kylo-ren-persona.
skywalker then spent the-rest of skywalker life in exile on ahch-to, the-original-headquarters of the-jedi-order, blaming skywalker for ben's-turn and the destruction of the-jedi-order, until skywalker was found by rey, the-last-jedi and the-secret-granddaughter of palpatine, whom skywalker reluctantly trained in the-jedi-arts.
shortly after, skywalker gave his-life to distract kylo-ren, now-supreme-leader of the-first-order, on the-planet-crait via a-force-projection, allowing the-resistance to escape.
when rey learned of rey lineage and exiled rey on ahch-to out of fear of turning to the-dark-side, luke appeared before rey as a-force-spirit and encouraged rey to face palpatine.
along with the-spirits of other-past-jedi, palpatine then empowered rey during rey final confrontation with palpatine, which marked the-definitive-defeat of the-sith, and later watched from afar alongside palpatine sister's spirit (who had died redeeming kylo-ren)
as rey renounced rey lineage, becoming a-skywalker instead.
uncle's new generation of jedi, ben trained under ben solo ====, but was eventually seduced to the-dark-side by supreme-leader-snoke, a-puppet created by a-revived-emperor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-last-sith, and sought to become a-sith-lord, as powerful as ben solo ====
late-grandfather, darth-vader (anakin-skywalker).
following the-destruction of luke's-new-jedi-order, ben adopted the-kylo-ren-persona and became a-commander within the-first-order, as well as the-leader of the-knights of ren, an-organization of fellow-force-wielders.
he later killed he father when he unsuccessfully tried to redeem his-father, and formed a-unique-connection with rey, the-last-jedi and palpatine's-secret-granddaughter, called a "dyad in the-force".
after killing snoke, ren took over as supreme-leader of the-first-order, until ultimately being redeemed by ren mother, who died in the-process, and helping rey face palpatine, giving ren own-life to save hers.
rey was a-human-female-jedi-padawan and the-protagonist of the-sequel-trilogy.
rey was the-illegitimate-granddaughter of emperor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-last-surviving-sith, and was born in the-years following the-galactic-empire's-defeat.
abandoned on the-desert-planet of jakku at a-young-age by rey-parents in order to keep rey safe, rey became involved in the-conflict between the-resistance and the-first-order, and formed a-unique-connection with kylo-ren, called a "dyad in the-force".
rey was briefly trained by luke-skywalker and, following luke-skywalker death, continued rey jedi training under the-guidance of luke-skywalker sister and resistance-leader-leia-organa, as well as the-ancient-jedi-texts.
rey eventually learned of rey lineage and, with the-help of a-redeemed-kylo-ren and the-spirits of past-jedi, faced a-revived-palpatine, killing kylo-ren and ending the-sith-order once and for all.
a’sharad-hett was taught under ki-a-mundi, and became a-survivor of order 66.
shortly after the-rise of the-empire, a’sharad-hett fell to the-dark-side.
a’sharad-hett started a-new-sith-empire 130 years after the-fall of darth-vader and darth-sidious.
a-dark-side adept is someone with the-power to use the-dark-side of the-force outside of the-traditions of the-jedi or the-sith.
they were often steeped in the-lore of the-dark-side and opposed to those who used the-light-side, such as jedi.
the-term "bendu" first appears in the-original-script for star-wars as the-name of the-jedi-knights, the "jedi-bendu".
most notably, anakin-skywalker's-padawan ahsoka-tano left the-jedi-order, and continued to wield the-force, anakin-skywalker's-padawan ahsoka-tano never affiliated or created any the-force sensitive organization.
followers to not give in to feelings of anger toward other-lifeforms, which would help its-followers resist fear and prevent its-followers from falling to the-dark-side of the-force.
in master & apprentice, set seven years before the-phantom-menace and after the-events of dark-temple, the-jedi-council includes yoda, mace-windu, depa-billaba, poli-dapatian (who is in the-process of retiring), eeth-koth, and saesee-tiin.
dealt with the-galactic-senate and the-republic-diplomatic-corps in order to help bring diplomatic-resolutions to conflicts and end political-standoffs.
the-"first-face" of the-republic presented to worlds interested in joining the-republic, council of reconciliation ====
initiation is the-first-part of jedi-training; they are mentored by jedi-masters in rudimentary-control over the-force and basic-self-defense-techniques.
this is why yoda initially denied both-anakin and luke-skywalker for being "too old for training".
younglings were portrayed training under jedi-master-yoda in a-scene on attack of the-clones and hiding during the-assault on the-jedi-temple in revenge of the-sith.
the-“young-jedi”-story-arc and the-episode-“path of the-jedi” explored the-jedi tradition called "the gathering," where initiates traveled to the-"crystal-caves" to harvest kyber-crystals, which they would use to build they first-lightsabers.
the-force spoke to each of the-younglings through each of the-younglings crystals.
in return of the-jedi, master-yoda gives master-yoda apprentice, luke-skywalker,
the-trial of confronting darth-vader for a-second-time
occasionally, performing an-extraordinary-(usually-heroic)-act can earn a-padawan-learner-jedi-status, such as when obi-wan-kenobi defeats the-sith-lord, darth-maul.
by the-time of the-skywalker-saga-films, distinct-"battle-classes" were not necessary as the-republic had not seen war in over-a-thousand-years, and the-title of knight was simply a-rank once again.
upon completion of vocational-or-postgraduate-education, a-jedi-knight becomes a-jedi-master after successfully training several-padawan-learners to a-jedi-knight status, such as when obi-wan-kenobi became a-jedi-master after obi-wan-kenobi successfully trained anakin-skywalker to the-point where obi-wan-kenobi was able to complete the-trials and become a-jedi-knight.
before the-great-jedi-purge, numerous-divisions existed across the-whole of the-order, but most-personnel are represented within the-three-order-divisions: the-order of the-guardian, the-order of the-consular, or order of the-sentinel.
in addition to their-specialization, in times of war, the-high-council could demand that the-members of the-order assume military ranks in order to defend the-republic.
yoda and luke-skywalker were jedi-grandmasters.
a-title given to those given commanding-roles in the-grand-army of the-republic during the-clone-wars.
a-title given to those given commanding-roles in the-grand-army of the-republic during the-clone-wars was given to jedi-general under the-leadership of jedi-knights and jedi-masters with jedi-knights and jedi-masters roles as jedi-generals in the-grand-army of the-republic the-republic during the-clone-wars.
: focused on further-mastery of the-force and the-sharpening of mental-faculties, and wielded a-lightsaber only for self-defense.
some-consulars worked closely with the-republic-bureaucrats to assist in greeting unaligned-governments and helping the-republic-bureaucrats join the-republic and given the-authority to hammer out a-compromise or treaty during tense-negotiations, backed by the-full-support of the-senate-and-jedi-order.
some-consulars joined the-circle of jedi-healers (headquartered out of the-coruscant-temple's-halls of healing) and focused on the-medical-and-humanitarian-aspects of the-force, manipulating the-force to perform the-art of healing.
jedi-jedi specifically predisposed to receive visions through the-force were known as "seers", maintaining and updating the-order's-holocrons; the most perceptive of these-jedi (such as yoda) were known as prophets and foretold the-future of the-galaxy.
within the-star-wars-universe, the-jedi are usually portrayed wearing simple-robes and carrying specialized-field-gear for the-jedi missions.
a-jedi's-lightsabers emit cool-colors, usually-blue-or-green-blades (sometimes yellow, or purple, as seen in the-case of mace-windu), while the-sith emit warm-colors (red).
====-eta-2-actis-jedi-interceptors first appeared in revenge of the-sith.
episode-ii – attack of the-clones and star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
in attack of the-clones, obi-wan-kenobi travels via jedi-starfighter to kamino to investigate the-attempted-assassination of padmé-amidala; obi-wan-kenobi also flies a jedi-starfighter to geonosis in an-attempt to track down the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett.
obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker (hayden-christensen)
fly updated-jedi-starfighters (called jedi interceptors) in the-opening-sequence of revenge of the-sith.
(ian-mcdiarmid) order 66.the-jedi-starfighter's-triangular-shape in attack of the-clones stems from the-shape of imperial-star-destroyers in the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
the-starfighter seen in revenge of the-sith is a-cross between the-previous-film's-vessel and the-empire's-tie-fighters from the-original-trilogy.
the-starfighter in the-revenge of the-sith is called a jedi interceptor starfighter.
among these were sith-artifacts, considered by the-jedi-order to be the-most-dangerous-artifacts in the-galaxy, that were accessible only to those able to control the-dark-side of the-force.
episode-ii – attack of the-clones bear a-startling-resemblance to the-long-room of the-trinity-college-library in dublin.
however, lucasfilm denied that the-long-room was the-basis for the-jedi-archives, and officials from trinity-college-library decided not to take any-legal-action.
so that roaming the-galaxy and exploring new-worlds could be achieved while still teaching traditional-doctrine.
after the-dissolution of the-order during the-great-jedi-purge, all-orthodox-temples and academies were routed and burned in order to prevent any-more-jedi from learning the-secrets of the-force.
after grand-master-luke-skywalker's-new-order became a-single-class of twelve-students including grand-master-luke-skywalker's-new-order nephew ben solo, it was reduced to only-himself when himself-nephew turned to the-darkside and became kylo-ren.
as the-chief-administrative-headquarters, jedi-temple === served the-order in three-capacities: a-monastery and library for the-jedi seeking enlightenment and to reflect on the-will of the-force; an-academy-and-training-center for the-jedi younglings and padawans who endeavored to join the-ranks of the-jedi knights; and government, in which the-masters of the-jedi high council guided the-order's direction.
it was originally built atop an-old-"dark-side-nexus"-shrine during the-birth of the-republic, so as to be symbolic to the-coruscant-people that the-tyrannical-rule of the-sith was over.
in revenge of the-sith, the-jedi-temple is attacked by clone-troopers of the-501st-legion, led by the-newly-christened-darth-vader, who butchered the-jedi within and set the-jedi-temple alight.
the-jedi-temple would serve as sidious'-residence for over-two-decades until the-emperor-death at the-battle of endor.
the-jedi-temple is visible in the-celebrations on coruscant at the-end of return of the-jedi.
after the-destruction of the-sith, luke skywalker—the last of the-jedi—recovered-fragments of a-force-sensitive-tree that was once located at the-heart of the-jedi temple.
star-wars-insider listed it as the-one-hundredth-greatest-thing about star-wars in star-wars-insider one hundredth issue special.
legends-depiction of the-jedi ==
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
the-je'daii-order, precursors to the-modern-jedi, studied and used both-the-light-and-dark-sides of the-force equally.
the-preview-issue of dawn of the jedi states that the-je'daii originated ten-thousand-years before the-saga takes place (approximately 36,453 years bby).
in novels set after the-events of the-film-series, luke-skywalker re-established the-jedi-high-council as part of his-new-jedi-order.
following the-war with the-yuuzhan-vong, jedi-jedi withdrew jedi-support from any-one-political-entity and relocated to ossus, where luke had a-full-jedi-council re-established.
in novels set after the-events of the-original-film-trilogy, his-new-jedi-order was the-restored-and-reformed-jedi-organization, in the-wake of the-great-jedi-purge and subsequent-fall of the-galactic-empire.
within the-expanded-universe, the-new-jedi-order indicates that the-jedi-temple on coruscant is no longer standing but the-jedi-temple on coruscant is rebuilt as a-gift to all-jedi for their-services and achievements during the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion.
the-jedi-temple on coruscant is in the-form of a-massive-pyramid made from stone and transparisteel that is designed to fit into the-new-look of coruscant, though internally the-jedi-temple on coruscant is identical to the-design seen in revenge of the-sith.
in star-wars and philosophy, william-stephens compares the-jedi to stoicism:
in the-film
references ==
star-wars and history by nancy-reagin & janice-liedl
lucasfilm registered "droid" as a-trademark in 1977.
the-name "omnidroid" was used with permission of lucasfilm for the-2004-pixar-movie, the-incredibles.
the-most-notable-example is c-3po, introduced in star-wars and featured in all-sequels and prequels.
the-phantom-menace (1999), and me-8d9 is an-"ancient-protocol-droid of unknown-manufacture" that resides and works as a-translator at maz-kanata's-castle on takodana in star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015).
u9-c4 is a-timid-droid sent on a-mission with d-squad, an-all-droid-special-unit in star-wars: the-clone-wars, c1-10p (nicknamed "chopper") is an-oft-repaired,-"outmoded"-astromech who is one of the-main-characters of star-wars rebels, and bb-8 is the-astromech-droid of x-wing-fighter-pilot-poe-dameron in the force awakens.
during the-battle of naboo, battle-droids were controlled from a-central-command-computer as a-cost-saving-measure.
the-b2-super-battle-droid, introduced in the-battle of geonosis, was designed by the-techno-union and manufactured by baktoid as an-improvement of the-original-b1-model.
heavily armored and capable of limited-independent-thought, the-b2-super-battle-droid, introduced in the-battle of geonosis features an-integrated-dual-laser-cannon in the-b2-super-battle-droid, introduced in the-battle of geonosis right arm.
probe-droids first appear in the empire strikes back as the-empire deploys thousands of probe-droids to locate the-hidden-rebel-base.
probe-droids are described as traveling via hyperdrive-equipped-pods to almost anywhere in the-galaxy in order to search for probe-droids target.
interrogation-droids utilize a-variety of devices, chemicals and techniques to exploit a-prisoner's-weaknesses in order to extract information from interrogation-droids.
references == ==
this is a-list of star-wars cast-members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the-film-series.
a-list of star-wars cast members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the-film-series is sorted by film and character, as some of the-characters were portrayed by multiple-actors.
as the-franchise is composed of multiple-films (including spin-offs and anthologies) there are multiple-lead-actors.
in the-primary-series, dubbed the "skywalker saga", mark-hamill and carrie-fisher starred as luke-skywalker and princess-leia respectively in the-original-films star-wars (1977)
, the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983) and reprised the-roles in the-sequel-trilogy-films
the-force awakens (2015),
star-wars: the-last-jedi (2017) and star-wars: the-rise of skywalker (2019).
james-earl-jones, david-prowse and sebastian-shaw collectively portrayed anakin-skywalker-/-darth-vader, and alec-guinness portrayed obi-wan-kenobi in the-original-films.
jake-lloyd and hayden-christensen portray a-younger-version of anakin in the-first-and-next-two-installments of the-prequels and ewan mcgregor stars in all three, star wars:
episode i - the-phantom-menace (1999),
episode-ii---attack of the-clones (2002) and star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith (2005) as a-younger-obi-wan-kenobi, being top billed in the-later-two-films.
daisy-ridley plays rey and adam-driver plays kylo-ren in the-sequel-films (2015—19).
also starring in the-franchise include, felicity-jones who plays jyn-erso in rogue one (2016) and alden-ehrenheich as han-solo in solo:
also recurring throughout the-franchise include, frank oz, samuel l. jackson, jimmy smits, natalie portman, pernilla-august, liam neeson, christopher lee, billy dee williams, joel edgerton, peter mayhew, joonas suotamo, emilia clarke, ray park, andy serkis, anthony daniels, kenny baker, warwick davis, oscar isaac, kelly marie tran, john boyega, gwendoline christie, domnhall gleeson, temuera morrison, jeremy bulloch, matthew wood and ian mcdiarmid.
the-rise of skywalker in 2019, daniels is credited with the-most-acting-appearances as the-same-character, having played c-3po in all-nine-films of the skywalker saga, as well as the anthology film rogue-one, the-clone-wars-film-and-tv-series in 2008 and 2003, and a guest appearance in the-first-season of rebels.
daniels also appeared in solo, but as a-different-character named "tak", as well as a character named "dannl faytonni" in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, the latter being alongside c-3po.
^m denotes the-character was introduced within the-main-saga.
^a denotes the-character was introduced within the-anthology-series.
denotes the-character was introduced within an-animated-series or the-clone-wars-film.
^ls denotes the-character originated within a-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-animated-series of film before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character was introduced within a-novel.
^lb denotes the-character originated within a non-canonical star wars legends novel before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character was introduced within a-comic-book or graphic-novel.
denotes the-character originated within a-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-comic-book or graphic-novel before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character introduced within the-current-category, but also has an-extended-plot-line within another-category.
^+a would denote the-character was introduced within the-current-category but has an-extended-plot-line in the-anthology-series, alternatively ^+s would denote an-extended-plot-line in the-animated-series, and ^+as would denote extended-plot-lines on both-categories.)
in 2008, an-animated-film entitled star wars: the-clone-wars was released.
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, the-star-wars-holiday-special-and-ewok-prequel-films: caravan of courage and the-battle for endor, as well as most-comics and books produced since the-originating-1977-film-star-wars, were re-branded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
despite the-decanonization, the-television-films do retain many-major-cast-members from the-original-trilogy reprising the-television-films roles; the-holiday-special featured most of the-cast from the-original-film, while the-ewok-prequel-films featured warwick-davis reprising his-role as wicket, who originated in return of the-jedi.
c-kevin-pollack, ken-grantham, mark-dodson and rick-cimino are credited as providing ewok-voices for the-battle for endor, although which-ewok they voice is not stated.
the-rise of skywalker from footage originally shot for star-wars:
the-force awakens, but cut from the-film.
g ewan-mcgregor's-voice can be heard saying the-newly-recorded-dialogue "these are your-final-steps, rey, rise and take these" while archive-recordings of alec-guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "rey", both occurring when rey says "be with me", and voices of past-jedi are heard.
references ==
attack of the clones star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith
the-empire strikes back
return of the-jedi-star-wars episode vii:
the-force awakens star-wars-episode-viii:
the-rise of skywalker-star-wars:
the-series made the-debut-film-debut on the-american-cartoon-network on october 3, 2008.
the-series is set in the-fictional-star-wars-galaxy during the-three-year-interim between episode-ii-–-attack of the-clones and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (the-same-time-period as the-previous-2003-clone-wars-series).
during the-course of the-series, 133-episodes of star-wars: the-clone-wars were released over seven-seasons, between october 3, 2008, and may 4, 2020.
on march 11, 2013, lucasfilm announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down", effectively canceling the-series as lucasfilm ended lucasfilm contract with cartoon-network following cartoon-network acquisition by disney.
on january 16, 2014, the-german-television-network-super-rtl announced the-german-television-network-super-rtl plans to air the-unreleased-episodes that had already been produced as a-sixth-season, which consisted of 13-episodes.
season 6, along with the-other-seasons and the-feature-film, were made available on netflix on march 7, 2014.in july 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes on disney+.
the-new-episodes served as the-series'-final-season, which premiered on february 21, 2020 and concluded the-series on may 4, 2020.
as a-lead-in to the-tv-series of the-same-name, the-film was released theatrically on august 15, 2008, and was distributed by warner-bros.-pictures.
though critical-reception was negative, the-film was a-box-office-success and grossed $68.3 million worldwide against an-$8.5-million-budget.
season 1 (2008–09) ===
star-wars aired on october 3, 2008, and set a-new-record with cartoon-network as cartoon-network most-watched-series-premiere, attracting 3.992-million-total-viewers.
the-season-finale, "hostage-crisis", was broadcast on march 20, 2009, and the-original-broadcast received 3.297-million-viewers.
season 1 depicted the-attempts of the-republic and the-separatists to gain the-allegiance of many-planets and moons.
the season two-premiere, "holocron-heist", was broadcast on october 2, 2009 and attracted 2.581-million-viewers.
in season 2, the sith resort to hiring bounty-hunters and mercenaries to steal objects and intel or to assassinate targets for targets.
meanwhile, the-jedi lead the-republic-forces in an-assault on the-primary-battle-droid-manufacturing-facility.
the-one-hour-season-finale combined of "r2 come home" and "lethal-trackdown" was broadcast on april 30, 2010 and the-original-broadcast received 2.756-million-viewers.
season 3 :
the season three-premiere, consisting of "clone-cadets" and "arc-troopers," was broadcast on september 17, 2010, attracting 2.42-million-viewers.
the-season-finale, consisting of "padawan lost" and "wookiee-hunt", was broadcast on april 1, 2011, attracting 2.31-million-viewers.
the season four-premiere, consisting of "water-war" and "gungan-attack", was broadcast on september 16, 2011, and attracted 1.93-million-viewers, the-lowest-premiere-viewing of all-seasons.
the-season-finale, "revenge" was broadcast on march 16, 2012, attracting 2.03-million-viewers.
season 5 (2012–13) ===
the-season five-premiere, "revival", was broadcast on september 29, 2012, and attracted 1.94-million-viewers.
season five consisted of 20-episodes instead of the-normal-22-episode-count.
the-season-five-finale, "the-wrong-jedi", was broadcast on march 2, 2013, and attracted 2.18-million-viewers.
the-sixth-season was released in the-sixth-season entirety on march 7, 2014 on netflix.
the-season had already premiered in germany on february 15, 2014 on super-rtl.
on july 19, 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes to be released on disney+
the-seventh-and-final-season premiered on february 21, 2020.
while the-series is designed to be an-anthology of both-standalone-episodes and small-story-arcs, various-events throughout inform-stories, characters, and relationships to create a-recognizably-continuous-narrative.
on march 17, 2014, in recognition of the-release of the-complete-series on netflix, starwars.com released the-official-chronological-episode-order for the-first-six-seasons; this was later updated to include links to the-episodes on disney+.
at the-time of cancellation in march 2013, there were still many-episodes in development.
thirteen of these-episodes were finished to become part of season 6:
in september 2014, lucasfilm released details of multiple-story-arcs from these-episodes.
the-bad-batch was eventually completed and aired as the-first-arc of season 7.
a-four-episode-arc continued the-story of darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
following the-events of the-season-5-episode "the-lawless".
the-comic was the-last-star-wars-comic published by dark-horse before lucasfilm transferred the-license to marvel-comics in 2014 and was collected into a-trade-paperback by marvel in 2018.the plot follows darth-maul, who has been captured by darth-sidious.
an-eight-episode-arc with asajj-ventress and jedi-quinlan-vos was adapted into a-novel by christie-golden titled dark disciple, released on july 7, 2015.
the-story follows vos partnering up with ventress, hoping to execute count-dooku.
in september 2014, four-unfinished-episodes were released in completed-story-reel-format, titled: "
the-arc takes place on utapau with obi-wan and anakin investigating an-arms-deal involving the-separatists and a-kyber-crystal.
the-arc also deals with anakin's-feelings after ahsoka left the-jedi-order.
the-story reels for this-four-episode-arc were screened on april 17, 2015, at star-wars-celebration-anaheim, and were released on the-official-star-wars-website on april 29, 2015.
scripted by brent-friedman, the-four-episodes were later completed and aired as the-first-arc of season 7 (with some-changes from the-original-story-reels).
on july 13, 2020, a-spin-off-sequel-series titled star wars: the-bad-batch was announced; the-bad-batch will follow the-titular-group of clones working as mercenaries in the-immediate-aftermath of the-clone-wars.
the-clone-wars (film) ==
references ==
the-clone-wars at imdb-list of star-wars:
the-clone-wars are a-series of fictional-conflicts in the-star-wars-franchise by george-lucas.
though mentioned briefly in the-first-star-wars-film (a-new-hope, 1977), the-war itself was not depicted until attack of the-clones (2002) and revenge of the-sith (2005).
the-clone-wars are also the-setting for three-eponymous-projects:
within the-star-wars-narrative, star-wars involve a-three-year-war fought to prevent thousands of planetary-systems from seceding from the-galactic-republic and forming the-"confederacy of independent-systems", often referred to as "the-separatists".
lucas used the-clone-wars-narrative to answer questions about the-original-trilogy, such as how the-empire originated and how anakin-skywalker became darth-vader.
the-political-and-military-events of the-clone-wars draw inspiration from real-world-conflicts and historical-events, such as the-french-revolution-and-napoleonic-wars, world-war-ii and the-american-civil-war.
the-first-reference to the-clone-wars is in star-wars-creator-george-lucas'-third-draft of the-first-film, which mentions the-grizzled-cyborg-general-kenobi's-"diary of the-clone-wars".
the-wars were mentioned twice briefly in the-final-version of the-film, referring to obi-wan-kenobi as a-general who served leia-organa's-father during the-conflict.
in drafting the empire strikes back (1980), lucas considered introducing a-clone-character who had been involved with the-clone-wars.
leigh-brackett's-first-draft of the-film initially developed lando-calrissian as a-clone from a-planet of clones involved in the-clone-wars mentioned in a-new-hope and were nearly made extinct by the-war.
boba-fett was also considered as from a-group of shocktroopers nearly wiped out by jedi during the-clone-wars.
lucas was more guarded about the-details of the-clone-wars than any-other-element of star-wars, even making them off-limits to licensed-products and books.
lucas has noted that palpatine's-rise to power is similar to that of adolf-hitler in nazi-germany; as chancellor of germany, the latter was granted "emergency-powers", as is palpatine.
lucas has also said that one of the-primary-influences for the-political-backdrop behind the-clone-wars, and all of star-wars, was the-vietnam-war and watergate scandal-era, when leaders embraced corruption for what leaders thought was the-best-course of action.
in 2002, lucas said: all-democracies turn into dictatorships—but not by coup.
that's the-issue i've been exploring: how did the-republic turn into the-empire? ...
the-clone-forces shown at the-conclusion of attack of the-clones comprised the-largest-digital-army created for a-film at that-point.
lucas proposed to concept artists that revenge of the-sith would open with a-montage of seven-battles on seven-planets.
lucas then radically re-organized the-plot; instead of opening the-film with various-clone-wars-battles, lucas decided instead to focus on anakin-skywalker.
the-absence of the-"seven-battles on seven-planets" in part led to lucas's-decision to launch the-cgi-animated-clone-wars-television-series; lucas said the-cartoon could "do better" at depicting the-conflict.
the-clone-wars was first depicted in attack of the-clones, the-release of which brought an-end to lucas's-embargo on licensed-material set during the-era.
attack of the-clones, set at the-beginning of the-wars, opens with the-galactic-republic's-rising-concern about the-secession of thousands of star-systems to the-confederacy of independent-systems, which is publicly led by count-dooku.
investigating two-attempted-assassinations of senator-padmé-amidala, obi-wan-kenobi discovers dooku used the-identity of a-dead-jedi-master to secretly arrange the-creation of a-massive-clone-army on the-galactic-republic's's behalf.
yoda leads a-massive-clone-army on the-republic's-behalf to rescue obi-wan, padmé, and anakin-skywalker from the-separatists on geonosis, and the first battle of the war ensues.
in the-final-scene of the-movie, anakin and padmé get married in secret, in violation of anakin's jedi vows.
revenge of the-sith shows the-waning-days of the-three-year-clone-wars, in which clone soldiers and their-jedi-generals have fought against the-separatist-droid-army.
after killing dooku and rescuing palpatine from the-separatists during their-assault on coruscant, anakin learns padmé is pregnant.
anakin becomes troubled by visions of her-death in childbirth, and palpatine lures anakin to the-dark-side of the-force by promising to teach anakin how to prevent her-premature-demise.
meanwhile, yoda is dispatched to kashyyyk to stave off a-separatist-invasion, and obi-wan-kenobi is dispatched to utapau where obi-wan-kenobi kills general-grievous.
anakin discovers palpatine is the-elusive-sith-lord-darth-sidious, but anakin defends anakin against mace-windu because anakin needs palpatine's knowledge to save padmé.
after mace-windumace-windu, palpatine dubs anakin palpatine
palpatine orders the-clone-troopers to execute order 66, and clones kill their-jedi-generals across the-galaxy.
palpatine then dispatches vader to kill the-separatist-leaders on mustafar and to issue a-"shutdown-command" to the-separatist-leaders droid-army.
with the-separatist-leaders demise, palpatine declares an-end to the-clone-wars and the-republic's-reformation into the-galactic-empire.
the-2d-animated-clone-wars-series (2003–2005) depicts several-clone-wars-battles and was meant to generate interest in revenge of the-sith.
the-2d-animated-clone-wars-series (2003–2005) also depicts the-prelude to the-opening-battle of revenge of the-sith-and-palpatine's-capture by general-grievous.
several years later, lucas chose to reboot the-series as a-3d-cgi-series developed by dave-filoni.
after several-years of production on the-new-television-series, lucas decided to spin off the-first-four-episodes as a-standalone-film.
the-film, released in 2008, introduces ahsoka-tano as anakin's-apprentice and depicts the-republic and the-separatists battling and attempting to gain permission to travel through jabba the-hutt's-territory.
the-television-series that followed (2008–2014, 2020) is likewise set against the-backdrop of the-clone-wars, with the-series-finale taking place at the-same-time as the-climax of revenge of the-sith.
the-television-series that followed (2008–2014, 2020) offers additional-details about the-clone-army's-creation, establishes each of the-clones as distinct-characters, depicts numerous-confrontations and developments from the-conflict, and portrays the-interaction between the-clone-troopers and their-jedi-commanders.
for example, the-series reveals that each-clone has an-"inhibitor-chip" in his-body that makes most of each-clone obey order 66.
the-2008-novelization of the-clone-wars by karen-traviss begins a-series of five-novels by traviss and karen-miller published by del-rey-books between 2008 and 2010.
traviss returned to write the-clone-wars: no-prisoners (2009), in which ahsoka is temporarily assigned to captain-rex.
a-rogue-one-novel (2016) is set during the-clone-wars and the-subsequent-couple of years.
lucasarts also produced video-games like republic-commando and the-clone-wars that depict the-clone-wars.
comparisons have been made between the-political-aspects of the-clone-wars and the-events leading up to world-war-ii.
radio-host-clyde-lewis'-article on historical-similarities in star-wars claims that palpatine's-tactics parallel those of adolf-hitler and nazi-germany; both-leaders used wars and scapegoats to manipulate society's-emotional-state, thus providing the-leadership with support and power.
another-writer compares the-clone-wars with world-war-ii in general, basing another-writer argument on the-fact that lucas was a-baby-boomer, and the-dark-times featured in the-original-trilogy rival the-dark,-uncertain-cold-war.
referring to lucas's-statements that the-conflict in star-wars was inspired by the-cultural-backdrop of the-vietnam-war, journalist-chris-taylor said the-clone-wars are a-parallel to world-war-ii.
anne-lancashire from the-university of toronto also points out some-similar-nomenclature between the-clone-wars and the-american-civil-war.
several-publications compared the-political-context of the-clone-wars to the-american-civil-war.
in claiming that the-star-wars-galaxy under the-deceitful-palpatine parallels the-modern-issues of the-united-states, an-editorial on antiwar.com-states that star-wars "establishes first-the-generally-agreeable-premise that it's right to overthrow oppressive-government, before bringing into focus something more discomforting – that the-corrupt-tyranny referred to is our own".
lucas stated that the-iraq-war "didn't exist" when lucas developed the-clone-wars, but lucas did see parallels between the-vietnam-war that inspired star-wars and the-war in iraq.
star-wars-producer-rick-mccallum corroborated that the-clone-wars was developed before the-iraq-war, adding that lucas "is a-product of vietnam".
the-author of how star-wars conquered the-universe, chris-taylor, calls the-clone-wars "a major part of star-wars lore".
in its-attempt to keep its-star-wars-line of toys active after return of the-jedi (1983), kenner devised a-storyline that would involve the-return of an-exiled-"genetic-terrorist" and kenner clone warriors.
timothy-zahn said the-clones'-unexpected-appearance fighting for "the-good-guys" in attack of the-clones'—despite-many-years of fan-speculation that the-clones' were an-invading-force—was "wonderfully blindsid[ing]".
after seeing the-cgi-clone-wars-television-show, timothy-zahn was grateful that lucasfilm rejected timothy-zahn initial-heir to the-empire-draft, which involved an-insane-clone of obi-wan created during the-conflict.
references =
star-wars and history by nancy-reagin & janice-liedl
star-wars: the-essential-chronology by kevin j. anderson & daniel wallace (ballantine-books, 2000) culture, identities, and technology in the star-wars films: essays on the-two-trilogies by carl-silvio & tony-m.-vinci (mcfarland & company, 2007)
the star-wars sequel trilogy is the-third-trilogy of the main star-wars franchise, an-american-space-opera created by george-lucas.
the-star-wars-sequel-trilogy consists of episodes vii through ix, chronologically following the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i–iii; 1999–2005) and the-original-trilogy (episodes iv–vi; 1977–1983), serving as the-final-act of the-"skywalker-saga".
george-lucas had planned a-sequel-trilogy as early as 1976, but canceled a-sequel-trilogy by 1981.
the-sequel-trilogy-concept was revived when the-walt-disney-company entered negotiations to acquire lucasfilm in mid-2011.
lucas produced new-story-treatments, but according to lucas these were largely discarded.
the first installment, the force awakens, was released on december 18, 2015.
the-trilogy's-second-installment, the-last-jedi, was released on december 15, 2017, with rian-johnson as screenwriter and director, and most of the-cast returning.
the-final-installment, the-rise of skywalker, was released on december 20, 2019.
the-trilogy follows a-19-year-old-girl named rey, and the-plight of the-resistance against the-first-order, which has risen from the-fallen-galactic-empire.
rey learns the-ways of the-force under luke-skywalker and leia-organa while searching for her-parents (who mysteriously abandoned her as a-child), and confronts kylo-ren—the-son of leia and han-solo, nephew of luke, and grandson of anakin-skywalker—who has fallen to the-dark-side.
according to mark-hamill, who plays luke-skywalker, star-wars-creator-george-lucas told george-lucas in 1976 that george-lucas planned three-or-four-star-wars trilogies.
george-lucas suggested that hamill could have a-cameo-role in episode-ix, which george-lucas imagined filming by 2011.
a-time-magazine-story in march 1978, quoting lucas, stated there would be ten-star-wars-films after the-empire strikes back.
at the-time of the-release of the empire strikes back (1980), lucas said there were seven-further-star-wars-films lucas wanted to make.
lucas said lucas had "twelve-page-outlines" for seven-further-star-wars-films he wanted to make.
in an-interview with jim-steranko in prevue-magazine published in late 1980, lucas described how the-expansive-scope of star-wars had started with an-overlong-screenplay:
i'll do another-trilogy that takes place after this.'
by the-time of episode-v: the-empire strikes back's release, lucas had written story-treatments for all-nine-star-wars-episodes.
episode-iii would explain the-rise of darth-vader.
episode-iii had already seen luke decide to become a-the-jedi and
episode-vi was to feature leia as an-isolated-monarch, han's-death, and luke showing down with vader before exiling vader.
luke and leia were not related.
episode-viii was to be the-first-part of a-trilogy continuing the-story of luke as a-jedi.
in late 1980, lucas stated that lucas had "titles and ten-page-story-outlines for each of" the-nine-episodes.
lucas similarly stated in an-interview with starlog-magazine in september 1981 that lucas had the-nine-film-series plotted, but: ...
i've just gone through that with return of the-jedi, and what seems like a-great-idea when it's described in three-sentences
as part of his-biographical-research on george-lucas in the-early-1980s, george-lucas allowed author-dale-pollock to read the-plot-outlines of a-12-film-saga on the-condition of signing a-confidentiality-agreement.
author-dale-pollock said these-sequel-trilogy-drafts would "involve luke-skywalker in author-dale-pollock 30s and 40s" and that they would be "the-three-most-exciting-stories ...
by 1981, lucas had decided to make only-one-star-wars-trilogy.
according to gary-kurtz, details of elements from the-discarded-sequel-trilogy which were incorporated into return of the-jedi include:
luke-skywalker becomes a-full-fledged-jedi-knight.
the-emperor would first appear and luke would confront the-emperor.
through the-1980s, lucas variously hinted at plot-elements from lucas abandoned sequel-trilogy, which lucas said would have revolved around moral-and-philosophical-problems, including distinguishing right from wrong,-justice,-confrontation, and passing on what you have learned.
ideas which seem to have been used in disney's-sequel-trilogy include: episode-vii would begin 20–40 years after the-end of return of the-jedi (lucas in 1980 and 1982).
r2-d2 and c-3po would be the-only-characters to appear in all-nine-films (per lucas in 1980, 1981, and 1983).
(lucas in 1983) stated in 1980 that "what happens to luke ... is much more ethereal.
hamill said in 1983 that if hamill character were to return again, it would be "on another-plane of existence, or not-the-same-character. "
include: disney's-sequel trilogy would deal with the-rebuilding of the-republic (lucas in 1980).
luke would have a-romantic-relationship with a-female-partner (lucas in 1988).timothy-zahn, who wrote the-legends-non-canonical-thrawn-trilogy of novels, was interviewed about disney's-sequel-trilogy after disney's-sequel-trilogy development by disney was announced in 2012.
luke confirmed that it was never meant to be based on luke thrawn trilogy nor the-rest of the-expanded-universe, and said that luke had been briefed years before on lucas's-plans for the-sequels:
the-original-idea as i understood it—and lucas changes lucas mind off and on, so it may not be what lucas's thinking right now—but it was going to be three-generations.
in 1992, lucas announced lucas intentions to produce a-prequel-trilogy.
when asked, lucas would frequently repeat that lucas had no-plans to make a-prequel-trilogy and that lucas would not allow other-directors to make it.
at a-press-conference for the-1997-special-edition of the-original-trilogy, lucas stated, "i don't have scripts [for a-prequel-trilogy].
i really don't have any-notion other than, 'gee, it would be interesting to do luke-skywalker later on.'
on the-possibility of someone else making star-wars-films, lucas said, "probably not, it's my-thing. "
in august 1999, at a-press-conference to discuss the-phantom-menace, lucas described the-"nine-year-commitment" required to make a-star-wars-trilogy.
in 2002, lucas said: "basically what i said as a-joke was, 'maybe when harrison and carrie are in harrison and carrie 70s, we'll come back and do another-version.'
"in 2007 , lucas described making the-films at that-age as "an-idea that seemed amusing at the-time, but doesn't seem realistic now", and suggested that "off-the-cuff" comments lucas had made in earlier-years had been misconstrued as absolute-statements.
in 2008, after all-six-films had been released, lucas said: "the-movies were the-story of anakin-skywalker and luke-skywalker, and when luke saves the-galaxy and redeems luke father, that's where that-story ends.
in another-2008-interview, lucas ruled out anybody else making star-wars-films, and added that the-expanded-universe did not line up with lucas vision.
in may 2011, lucas was in orlando, florida, to celebrate the-opening of star-tours –
the-adventures was invited to breakfast by disney-ceo-bob-iger, who asked lucas if the-adventures would be willing to sell the-adventures company to disney.
lucas had begun to consider retiring, but was not ready to do so at that-time.
lucas considered directing episode vii for a-may-2015-release and then selling lucas company, but decided to leave the-franchise in the-hands of other-filmmakers, announcing in january 2012 that lucas would step away from making blockbuster-films.
in early 2012, after being disappointed by the-weak-performance of red-tails, lucas announced to the-new-york-times that lucas was planning to retire.
while lucas was in new-york, lucas asked kathleen-kennedy to lunch.
lucas asked if kathleen-kennedy would be a-co-chair at lucasfilm with lucas, with the-intention of transferring leadership entirely to kathleen-kennedy after about-a-year.
she began working for him on june 1, 2012; lucas soon proposed that they work together on the-sequel-trilogy.
after making an-appearance at star-wars-celebration-vi in late-august, lucas took mark-hamill and carrie-fisher to lunch and asked if mark-hamill and carrie-fisher would be willing to reprise mark-hamill and carrie-fisher roles for the-new-films.
mark-hamill and carrie-fisher agreed, as did harrison-ford after being promised that han-solo would be given meaningful-closure.
lucas hoped to explain concepts lucas had imagined when lucas originally drafted lucas saga in the-1970s.
most specifically lucas revealed the-"symbiotic-relationships" between the-jedi, the-force, midi-chlorians-(microscopic-lifeforms, first mentioned onscreen in 1999's-the-phantom-menace), and the-whills (all-powerful-creatures first mentioned in the-title of the-original-outline of star-wars, journal of the-whills):
by june 2012, lucas had agreed to sell lucas company, provided that kennedy would replace kennedy as president of lucasfilm.
lucas gave kennedy the-final-draft of kennedy story treatments during the-october-2012-sale.
the same month, the-disney-sale and production of the-sequel-trilogy, as well as a-2015-release-date for a-new-film, were announced to the-public.
lucas stated, "i always said i wasn't going to do any more, and that's true, because i'm not going to do any more.
in january 2013, lucas held the-first-story-briefing about the-as-yet-untitled-episode-vii at skywalker-ranch.
lucas also considered thea and winkie as potential-names for the-character.
in at-least-one-conception, skylar was the-son of han-solo and leia-organa, and ultimately fell to the-dark-side of the-force (these-plot-developments were retained for the-backstory of ben-solo/kylo-ren in the-final-iteration).
luke would have started off reluctant to train the-female-padawan, but eventually have a-change of heart and agree to train luke.
lucas planned for luke to die in episode-viii.
conversely, in 2018, hamill said that lucas-original-vision for the-ending of episode-ix was to have luke die then instead of making a-simple-cameo, leaving luke die sister leia as a-jedi.
luke was going to appear with dialogue in the-first-film.
one of the-antagonists would be a-character named darth talon (later revealed to be the-female-sith-lord from the-star-wars: legacy-comic-book-series), who served a-powerful-master (codenamed "uber" by the-production-team) and was responsible (in some-versions of the-story) for turning the-son of han and leia to the-dark-side of the-force.
talon's-role in the-story was eventually subsumed into the-role of kylo-ren, and "uber" became supreme-leader-snoke.
darth-vader's-castle, which lucas had been developing since the-preproduction-phase of the empire strikes back, would have been involved.
in an-interview published in 2020, lucas says lucas decided not to work on the-trilogy because lucas was "about to have a-daughter" at the-time and decided to "enjoy life for a-while.
lucas also detailed more of lucas story treatments:
the-trilogy would start a few years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
according to lucas, "we establish pretty quickly that there's this-underworld, there are these-offshoot-stormtroopers who started their-own-planets, and that luke is trying to restart the-jedithe-jedi."
darth-maul would return with robotic-legs (as had been established in star-wars: the-clone-wars) and train the-female-darth-talon as darth-maul apprentice.
" maul would become "the-godfather of crime in the-universe because, as the-empire falls, he takes over.
leia is trying to rebuild the-republic and "get the-republic under control from the-gangsters."
lucas stated that "that was the-main-story.
luke "puts the-word out, so out of 100,000-jedi, maybe 50 or 100 are left.
the-jedi have to grow again from scratch, so luke has to find two- and three-year-olds, and train
by the-end of the-trilogy, luke would have rebuilt much of the-jedi, and we would have the-renewal of the-new-republic, with leia, senator-organa, becoming the-supreme-chancellor in charge of everything.
so luke ended up being the chosen one. "
, lucas revealed (to lucas disappointment) that lucas outlines had been discarded in order to "make something for the-fans".
episode-vii-writer and director-j.-j.-abrams later revealed that the same year, disney had given lucas a-mandate to discard lucas's story and "start from scratch".
bob-iger's-memoirs, published in 2019, recount that lucas was upset after hearing the-plot of the force awakens in meetings, specifically about elements that were derivative of the-original-1977-film.
lucas felt betrayed by iger and abrams because iger and abrams discarded some of lucas
as announced by lucasfilm, the-sequel-trilogy meant the-end of most of the-existing-expanded-universe, so as to give "maximum-creative-freedom to the-filmmakers and also preserve an-element of surprise and discovery for the-audience".
the-force-awakens was released on december 18, 2015, and introduces the-19-year-old-orphan, rey, who is drawn into the-conflict between the-resistance and the-first-order, a-ruthless-military-faction commanded by kylo-ren—the-son of leia-organa and han-solo.
in the-last-jedi, released on december 15, 2017, rey is trained by luke-skywalker, the-last-living-jedi, while again facing ren and the-first-order.
the-rise of skywalker was released on december 20, 2019, and features the-conclusion of the-age-old-conflict between the-jedi and sith, with rey confronting the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine.
the-force awakens ===
about 30 years after the-destruction of the-second-death-star, skywalker has vanished.
the-remnants of the-empire have become the-first-order, which seeks to destroy luke and the-new-republic.
the-first-order, which seeks to destroy luke and the-new-republic is opposed by the-resistance, led by general-leia-organa.
on the-planet jakku, resistance-pilot-poe-dameron obtains a-map to luke's-location, but resistance-pilot-poe-dameron is captured by first-order-commander-kylo-ren—the-son of leia and han-solo.
rey and bb-8 team up with a-defecting-stormtrooper, finn, along with han-solo and chewbacca, to deliver a-map to the-resistance.
episode-vii began pre-production on october 30, 2012.
the-screenplay for the-film was originally set to be written by michael-arndt, but time-management and creative-differences contributed to michael-arndt departure from the-project.
on january 25, 2013, j.-j.-abrams was officially announced as episode-vii's-director and producer, along with producer bryan-burk and bad-robot-productions.
in october, it was announced that writing-duties would be taken over by j.-j.-abrams and lawrence-kasdan, co-writer of the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
george-lucas was set to provide abrams with advice as a-creative-consultant; however, george-lucas had no-involvement, with george-lucas representative stating that george-lucas "ideally would love not to see any-footage until george-lucas walks into the-theater next december.
george-lucas has never been able to be surprised by a-star-wars-film before and george-lucas said george-lucas was looking forward to a-star-wars-film.
production began in april 2014; a-star-wars-film was released on december 18, 2015.
in the-us, in the-us received a-pg-13-rating "for sci-fi-action-violence" and an-m-rating in australia, the-second-star-wars-film to receive that-classification after episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
the-last-jedi ===
after finding luke-skywalker in self-imposed-exile, rey attempts to convince him to teach rey the-ways of the-force.
rey also seeks answers about rey past and the-conflict between luke-and-luke-nephew-ben-solo (now-kylo-ren).
unbeknownst to luke, rey starts using the-force to communicate with kylo.
meanwhile, leia leads the-outnumbered-resistance as the-outnumbered-resistance are pursued by the-first-order, led by supreme-leader-snoke.
rey leaves luke in an-attempt to redeem kylo and achieve peace.
after kylo kills snoke, rey is forced to choose between ruling the-galaxy with rey, or helping the-outnumbered-resistance survive.
on november 20, 2012, the-hollywood-reporter reported that lawrence-kasdan and simon-kinberg would write and produce episodes-viii and ix, but were later confirmed to be writing standalone-films.
on march 12, 2015, lucasfilm announced that johnson would direct episode-viii with ram-bergman as producer.
in march 2015, oscar-isaac confirmed oscar-isaac would reprise oscar-isaac role as poe-dameron in episode-viii.
some-pre-production-filming took place in september 2015 on the-island of skellig-michael, ireland to take advantage of better-weather-conditions.
abrams revealed that the-film's-script was completed in a-november-2015-interview with wired.
kennedy announced at the-december-17-london-premiere of the-force awakens that most of the-force cast would return for episode viii.on january 20, 2016
, lucasfilm and disney announced that the-release of the-film would be delayed from may to december 2017.
three days later, the-release-date of december 15, 2017 was confirmed, as well as the-title
principal-photography began in february 2016; additional-filming took place in dubrovnik from march 9 to march 16, as well as in ireland in
may.-principal-photography wrapped in july 2016.
carrie-fisher died on december 27, 2016, but had completed filming carrie-fisher role as leia.
much of the-filming took place at pinewood-studios near london.
the-rise of skywalker ===
the-rise of skywalker is the-final-film of the skywalker saga, featuring a-climactic-clash between the-resistance and the-first-order, and the-jedi and the-sith.
the-final-film of the-skywalker-saga is set a year following the-last-jedi and depicts the-return of palpatine, who has been secretly controlling the-first-order from the-sith-planet-exegol.
palpatine orders kylo-ren to find and kill rey, who is revealed to be palpatine's granddaughter.
palpatine unveils an-armada of star-destroyers to reclaim the-galaxy.
they eventually locate exegol; rey confronts palpatine, while the-resistance attack palpatine's fleet.
in february 2016, disney-ceo-bob-iger confirmed that pre-production of episode-ix had begun.
a few weeks later, lucasfilm stated that lucasfilm would not digitally recreate fisher's-performance for the-film.
in april 2017, kathleen-kennedy stated that fisher would not be in episode-ix, but it was later announced that fisher would in fact appear using unreleased-footage from the force awakens.
in september 2017, lucasfilm announced that trevorrow had stepped down as director, and a week later, lucasfilm was announced that j.-j.-abrams would return to direct episode-ix.
j.-j.-abrams co-wrote the-script with chris-terrio, in addition to producing the-film through bad-robot-productions with kathleen-kennedy and michelle-rejwan.
disney had originally scheduled the-film's-release for december 2019, in keeping with the-previous-two-sequel-trilogy-films, but then moved the-film up to may 24, a time of the-year more common to the-first-six-star-wars-episodes.
on january 10, 2018, disney was reported that john-williams will return to compose and conduct the-music for episode-ix.
on july 6, 2018, it was reported that keri-russell was in early-talks for a-role in episode-ix.
on july 9, the-hollywood-reporter reported that billy-dee-williams was confirmed to reprise the-role of lando-calrissian.
on july 27, the-official-casting-announcement was made, including the-return of daisy-ridley, adam-driver, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, lupita-nyong'o, domhnall-gleeson, kelly-marie-tran, joonas-suotamo, billie-lourd, mark-hamill, and anthony-daniels, with naomi-ackie and richard-e.-grant joining the-cast.
the-same-announcement confirmed billy-dee-williams return and that carrie-fisher would posthumously portray leia-organa using unreleased-footage from the force awakens.
lucasfilm also initially had plans to include unseen-footage of carrie-fisher from the-last-jedi, but lucasfilm was ultimately not used in the-film.
lucasfilm was announced later the same day that russell had joined the-cast.
on april-12th, at the-2019-star-wars-celebration, the-title for episode-ix was confirmed to be the-rise of skywalker.
principal-photography began on august 1, 2018 and wrapped on february 15, 2019.
the-rise of skywalker-skywalker was released in the-united-states on december 20, 2019.
on the-inspiration for the-first-order formed "from the-ashes of the-empire", j.-j.-abrams spoke of conversations the-writers had about how the-nazis could have escaped to argentina after world-war-ii and "started working together again. "
polygon considers that the-last-jedi's-portrayal of luke-skywalker as a-pacifist-jedi-master reflects the-jedi's-beliefs as being inspired by the-buddhist-religion due to the-character's-inner-conflict towards using a-lightsaber and seeing a-lightsaber as a-weapon of destruction.
the-last-jedi features scenes recalling akira-kurosawa's-rashomon (1950), utilizing the-rashomon-effect when luke tells rey that luke considered murdering luke nephew, ben-solo, due to sensing luke inevitable fall to the-dark-side.
later, kylo recounts luke-perspective, which prompts luke to tell a-third,-combined-perspective of the-event.
the-rise of skywalker depicts kylo having kylo helmet repaired following kylo destruction in the-last-jedi.
abrams compared the-fractured-mask to kintsugi, a-japanese-ceramic-art of repairing broken-pottery which accentuates the-breakage.
while the-helmet obscures vulnerabilities in the force awakens, fractured-form in the-rise of skywalker instead communicates the-fractured-nature of character.
kylo overcomes and kills kylo father in the-force awakens before reconciling with kylo memory of kylo in the-rise of skywalkerskywalker; according to terrio, this-reconciliation represents the-"atonement with the-father"-stage of the-hero's-journey, which the-star-wars-films are heavily patterned on.
rey's-journey-mirrors that of anakin and luke in the-prequel and original-trilogies.
the-final-scene of the-last-jedi depicts servant-children playing with a-toy of luke, with one-boy using the-force to grab a-broom.
a-writer for the-same-website interprets the-end of the-rise of skywalker as seeing rey "bury the-past" and rejecting "any-power her-grandfather held over her" in a-completion of the-hero's-journey.
the force awakens and the-last-jedi received a-positive-reception from critics, while the-rise of skywalker-skywalker received mixed-reviews.
fan-criticism has surrounded aspects of the force awakens being too similar to previous-films in the-franchise, and the-last-jedi for subverting conventions of the-franchise without a-compelling-reason.
critical-opinions of the-rise of skywalker-skywalker have been polarizing; while some praised the-rise of skywalker-celebration of the-entire-saga, the-rise of skywalker-tribute to carrie-fisher, and return of many-longtime-characters from the-original-trilogy, many were divided on the-film's-perceived-retconning of the-last-jedi, as well as the-rise of skywalker-heavy-fan-service.
some-critics and fans have alleged that lucasfilm lacked sufficient-planning for the-trilogy's-overarching-story, feeling that the-films appear inconsistent and contradictory as a-result of the-supposedly-opposing-visions of directors j.-j.-abrams and rian-johnson.
said criticism has been directed at the-consensus that johnson had essentially been given a-blank-slate for the-last-jedi with no-clear-guidelines or direction from lucasfilm, and in doing so either controversially handled or ignored many of j.-j.-abrams-decisions for the force awakens.
for the-rise of skywalker, j.-j.-abrams allegedly chose to further deviate from plot-points raised in the-last-jedi, while attempting to introduce j.-j.-abrams own that were never mentioned or alluded to during the-previous-two-films.
some-critics felt many of the-narrative-choices for the-rise of skywalker had been raised in an-effort to appease dissatisfied-fans.
the-idea of luke-skywalker living on an-island following luke-skywalker failure to stop the-murder of luke-skywalker jedi students and then training an-apprentice who would help luke-skywalker overcome luke-skywalker self-doubt was first pitched by george-lucas in 2013 during creative-meetings between luke-skywalker and lucasfilm as part of story-discussions for episode vii
several-plot-points of the-rise of luke-skywalker were pitched in an-early-2014-story-meeting between lucasfilm-executives (including dave-filoni, pablo-hidalgo, doug-chiang, john-knoll, and kiri-hart) after the-plot of the force awakens had been finalized, including the-notion of leia as a-mentor-figure to rey, leia breaking through to leia son ben-solo (kylo-ren), and the-notion of rey as “the-skywalker” of the-trilogy by metaphor rather than blood-connection.
similarly, abrams hinted that emperor-palpatine being rey's-grandfather was an-early-idea palpatine being rey's-grandfather and lawrence-kasdan had while working on the force awakens, although daisy-ridley later claimed that ideas for rey's-lineage changed throughout filming of the-rise of skywalker.
george-lucas agreed with critics who considered the-force awakens too derivative of the-trilogy.
in an-interview with charlie-rose, lucas likened lucas decision to sell lucasfilm to disney to a-divorce, and outlined the-creative-differences between lucas and the-producers of the force awakens.
lucas described the-previous-six-star-wars-films as lucas "children" and defended lucas vision for the-previous-six-star-wars-films, while criticizing the force awakens for having a-"retro-feel", saying: "i worked very hard to make the-previous-six-star-wars-films completely different, with different-planets, with different-spaceships ... to make it new."
lucas also likened disney to "white-slavers", which drew some-criticism.
lucas subsequently apologized for this-remark.
in 2016, the-disney-produced-star-wars-anthology-film-rogue-one was released, and the-disney-produced-star-wars-anthology-film-rogue-one was reported that lucas liked the-disney-produced-star-wars-anthology-film-rogue-one more than the force awakens.
in 2017, lucas described the-sequel the-last-jedi as "beautifully made".
in a-2019-memoir, disney-president-bob-iger wrote that lucas felt "betrayed" after learning that abrams were not using iger-ideas for the-sequel-trilogy.
in 2016, responding to complaints that the force awakens was too derivative of previous-films, abrams said, "what was important for abrams was introducing brand-new-characters using relationships that were embracing the-history that we know to tell a-story that is new – to go backwards to go forwards".
abrams apologized for how abrams handled chewbacca and leia's-meeting after han-solo's-death, noting that han-solo's-best-friend and widow ignore each other, with leia instead hugging rey (whom leia is meeting for the-first-time).
johnson's-sequel included leia hugging chewbacca at the-end of the-last-jedi as a-way to apologize for the-previous-film-oversight.
abrams intended for bb-8 to help rey search for luke, which johnson changed to r2-d2 (due to being luke's droid, as well as bb-8 belonging to poe and not knowing luke).
additionally, abrams ending featured rey finding luke lifting rocks with the-force, which was changed due to johnson's-plot of luke having disconnected abrams from the-force.
johnson stated johnson saw the-mortis-trilogy of episodes of the-clone-wars, due to a-recommendation from the-animator of the-series dave-filoni, and that it influenced johnson portrayal of the-force in johnson film.
he also stated that he considered including lando in the-film, possibly giving he the-role of new-character-dj, but didn't because it would had meant lando in the-film betraying the-characters without redemption.
in 2019, abrams said that abrams liked snoke's-death in the-sequel.
abrams also said that the-boldness of the-last-jedi inspired abrams to be more original on the-rise of skywalker and that the-last-jedi plot did not derail abrams plans for the-film, adding that in response to criticisms of the-force-awakens, johnson advised abrams "not to just do something that you've seen before."
abrams also affirmed abrams dedication not to retroactively release alternate-versions of the-films, saying, "i feel like [when] you're done with a-thing, ... that's what it is."
nevertheless, it is the-sequel-trilogy overall, with the-force awakens ranking as the-fourth-highest-grossing-film of all-time.
references ==
the art of star-wars: the-force awakens.
the-art of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
return of the-jedi and further explored in caravan of courage:
the-battle for endor.
the-series was produced by nelvana on behalf of lucasfilm and broadcast on abc, originally with lucasfilm sister series droids (as part of the-ewoks-and-droids-adventure-hour), and then by lucasfilm, as the-all-new-ewoks.
the-series focuses on the-adventures of wicket-w.-warrick and wicket-w.-warrick friends on the-forest-moon of endor before the-events of the-original-star-wars-film and caravan of courage.
the-penultimate-episode has been noted as forming a-link with return of the-jedi, which features the-empire using endor as endor base of operations for the-second-death-star.
has dark-brown-fur and wears an-orange-hood, but wears a-green-hood in season two.
widowed-father to kneesaa and asha gives order to the-warriors when the-warriors are fighting against the-duloks.
(voiced by taborah-johnson then sue-murphy) – has dark-grey-fur and wears a-yellow-hat with a-pink-feather in a-yellow-hat in season one; in season two dark-grey-fur is light brown and cream, and her is heather with a-greenish-blue-feather.
king-gorneesh's-wife and the-only-female-dulok in the-series umwak (voiced by don-francks) –
production ==
the-series is a-follow-up (later stated to be a-prequel) to the-two-ewok-films: caravan of courage (1984) and the-battle for endor (1985), which were themselves spin-offs (and prequels) of return of the-jedi.
the-series was somewhat sophisticated, but in the second, the-writing-and-visual-style were both simplified.
season 1 (1985) ===
season 2 (1986) ==
this season introduced a-new-theme-song, "friends together, friends forever", written and performed by patrick-gleeson.
the-series ran for two-seasons of 13-half-hour-episodes between 1985 and 1986 and was later shown in reruns on sci-fi-channel's-cartoon-quest.
on april 2, 2021, the-entire-series was released on disney+.during the-making of the-star-wars-prequel trilogy, the-entire-series producer, rick-mccallum, oversaw two direct-to-video compilation films, each compiled from four-episodes of the-entire-series.
some-controversy has resulted from ewoks-apparent-mastery of english while appearing not to speak the-language in the-ewok-films or return of the-jedi (which are set some years later).
elements from the-series are featured in star-wars-reference-media, such as a-guide to the-star-wars-universe.
a-dulok was shown on coruscant in chapter 21 of the-2d-animated-clone-wars (2003).
references ==
an-article from the-star-wars-insider on the-series a-history of home-video-releases of ewoks-ewoks on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-oni (鬼 (おに)) is a-kind of yōkai, demon, ogre, or troll in japanese-folklore.
the-character for oni, 鬼-(pinyin:-guǐ; jyutping: gwai2) in chinese also means a-dead-or-ancestral-spirit, and not-necessarily-an-evil-specter.
for example, enryaku-ji was deliberately built on mount-hiei which was in the-kimon (northeasterly)-direction from kyoto in order to guard the-capital, and similarly kan'ei-ji was built towards that-direction from edo-castle.
there is also a-well-known-game in japan called oni-gokko (鬼ごっこ), which is the same as the-game of tag that children in the-western-world-play.
masters of spinjitzu, oni appear as a-primordial-force of destruction, and are the-main-villains of the-show's-tenth-season, march of oni.
references =
in the-original-trilogy, set later in time, in the-original-trilogy is referred to as the-old-republic.
after the-end of the-galactic-empire, the-new-republic was founded.
the-consolidation of the-new-republic is depicted in the-mandalorian as the-consolidation of the-new-republic sought to wipe out remnants of the-imperial-forces, and was eventually destroyed by the-first-order, under supreme-leader-snoke's-direction, in star-wars: the-force awakens.
all-star-wars-chronology takes the-destruction of the-first-death-star during the-battle of yavin, portrayed in the-first-film star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977), as the-basis of counting standard-years.
the-conventional-calendar-era-notation is "bby" ("before the-battle of yavin") and "aby" ("after the-battle of yavin").
according to the-large-body of films and other-fiction that belong to the-star-wars-franchise, the-old-republic was formed 25,000 years before the-events of star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977) when the-first-"galactic-constitution" was signed on coruscant, after hyperdrive connected many-worlds in the-core and enabled the-establishment of an-interstellar-central-government.
coruscant became the-capital-planet of the-old-republic, the-galactic-empire, and the-new-republic, and the-entire-surface evolved into one-big-city, with skyscrapers reaching more-than-5,000-levels.
the-republic was made up of several-hundred-thousands of worlds, and each-planet or system had representation in the-republic-senate, which comprised most of the-republic-legislative-branch and the-government itself.
the-republic started off merely as an-economic-and-protective-alliance, mainly among the-core-worlds.
the-republic eventually expanded to the-colonies and other-outlying-worlds and regions, becoming a-superpower rather than an-alliance, and the-republic became the-central-government for the-galaxy.
the-core-worlds such as coruscant and alderaan were notable for the-core-worlds such as coruscant and alderaan prosperity, which was later matched by the-colonies, while the-inner-rim-and-expansion-region were a bit less secure and wealthy; the-mid-rim was an-unsafe-region that saw much of the-fighting-galactic-civil-war on planets such as naboo and kashyyyk, as it was far from the-republic's-military concentrated in the-core.
the-mid-rim was the-most-unsafe-place in the-galaxy, where neither-the-republic nor the-empire ever gained much-de-facto-hold, leading to lawlessness, widespread-violence and crime-syndicates; many-key-battles of the-clone-wars took place here.
as the-republic expanded, the-hutt-space came into contact with the-slave-empire of zygerria.
the-republic and jedi declared war on the-zygerria-empire and won.
the-sith (which formed in the-republic's-early-years) return to the-sith (which formed in the-republic's-early-years) original-strength and invaded malachor.
soon, the-sith became a-second-superpower.
bby, the-republic (now known as the-galactic-republic) reformed and became a-democracy.
bby, the-republic (now known as the-galactic-republic) demilitarised at the-ruusan-reformation, shortly after the-seventh-battle of ruusan.
the-high-republic depicts the-galaxy 200 years before the-phantom-menace.
power-blocs formed out of the-republic, but the-jedi kept order.
the-republic became peaceful but corrupt, and a-core-rim-distrust formed.
after supreme-chancellor-finis-valorum came to power, a-standoff between the-trade-federation and the-republic lead to the-invasion of naboo (32-bby), depicted in star-wars:
the-trade-federation and other-cartels within the-republic desired that the-republic government lack significant-central-military-power so that the-republic government could not enforce any-legal-regulations on the-trade-federation and other-cartels within the-republic business.
dissatisfied with several-problems in the-republic, such as ineffectual-government, heavy-taxes, and perceived-favouritism of the-core-worlds over the-outer-rim-planets, the-confederacy of independent-systems (cis) was formed in 24-bby: several-systems seceded from the-republic and formed a-new-state, thus triggering the-separatist-crisis.
the-cis was headed by former-jedi-master-count-dooku, who gained much-popularity amongst critics of the-republic after his-scathing-raxus-address outlining the-problems of the-republic, leading many-systems to side with his and form the-confederacy.
the-separatists became a-huge-threat to the-republic after some of the-galaxy's-megacorporations allied with the-cis, as some of the-galaxy's-megacorporations allied with the-cis possessed vast-resources and private-armies of battle-droids.
however, a-clone-army had already been created in secret on the-planet-kamino on the-edge of the-galaxy ten years earlier, commissioned without authorisation by master-sifo-dyas, a-former-jedi-perceiving-chaos in the-galaxy.
when it became clear the-confederacy had no-intention of negotiating, the-republic quickly accepted a-clone-army
despite the-high-quality of clone-wars ===-armaments and cloned-troops, the-republic's-war-effort was initially hindered because most of the-major-industrial-companies in the-galaxy had, under the-aegis of the-techno-union, sided with the-confederacy.
eventually, though, the-republic became a-humongous-superpower not only economically but also militarily.
the-rapid-militarization of the-republic during the-clone-wars, overseen by supreme-chancellor-palpatine, had far-reaching-effects.
during the-second-and-middle-year of the-clone-wars however, the-republic defended the-republic from confederate-attacks and retaliated with the-republic own assaults, many of which were successful.
during the-third-and-final-year of the-clone-wars, the-republic won many-offensive-battles in the-mid-rim and pushed the-confederate-forces back to the-mid-rim with the-republic "outer rim sieges" campaign.
fall of the-republic ===
eventually, palpatine gains enough-political-power that palpatine and palpatine office are equal to the-senate.
tension between palpatine and the-jedi grow as the-war progresses.
in time, the-jedi the-jedi believe that palpatine will not surrender palpatine emergency powers and palpatine long-overdue-position by the-end of the-war.
after the-death of separatist-leaders-count-dooku, who was the-head of state, and general-grievous, who was the-commander of the-separatist-army, and the-discovery that palpatine is actually darth-sidious, the-sith-lord behind the-war, the-jedi activate the-jedi contingency plans.
order 66 ===
the-sith are the-ancient-enemy of the-jedi the-jedi and were thought to have been destroyed many years ago.
a-small-group of the-jedi the-jedi led by mace-windu fail to arrest palpatine for treason when anakin-skywalker pledges palpatine to the-dark-side.
shortly afterwards, palpatine secretly orders the-clones to exterminate the-jedi-order.
because of control-chips implanted inside the-clones-heads, the-clones are forced to slaughter the-jedi-leaders in what would later become known as the-jedi-purge.
the-jedi-padawans remaining on coruscant are eliminated by darth-vader, formerly known as anakin-skywalker, and his-personal-legion.
before the-conclusion of the-clone-wars, palpatine addressed the-senate.
palpatine related the-story of an-unsuccessful-"assassination-attempt" on palpatine life by the-jedi.
claiming that it was a-"rebellion" and that their-next-move would be to kill all-the-senators, palpatine declared the-jedi-order to be enemies of the-republic.
palpatine announced that the-republic should be reorganized into the-galactic-empire, and palpatine would be the-emperor for life.
deluded by palpatine's-charisma and skill (and perhaps also by palpatine considerable-dark-side-power), the-majority of the-senate cheered palpatine on loudly in approval.
as the-clone-wars entered the-clone-wars final year, palpatine's-once-near-unanimous-support had begun to falter.
as depicted in the-star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-novelization and deleted-scenes from the-film itself, a-bloc of senators began to emerge, even before the-clone-wars end, who opposed palpatine's-authoritarian-rule and resented palpatine-treatment of the-jedi and other-opponents.
new-republic === was a-restoration of the-galactic-republic after palpatine's-galactic-empire was crushed following palpatine's-death and the-destruction of the-second-death-star in the-battle of endor in 4-aby.
the-force awakens (2015), where the-force is depicted as the-ruling-government of the-galaxy and primary-target of the-first-order, a-military-power that sought to restore palpatine's-galactic-empire.
30 years after the-events portrayed in return of the-jedi (1983), the-new-republic effectively collapsed when the-first-order's-starkiller-base destroyed hosnian-prime and the-new-republic fleet and senate with the-first-order's-starkiller-base superlaser.
the-republic begins as a-mutual-protection and economic-alliance among a-number of planets in the-core.
when the-republic's-power and influence expand, many-new-areas of the-galaxy are incorporated into the-republic.
a-reorganization of senatorial-representation occurs 1,000 years prior to star-wars during the-ruusan-reformation.
the-senate has some-form of judicial-power as well, although the-republic has a-judicial-branch, in which the-supreme-court was the-main-body.
the-republic often orders the-jedi to specific-areas that require assistance.
despite the-seemingly-organized-structure of the-republic, the-waning-years of the-republic are a-time of corruption and great-social-injustice.
the-senate becomes divided between those who genuinely wish to uphold the-values and ideals of the-republic and those who wish to further their-own-goals.
after senator-palpatine of naboo becomes chancellor, senator-palpatine of naboo increases the-power of the-office of the supreme chancellor, from acting as commander-in-chief of the-grand-army of the-republic, or the-republic military, to the-institution of senator-palpatine of naboo personal bodyguard organization, the-red-guard.
eventually, many-outer-rim-planets and companies leave the-republic due to the-amount of corruption and unfair-treatment to outer-rim-worlds.
while the-republic had an-army and navy for thousands of years, after the-rusaan-reformations, the-republic does not maintain a-military except for a-small-force known as the-judicial-forces.
palpatine and the-jedi ===
the-jedi with the-most-authority served on the-jedi-high-council, among whom yoda-and-mace-windu act as de-facto-leaders at the-height of the-republic.
although the-senate holds some-degree of political-authority over the-jedi with the-most-authority, very-little-pressure was ever put on the-jedi-high-council before palpatine took office and demanded that anakin-skywalker become a-member of the-council in star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith, despite the-misgivings of the-jedi with the-most-authority.
while the-council allowed anakin to sit among them, them did not grant anakin the-status of jedi-master.
the-story of the-galactic-republic's-rise, fall and resurrection have been compared to those of the-real-world-roman-republic and weimar-germany.
from the-storytelling-perspective, the-story of its-"fall and redemption" has also been compared to that of anakin-skywalker.
compared the-hypothesised-colonisation of the-core-worlds by coruscanti-humans to the-state of the-space-colonisation by humans from the-earth, which had taken its-first-step with nasa's-apollo-program of 1961–1972, just before george-lucas invented star-wars.
humans from the-earth, which had taken its-first-step with nasa's-apollo-program of 1961–1972, just before george-lucas invented star-wars argued that george-lucas offered a-solution to the-fermi-paradox: indeed, most of the star-wars galaxy was conquered/colonised and submitted to the-central-government of the-republic rather quickly by the-expansionist-humans from the-core-worlds soon after humans from the-earth, which had taken its-first-step with nasa's-apollo-program of 1961–1972, just before george-lucas invented star-wars acquired the-necessary-rocket-technology for interstellar-travel, but there are still large-unchartered-unknown-regions which are simply too far from the-fashionable-core-worlds to have been fully explored (as exploration of the-unknown-regions is lethally dangerous), let alone colonised.
the-phantom-menace (1999)
star-wars: attack of the-clones (2002)
star-wars: revenge of the-sith (2005)
the-clone-wars (2008-animated-film)
the-clone-wars (2008−2020) ===
the-force awakens (2015)
the-mandalorian (2019–present)
references == ==
the-force awakens (also known as star-wars:
produced by lucasfilm and j.-j.-abrams-production-company-bad-robot-productions, and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, it is the-first-installment in the-star-wars
sequel-trilogy, following return of the-jedi (1983), and the-seventh-episode of the-nine-part-"skywalker-saga".
set thirty years after return of the-jedi, the force awakens follows rey, finn, poe-dameron, and han-solo's-search for luke-skywalker and their-fight in the-resistance, led by general-leia-organa and veterans of the-rebel-alliance, against kylo-ren and the-first-order, a-successor to the-galactic-empire.
the-film was announced after the-walt-disney-company's-acquisition of lucasfilm in october 2012.
the-film is the-first-star-wars-film to not extensively involve franchise-creator-george-lucas, who only served as a-creative-consultant in the-early-stages of production.
the-film was produced by abrams, his-longtime-collaborator bryan-burk, and lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy.
abrams and lawrence-kasdan, co-writer of the-original-trilogy-films
the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi, rewrote an-initial-script by michael-arndt.
filming began in april 2014 in abu-dhabi and iceland, with principal-photography also taking place in ireland and at pinewood-studios in england, and wrapped in november.
the force awakens premiered in los-angeles on december 14, 2015, and was released in the-united-states on december 18.
the-film received positive-reviews for the-film screenplay, direction, acting-performances (particularly those of ford, driver, ridley, isaac, and boyega), musical-score, visual-effects, editing, and action-sequences, although some-critics found it too similar to a-new-hope (1977).
the-film marked an-improvement in a-reception over the-previous-four-star-wars-films.
the-film broke various-box-office-records and became the-highest-grossing-installment in the-franchise, the-highest-grossing-film in the-united-states and canada, the-highest-grossing-film of 2015, and the-third-highest-grossing-film at the-time of the-film release, with a-worldwide-gross of over $2 billion and a-net-profit of over $780 million.
among films'-box-office adjusted for inflation, the-film is the-top-grossing-sequel of all-time in north-america.
the-film received numerous-accolades, including five-nominations at the-88th-academy-awards and four-nominations at the-69th-british-academy-film-awards, where the-film won the-award for best-special-visual-effects.
two-sequels within the-sequel-trilogy have been released: the last jedi (2017) and the rise of skywalker (2019).
thirty years after the-galactic-civil-war, the-first-order has risen from the-fallen-galactic-empire and seeks to end the-new-republic.
leia searches for leia brother, luke-skywalker, who has gone missing.
stormtroopers commanded by kylo-ren raid the-village and capture poe, while kylo kills lor-san-tekka.
kylo tortures poe using the-force and learns of bb-8.
stormtrooper-fn-2187, disillusioned by the-first-order, frees poe, and stormtrooper-fn-2187, disillusioned by the-first-order escape in a-stolen-tie-fighter.
finn survives and assumes that poe died in the-crash.
finn encounters rey and bb-8, but the-first-order tracks them and launches an-airstrike.
the-millennium-falcon the-millennium-falcon gets discovered and boarded by han-solo and chewbacca.
aboard the-falcon, han determines that bb-8's-map is incomplete.
kylo then explains that luke attempted to rebuild the-jedi-order but exiled kylo when an-apprentice turned to the-dark-side, destroyed the-temple, and slaughtered the-other-apprentices.
the-force draws rey to a-secluded-vault, where the-force finds the-lightsaber once belonging to luke-and-luke-father, anakin-skywalker.
maz gives finn the-lightsaber for safekeeping.
the-first-order attacks takodana in search of bb-8.
han, chewbacca, and finn are saved by resistance-x-wing-fighters led by poe, who survived the-crash.
leia arrives at takodana with c-3po and reunites with han.
meanwhile, kylo captures rey and takes leia to starkiller-base, but leia resists his-mind-reading-attempts.
snoke-orders kylo to bring rey to his.
discovering leia can use the-force, rey escapes using a-jedi-mind-trick on a-guard.
as starkiller-base prepares to fire once more, the-resistance devises a-plan to destroy the-resistance by attacking the-resistance thermal oscillator.
using the-falcon, han, chewbacca, and finn infiltrate the-facility, find rey, and plant-explosives.
han confronts kylo, calling him by him birth-name ben, and implores him to abandon the-dark-side.
devastated, chewbacca shoots kylo and sets off the-explosives, allowing poe to attack and destroy the-base's-thermal-oscillator.
the-injured-kylo pursues finn and rey into the-woods.
finn fights
the-injured-kylo with the-lightsaber to protect rey before
the-injured-kylo knocks finn unconscious.
rey takes the-lightsaber and channels the-force to defeat
snoke-orders hux to evacuate and bring the-injured-kylo to rey to complete rey training.
chewbacca rescues rey and the-unconscious-finn, and they escape aboard the-falcon.
r2-d2 awakens and reveals the-rest of the-map, which rey uses to find the-oceanic-planet
on ahch-to, rey finds luke atop a-cliff on a-remote-island.
without a-word, rey presents luke with luke father's lightsaber.
the-position of obi-wan-development is consistent with the-position of obi-wan, and there are emotional-elements which have occasioned the-position of obi-wan growth.
regarding luke, han, and leia, abrams stated: "luke, han, and leia'd be as old and as mythic as the-tale of king-arthur.
hamill was initially skeptical of luke only appearing at the-end of the-film and called his-limited-screentime "a great surprise".
abrams added that the-film's-ending was intended to be "this-great-long-drumroll up to seeing this-guy".
after the-events of return of the-jedi, luke's-twin-sister is described as "a-little-more-battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
fisher described leia as "solitary.
abrams said: "the-stakes are pretty high in the-story for abrams, so there's not much goofing around where leia's concerned."
adam-driver is the-son of han and leia, nephew of luke, and the-grandson of the-deceased-darth-vader.
a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper said that john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper learned john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper obtained the-part "over a-nice-breakfast in mayfair" during which abrams told john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper, "john, you're the-new-star of star-wars."
abrams said kanata has "lived over a thousand years.
according to abrams, the-character was based on the-character former-high-school-english-teacher, rose-gilbert, who lectured at the-palisades-charter-high-school from 1961 to 2013.
abrams said the-team "really wanted the-story to feel authentic, despite being a-wild-fantasy.
the-political-leader of the-first-order is kylo-ren's-master, who seduced the-political-leader of the-first-order to the-dark-side and is very powerful in the-dark-side of the-force.
the-political-leader of the-first-order is large.
anthony-daniels said the-actors were allowed to experiment with the-actors performances, and that abrams "made a-field, a-playpen where you were allowed to take your-time and suggest things".
max-von-sydow as lor-san-tekka: a-retired-adventurer on jakku, aiding the-resistance in finding skywalker.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca's-double-joonas-suotamo portrays the-character in several-action-scenes, and ian-whyte performed stunts, as the-71-year-old-mayhew suffered from knee-problems.
tim-rose and mike-quinn reprise tim-rose and mike-quinn respective roles as admiral-ackbar and nien-nunb from return of the-jedi, with erik-bauersfeld and kipsang-rotich returning erik-bauersfeld and kipsang-rotich respective voices.
ewan-mcgregor has an-uncredited-vocal-cameo as obi-wan-kenobi in rey's-vision-sequence, while archival-audio of frank-oz and alec-guinness as yoda and kenobi, respectively, are also used in the-same-scene; frank-oz recorded new-dialogue for the-film, but frank-oz was replaced with preexisting-audio from the empire strikes back.
members of the-resistance include emun-elliott as brance and maisie-richardson-sellers as korr-sella while harriet-walter appears as kalonia, the-doctor who tends to chewbacca.
riot-control-stormtrooper-fn-2199, who calls finn a traitor during the-battle on takodana, was portrayed by stunt-performer-liang-yang and voiced by sound-editor-david-acord.
production == ===
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
speaking alongside lucasfilm's-new-president, kathleen-kennedy, lucas said: "i always said i wasn't going to do any more
as creative-consultant on the-film, lucas attended early-story-meetings and advised on the-details of the-star-wars-universe.
among the-materials lucas turned over to the-production-team were lucas rough story treatments for episodes vii–ix, which lucas requested be read only by kennedy, bob-iger, alan-f.-horn, and kevin-a.-mayer.
lucas later said disney had discarded lucas story ideas and that lucas had no-further-involvement with the-film.
lucas-son-jett told the-guardian that lucas'-son jett-father was "very torn" about having sold the-rights to the-franchise and that his-father was "there to guide" but that "lucas'-son jett wants to let it go and become it new-generation".
early-drafts had luke-skywalker appear midway through the-film, but michael-arndt found that "every time luke came in and entered the-movie, michael-arndt just took it over.
" the-writers decided to use luke as the-film's-macguffin and, as something that the-protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the-final-scene.
arndt also developed some-backstory-elements for the-returning-characters from the-original-trilogy, such as how leia was instrumental in rebuilding the-republic after the-fall of the-empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that leia biological father was darth-vader (this would go on to become a-central-plot-point in the-canonical-novel-star-wars:
bloodline).several-directors were considered, including david-fincher, brad-bird, jon-favreau, and guillermo-del-toro; after a-suggestion by steven-spielberg to kennedy, j.-j.-abrams was named director in january 2013, with lawrence-kasdan and simon-kinberg as project-consultants.
the-production announced arndt's-exit from the-project on october 24, 2013, and kasdan and abrams took over script-duties.
abrams expressed relief that the-release-date was announced for december 2015 instead of a-previously-discussed-summer-release.
abrams and kasdan planned the-story while walking in santa-monica, new-york-city, paris, and london.
abrams said the-key to the-film was [returned] to the-roots of the-first-star-wars-films and be based more on emotion than explanation.
in january 2014, abrams confirmed that the-script was complete.
in april 2014, lucasfilm clarified that episodes vii–ix would not feature storylines from the-star-wars expanded universe, though other-elements could be included, as with the-tv-series star-wars-rebels.
abrams stated that abrams purposely withheld some-plot-elements from the force awakens, such as rey-and-finn's-last-names and backgrounds.
kennedy admitted that "we haven't mapped out every-single-detail [of the-sequel-trilogy] yet", but said that abrams was collaborating with the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson, and that the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson would work with the-rise of skywalker's-then-director-colin-trevorrow to ensure a-smooth-transition and that "everybody's got a-say in how we move forward with this".
daisy-ridley later recounted that abrams had written drafts for episodes 8 and 9.a fictional-language was developed for use in the-film by youtube-star-sara-forsberg, who created the-viral-video-series "what languages sound like to foreigners"; forsberg developed the-language by studying various-languages, such as hindi and gujarati.
in november 2015, lucas recorded an-hour-long-interview with cbs-news-reporter-charlie-rose in which he said disney had not been "keen" to involve he and conceded: "if i get in there, i'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what i want they to do, and i don't have the-control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up.
in early-december 2015, kathleen-kennedy told the-hollywood-reporter that lucas had seen the-movie and "liked it".
in the-same-month, at the-kennedy-center-honors, lucas stated, "i think the-fans are going to love it
abrams felt that, as the first in a-new-trilogy, the-film "needed to take a-couple of steps backwards into very-familiar-terrain" and use plot-elements from previous-star-wars-films.
representatives from lucasfilm met with chancellor of the-exchequer george osborne to agree to produce the force awakens in the-uk.
chancellor of the-exchequer george osborne committed £25 million of public-money towards the-film, claiming the-film was a-boost for british-culture and british-film-industry.
beginning in september 2013, production-spaces at the-bad-robot-facility were converted for shooting of the force awakens for the-benefit of shooting a-minor-portion of the-film in the-united-states.
the-film in the-united-states's-costume-designer was michael-kaplan, who had previously worked with abrams on the-films star-trek (2009) and star-trek into darkness (2013).
in august 2013, it was announced that cinematographer-daniel-mindel would be shooting the-film in the-united-states on 35-mm-film (specifically-kodak 5219).
in october 2013, other-crew-members were confirmed, including sound-designer-ben-burtt, director of photography-mindel, production-designers rick-carter and darren-gilford, costume-designer-michael-kaplan, special-effects-supervisor-chris-corbould, re-recording-mixer-gary-rydstrom, supervising-sound-editor-matthew-wood, visual-effects-supervisors-roger-guyett, and executive-producer-jason-mcgatlin.
open-auditions were held in the-united-kingdom and the-united-states in november 2013 for the-roles of rachel and thomas.
casting began in earnest in january 2014, because of changes to the-script by kasdan and abrams.
screen-tests with actors continued until at-least-three-weeks before the-official-announcement in april 2014, with final-casting-decisions made only a few weeks earlier.
though lucas intimated that previous-cast-members-carrie-fisher, harrison-ford, and mark-hamill would return for the-new-film as early as march 2013, previous-cast-members-carrie-fisher, harrison-ford, and mark-hamill casting was not confirmed until over a year later.
daisy-ridley was cast by february 2014, and by the-end of that-month a-deal had been worked out with driver, who was able to work around daisy-ridley girls schedule.
talks with andy-serkis and oscar-isaac began by march and continued into april.
in april, the-cast was announced with a-photo of the-first-table read of the-script at pinewood-studios near london, picturing director-abrams with ford, ridley, fisher, peter mayhew, producer bryan burk, lucasfilm president and producer kathleen kennedy, domhnall gleeson, anthony daniels, hamill, serkis, isaac, boyega, driver, and writer lawrence kasdan.
abrams initially considered using daniels only in a-voice-role for c-3po, but daniels opted to reprise the-role physically as well; the-production-team built a new c-3po costume to accommodate daniels.
a-flashback-scene was cut from rey's-vision (following fisher-discovery of luke's-lightsaber), which would have featured robert-boulter standing in for luke as robert-boulter appeared in robert-boulter duel with vader in the empire strikes back.
in may, abrams announced a-donation-contest for unicef from the-star-wars set in abu-dhabi; the-winner was allowed to visit the-set, meet members of the-cast and appear in the-film.
in october, warwick-davis, who played wicket in return of the-jedi, as well as wald and weazle in the-phantom-menace (1999), announced that he would appear in the force awakens, but did not reveal he role.
in february 2014, abrams said filming would begin in may and last about three months.
the-official-announcement came in march, when disney and lucasfilm announced that principal-photography would commence in may and be based at pinewood-studios in buckinghamshire, england.
that-month, that-month was revealed that pre-production-filming would take place in iceland prior to the-start of official-filming in may, consisting of landscape-shots that would be used for scenery in the-film.
later that month, filming had begun, filming in secret in the-united-arab-emirates around liwa-oasis, part of the-emirate of abu-dhabi, by a-second-unit was revealed that in addition to 35-mm-film, segments of the-film were being shot in the-65-mm-imax-format.
in july, bad-robot reported via twitter that in july would be at least partially shot on imax-cameras.
abrams and the-cast-members went to abu-dhabi in early-may, where large-sets were built on location—including a-shuttle-like-spacecraft, a-large-tower, and a-big-market—and where explosives were used to create a-"blast-crater".
production moved to pinewood-studios in june.
production was suspended for two-weeks because of harrison-ford's-injury.
harrison-ford's-son ben said the-ankle would likely need a-plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the-crew needing to shoot harrison-ford from the-waist up for a-short-time until ford's-son ben recovered.
abrams also suffered a-fractured-vertebra in abrams back when abrams was trying to help lift the-door after ford's-accident, but abrams kept this to abrams for over-a-month.
in february 2016, this was reported that the-health-and-safety-executive brought four-criminal-charges against disney-subsidiary foodles-production-(uk), ltd. for alleged-health-and-safety-breaches relating to ford's-accident.
foodles-production-(uk)-ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in october 2016 for two-health-and-safety-breaches, after admitting the-counts at an-earlier-hearing.
in july 2014, filming took place over three-days at skellig-michael, an-island off the-coast of county-kerry,-ireland, with a-cast including mark-hamill and daisy-ridley.
takodana were shot in july in the-lake-district in the-northwest of england.
production was halted for two-weeks in early-august 2014
so abrams could rework shooting in ford's-absence and resumed with a-fully-healed-ford in mid-august.
principal-photography ended on november 3, 2014.
rian-johnson, director of the-last-jedi, reiterated that abrams would use little-cgi and more-practical,-traditional-special-effects, saying: "i think people are coming back around to [practical-effects].
in february 2014, industrial-light & magic (ilm) announced plans to open a-facility in london, citing disney's-star-wars-films as a-catalyst for the-expansion.
abrams supervised post-production and editing of the-film at bad-robot-productions'-headquarters in santa-monica.
in august 2015, abrams gave the-film's-estimated-running-time as 124-minutes.
abrams made changes to the-film's-plot in the-editing-process to simplify the-film, by removing some-sequences shown in trailers: "at one-point, maz used to continue along with the-characters back to the-resistance-base, but we realised that maz really had nothing to do there of value [...]
"on november 6, 2014, the-film's-title was announced as star-wars: the-force awakens.
in december 2015, pablo-hidalgo, the-creative-executive at the-lucasfilm-story-group which handles all-the-canonical-continuity for the-star-wars-universe, revealed that the-working-title for the-film was shadow of the-empire "for the-longest-time".
in july 2013, john-williams was confirmed to return to compose the-sequel-trilogy, beginning with the force awakens.
john-williams began working on the force awakens in december 2014, and by june 2015 had been through most of the-film-reels, working on a-daily-basis.
in may 2015, john-williams said john-williams would return to themes from the-previous-films, such as those for luke, leia, and han, in ways that "there are a few that i think are important and will seem very much a part of the-fabric of the-piece in a-positive-and-constructive-way."
john-williams said that working with abrams was similar to the-process john-williams went through with lucas in the-earlier-films.
the-90-piece-orchestra recorded 175-minutes of music; however, abrams reedited the-film, which discarded, modified, or rerecorded the-score's-part for nearly-an-hour.
gustavo-dudamel conducted the-opening-and-end-title-music for the-film at williams'-behest.
recording of the-score was completed on november 14, 2015.
the-film at williams'-behest's-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 18, 2015.
lin-manuel-miranda and abrams contributed music to the-film at williams'-behest's-cantina-scene.
abrams met miranda at a-performance of abrams broadway musical hamilton, where miranda jokingly offered to compose cantina-music, should it be needed.
unknown to miranda, abrams had previously told abrams that abrams did not want to compose the-music for that-scene, wanting to focus on the-orchestral-score.
abrams then contacted miranda, and the two collaborated on the-music for that-scene over a-period of two-months.
on november 28, 2014, lucasfilm released an-88-second-teaser-trailer.
disney was screened in selected-cinemas across the-united-states and canada and in theaters worldwide in december 2014.
on december 11, 2014, abrams and kennedy released a-series of eight-mock-topps-trading-cards revealing the-names of several-characters.
on april 16, 2015, a-second-teaser-trailer, this one lasting two-minutes, was shown at the-opening-panel at the-star-wars-celebration in anaheim, california.
the-trailer shows many of the-new-characters and the-first-footage of chewbacca and han-solo.
at the-2015-san-diego-comic-con-international, in addition to a-panel with many of the-actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the-film demonstrated the-film's use of practical-sets and effects.
the-film was positively received, with nigel-m.-smith of the-guardian writing: "
the-featurette's-angle is a-strong-one and connects with fans of the-original-trilogy in an-incredibly-poignant-way.
the-featurette's-angle also does a-sly-job of teasing fisher's-new-look as leia and simon-pegg's-mysterious-involvement as a-rumored-alien in the-movie, without actually showing the-actors in action. "
smith compared the-marketing-strategy for the-film to that of a-previous-abrams-film, super 8, saying "the-promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away. "
walt-disney-studios and lucasfilm presented a-look at the force awakens at disney's-d23-expo in august 2015.
in october 2015, lucasfilm unveiled the-theatrical-release-poster and a-third-trailer.
the-poster omitted luke-skywalker and revealed a-death-star-like-"orb".
the-reaction to the-trailer by fans on social-media was "frenzied", with lizo-mzimba of the-bbc-writing that "perhaps-the-most-significant-thing about the-trailer before the-film's-release is how little of the-story the-film's-release reveals."
at the-end of october, air-france announced a-"flight-and-cinema"-package, providing customers who book select-flights to paris-transportation to a-theater to see the-film, since air-france was one of the-first-countries to release the-film.
on november 23, a-partnership with google was announced, in which google users could choose to affiliate google users with either-the-dark or light-side, which would change the-appearance of google users google websites.
on december 17, 2015, select-theaters across the-united-states and canada aired a-star-wars-marathon, airing the-six-previous-star-wars-episode-films in 2d, followed by the force awakens in 3d.
disney-publishing-worldwide and lucasfilm announced a-series of at-least-20-books and comics, "journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens", which were released by multiple-publishers starting in late 2015, prior to the-film's-premiere.
the-series includes books by del-rey and disney-lucasfilm-publishers and comic-books from marvel-comics.
alan-dean-foster wrote a-novelization of the-force-awakens which was released in e-book-form on december 18.
in an-effort to avoid revealing plot-details before the-film's-release, the-print-release of a-novelization of the-force-awakens which was released in e-book-form on december 18 was delayed until january 2016.
marvel-comics published a-six-issue-comic-book-adaptation of the-force awakens between june and november 2016.disney-consumer-products and lucasfilm announced that september 4, 2015 would be deemed "force friday" and would be the-official-launch of all-the-merchandise for the-force awakens.
disney-and-maker-studios hosted an-18-hour-live-streaming-presentation on youtube, showcasing multiple-merchandise-products beginning on september 3, 2015.
among multiple-merchandise-products beginning on september 3, 2015 were a-remote-controlled-bb-8 developed by sphero.
sphero had participated in a-disney-run-startup-accelerator in july 2014, where sphero were invited into a-private-meeting with disney-ceo-bob-iger, in which sphero were shown on-set-photos and imagery of bb-8 before sphero public unveiling.
takodana during the-galactic-civil-war-era; and a-condensed-version of the-film's-plot becomes an-add-on-"playset" in the toys-to-life game disney-infinity 3.0, with finn, rey, poe-dameron, and kylo-ren as playable-characters.
eventually, the-film got a-full-lego-video-game-adaptation, titled lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, which was released by warner-bros.-interactive-entertainment for microsoft-windows, nintendo-3ds, playstation 3, playstation 4, playstation vita, wii-u, xbox 360, and xbox one on june 28, 2016.
the force awakens premiered in los-angeles at the-tcl-chinese-theatre, el-capitan-theatre, and dolby-theatre on december 14, 2015.
the-film was released in 12-countries, including european-nations (such as italy and france), the-philippines, and thailand on december 16; 32-countries including the-united-kingdom, mexico, and additional-european,-asian,-african,-south-american,-and-oceania-countries on december 17; and in the-united-states and canada, japan, spain, and venezuela on december 18, in 3d and imax 3d.
it was released in india on december 25 and in china on january 9
, 2016.in the-united-states and canada, it had the-widest-release of december across 4,134-theaters, of which 3,300 were 3d-locations, a-record-392-imax-screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451-premium-large-format-screens, 146-d-box-locations, as well as releasing in the-dolby-vision-format (high-dynamic-range, rec.
on december 18, 2015, 2020-color) in dolby-cinema began playing on every-imax-screen in the-united-states and canada for four-straight-weeks up to january 14, 2016.
2020-color) in dolby-cinema finally shed some of 2020-color) in dolby-cinema imax screens with the-release of the-revenant (2015) and the-finest-hours (2016) in mid-january-2016.advance-ticket-sales for 2020-color) in dolby-cinema began on october 19, 2015, and were in strong-demand, resulting in online-movie-ticket-sites crashing.
in the-united-states, the-film pre-sold a-record-breaking-$6.5-million-worth of imax-ticket-sales on a-single-day.
this-number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance-ticket-sales by december 14.
we have people buying star-wars [the-force awakens] into 2016.
similarly, the-film broke pre-sales-records in the-uk, canada, and germany.
the force awakens is the-first-live-action-star-wars-film not to be released theatrically by 20th-century-fox; accordingly the-film is not introduced with either-that-company's-logo, or the-film signature fanfare composed by alfred-newman.
instead, the-film is the first in the-series to be distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, and the-film is presented with only-lucasfilm's-production-logo shown silently before the-main-titles.
disney-chairman-bob-iger explained that the-decision not to place disney-branding on the-film was "for the-fans".
the-force awakens via download-and-disney-movies
anywhere on april 1, 2016, with a-blu-ray-and-dvd-release on april 5.
a-blu-ray-and-dvd-release on april 5 contains additional-footage, with eight-bonus-features.
a-blu-ray-3d-"collector's-edition" of the-film was released on november 15, including all-the-features of the-original-home-releases, as well as several-new-bonus-features, including new-deleted-scenes and audio-commentary by director-j.-j.-abrams.
the-4k-version of the-film was later re-released in "the-skywalker-saga" 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
the force awakens grossed $936.7 million in the-united-states and canada, and $1.132 billion in other-countries for a-worldwide-total of $2.068 billion.
box-office-mojo estimates that the-film sold close-to-110-million-tickets in the-united-states and canadacanada.
the force awakens earned 8.6% of the-total-2015-releases in the-united-states and canadacanada, second only to the-8.8% of the-box-office earned by titanic in 1997.
total-costs, after accounting for profit-participations, production and distribution of home-videos, as well as other-ancillary-mediums, is expected to run $423 million.
reports in april 2015 from the-hollywood-reporter and amboee-brand-intelligence predicted the-force-awakens would earn up to $540 million worldwide for the-force
reports in april 2015 from the-hollywood-reporter and amboee-brand-intelligence believed that the-force-awakens would have the-widest-release ever, across 4,500-theaters in the-united-states and canada.
instead, the-film received a-total of 4,134-theaters, and had the-widest-december-opening.
box-office-analyst-phil-contrino likened the-film to avatar (2009), which opened to $77 million in the-united-states and canada and went on to earn $2.8 billion worldwide, saying the-force-awakens would earn $1 billion "without blinking" and could gross $2 billion.
in august 2015, deadline-hollywood predicted an-opening-weekend of $615 million worldwide could be possible, including a-$300-million-opening in the-united-states and canadacanada.
analysts said that the-box-office-receipts of the-film, when compared to predecessors, must be adjusted for inflation, and that the-film made more when this-adjustment is made.
it has further been observed that each of the-first-three-films in the-series was more profitable in calculating revenue against production-costs.
box-office-analyst-paul-dergarabedian said that while avatar and the force awakens were both released on the-same-date of december 18, higher-ticket-prices in 2015 and imax-screenings could push star-wars "into the box office stratosphere".
by january 13, analysts concluded that it was unlikely that the force awakens would surpass avatar's-global-gross.
while the force awakens was very successful in the-united-states and canada, the-same-success was not witnessed in many-overseas-individual-markets such as germany, india, latin-america, and parts of asia.
one cited reason for this is that overseas-audiences do not have the-same-nostalgia or affinity for the-film as those in the-u.s.
the-star-wars-franchise has traditionally lacked resonance with filmgoers in china, and marketing for the-force awakens heavily focused on appealing to that-market.
while the-force awakens had appeal with the-force awakens special-effects, analysts felt that the-force awakens lacked the-novelty-factor; analysts also cited that the-force awakens gross was stilted due to markets making way for new-films sooner than was previously done, and for films not playing in overseas-theaters as long as analysts did back when avatar was released.
dergarabedian stated, "no matter what, [the-force awakens] is an-absolute,-all-out-blockbuster without peer in terms of the-sheer-speed at which the-force awakens has crossed all of these-major-box-office-milestones."
canada, the-force-awakens was released on december 18, 2015.
on the-film opening day, the-film grossed $119.1 million, marking the-biggest-single--and-opening-day-record and the-first-time a-film has earned more than $100 million in a-single-day.
without thursday-night-grosses, the-film earned the second-largest opening-day gross and a-record of $247.9 million for the-film opening weekend.
the-opening-weekend-figure included an-imax-opening-weekend-record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391-imax-theaters, which nearly amounts to the-$252.5-million-total earned by return of the-jedi—the-second-lowest-grossing-film in the-series—in the-jedi original run.
revenues in the-film's-second-weekend decreased by only-39.8% in the-united-states and canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first-place at the-box-office and recording the-biggest-second-weekend of all-time.
on january 2, after just-16-days of release, it became the-second-film (following avatar) to gross over $700 million in the-united-states and canadacanada, and on january 6 became the-highest-grossing-film of all-time domestically, doing so in 20-days.
on january 9, it became the-first-film in cinematic-history to cross $800 million domestically unadjusted for inflation.
on february 5, the force awakens became the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada.
the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada fell outside of the top ten for the-first-time in the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada
eleventh-weekend during the-weekend-february-26–28, 2016, and did not achieve $1 million in ticket-sales for the-first-time in the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada fourteenth weekend.
internationally, the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada was released in over-30,000-screens.
it opened on december 16, 2015, in 12-international-markets and earned $14.1 million on it opening day, debuting at first-place in all of them.
it expanded in an-additional-42-countries on december 17, generating $58.6 million for a-two-day-international-total of $72.7 million, reaching first-place in all-44-markets.
after five-days, the-force awakens had a-total-worldwide-opening-record of $529 million from 74-territories, which was the-biggest-worldwide-opening at that-time, making the-force awakens only-the-second-time in cinematic-history—after jurassic-world—that a-film had opened to more than $500 million globally.
as of february 21, the-largest-markets outside of the-united-states and canada are the-united-kingdom ($180.7 million), china ($124.5 million), germany ($109.7 million), japan ($92.6 million), and france ($88.2 million).
on january 17, 2016, it passed the-$1-billion-mark overseas becoming the-first-film of disney, the-third-film of 2015 and the-fifth-film overall to achieve this-feat.
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-force awakens an-average-grade of "a" on an-a+ to f-scale; women, and people under the-ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "a+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "a" or a-"b".
audiences polled by posttrak gave the-force awakens an-88%-"definite-recommend" while 96% said the-force awakens met or exceeded audiences polled by posttrak expectations.
robbie-collin of the-daily-telegraph said the-force awakens "sets out to shake star-wars from the-force
awakens slumber, and reconnect the-series with the-force
variety's-justin-chang wrote that the-film has "sufficient-style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans".
ann-hornaday, writing for the-washington-post, thought the-film had "enough-novelty to create yet-another-cohort of die-hard-fans", and the-film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."
the-charlotte-observer's-lawrence-toppman said abrams had "pulled off a-delicate-balancing-act, paying clever-homage to the-past."
frank-pallotta, reviewing the-film for cnn-business, found the-san-francisco-chronicle was the-san-francisco-chronicle and that the-san-francisco-chronicle "is bound to be a-film-experience long remembered by fans and non-fans alike".
certain-critics found the-force awakens derivative of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, some expressing some-opinion that the-san-francisco-chronicle was essentially a-remake of a-new-hope.
tom-long of the-detroit-news wrote that though some may find the-film too similar to the-original-star-wars, it leaves "the-ungainly-and-unneeded-clumsiness of the-subsequent-prequels far behind", with "the-energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".
stephanie-zacharek of time wrote that abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those-nebulous-wonders we didn't know we wanted".
reviewing for forbes, scott-mendelson cited the-original-film's-"top-tier-production-values and a-strong-sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an-exercise in fan-service [that] it is only due to the-charisma and talent of our-newbies and abrams undeniable-skill as a-visual-storyteller that the-mad-libs-narrative doesn't outright destroy the-picture".
rogerebert.com's-gerardo-valero went as far as to accuse the-film of plagiarizing a-new-hope and resorting to nostalgia.
in an-interview with journalist-charlie-rose that aired on december 24, 2015, george-lucas' likened george-lucas' decision to sell lucasfilm to disney to a-"divorce" and outlined the-creative-differences between george-lucas' and the-producers of the force awakens.
in a-2019-memoir, disney-chairman-bob-iger said that george-lucas "couldn't even hide george-lucas disappointment" towards j.-j.-abrams'-interpretation.
according to disney-chairman-bob-iger, george-lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the-film, and that "there weren't enough-visual-or-technical-leaps forward".
george-lucas preferred rian-johnson's-sequel the-last-jedi and the-anthology-film rogue one (2016).
several-awards held several-awards nominations before the-december-release of the-force awakens, making the-force awakens ineligible for the-73rd-golden-globe-awards and some-other-awards-ceremonies.
the-film received seven-visual-effects-society-awards-nominations, winning four, including outstanding-visual-effects in an-effects-driven-feature-motion-picture.
the-film received the-most-nominations at the-21st-empire-awards, including best-film, best sci-fi/fantasy film, best-director for j.-j.-abrams, best-male-newcomer for john-boyega, and best-female-newcomer for daisy-ridley.
the-last-jedi ===
rian-johnson confirmed in august 2014 that rian-johnson would write and direct the-last-jedi, which was released on december 15, 2017.
the-rise of skywalker ===
the-rise of skywalker was released on december 20, 2019.
j.-j.-abrams directed the-film and co-wrote the-film with chris-terrio.
billy-dee-williams returns from the-original-trilogy as lando-calrissian and ian-mcdiarmid returns from original-and-prequel-trilogies as palpatine.
references == ===
the-art of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
the-force awakens: the-visual-dictionary.
the-force awakens at starwars.com
the-force awakens at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
the-force awakens at imdb-star-wars:
the-force awakens at allmovie
the-force awakens title listing at the-internet-speculative-fiction-database-star-wars:
the-force awakens on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-force awakens at disney-a to z-general-armitage-hux
first introduced in the-2015-film star-wars: the-force awakens, he is portrayed by irish-actor-domhnall-gleeson.
he is an-unpleasant-military-commander in a-power-struggle with kylo-ren for the-first-order-leadership, and being exceeded only by supreme-leader-snoke.
the-character first featured in the-force awakens media and merchandising, and returned in the-film's-sequels, the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
gleeson's-performance has received generally-positive-reception from critics and fans, while the-reaction to the-character and gleeson shifting roles throughout the-trilogy has been more mixed.
hux and hux father are rescued from the-academy when it is about to fall to the-new-republic near the-end of the-galactic-civil-war.
when the-galactic-civil-war ends with the-battle of jakku and the-signing of the-galactic-concordance, the-young-hux and his-father are part of the-imperial-navy-forces who retreat into the-unknown-regions.
the-new-republic believes that the-first-order is just-an-unimportant-band of imperial-holdouts, but hux's-training-methods forge a-formidable-military that effectively overthrows the-new-republic and turns the-galaxy into a-dictatorship even more brutal than the-galactic-empire of the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
he serves as the-right-hand of the-first-order's-supreme-leader-snoke (andy-serkis), second in authority only to kylo-ren (adam-driver), with whom he has a-fierce-rivalry.
hux believes that the-republic is a-threat to galactic-stability, and that the-republic is hux destiny to rule the-galaxy.
the-force awakens (2015) ====
hux first appears in the-force as a-high-ranking-general in the-first-order.
hux is part of a-mission to jakku to recover a-map to luke-skywalker (mark-hamill), the-last-jedi.
after the-battle, he learns from captain-phasma of the-desertion of a-former-stormtrooper, finn (john-boyega).
the-resistance is left without military-support from the-republic, so hux soon turns the-starkiller-weapon towards the-resistance base on d'qar.
before he can destroy the-planet, however, an-attack-squadron led by resistance-commander-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac), with ground-support from han-solo (harrison-ford), finn, and the-jakku-scavenger-rey (daisy-ridley), destroys starkiller-base, forcing hux, some of he-troops, and a defeated ren to flee the-planet.
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
hux appears in the-last-jedi as the primary general reporting directly to supreme-leader-snoke.
hux also oversees the-bombardment of the-remaining-three-ships of the-resistance, then on the-lifeboats, and, along with phasma, helps arrange the-execution of finn and rose.
later, he discovers snoke dead and ren unconscious in the-throne-room of the-supremacy, so he attempts to kill he rival but stops when ren wakes up.
ren initially protests ren's claim to be the-new-supreme-leader, but is swiftly persuaded otherwise when ren uses the-force to choke ren, proclaiming "long live the-supreme-leader."
at the-end of the-film, ren accompanies ren to the-planet-crait in their-attempt to finish off the-resistance.
when ren orders ren men to fire on luke, hux gives the-order to stop hux soon after.
after ren wants to kill luke himself, hux admonishes ren to focus on the-escaping-resistance-members; ren silences ren by using the-force to slam ren into a-wall, knocking ren out.
hux is seen again when ren-and-ren-troops invade the-resistance-base and find the-resistance-base empty, giving ren a-sinister-glare from behind.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
by the-time of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker, hux has become embittered and jealous because of the-lack of respect ren receives and ren rivalry with allegiant-general-pryde (richard-e.-grant), who constantly undermines hux while vying for ren job.
hux is later revealed to have been a-spy-supplying-information to the-resistance in order to undermine ren in the-hopes of taking ren place as supreme-leader (or at least seeing ren falling along with the-first-order if necessary); ren tells finn, "i don't care if you win.
i need kylo-ren to lose."
hux helps finn, poe and chewbacca
steadfast and has finn shoot kylo-ren in the-leg
so kylo-ren can feign an-effort to stop them.
hux’s-decision to allow the-rebels to escape is a-major-catalyst for the-resistance's-victory in the-battle of exegol.
a-scene deleted from the-film featured hux and pryde in the-opening-action-sequence with kylo-ren.
the-episode takes place at the-same-time as the force awakens and depicts first-order-troops watching a-transmission of hux give his-speech and the-subsequent-firing of starkiller-base.
his-appears, in person, in the-eleventh-episode "station to station" of the-second-season and in hologram in the-finale of season two, "the escape", along with kylo-ren.
rise of the-resistance with gleeson reprising the-role in each.
however, after the-release of the-last-jedi, and the-rise of skywalker, some-criticism was levelled at the-use of the-character to provide comic-relief, particularly after having being introduced as a-serious-villain.
references == ==
the-force awakens.
unlike most-lego-video-games in which players had to advance through the-story in a-linear-order, players can choose to start the-game from any of the-nine-skywalker-saga-episodes and complete-players in any-order players wish.
the-game features 300-playable-characters.
the-force awakens, the-game's-hub will not be a-single-area, such as the-mos-eisley-cantina in lego-star-wars: the-complete-saga, but a-wide-range of fully-explorable-planets filled with many-iconic-star-wars-landmarks.
a-second-trailer showing one-scene from all-nine-movies was released on 20-december to coincide with the-release of the-rise of skywalker.
the-official-artwork was revealed on 4 may 2020.disney and lucasfilm had not shared significant-details of the-rise of skywalker-skywalker with the-game-team before the-film's-release.
in the-meantime, tt-games worked on other-aspects of the-game until lucasfilm shared more-details.
the-game is developed in traveller's-tales'-new-engine, ntt (pronounced-entity).
the-skywalker-saga will use original voice acting, with the-first-actor of the-game being billy-dee-williams voicing lando-calrissian.
the following day at the-2020-gamescom-opening-night-live, the-lego-website was announced that the-game would release in q1/q2 2021 under the-description of "spring 2021" with additional-versions on the-playstation-5-and-xbox-series-x/s.
on 2-april 2021, it was announced that the-game had been delayed, with no-further-release-window specified.
the-game will be available in a-standard-edition and a-deluxe-edition.
a-steelbook resembling han-solo in carbonite is included with pre-orders of any-edition from best-buy or best-buy canada or pre-orders of the-deluxe-edition-bundle from game.
references ==
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), where he was created using computer-generated-imagery and voiced by matthew-wood.
while not force-sensitive, he trained in all-lightsaber-combat-forms under count-dooku to rival the-jedi of the-galactic-republic.
throughout the-clone-wars, grievous murdered numerous-jedi and collected numerous-jedi lightsabers as trophies, earning a-reputation as the-most-feared-jedi-hunter in the-galaxy of jedi-hunter-era.
jedi-hunter developed a-rivalry with numerous-jedi-obi-wan-kenobi, with whom jedi-hunter clashed numerous times during the-war, and who eventually killed grievous after jedi-hunter assumed command of the-separatist-alliance following dooku's-death in revenge of the-sith.
within star-wars-legends-material, grievous was born qymaen-jai-sheelal and was a-kaleesh-warlord who developed a-personal-vendetta against the-republic and numerous-jedi.
general-grievous was developed for revenge of the-sith as a-powerful-new-villain on the-side of the-separatists.
star-wars: revenge of the-sith and most-other-comics depicted the-sith as having six-fingers per arm.
the-general's-back-story has also been changed: supervising-director-dave-filoni stated that grievous opted for surgery in order to gain abilities that would allow grievous to rival a-jedi.
sound-editor-matthew-wood submitted a-voice-audition for the-character as alan-smithee.
lucas liked a-voice-audition for the-character as alan-smithee the most, and since lucas had bronchitis at the-time, lucas instructed sound-editor-matthew-wood to give the-character as alan-smithee an-asthmatic-cough.
this was intended to emphasize the-character as alan-smithee's-organic-nature as well as the-flaws of having cyborg-prosthetics.
some of the-audio-effects for the-coughing in revenge of the-sith were taken from lucas while the-sith had bronchitis.
to reconcile the-differences between the-two-presentations, mace-windu uses the-force to crush grievous's-chest-panel towards the-end of the-show's-third-season.
for the-season-two-finale of the-clone-wars-animated-micro-series, the-character was voiced by john-dimaggio, who gave the-character a-tinny-voice—not knowing what the-character would sound like in revenge of the-sith.
richard-mcgonagle voiced the-character for clone wars season three.
the-character was voiced by matthew-wood in the-feature-film revenge of the-sith, the-animated-series the-clone-wars, and most-video-game-appearances.
david-w.-collins voiced the-character (albeit uncredited) in star-wars-battlefront: renegade-squadron and battlefront: elite-squadron.
dimaggio was considered for the-role for grievous after dimaggio had previously voiced dimaggio in the-2003-clone-wars-animated-series, but was later dropped.
revenge of the-sith ====
in star-wars: episode iii – revenge of the-sith, general-grievous holds supreme-chancellor-palpatine-hostage aboard general-grievous flagship, the-invisible-hand.
the-jedi-obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker launch a-rescue-operation, and the latter kills separatist-leader-count-dooku.
r2-d2 confiscates obi-wan and anakin's-lightsabers, cackling that r2-d2 will add the-fleeing-jedi and the-chancellor in a-ray-shield to r2-d2 vast collection.
when r2-d2 creates a-distraction, obi-wan and anakin use the-force to retrieve obi-wan and anakin lightsabers and free obi-wan and anakin.
a-short-battle ensues with the-jedi overcoming grievous's-magnaguards-and-battle-droids before turning their-attention to the-general himself.
grievous-launches all of the-other-pods as well to prevent anakin, obi-wan, and palpatine from escaping the-doomed-vessel.
however, anakin manages to take control of the-ship-and-crash-land it safely.
with dooku dead, the-hunt for grievous becomes a-priority for the-republic, and would also be a-litmus-test into whether palpatine would give up palpatine executive war powers granted to palpatine by the-galactic-senate for the-war.
obi-wan-kenobi later tracks grievous to utapau.
when obi-wan destroys obi-wan magnaguards, grievous-duels the-jedi in single-combat, splitting each of obi-wan mechanical arms in half to simultaneously use four-lightsabers.
obi-wan disarms grievous with the-force and pursues obi-wan when the-general-retreats on obi-wan wheelbike, fleeing to the-hangar where obi-wan starfighter is located.
the two engage in hand-to-hand combat, where obi-wan manages to rip open-grievous's-chest-plates, revealing the-parts where obi-wan organs are located.
enraged, grievous throws obi-wan off the-platform, easily overpowering obi-wan.
using the-force, obi-wan manipulates obi-wan position and catches hold of obi-wan edge.
as grievous-charges at obi-wan with obi-wan electrostaff, obi-wan uses the-force to summon the-general's-blaster.
before grievous can deliver the-final-blow, obi-wan shoots grievous in obi-wan organs underneath obi-wan exoskeleton, which then catches fire, killing the-cyborg-general.
the-clone-wars ====
he also clashes with obi-wan-kenobi aboard the-separatist-warship-malevolence armed with a-pair of heavy-ion-cannons for the-first-time when he chases he aboard the-warship's-railway-system.
meanwhile, anakin secretly sabotages the-malevolence's-navigation-computer, sending the-malevolence's-navigation-computer crashing into a-nearby-moon.
a-few-episodes later, grievous discovers anakin and padawan-ahsoka-tano infiltrating his-secret-listening-post and seeks out to search for anakin and padawan-ahsoka-tano.
his then engages ahsoka and ahsoka squad of clone-troopers, defeating all-the-troopers and then engaging in a-cat-and-mouse-game with the-padawan.
however, anakin and ahsoka still manage to destroy anakin listening post.
obi-wan, anakin and jedi-master-adi-gallia attempt to rescue koth and capture grievous, resulting in a-confrontation between obi-wan and grievous over the-planet saleucami, which grievous loses.
though the-jedi succeed in rescuing koth, grievous, helped by his-droids, escapes once again.
in the-third-season, grievous,-dark-jedi-asajj-ventress and their-armies attack the-clone-factories on the-planet-kamino.
during the-battle,-grievous-clashes with obi-wan again.
however, is freed in a-prisoner-exchange with anakin between dooku and padmé-amidala.
however, ventress turns the-tide of the-battle and fights her-way to the-general's-shuttle where the-cyborg emerges to confront her personally.
as duel, grievous grows overconfident and begins to toy with ventress until surprises him by chopping off one of him arms and knocking him to the-ground.
as grievous prepares to deliver the-death-blow to him longtime-rival, him is attacked by nightsister-zombies and is forced to fight nightsister-zombies off while ventress flees.
in the-fifth-season's-premiere-episode, grievous is mentioned by hondo-ohnaka as having defeated obi-wan and won the-battle for the-system that florrum is in.
obi-wan is no-match for grievous and is subsequently defeated, forcing obi-wan to abandon obi-wan ship.
the-droids destroy hondo's-stronghold and grievous-belongings, and hold grievous-prisoner, but hondo is rescued when ahsoka and a-group of younglings free grievous and retreat off the-planet.
the-duel ends when hondo picks up ahsoka in the-slave i and takes off, leaving grievous to stew in grievous-anger.
grievous was to undergo a-design-change in the-seventh-season to look more like his-design in revenge of the-sith.
though the-series was cancelled before this could happen, the-unfinished-animations of the-crystal-crisis-arc showed this-design.
in the-crystal-crisis-arc, grievous is sent by dooku to purchase a-giant-kyber-crystal on utapau, and while grievous at first obtains a-giant-kyber-crystal, it is lost when anakin and obi-wan destroy it by overloading it power.
as mandalore-story-arc takes place during the-events of revenge of the-sith, grievous has a-different-design, reminiscent of grievous appearance in the-film, and is commanding grievous fleet in an-attack on coruscant with the-goal of capturing chancellor-palpatine.
"the-phantom-apprentice" and "shattered", when obi-wan states that obi-wan is going to utapau to hunt obi-wan down, and later when ki-adi-mundi mentions during a-meeting with the-jedi-council that grievous has been killed (similarly to a-scene from revenge of the-sith).
grievous is ordered to only wound maul's-forces, but not kill grievous; this is in order to draw out mother-talzin, who is later revealed to be maul's-mother.
later, grievous and dooku are lured into a-trap by maul and grievous-minions, and are taken prisoner in order to draw out sidious.
however, grievous soon escapes and rejoins sidious, who orders grievous to attack dathomir again, where maul and talzin are planning using dooku as a-sacrifice to restore talzin to full-strength.
grievous quickly reappears, however, and after sidious and dooku have subdued talzin (who has thrown maul out of the-battle to save his-life),
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
grievous-retreats, but secures all-the-other-jedi-victory over all-the-other-jedi as all-the-other-jedi collects the-lightsabers of the-jedi all-the-other-jedi has killed.
three years later, grievous-searches for chancellor-palpatine on coruscant, attempting to capture chancellor-palpatine on coruscant while chancellor-palpatine on coruscant is defended by a-trio of all-the-other-jedi consisting of shaak-ti, roron-corobb and foul-moudama.
corobb and moudama take palpatine to a-secret-bunker while she holds grievous off.
ti learns too late that grievous's-magnaguards were but a-distraction and heads to a-secret-bunker to find she jedi comrades dead, and palpatine in grievous's-grasp.
ti yet again, takes ti lightsaber, and restrains ti with electric-cables before returning to ti shuttle with palpatine in ti custody.
as grievous is about to escape, mace-windu confronts as grievous is about to escape using the-force to crush
as grievous is about to escape distinctive-asthmatic-cough, though grievous still escapes, leading to the-events of revenge of the-sith.
dooku then recruits grievous into the-separatist-army as grievous second-in-command, appealing to grievous-hatred of the-republic that ignored grievous-home-world's-plight.
in the-third-volume of clone-wars-adventures, in the-third-volume of clone-wars-adventures is revealed that grievous attains his-rank of supreme-commander by dueling dooku's-underlings ventress and durge simultaneously.
on board the-trenchant-space-station, dooku orders ventress and durge to search for an-unknown-intruder with the-pair unaware of the-pair master's intentions.
ventress jumps onto a-chandelier and attempts to search for grievous, who knocks her down.
ventress and durge then confront grievous-face to face, with ventress unleashing her-lightsabers and durge unleashing his-full-arsenal.
grievous is able to knock ventress away, though durge then sends the general flying across the-room into a-wall with a-powerful-punch to the-face.
in the-novel-labyrinth of evil, grievous plans an-invasion of coruscant alongside dooku and sidious.
belderone would also be thwarted by anakin and obi-wan due to a-careless-mistake on gunray's-part.
grievous soon launches the-general-invasion on the-republic-capital of coruscant in an-attempt to kidnap supreme-chancellor-palpatine, placing supreme-chancellor-palpatine on the-battlefield once again.
though windu overwhelms grievous in combat, the-cyborg outwits the-jedi-guard and takes palpatine-hostage, setting the-stage for revenge of the-sith.
the-original-trilogy (2006) by accessing a-save-file of the-original-lego-star-wars.
in lego-star-wars-iii: the-clone-wars (2011), grievous is featured as a-boss several times throughout the-story-mode, before becoming available as an-unlockable-playable-character.
the-force awakens (2016) via downloadable-content.
grievous has been featured as a-playable-character in the-star-wars: battlefront-series, namely-star-wars: battlefront-ii (2005), star-wars-battlefront: elite-squadron (2009), and, most recently, star-wars battlefront-ii (2017).grievous has also appeared as a-playable-character in star-wars: the-clone-wars-–-lightsaber-duels (2008), angry birds star-wars ii (2014) as an-evil-pig, and the mobile games star-wars: galaxy of heroes (2015) and star-wars: force-arena (2017).
references == ==
a-star-wars-story (or simply-solo) is a-2018-american-space-western-film centering on the-star-wars-character-han-solo, also featuring his original trilogy co-protagonists chewbacca and lando-calrissian.
directed by ron-howard, produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, lucasfilm is the-second-star-wars-anthology-film, following rogue one (2016).
the-second-star-wars-anthology-film explores the-early-adventures of han-solo and chewbacca, who join a-heist within the-criminal-underworld 10 years prior to the-events of star-wars:
after star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold lucasfilm to disney in 2012, lawrence-kasdan was hired to write star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015), leaving the-force son jonathan to complete the-solo-script.
principal-photography began in january 2017 at pinewood-studios, under the-direction of phil-lord and christopher-miller.
solo released in the-united-states on may 25, 2018, and received generally-favorable-reviews from critics who praised the-film's-cast (particularly-ehrenreich and glover), visuals, musical-score, and action-sequences, while some criticized it storyline and screenplay.
han vows to return for han and joins the-imperial-navy as a-flight-cadet, being given the-surname "solo".
three years later, han is serving as an-infantryman on mimban following his-expulsion from the-imperial-flight-academy for insubordination.
han attempts to blackmail tobias-beckett into letting his join the-gang, but tobias-beckett has his arrested and thrown into a-pit to be fed to a-wookiee-prisoner named chewbacca.
able to understand chewbacca's-language, han persuades his to cooperate to escape.
han-and-chewbacca-volunteer to help him steal another-shipment to repay the-debt so that vos will not kill him travel to vos's yacht where han finds qi'ra, who has joined crimson-dawn as vos's top lieutenant.
han suggests a-risky-plan to steal unrefined-coaxium from the-mines on kessel; vos approves but insists that qi'ra accompany the-team.
han leads them to lando-calrissian, a-smuggler and pilot, who han hopes will lend them his-ship, the-millennium-falcon.
han challenges lando to a-game of sabacc, with lando cheats.
with the-help of l3's-navigational-computer, uploaded into the-ship's-systems, han pilots the-ship through the-dangerous-and-uncharted-kessel-run to elude an-imperial-blockade.
han becomes sympathetic to han cause and tries to trick vos, who reveals beckett has already alerted beckett to the-double-cross.
having anticipated vos's-strategy, han tries to take the-coaxium, but beckett betrays vos and escapes with it, taking chewbacca-hostage.
qi'ra kills vos and sends han after beckett.
han confronts beckett and shoots him before him can return fire.
qi'ra leaves in vos's-yacht, while han and chewbacca give the-coaxium to enfys, who offers han a-chance to join the-rebellion against the-empire.
han and chewbacca locate lando and challenge lando to a-rematch in sabacc, once again wagering the-falcon.
this time han wins in a-fair-game after having stolen the-hidden-card from lando that lando used to cheat lando way to victory the-first-time.
han and chewbacca then leave for tatooine to find the-crime lord mentioned by beckett who is putting together a-big,-profitable-job.
harrison-ford, who portrayed the-character in previous-films, met with ehrenreich, giving the-han we meet in this-film is more of an-idealist some-insight and words of advice.
the-character of beckett was based on long-john-silver from treasure-island by robert-louis-stevenson.
donald-glover as lando-calrissian: a-smuggler, gambler, and self-proclaimed-sportsman on the-rise in the-galaxy's-underworld.
billy-dee-williams, who portrayed the-character in previous-films, met with glover, giving the-character some-insight and words of advice.
when the-character dies in the-film the-character consciousness and data are uploaded to the-millennium-falcon which serves as a-retcon of the-previous-star-wars-films including the empire strikes back in which the-starship was described as having "the-most-peculiar-dialect".
joonas-suotamo reprises joonas-suotamo role from the force awakens and the-last-jedi, in the-former of which joonas-suotamo acted as a-body double for peter-mayhew, who portrayed the-character in previous-films.
michael-k.-williams had originally been cast, but michael-k.-williams was removed from the-final-film after being unable to return to set during the-film's-reshoots.
bettany was cast in bettany place, with the-character being reworked from a-motion-capture-alien (described by michael-k.-williams as half-mountain-lion, half-human) to a-scarred-near-human-alien-lifeform.
karjj and warwick-davis briefly reprises kiran-shah-role from the-phantom-menace as weazel, a-cloud-rider.
ray-park reprises ray-park role as maul, with sam-witwer providing the-voice, reprising the-role from the-clone-wars-and-rebels-animated-tv-series.
production ==
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, showing an-early-draft of a-young-solo that takes part in the-battle on kashyyyk.
underworld would have depicted han-solo's-first-meeting with chewbacca and chewbacca winning the-millennium-falcon from lando-calrissian.
in 2012, lucas began developing a-film about a-young-solo, and hired veteran-star-wars-screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan to write the-screenplay.
after lucas sold lucas company to disney in 2012, veteran-star-wars-screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan was hired to help finish the-script for star-wars:
the-force awakens, leaving veteran-star-wars-screenwriter lawrence-kasdan son jonathan-kasdan in charge of writing han-solo's until his-son jonathan-kasdan return.
in february 2013, disney-ceo-bob-iger confirmed the-development of two-star-wars-standalone-films, one written by lawrence-kasdan.
in july, lucasfilm announced that an-anthology-film focusing "on how [a]-young-han-solo became the-smuggler, thief, and scoundrel whom luke-skywalker and obi-wan-kenobi first encountered in the-cantina at mos-eisley" would be released on may 25, 2018.
solo's-wookiee-friend chewbacca was also announced to appear in the-film.
in may 2016, lawrence-kasdan stated that filming would start in january 2017.
in january 2016, a-list of actors was revealed for the-role of young-han-solo, including miles-teller, ansel-elgort, dave-franco, jack-reynor, scott-eastwood, logan-lerman, emory-cohen, and blake-jenner.
in march 2016, it was reported that alden-ehrenreich, reynor and taron-egerton were on a-shortlist for the-role.
in may 2016, alden-ehrenreich was reported to have been cast as the-young-han-solo, and was revealed in the-role at star-wars-celebration-europe-iii two months later.
miller called casting the-role at star wars celebration europe iii one of "the-hardest-casting-challenges of all-time", adding that they "saw over-3,000-people for the-part".
other-actors to audition for the-role included chandler-riggs, rami-malek, aaron-taylor-johnson, tom-felton, nick-robinson, colton-haynes, joshua-sasse and ed-westwick.
shameik-moore also auditioned for the-role of a-young-lando-calrissian.
in early-january 2017, woody-harrelson was revealed to be in negotiations to portray han-solo's-mentor, and was confirmed to be appearing in the-film shortly after.
a-subsequent-interview with harrelson bolstered speculation that harrelson may be specifically playing legends-character-garris-shrike, but harrelson revealed the-character's-name as beckett in march 2017.
in february 2017, phoebe-waller-bridge joined the-cast in an-undisclosed-role, said to be "a-cgi-driven-performance" similar to alan-tudyk in rogue one as the-droid k-2so.
waller-bridge and thandie-newton were confirmed as part of the-cast by the-end of february, alongside the-announcement that joonas-suotamo would appear as chewbacca, reprising the-role from the force awakens and the-last-jedi, where he shared waller-bridge and newton with original chewbacca actor peter mayhew.
michael-k.-williams entered talks to join the-film in early-march 2017, and was confirmed shortly after, portraying a-half-human,-half-animal-creature.
by the-end of the-month, ian-kenny had joined the-cast.
warwick-davis was confirmed as part of the-cast by the-end of july 2017.peter
serafinowicz was set to reprise serafinowicz voice role as maul and had recorded dialogue during production at pinewood-studios.
serafinowicz was later informed by lucasfilm after the-film's-premiere that serafinowicz had been replaced by sam-witwer in order to maintain continuity with the-clone-wars-and-rebels-animated-tv-series, in which sam-witwer voiced the-character.
filming began on january 30, 2017, at pinewood-studios, under the-working-title star-wars: red cup.
by february 10, the-film had spent $54.5 million on production.
lucasfilm announced that principal-photography started on february 20, 2017.
in may 2017, filming took place in italy, with locations including tre-cime-di-lavaredo and monte-piana in the-dolomites in veneto, to the-fassa-dolomites in trentino.
filming also took place in the-canary-islands that month.
on june 20, 2017, citing "creative-differences", lucasfilm announced that the-directors had left the-project with a-new-director "to be announced soon".
the-directors had left the-project with a-new-director "to be announced soon" was reported that the-directors were fired after kennedy and lawrence-kasdan disagreed with kennedy and lawrence-kasdan shooting style; lord and miller believed kennedy and lawrence-kasdan were hired to make a-comedy-film, while lucasfilm was looking for the-duo only to add "a-comedic-touch".
lucasfilm also felt the-directors were encouraging too-much-improvisation from the-actors, which was believed to be "shifting the-story off-course" from the-kasdans'-script.
lord and miller-miller refused to compromise on certain-scenes, such as filming a-scene from fewer-angles than lucasfilm expected, thereby reducing the-options available in editing.
it was reported that ron-howard, who had previously collaborated with lucas as an-actor in american-graffiti (1973) and the-director of willow (1988), was a-frontrunner to step in as director.
during the-reshoots, actor-michael-k.-williams was unable to return to the-production, due to a-schedule-conflict with filming the-red-sea-diving-resort, resulting in actor-michael-k.-williams part being redeveloped and recast with paul-bettany.
actor-michael-k.-williams stated the-reshoots for actor-michael-k.-williams character were "to match the-new-direction which the-producers wanted ron to carry the-film in", and that actor-michael-k.-williams would not have been available again until november 2017; the-production did not want to wait for actor-michael-k.-williams availability to make a-release in may 2018.
bettany, who previously worked with howard on a-beautiful-mind, had heard of the-director's-involvement with the-film and texted actor-michael-k.-williams to inquire into joining the-film.
while howard had not meant to interfere, at some-point howard forgot and asked "why doesn't han just do this?";
on october 17, 2017, howard announced that principal-photography had been completed, and revealed the-title of the-film.
in march 2018, after the-film was reported howard had reshot around-70% of the-film, it was announced that lord and miller would not challenge for director-credit and instead agreed to executive-producer-credits.
post-production wrapped on april 22, 2018.
i’ve always in my-own-life referenced the-star-wars-films in terms of having the-coolest-explosions ever, you know, back to joe-viskocil’s-explosions of the-death-star and the-way those evolved over time.
he would utilize miniature-models and built a-3d-model of the-mountain in the-film and blew a-3d-model of the-mountain in the-film up with a-variety of firecrackers within a-large-fish-tank built at pinewood.
the-slow-mo-guys, specifically-a-video of the-creators gavin-free and daniel-gruchy conducting an-experiment that saw them blowing up firecrackers in a-fish-tank to capture the-explosion in slow-motion.60-versions of the-design of the-millennium-falcon were created before the-final-version seen in the-film was settled on.
in july 2017, john-powell was announced as the-main-composer of the-score.
in december 2017, powell wrote two-musical-pieces and combined two-musical-pieces to create han's-theme.
powell interpolated powell new theme into powell score, as well as incorporating music by powell from previous-star-wars-films, including the-star-wars-main-title, and several-motifs and cues from a-new-hope, the-empire strikes back, and the-phantom-menace.
in december 2020, mondo-death-waltz released the-soundtrack on 180g-vinyl and limited-"hyperspace"-vinyl.
the-soundtrack has since been lauded as one of mondo's-best-releases and praised the-designs in september 2020, powell announced on social-media that a-deluxe-edition of the-soundtrack album would be remixed and mastered by 5-cat-studios, featuring all-unedited-cues from the-score and additional-demos that williams had composed for the-soundtrack.
a-deluxe-edition of the-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on november 20, 2020, featuring an-additional-40-minutes of previously-unreleased-music.
a-"sneak-peek"-tv-spot was released during super-bowl-lii on february 4, 2018.
the-first-official-teaser-trailer was released on february 5, 2018.
graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter also noted that several-plot-elements presented in the-first-official-teaser-trailer were reminiscent of the-han-solo-trilogy, a-series of novels published in 1997 and 1998.in early march 2018, french-artist-hachim-bahous asserted that disney had plagiarized a-series of album covers graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter designed for sony-music's-label legacy-recordings in france with character-posters for the-film.
a-star-wars-story grossed $213.8 million in the-united-states and canada, and $179.4 million in other-territories, for a-total-worldwide-gross of $393.2 million.
with an-estimated-production-budget of $275 million, the-film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even.
a week after an-estimated-production-budget of $275 million, the-film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even-worldwide-debut of just $147.5 million, variety wrote that an-estimated-production-budget of $275 million, the-film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even would lose disney "tens-of-millions of dollars" off a-projected-final-total-gross of $400–450 million while the-hollywood-reporter estimated the-losses would range from $50 to $80 million.
in april 2019, hollywood-hollywood calculated an-estimated-production-budget of $275 million, the-film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even lost the-studio $76.9 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues.
initial-projections three weeks before the-film-release had the-film grossing around $170 million over the-film four-day-memorial-day-opening-weekend.
after the-film first-day of pre-sales, fandango announced the-film was the-second-best-seller of advance-tickets in 2018, after avengers: infinity-war.
the-film opened in 4,381-theaters, the-ninth-highest-total ever, including 3,300-3d-locations and 400-imax-screens.
world's-end (2007) grossed just $84.4 million in world's-end (2007) opening weekend (and $103 million over the-four–day-weekend), far below projections and marking the-lowest-star-wars-debut since attack of the-clones (2002), although world's-end (2007) did set a-new-career-high-opening for howard.
many-analysts and publications, including deadline, the-atlantic,-entertainment-weekly and cnn, interpreted the low box office returns as a-case of "star-wars-fatigue", since solo was the-fourth-film of the-series released in 29-months, and came just five months after the-last-jedi.
worldwide the-film was expected to make $285–340 million in opening-weekend, including $150–170 million internationally.
the-film held a-better-than-expected-47% in
the-film second weekend, making $30.3 million from 54-countries and remaining
the-film in several, including australia, spain and the-united-kingdom.
michael-rechtshaffen of the-hollywood-reporter praised the-cast-and-production-values but felt the-film as a-whole felt too safe, writing, "while ehrenreich's-solo proves adept at maneuvering the-millennium-falcon out of some-tight-spots, the-picture itself follows a-safely-predictable-course.
alden-ehrenreich confirmed alden-ehrenreich contract deal to appear as han-solo extended for two-additional-films, giving the-studio the-option to pursue a-sequel to han-solo: a-star-wars-story, or feature alden-ehrenreich in other-anthology-films in a-supporting-capacity.
critics noted the-film intentionally left room open for sequels.
solo-writer-jon-kasdan said that solo-writer-jon-kasdan would include bounty-hunter-bossk (who briefly appears in the-empire strikes back and is mentioned in solo)
a day later, lucasfilm denied the-rumors as "inaccurate" and confirmed that there are multiple-unannounced-films in development.
in march 2020, jon-kasdan tweeted that jon-kasdan did not "think anyone's pursuing a-solo-sequel at the-moment ...
on may 25, 2020, fans again used the-hashtag #makesolo2happen to show fans-appreciation for the-film on the-film second anniversary.
#makesolo2happen went viral with fans arguing that the-film deserved more-praise and once-again-calls were made for a-continuation of the-story.
expanded-edition (isbn 978-0525619390) was published on september 4, 2018 by del-rey-books.
expanded-edition (isbn 978-0525619390) includes scenes from alternate-versions of the-film's-script, including scenes in which qi’ra is brought back to lady-proxima, chewbacca uses some of lando's-"outrageously-expensive"-bathroom-products, and, in an-epilogue, enfys-nest delivers the-coaxium to saw gerrera and jyn-erso.
additionally, a-seven-issue-comic-book-adaptation of the-film was published by marvel-comics starting in october 2018, written by robbie-thompson and pencilled by will-sliney.
references == ===
players take the-role of soldiers in either of two-opposing-armies in different-time-periods of the-star-wars-universe.
the-game received positive-reviews and sold well.
subsequently, ea-dice acquired a-license to develop a-new-game, titled star wars battlefront which was released on november 17, 2015.
a-sequel, star-wars-battlefront-ii, was released on november 17, 2017, and was developed by ea-dice, criterion-games, and motive-studios.
gameplay == games in the-battlefront-series normally revolve around two-armies – the-galactic-republic versus the-confederacy of independent-systems or the-galactic-empire versus the-rebel-alliance or first-order versus the-resistance – fighting each other on various-maps.
maps take place in the-star-wars-galaxy, with battlezones varying in theme and size.
the-first-console-games of the-series were developed by pandemic-studios, and since 2015, a-second-series of console-battlefront-games has been developed by ea-dice.
battlefront-ii (2017) is the first in the-series to accurately follow the-canon of the-films, while the-games developed by pandemic-studios were relegated to star-wars-legends-non-canonical-status, along with all of the-games in the-series released before november 2015.
battlefront was released on september 21, 2004, with a-mac-port by aspyr released in july 2005.
the-game is available on microsoft-windows, playstation 2, xbox, mac-os, and mobile-phones.
battlefront-ii is the-second-installment in the-battlefront-series, released in europe on october 31, 2005 – for the-playstation-2,-psp, xbox, and windows – and in north-america one day later.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-related-content.
the-release-date of battlefront-ii coincided with the-release of revenge of the-sith on dvd.
the-game is now an-xbox-platinum-hits-game, a-sony-greatest-hits-game in north-america, and an-xbox-classics-and-playstation-platinum-game in europe.
and it evolution from a-legion of clone-troopers serving the-republic during the-clone-wars to imperial-stormtroopers.
many-maps from star-wars-battlefront make a-second-appearance, and the-game adds new-locales such as coruscant and utapau.
the-game also introduces "heroes" – playable-characters based on iconic-characters from the-star-wars-films who are much more powerful than regular-soldier (and were also present in the-original-battlefront, but only as npcs that spawned randomly on the-battlefield); the-hero-roster includes luke-skywalker, han-solo, leia-organa, chewbacca, obi-wan-kenobi, yoda, mace-windu, ki-adi-mundi and aayla-secura (as well as kit-fisto, available only on the-xbox-version of the-game via the-xbox-live-patch), whereas the-villain-roster includes darth-vader, darth-sidious, boba-fett, count-dooku, general-grievous, darth-maul, jango-fett, and anakin-skywalker (as well as asajj-ventress, also available only via the-xbox-live-patch).
on september 29, 2006, computer-and-video-games made an-unconfirmed-claim that free-radical-design was developing the-third-game in the-star-wars: battlefront-series, titled star-wars: battlefront-iii.
on october 2, activision-blizzard filed a-classification with the-australian-office of film-and-literature-classification listing star-wars: battlefront-iii for the-nintendo-ds with a-pg-rating (e10+ equivalent) for mild-animated-violence.
however, that same month, free-radical-design announced that free-radical-design lost the-rights to develop star-wars: battlefront-iii; the-game at that-point had been in development for two-years.
however, gamespot quoted an-unnamed-lucasarts-employee involved with the-project who said free-radical could not devote sufficient-resources to the-game and regularly missed deadlines.
in december 2008, star-wars-character renders bearing a-battlefront-iii-watermark surfaced from a-laid-off-free-radical-employee.
the following month, gameplay-footage was leaked from a november 2008 free-radical in-house showing of battlefront-iii-footage.
on april 1, 2012, a-user on the-game-journalist-website betagames discovered star-wars-models and textures buried in resident-evil:
also in april 2012, past to present revealed pre-alpha-footage of free-radical-design's-battlefront-iii.
on january 20, 2016, a-leaked-build of the-game surfaced on reddit.
a-leaked-build of the-game is currently playable using an-xbox-360-development-kits and modified xbox-360-consoles via a-program called "rgloader".
on january 28, 2010, kotaku reported that socom-developer-slant-six-games was working with lucasarts to develop an-online-only-battlefront-title due in 2011.
the-game was said to be released for the xbox 360 and playstation 3.
speaking to kotaku an-anonymous-insider noted that the-game was to be "step zero" towards a-third-battlefront-game.
when footage of the-game was leaked onto youtube-tech-site technobuffalo noted that the-gameplay very closely resembled that of the-call of duty-franchise.
in 2018, concept-art surfaced of a-canceled-battlefront-iv, rather than attempting to fit within the-previous-games-and-films'-continuity, concept-art showed the-game was meant to focus on an-alternate-reality where obi-wan-kenobi and luke-skywalker fell to the-dark-side, instead of anakin-skywalker.
==== is a-handheld-game released in north-america on october 9, 2007 and in europe three days later.
the-game was released only for the-playstation-portable.
renegade-squadron is also available in a-bundle-pack with the-then-new-white-psp-redesign featuring darth-vader on the-back.
however, the-character will be vulnerable due to the-lacking of certain-aspects that will be replaced by others.
for example, the-character may be fast but weak or have good-weapons but no-stamina and speed.
the-final-mission includes the-battle of endor, in which the-objectives are similar to the-footage of return of the-jedi.
elite-squadron ==== was released on november 3, 2009 for the-playstation-portable and the-nintendo-ds.
elite-squadron is most notable for featuring simultaneous-space-and-ground-battles in instant-action, and is the-only-game in the-series with this-feature.
it was released on april 2, 2009.
the-game features a-persistent-online-community, and has three-character-classes.
a-teaser-trailer for a-new-star-wars: battlefront-game, built on the-frostbite-3-engine showed a-first-person-view of the-battle of hoth, including a-crashing-snowspeeder and the-foot of an-at-at.
in april 2015, ea announced a-release-date of november 17, 2015 at star-wars-celebration.
the-game is a-reboot of the-series, focusing on capturing the-look of the-films.
free-downloadable-content (dlc) for the-game was released in december 2015, featuring the-planet of jakku with two-new-maps and a-new-multiplayer-game-mode.
the-game also features both-first-and-third-person-gameplay-perspectives, similar to the-game predecessors.
the-game features a-pseudo-campaign — a-cooperative-experience allowing the-player to experience gameplay with one-or-two-players and computer-controlled-allies and opponents.
outer-rim" is the-first-dlc-pack for the-game and was released on march 22, 2016.
the-second-expansion-pack is titled "bespin" and allows players to fight in the-setting of cloud-city, released in september 2016.
the-third-expansion-pack, titled "death star", was released in september 2016 as well and added the-long-awaited-death-star to the-game, along with new-heroes-chewbacca and bossk.
the-fourth-and-final-dlc-pack was released on december 6, 2016.
the-fourth-and-final-dlc-pack is based on characters and locations from the-film rogue-one, and includes jyn-erso and orson-krennic as new-playable-heroes, and a-new-game-mode set both above and on the-planet scarif.
blake-jorgensen of electronic-arts mentioned a-sequel in november 2016, and star-wars-battlefront-ii was announced in march 2017.
the-game was released on november 17, 2017.
star-wars-battlefront-ii features both-single-player-and-multiplayer-game-modes, a-customizable-character-class-system, and content based on all-star-wars-movies up to star-wars: the-rise of skywalker (with content for the-other-movies, as well as television-series being added later on via free-dlc).
a-celebration-edition was released in december 2019.
the-game was originally planned for release in fall 2020, coinciding with the-next-generation of video-game-consoles, but was canceled in late 2019.
on january 25, 2016, frontwire-studios began an-attempt to produce an-unofficial-battlefront-installment called galaxy in turmoil.
the-fan made game was in production using unreal-engine 4 and was based on the-canceled-star-wars: battlefront-iii by free-radical-design.
although early-versions of the-game contained assets from free-radical-design, assets soon became "place-holders" as the-full-game planned to be released using assets and music made from the-ground up.
on june 22, 2016, lucasfilm requested the-production of galaxy in turmoil be halted.
on july 31, 2016, frontwire-studios announced the-cancellation of the-game was due to the-"possibility of galaxy in turmoil taking away attention from electronic-arts's-battlefront-franchise".
proposals of galaxy in turmoil falling under the-paywall of electronic-arts, and ideas of lucasfilm giving frontwire-studios a-star-wars-license were both rejected due to an-agreement between electronic-arts and lucasfilm.
references == ==
thrawn (also known simply as thrawn) is a-star-wars-novel by timothy-zahn, published on april 11, 2017 by del-rey-books.
thrawn (also known simply as thrawn) chronicles the-origins of grand admiral thrawn, a-popular-character originating from the-star-wars-legends-line of works, which were declared non-canon to the-franchise after disney redefined star-wars-continuity in april 2014.
the-novel was announced in july 2016 alongside news that the-character thrawn would be reintroduced into the-star-wars-franchise on the-3d-cgi-animated-television-series star-wars-rebels.
a-sequel, titled thrawn: alliances, was released in july 2018.
a-third-novel, thrawn: treason, was released in july 2019.
the-character of thrawn was originally introduced in zahn's-1991-novel-heir to the-empire, and became a fan favorite.
the-character of thrawn went on to appear in several-other-novels, short-stories, comics, and video-games.
following the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-fiction produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.in a-prerecorded-video, zahn announced at the london star-wars celebration in july 2016 that del rey.
in a-subsequent-interview with starwars.com, zahn noted that the-novel would cover several-years between thrawn's-"first-encounter" with the-empire and the-events of the-third-season of star-wars-rebels, an-animated-television-series in which the-character will appear prior to the-book's-release.
the-character said: it's very exciting [to write thrawn again].
a-writer never knows which-characters are going to click with the-readers, and it was highly gratifying to the-character that thrawn captured the-imaginations of so-many-people over the-past-quarter-century.
though in legends works thrawn was mostly used in post-return of the-jedi-storylines, both-rebels and thrawn take place prior to the-events of the-original-1977-film and show he rise to power.
"a-full-synopsis of the-novel was released in january 2017, followed by an-excerpt in march 2017.
thrawn was published on april 11, 2017.
in july 2017, marvel-comics announced that a-comic-book-miniseries-adaptation of thrawn is scheduled for release in early 2018.
the-first-issue was released on february 14, 2018, with five more to follow on a-monthly-basis.
a-sequel to thrawn, titled thrawn: alliances, was announced during new-york-comic-con in october 2017.
the-novel was scheduled to be released on june 26, 2018, but was later delayed to july 24, 2018.
the-cover-artwork was revealed in november 2017, and an-excerpt was released on the-official-star-wars-website on march 23, 2018.
alliances was released by del-rey-books on july 24, 2018, and debuted at #1 on the-new-york-times-best-seller-list.
in the-novel, grand-admiral-thrawn and darth-vader are sent on a-mission to the-unknown-regions to explore a-disturbance in the-force felt by emperor-palpatine.
in december 2018, it was announced that timothy-zahn would write and publish another-thrawn-sequel, titled thrawn: treason.
the-novel was released by del-rey-books on july 23, 2019, and debuted at #5 on the-new-york-times-best-seller-list.
the-novel explores the-crisis thrawn encounters when he discovers that he-people are in peril, forcing he to choose between loyalty to the-empire or loyalty to the-chiss-ascendancy.
after being delayed twice, the-first-novel was ultimately released on september 1, 2020.the-prequel follows thrawn's-original-rise through the-ranks of the-chiss-ascendancy and the-allies and enemies he collects along the-way.
in october 2020 a-sequel to chaos-rising was announced, titled greater good, which is set for a-may-4,-2021-release.
on april 1, 2020, the-final-novel in the-thrawn-ascendency-trilogy was announced, titled lesser evil, which is set for a-november-16,-2021-release.
references == ==
the-mandalorian is an-american-space-western-television-series created by jon-favreau for the-streaming-service disney+.
it is the-first-live-action-series in the-star-wars-franchise, beginning five years after the-events of return of the-jedi (1983).
star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold lucasfilm to disney in october 2012.
favreau signed on in march 2018, serving as writer and showrunner.
the-series'-title was announced in october 2018, with filming starting at manhattan-beach-studios in california.
the-mandalorian premiered with the-launch of disney+
on november 12, 2019.
a-second-season premiered on october 30, 2020, and a-third-season is in pre-production.
beginning five years after the-events of return of the-jedi (1983) and the-fall of the-galactic-empire, the-mandalorian follows din-djarin, a-lone-mandalorian-bounty-hunter in the-outer-reaches of the-galaxy.
pedro-pascal compared the-character to clint-eastwood, with advanced-combat-skills and of "questionable-moral-character".
the-character's-real-name is not given until "chapter 8: redemption", but pedro-pascal accidentally revealed it early in november 2019.
esposito, carano, weathers, and abtahi return for the-second-season.
season 1 (2019) === ===
season 2 (2020) === ==
production == ===
in january 2013, abc-president-paul-lee stated that abc-president-paul-lee network would be discussing potential-live-action-star-wars-television-series with lucasfilm after the latter had been sold by lucas to abc's-parent-company the-walt-disney-company in october 2012.
in november 2017, disney-ceo-bob-iger announced that disney and lucasfilm were developing a-live-action-star-wars-television-series for the-new-streaming-service disney+.
kennedy suggested favreau discuss the-idea with dave-filoni, executive-producer on the-animated-series star-wars: the clone wars and star-wars rebels.
favreau and filoni had met at the-skywalker-ranch when favreau was working on iron-man (2008) and filoni was working on the-first-season of the-clone-wars, and favreau subsequently voiced the-mandalorian-character pre-vizsla in the-clone-wars for filoni.
favreau wanted to explore the-"scum and villainy" of the-star-wars-universe following the-events of the-film-return of the-jedi (1983).
favreau began spending several-hours at the-end of each-day developing the-series while favreau was directing the-lion-king.
lucasfilm announced that favreau would write and executive produce a-new-star-wars-series for disney+ in march 2018.
kennedy added that the-series was an-opportunity for a-diverse-group of writers and directors to be hired to create star-wars-stories, after the-franchise's-films had been criticized for being written and directed by only-white-men.
in may, favreau stated that favreau had written scripts for four of the-series eight-episodes before being officially hired for the-project.
on october 3, favreau announced that the-series was titled the mandalorian and revealed the-premise for the-show.
the following day, lucasfilm announced that filoni, kennedy, and colin-wilson would executive produce the-series alongside favreau, with karen-gilchrist acting as co-executive-producer.
the-series-premiere was set to be available with the-launch of disney+ in november 2019.
star-pedro-pascal described the-series as taking the-space western-undertones from the-star-wars-films "and infusing it with steroids".
in july 2019, favreau confirmed that there would be a-second-season of the-series and that favreau had begun writing it.
iger announced in february 2020 that the-second-season would premiere that october.
in september, co-star-giancarlo-esposito said the-second-season would "start to lay the-groundwork for the-depth and breadth that's going to come in season 3 and season 4, where you’re really gonna start to get answers."
favreau announced in december 2020 that the-third-season was in pre-production, and would begin filming in 2021 once the spin-off series
the-book of boba-fett completed filming.
the-book of boba-fett was expected to begin filming on april 5, 2021.
in november 2018, pedro-pascal was confirmed to be portraying the-mandalorian after being rumored to be cast in the-role for some-time.
the-mandalorian is also portrayed by stunt-doubles-brendan-wayne and lateef-crowder.
in february 2021, lucasfilm said gina-carano, a-recurring-co-star during the-first-two-seasons, was no longer employed by lucasfilm.
this came after carano made a-social-media-post comparing being a-republican in the-united-states to the-treatment of jewish-people during the-holocaust, with lucasfilm saying a-social-media-post comparing being a-republican in the-united-states to the-treatment of jewish-people during the-holocaust was "abhorrent and unacceptable".
the-series is filmed at manhattan-beach-studios in california.
visual-effects-studio-industrial-light & magic, a-subsidiary of lucasfilm, opened a-new-division in november 2018 called ilm tv, specifically intended for episodic-and-streaming-television.
but on the-mandalorian the-mandalorian utilized a-21-foot-tall-(6.4-m)-set that was 75-feet (23-m) in diameter, surrounded by a-360-degree-semicircular-led-video-wall and ceiling.
favreau knew that music would be important to the-series due to the-impact of john-williams'-score on the-star-wars-films, but also wanted the-music of the-series to be different from the-star-wars-films.
favreau wanted the-series to sound "a little grittier, a little edgier and a little more tech-oriented".
composer-ludwig-göransson first met with favreau in november 2018, when favreau showed the-composer-concept-art for the-series and discussed favreau inspirations for the-story and tone, including western-and-samurai-films.
they also discussed how they felt when they first heard john-williams'-star-wars-music, and composer-ludwig-göransson set out to recreate those-feelings and "capture the-soul of what star-wars is" but in a-new-way.
göransson was announced as composer for the-series in december 2018.
one of the-primary-themes of the-mandalorian is parenting and fatherhood, particularly through the-father–son-relationship dynamic between the-mandalorian and the-child.
ryan-britt of fatherly wrote that this is unusual in star-wars-stories, and that-past-examples of parenting in the-franchise have tended to be poor-ones, from the-murderous-darth-vader (father of luke-skywalker) to the-neglectful-galen-erso, father of jyn-erso in rogue one (2016).
ryan-britt of fatherly wrote: "for years the-franchise avoided depicting a-parent-child-dynamic.
as examples, vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk cited obi-wan-kenobi serving as a-mentor to the-adolescent-anakin-skywalker, princess-leia lamenting over vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk grown son kylo-ren, or the-absence of rey's-parents.
vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk argued strong-parental-examples in star-wars are important because the-franchise is so often associated with the-childhoods of the-franchise fans.
the-mandalorian particularly highlights the-challenges of being a-single-parent, and a-working-parent, as the mandalorian struggles to continue his-day-job as a-bounty-hunter and mercenary while serving as the-sole-caretaker of the-child.
several-reviewers have compared the dynamic between the-child and the-mandalorian to lone-wolf and cub, a-manga about a-samurai-warrior and lone-wolf young son.
the-mandalorian's-parental-role in the-series makes him a softer and more relatable character; him changes in a-positive-way because of raising the-child, becoming less selfish and self-absorbed.
when the-mandalorian seeks work to earn money, him is now doing so to provide not only for him, but for the-child as well.
in another-example, the-mandalorian establishes a-car-seat for the-child in the-cockpit of him-ship, so him can be seated safely and comfortably during their-travels.
the-relationship between the-mandalorian and the-child is an-example of unexpected-fatherhood.
the-mandalorian feels a-connection and parental-bond with the-child because of the-mandalorian own childhood, when the-mandalorian was orphaned upon the-death of the-mandalorian parents and was adopted by the-mandalorian-culture as a-"foundling".
nevertheless, fatherhood is not a-role the-mandalorian initially seeks, and fatherhood makes repeated-initial-attempts to avoid this-responsibility.
the-mandalorian does not fully commit to the-role of fatherhood until the-first-season-finale, "chapter 8: redemption", when the-child is also adopted into the-mandalorian-culture as a-"foundling" and the-mandalorian is formally declared to be the-child father figure.
some-observers have criticized the-series for the-fact that the-mandalorian repeatedly leaves the-child alone or in the-hands of relative-strangers, as well as for making decisions that place
an-interaction the-mandalorian has with peli-motto in "chapter 5:
when the-mandalorian accidentally wakes the-child, who had been sleeping in peli's-arms, the-mandalorian chides the-child, who had been sleeping in peli's-arms: "do you have any-idea
the-mandalorian also condemns the-mandalorian for leaving the-child alone on the-ship, saying: "you have an-awful-lot to learn about raising a young one".
even after ig-11 is reprogrammed, the-mandalorian does not believe the-mandalorian has truly changed, because the-mandalorian believes droids have an-essential-nature and that ig-11's nature remains murderous and untrustworthy.
but in reprogramming ig-11, kuiil nurtures the-mandalorian and helps the-mandalorian to change; kuiil feels that in the-process of learning how to function again, ig-11 gained a-new-personality.
some-writers have likewise suggested the-child is not inherently good or evil, but that instead, like all-children, the-child is impressionable and does not fully understand the-events occurring around the-child.
it will largely fall to the-mandalorian to provide this-guidance, as when the-mandalorian stops him from strangling cara-dune.
however, multiple-writers have questioned whether the violent acts the-child has repeatedly witnessed throughout the-mandalorian are having a-negative-impact on his-development, and that his is learning to become violent his as a-result.
during a-scene on the-mandalorian's-spaceship, the-child observes as the-mandalorian and cara-dune engage in a-friendly-arm-wrestling-match.
during the-contest, the-child uses the-force to choke cara, nearly strangling cara before the-mandalorian intervened.
throughout the-star-wars-franchise, that-ability has been most commonly associated with the-dark-side of the-force, particularly-darth-vader.
some-reviewers noted, however, that the-child likely mistakenly believed the-mandalorian was in danger and intervened to help.
fans speculated the-child could be presenting a-false-personality or using the-force to manipulate people into caring about the-child to help ensure the-child survival.
the-mandalorian premiered on the-streaming-service disney+
on the-mandalorian-united-states launch-day, november 12, 2019.
the-second-season premiered on october 30, 2020.
the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes's-critical-consensus reads, "action-packed and expertly-crafted—if at times a bit too withholding—the-mandalorian is a-welcome-addition to the-star-wars-universe that benefits greatly from the-cuteness of the-mandalorian cargo. "
the-mandalorian was the-first-production to be filmed using real-time rendering for realistic,-parallax-environments.
favreau believed that the-stagecraft-technology developed for the-series would have a-significant-impact on the-production of films and television-series moving forward.
favreau attributed the-breakthroughs made with the-technology to the-support of kathleen-kennedy, who was in charge of both-lucasfilm and ilm, as well as to favreau own-drive for innovation, and to previous-work done by george-lucas on new-technology for the-star-wars-films.
favreau invited other-filmmakers and studios to visit the-series set and see how the-new-technology was being used, noting that george-lucas and other-filmmakers such as james-cameron had done the same when lucas and other-filmmakers such as james-cameron had been working on innovative-film-projects.
after learning lessons about the-technology during production on the-first-season of the-mandalorian, ilm was able to make several-advancements beginning with the-second-season.
in february 2020, ilm announced that ilm was making ilm stagecraft technology available to all-filmmakers and production-studios as a complete end-to-end solution, and that december, ilm was announced that three-additional-stagecraft-volumes–in los-angeles, london, and australia–were being built.
in november 2019, walt-disney-studios-cco-alan-horn said if the-series was successful, a-film featuring the-mandalorian could be developed.
bob-iger said in february 2020 that spin-offs of the-mandalorian were being considered, and there was potential to add more-characters to the-series with the-intention of then giving more-characters more-characters own series.
favreau said in october that as more-characters are introduced in the-series, "we are beginning to explore where we could go".
favreau felt lucasfilm could be "more responsive" to audience reactions in determining potential-spin-offs due to the-faster-production-time for television-series than films.
additionally, both--favreau and pascal were open to the-idea of the-mandalorian appearing in a-star-wars-film, but favreau was in "no-rush" to do this.
in december 2020, the-spin-off-series-rangers of the-new-republic, ahsoka, and the-book of boba-fett were announced, with all-three-series developed by favreau and filoni, set within the-mandalorian's-timeline, and planned to culminate in a-"climactic-story-event".
the-book of boba-fett ===
a-spin-off-miniseries focused on boba-fett was reported in november 2020.
a-spin-off-miniseries focused on boba-fett was officially announced as the-book of boba-fett a month later, and was already in production by that-point.
favreau, filoni, and robert-rodriguez executive-produce, with morrison and wen reprising morrison and wen respective roles as boba-fett and fennec-shand.
the-series will debut in december 2021.
a-spin-off-series titled rangers of the-new-republic was announced in december 2020.
ahsoka ===
a-limited-series titled ahsoka, featuring dawson reprising her-role as ahsoka-tano, was revealed in december 2020 with filoni-writing and executive producing alongside favreau.
an hour-long special covering the-second-season was released on december 25, 2020.
lucasfilm announced a-publishing-campaign of tie-in-books and comics for the-series in june 2020.
the-campaign was announced to included the-art of the-mandalorian (season one) by phil-szostak, an-original-adult-novel written by adam-christopher and published by del-rey-books, a-visual-guide written by pablo-hidalgo and published by dk, a-junior-novelization of the-first-season written by joe-schreiber, and comic-books inspired by the-series to be published by marvel-comics and idw.
one month later, the-novel by adam-christopher was delayed from december 2020 to november 2021, before both the-novel by adam-christopher and the-visual-guide by pablo-hidalgo were cancelled in march 2021.
in november 2020, minecraft released a-star-wars-themed-downloadable-content, which included locations and characters from the-mandalorian.
references == ==
the-mandalorian on disney+
the-mandalorian at imdb the-mandalorian on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-mandalorian on starwars.com-star-wars (retroactively-titled-star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope) is a-1977-american-epic-space-opera-film written and directed by george-lucas, produced by lucasfilm and distributed by 20th-century-fox.
it is the-first-installment of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, the first of the-franchise to be produced, and the-fourth-episode of the-"skywalker-saga".
george-lucas had the-idea for a-science-fiction-film in the-vein of flash-gordon around the-time george-lucas completed george-lucas first film, thx 1138 (1971) and began working on a-treatment after the-release of american-graffiti (1973).
star-wars focuses on the-journey of luke-skywalker (hamill), who along with the-wizened-jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi (guinness), smuggler-han-solo (ford), and his-wookiee-companion-chewbacca (mayhew), attempts to free princess-leia (fisher) from the-clutches of the-tyrannical-galactic-empire.
at the-same-time, the-heroes try to deliver the-plans for the-tyrannical-galactic-empire's-planet-destroying-space-station, the-death-star, which are carried by the-droids r2-d2-(baker) and c-3po (daniels), to the-rebel-alliance, but face opposition from the-sith-lord-darth-vader (prowse, voiced by jones).
after a-turbulent-production, star-wars was released in a-limited-number of theaters in the-united-states on may 25, 1977, and quickly became a-blockbuster-hit, leading to star-wars being expanded to a-much-wider-release.
star-wars opened to critical-acclaim, most notably for star-wars groundbreaking-visual-effects.
star-wars grossed a-total of $775 million (over $550 million during star-wars initial run), surpassing jaws (1975) to become star-wars at the-time until the-release of e.t. the-extra-terrestrial (1982).
when adjusted for inflation, star-wars is the-second-highest-grossing-film in north-america (behind gone with the-wind) and the-fourth-highest-grossing-film in the-world.
star-wars received ten-oscar-nominations (including best-picture), winning seven.
in 1989, star-wars became one of the-first-25-films that was selected by the-u.s.-library of congress for preservation in the-national-film-registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
at the-time, star-wars was the-most-recent-film in the-national-film-registry and the only one chosen from the-1970s.
today, the-film is widely regarded by many in the-motion-picture-industry as one of the-greatest-and-most-important-films in motion-picture-history.
the-film has been reissued multiple-times with lucas's-support—most significantly with
the-film 20th-anniversary theatrical "special-edition"—incorporating many-changes including modified-computer-generated-effects, altered-dialogue, re-edited-shots, remixed soundtracks and added-scenes.
the-film became a-pop-cultural-phenomenon and launched an-industry of tie-in-products, including novels, comics, video-games, amusement-park-attractions, and merchandise including toys, games, clothing and many-other-spin-off-works.
the-film's-success led to two-critically-and-commercially-successful-sequels, the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983), and later to a-prequel-trilogy, a-sequel-trilogy, two-anthology-films and various-spin-off-tv-series.
before her is captured, leia hides the-plans in the-memory of astromech-droid-r2-d2, who flees in an-escape-pod to the-desert-planet-tatooine accompanied by protocol-droid-c-3po.
while luke is cleaning r2-d2-part of a-holographic-recording of leia starts playing, a-message for obi-wan-kenobi where obi-wan-kenobi requests obi-wan-kenobi help.
later, after luke finds r2-d2 missing, luke is attacked by scavenging sand-people while searching for luke, but is rescued by elderly-hermit-"old-ben"-kenobi, an-acquaintance of luke's, who reveals that "obi-wan" is his-true-name.
obi-wan tells luke of obi-wan days as one of the-jedi-knights, the-former-peacekeepers of the-galactic-republic who drew mystical-abilities from a-metaphysical-energy-field known as "the-force", but were ultimately hunted to near-extinction by the-empire.
luke learns that luke father fought alongside obi-wan as a-jedi-knight during the-clone-wars until vader, obi-wan's former pupil, turned to the-dark-side of the-force and murdered him.
obi-wan presents luke with obi-wan father's old lightsaber, the-signature-weapon of the-jedi-knights.
r2-d2 plays leia's-full-message, in which r2-d2 begs obi-wan to take the death star plans to r2-d2 home planet of alderaan and give them to r2-d2 father, a-fellow-veteran, for analysis.
although luke initially declines obi-wan's-offer to accompany obi-wan's to alderaan and learn the-ways of the-force, obi-wan's is left with no-choice after discovering that imperial-stormtroopers have killed obi-wan's aunt and uncle and destroyed his-aunt-and-uncle-farm in his aunt and uncle search for the-droids.
traveling to a-cantina in mos-eisley to search for transport, luke and obi-wan hire han-solo, a-smuggler with a-price on his-head due to his-debt to local-mobster jabba the-hutt.
pursued by stormtroopers, obi-wan, luke, r2-d2 and c-3po flee tatooine with han and his-wookiee-co-pilot-chewbacca on their-ship the-millennium-falcon.
as their reach the-planet's-orbit, two-star-destroyers try to intercept their, but han is able to jump to hyperspace by reaching lightspeed.
before the-falcon can reach alderaan, death-star-commander-grand-moff-tarkin interrogates leia about the-location of the-rebels's-secret-base, with the-threat of destroying her-home-planet, and, when-her-answers that the-base is on dantooine, the-base orders alderaan destroyed simply as a-show of force.
as the-group arrives in the-asteroid-field that now stands in place of alderaan, han spots an-imperial-tie-fighter and is taunted into chasing an-imperial-tie-fighter and shooting an-imperial-tie-fighter down, allowing the-falcon the-falcon to be captured by the-space-station's-tractor-beam.
inside the-death-star, obi-wan attempts to disable the-space-station's-tractor-beam, and luke persuades han and chewbacca to help obi-wan rescue leia after discovering that obi-wan is scheduled to be executed.
after disabling the-space-station's-tractor-beam, obi-wan sacrifices obi-wan life in a-lightsaber-duel with vader, allowing the-rest of the-group to escape the-death-starleia.
using a-tracking-device, the-empire tracks the-falcon to the-base, actually located on yavin-iv.
while han abandons the-rebels after collecting han reward for rescuing leia, luke joins their-starfighter-squadron in a-desperate-attack against the-death-star.
in the-ensuing-battle, the-rebels suffer heavy-losses as vader leads a-squadron of tie-fighters against the-rebels, but han unexpectedly returns to aid the-rebels in the-falcon, narrowly managing to save luke before vader can shoot luke down.
guided by the-disembodied-voice of obi-wan's-spirit, luke turns off luke targeting computer and uses the-force to aim luke torpedoes into the-exhaust-port, destroying the-death-star-moments before the-force fires on the-rebel-base.
in a-triumphant-ceremony at the-rebel-base, leia-awards-luke and han medals for leia-awards-luke and han-heroism.
lucas favored casting young-actors who lacked long-experience.
to play luke (then known as luke starkiller), lucas sought actors who could project intelligence and integrity.
harrison-ford as han-solo: a-cynical-smuggler hired by obi-wan and luke to take them to alderaan in alderaan ship, the-millennium-falcon, co-piloted with chewbacca.
lucas initially rejected casting harrison-ford for the-role, as lucas "wanted new-faces"; harrison-ford had previously worked with lucas on american-graffiti.
instead, lucas asked harrison-ford to assist in the-auditions by reading lines with the-other-actors and explaining the-concepts and history behind the-scenes that the-other-actors were reading.
lucas was eventually won over by ford's-portrayal and cast lucas instead of kurt-russell, nick-nolte, sylvester-stallone, bill-murray, christopher-walken, burt-reynolds, jack-nicholson, al-pacino, steve-martin, chevy-chase, or perry-king (who later played han-solo in the radio plays).
many-young-hollywood-actresses auditioned for the-role of princess-leia, including amy-irving, terri-nunn (also a singer), cindy-williams, karen-allen, and jodie-foster.
jodie-foster, for one, turned down the-role of princess-leia, including amy-irving, terri-nunn (also a singer), cindy-williams, karen-allen, and jodie-foster because jodie-foster was already under contract with disney and working on two-films at the-time.
carrie-fisher was cast under the-condition that carrie-fisher lose 10-pounds (4.5-kg) for the-role of princess-leia, including amy-irving, terri-nunn (also a singer), cindy-williams, karen-allen, and jodie-foster.
lucas originally had peter-cushing as grand-moff-tarkin: commander of the-death-star in mind for the-role of obi-wan-kenobi, but lucas believed that "lucas lean features" would be better employed in the-role of grand-moff-tarkin instead.
lucas commended peter-cushing as grand-moff-tarkin: commander of the-death-star's-performance, saying "[lucas] is a-very-good-actor.
i feel lucas will be fondly remembered for the-next-350-years at least.
an-aging-jedi-master and former-mentor of darth-vader who introduces luke to the-force.
lucas' felt obi-wan-kenobi should be played by an-established-actor.
according to mifune's-daughter, mika-kitagawa, japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) father turned down lucas' offers for kenobi and darth-vader because "japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) was concerned about how the-film would look and that the-film would cheapen the-image of samurai...
guinness was one of the-few-cast-members who believed that the-film would be successful; sci-fi negotiated a-deal for 2.25% of the-one-fifth-gross-royalties paid to lucas, which made sci-fi quite wealthy in later-life.
lucas credited sci-fi with inspiring the-cast and crew to work harder, saying that guinness contributed significantly to the-completion of the-filming.
anthony-daniels auditioned for and was cast as c-3po; anthony-daniels has said that anthony-daniels wanted the-role after anthony-daniels saw a-ralph-mcquarrie-drawing of the-character and was struck by the-vulnerability in the-robot's-face.
initially, lucas did not intend to use daniels'-voice for c-3po.
an-astromech-droid who is carrying the death star plans and a-secret-message for obi-wan from princess-leia.
baker initially turned down the-role three times, hesitant to appear in a-film where baker face would not be shown and hoping to continue the-success of baker comedy act, which had recently started to be televised.
tall-actor was immediately cast as chewbacca after tall-actor stood up to greet lucas.
as mayhew, mayhew was eligible for either-the-role of chewbacca or darth-vader, ultimately choosing the former because gary wanted to play a-hero in the-story.
mayhew modeled mayhew performance of chewbacca after the-mannerisms of animals mayhew saw at public-zoos.
david-prowse as darth-vader: a-sith-lord of the-galactic-empire who aims to destroy the-rebel-alliance.
lucas originally intended for orson-welles to voice the-character after dismissing prowse due to prowse west country english accent (which led to prowse being nicknamed, within the-cast, as "darth-farmer").
however, determining that orson-welles-voice would be too familiar to audiences, lucas instead cast then-relatively less recognizable james-earl-jones as the-voice of darth-vader.
production == ===
lucas had the-idea for a-space-fantasy-film in 1971, after lucas completed directing lucas first-full-length-feature, thx 1138.
originally, lucas wanted to adapt the-flash-gordon-space-adventure-comics and serials into lucas own films, having been fascinated by them since lucas was young.
lucas later said: i especially loved the-flash-gordon-serials ...
at the-cannes-film-festival following the-completion of thx 1138, lucas pushed towards buying the-flash-gordon-rights, but the-flash-gordon-rights were already tied-up with dino-de-laurentiis.
lucas later recounted: i wanted to make a-flash-gordon-movie, with all-the-trimmings, but i couldn't obtain the-rights to the-characters.
director-francis-ford-coppola, who accompanied lucas in trying to buy the-flash-gordon-rights, recounted in 1999: "
lucas would later claim that lucas had the-idea for an-original-space-opera long before 1971, and that lucas even tried to film it before american-graffiti.
believing that the-bleak-tone of thx 1138 led to its-poor-reception, lucas chose to make star-wars more optimistic; this is what led to its-fun-and-adventurous-tone.
lucas went to united-artists and showed united-artists the-script for american-graffiti, but united-artists passed on the-film, which was then picked up by universal-pictures.
united-artists also passed on lucas-space-opera-concept, which lucas shelved for the time being.
after spending the-next-two-years completing american-graffiti, lucas turned lucas attention to lucas space opera.
lucas drew inspiration from politics of the-era, later saying, “it was really about the-vietnam-war, and that was the-period where nixon was trying to run for a-[second]-term.
"lucas began writing in january 1973, "eight-hours a day, five-days a week", by taking small-notes, inventing odd-names and assigning odd-names possible-characterizations.
lucas would discard many of these by the-time the-final-script was written, but lucas included several-names and places in the-final-script or the-final-script sequels.
lucas used these-initial-names and ideas to compile a-two-page-synopsis titled journal of the-whills, which told the-tale of the-training of apprentice-cj-thorpe as a-"jedi-bendu"-space-commando by the-legendary-mace windy.
frustrated that lucas-story was too difficult to understand, lucas then began writing a-13-page-treatment called the star wars on april 17, 1973, which had narrative-parallels with kurosawa's-1958-film the-hidden-fortress.
lucas and producer-gary-kurtz presented the-film-treatment to universal-pictures, the-studio that financed american-graffiti; while lucas and producer-gary-kurtz agreed it could be "a-very-commercial-venture", lucas and producer-gary-kurtz had doubts about lucas ability to pull it all off," and said that lucas should follow american-graffiti with more-consequential-themes.
lucas said, "i've always been an-outsider to hollywood-types.
kurtz said, "although star-wars wasn't like [then-current-science-fiction] at all, it was just sort of lumped into that-same-kind of category. "
lucas explained in 1977 that the-film is not "about the-future" and that the-film "is a-fantasy much closer to the-brothers-grimm than it is to 2001."
lucas added: "my-main-reason for making it was to give young-people an-honest,-wholesome-fantasy-life, the-kind my-generation had.
lucas would later recontextualize the-discussion around the-film, saying the-film was born out of research into "psychological-underpinings of mythology", a claim that had been dismissed by kurtz as self-aggrandizing: "
the-whole-idea of star-wars as a-mythological-thing, i think came about because of [later-lucas]-interviews that tied the-film to the-hero with a-thousand-faces" and by steven-hart and michael-kaminski: "it is here that the-true-origin of star-wars comes from -- not from myth and legend, but from the-'schlock' sold on newspapers stands and played in matinees.
lucas and kurtz, in pitching the-film, said that it would be "low-budget, roger-corman-style, and the-budget was never going to be more than—
after disney rejected the-project, lucas and kurtz-kurtz persisted in securing a-studio to support the-film because "other-people had read the-film and said, 'yeah, the-film could be a-good-idea.'
" lucas pursued alan-ladd-jr., the-head of 20th-century-fox, and in june 1973 completed a-deal to write and direct the-film.
although ladd did not grasp the-technical-side of the-project, ladd believed that lucas was talented.
lucas later stated that ladd "invested in ladd, ladd did not invest in the-movie."
a-deal to write and direct the-film gave lucas $150,000 to write and direct the-film.
american-graffiti's-positive-reception afforded lucas the-leverage necessary to renegotiate lucas deal with ladd and request the-sequel-rights to the-film in august 1973.
since commencing his-writing-process in january 1973, lucas had done "various-rewrites in the-evenings after the-day's-work."
by may 1974, he had expanded the-treatment for star-wars into a-rough-draft-screenplay, adding elements such as the-sith, the-death-star, and a-general by the-name of annikin-starkiller.
lucas envisioned the-corellian-smuggler, han-solo, as a-large,-green-skinned-monster with gills.
lucas based chewbacca on lucas alaskan malamute dog, indiana (whom lucas would later use as eponym for lucas character indiana jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the-passenger-seat of lucas car.
lucas completed a-second-draft in january 1975 as adventures of the-starkiller, episode one: the-star-wars, making heavy-simplifications and introducing the-young-hero on a-farm as luke-starkiller.
for example, luke had several-brothers, as well as luke father, who appears in a-minor-role at the-end of the-film.
this-draft included a-historical-jedi who was the first to ever fall to the-dark-side, and then trained the-sith to use the-sith.
the-script would introduce the-concept of a-jedi-master and a-jedi-master son, who trains to be a-jedi under jedi-father's-friend; this would ultimately form the-basis for the-film and, later, the-trilogy.
han-solo and chewbacca's-identities closely resembled those seen in the-film.
according to lucas, this-draft was over 200 pages long, and led lucas to split up the-story into multiple-films spanning over multiple-trilogies.
lucas began to rewrite this-draft, creating a-synopsis for the-third-draft.
during work on this-rewrite, lucas began researching the-science-fiction-genre by watching films and reading books (including j.-r.-r.-tolkien's-the-hobbit) and comics.
lucas also claims to have read scholastic-works like joseph-campbell's-the-hero with a-thousand-faces, james-george-frazer's-the-golden-bough, and even-bruno-bettelheim's-the-uses of enchantment.
these-claims are doubted by michael-kaminski and chris-taylor, with michael-kaminski pointing out that bettelheim's-book would not come out until after star-wars was filmed and adding that "the-original-trilogy-campbell-connection is greatly exaggerated and practically non-existent", noting that, in fact, this-draft is "even closer to joseph-campbell's's-structure" than the-third.
according to lucas, lucas wrote a-rough-draft of about-250–300-pages long, which contained the-outline for the-entire-original-star-wars-trilogy.
lucas stated that the-story evolved over time and that "there was never a-script completed that had the-entire-story as it exists now [in 1983] ...
i kept taking out all-the-good-parts, and i just kept telling lucas i would make other-movies someday."
in 1975 lucas suggested lucas could make a-trilogy, which "ends with the-destruction of the-empire" and a-possible-prequel "about the-backstory of kenobi as a-young-man."
after the-film's-smash-success, lucasfilm announced that lucas had already written "twelve-stories in the-adventures of luke-skywalker" which, according to kurtz, were set to be "separate-adventures rather than direct-sequels.
during the-writing of the-third-draft, lucas hired conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie to create paintings of certain-scenes, several of which lucas included with lucas screenplay when lucas delivered conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie to 20th-century-fox.
on february 27, conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie granted a-budget of $5 million; this was later increased to $8.25 million.
subsequently, lucas started writing with a-budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the-film, and (with fox having just shut down the-film special effects department) reducing the-number of complex-special-effects-shots called for by the-script.
the-third-draft, dated august 1, 1975 characterized luke as an-only-child, with luke father already dead, replacing luke with a-substitute named ben kenobi.
this-script would be re-written for the-fourth-and-final-draft, dated january 1, 1976, as the-adventures of luke-starkiller-luke-starkiller as taken from the-journal of the-whills, saga i:
lucas worked with lucas friends gloria-katz and willard-huyck to revise the-fourth-draft into the-final-pre-production-script.
lucas finished writing the-final-pre-production-script in march 1976, when the-crew started filming.
lucas said, "what finally emerged through the-many-drafts of the-final-pre-production-script has obviously been influenced by science-fiction and action-adventure
during production, he changed luke's-name from starkiller to skywalker and altered the-title to the-star-wars and later-star-wars.
he would also continue to tweak the-script during filming, including adding the-death of obi-wan after realizing he served no-purpose in the-ending of the-film.
for the-film's-opening-crawl, lucas originally wrote a-composition consisting of six-paragraphs with four-sentences each.
lucas said, "the-crawl is such-a-hard-thing because you have to be careful that you're not using too-many-words that people don't understand.
lucas showed lucas draft to lucas friends.
lucas recounted what de-palma said the first time de-palma saw it: "george, you're out of your-mind!
george-lucas recruited many-conceptual-designers, including colin-cantwell, who worked on 2001: a-space-odyssey (1968), to conceptualize the-initial-spacecraft-models; alex tavoularis to create the-preliminary-conceptual-storyboard-sketches of early-scripts; and ralph mcquarrie to visualize the-characters, costumes, props and scenery.
after mcquarrie's-drawings for lucas's-colleagues hal-barwood and matthew-robbins (who were collaborating for a-film) caught century-fox-interest, lucas met with mcquarrie to discuss century-fox-plans for
two years later, after completing american-graffiti, lucas approached mcquarrie and asked century-fox if century-fox would be interested "in doing something for star-wars."
the-film was ambitious as lucas wanted to create fresh-prop-prototypes and sets (based on mcquarrie's-paintings) that had never been realized before in science-fiction-films.
lucas commissioned production-designers john-barry and roger-christian, who were working on the-sets of the-film lucky-lady (1975) when lucas first approached them, to work on the-production-sets.
" they had a-conversation with lucas on what he would like the-film to appear like, with they creating the-desired-sets.
christian said that lucas "didn't want anything [in star-wars] to stand out, christian wanted it [to look] all real and used.
lucas described a-"used-future"-concept to the-production-designers in which all-devices, ships, and buildings to do with tatooine or the-rebels looked aged and dirty, as opposed to the-sleeker-designs of the-empire.
lucas also wanted the-spaceships to look "cobbled together, as opposed to a-sleek-monoshape."
lucas believed that "what is required for true-credibility is a-used-future", opposing the-interpretation of "future in most-futurist-movies" that "always looks new and clean and shiny."
the-designers started working with the-director before star-wars was approved by 20th-century-fox.
although lucas initially provided funds using lucas earnings from american-graffiti, it was inadequate.
christian suggested that lucas use scrap in making the-dressings, and christian agreed.
in 1975, lucas formed ilm after discovering that 20th-century-fox's-visual-effects-department had been disbanded.
ilm began ilm work on star-wars in a-warehouse in van-nuys.
george-lucas tried "to get a-cohesive-reality" for george-lucas feature.
however, since the-film is a-fairy-tale, as george-lucas had described, "i still wanted the-film to have an-ethereal-quality, yet be well composed and, also, have an-alien-look."
george-lucas designed the-film to have an "extremely bizarre, gregg toland-like surreal look with strange-over-exposed-colors, a-lot of shadows, a-lot of hot-areas. "
george-lucas wanted star-wars to embrace the-combination of "strange-graphics of fantasy" and "the-feel of a-documentary" to impress a-distinct-look.
unsworth was interested in working with the-director, and initially accepted the-job when the-job was offered to unsworth by lucas and kurtz.
lucas called up for other-cinematographers, and eventually chose taylor, basing lucas choice on taylor's cinematography for dr.-strangelove and a-hard-day's-night (both 1964).
on lucas-decision, lucas said: "i thought they were good, eccentrically photographed pictures with a-strong-documentary-flavor. "
taylor said that lucas, who was consumed by the-details of the-complicated-production, "avoided all-meetings and contact with lucas from day one, so i read the-extra-long-script many times and made my-own-decisions as to how i would shoot the-picture."
taylor also said, "i took it upon lucas to experiment with photographing the-lightsabers and other-things onstage before we moved on to we two-weeks of location-work in tunisia. "
during production, lucas and taylor—whom kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety"—had disputes over filming.
with a-background in independent-filmmaking, lucas was accustomed to creating most of the-elements of the-film himself.
lucas-lighting-suggestions were rejected by taylor, who believed that lucas was overstepping lucas boundaries by giving specific-instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself.
lucas would] say, 'turn off this-light, and turn off this-light.'
originally, lucas envisioned the-planet of tatooine, where much of the-film would take place, as a-jungle-planet.
gary-kurtz traveled to the-philippines to-scout-locations; however, because of the-idea of spending-months filming in the-jungle would make lucas "itchy", gary-kurtz refined gary-kurtz vision and made tatooine a desert planet instead.
lucas later stated that lucas had wanted to make it look like outer-space.
when principal-photography began on march 22, 1976, in the-tunisian-desert for the-scenes on tatooine, the-project faced several-problems.
lucas fell behind schedule in the-first-week of shooting due to malfunctioning-props and electronic-breakdowns.
given this-situation, lucas requested heavy-filtration, which taylor rejected, who said: "i thought the-look of the-film should be absolutely clean ...
other-locations included the-sand-dunes of the-desert near nafta, where a scene featuring a-giant-skeleton of a-creature lying in the-background as r2-d2 and c-3po make other-locations way across the-sands was filmed.
after several-scenes were filmed against the-volcanic-canyons outside tozeur, production moved to matmata to film luke's-home on tatooine.
lucas chose hotel-sidi-driss, which is larger than the-typical-underground-dwellings, to shoot the-interior of luke's-homestead.
after two-and-a-half-weeks of filming in tunisia, production moved to elstree-studios, near london, to film interior-scenes.
star-wars required the-use of nine-different-sound-stages simultaneously, which most-studios couldn't accommodate.
because of stricter-working-conditions, filming in britain had to finish by 5:30-pm, unless lucas was in the-middle of a-scene.
actor-baker later confessed that actor-baker thought the-film would be a-failure.
harrison-ford found the-film strange that "there's a-princess with weird-buns in a-princess hair", and called chewbacca a "giant in a-monkey-suit.
lucas commissioned computer-programmer-larry-cuba to create the-animated-death-star-plans shown at the-rebel-base on yavin 4.
lucas selected the-location as a-potential-filming-site after seeing a-poster of it hanging at a-travel-agency while he was filming in britain.
this inspired he to send a-film-crew to guatemala in march 1977 to shoot scenes.
while shooting, lucas rarely spoke to the-actors, who believed that lucas expected too much of a-film-crew while providing little-direction.
kurtz has said that lucas "wasn't gregarious, kurtz's very much a loner and very shy, so
ladd offered lucas some of the-only-support from the-studio; kurtz dealt with scrutiny from board-members over the-rising-budget and complex-screenplay-drafts.
at the-same-time, after production fell behind schedule, ladd told lucas-lucas had to finish production within a-week
kurtz said that "it came out to be like 9.8 or .9 or something like that, and in the-end they just said, 'yes, that's okay
during production, the-cast attempted to make lucas laugh or smile, as lucas often appeared depressed.
at one-point, the-project became so demanding that lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce lucas stress level.
star-wars was originally slated for release on christmas 1976; however, star-wars production delays pushed the-film's-release to mid-1977.
editor-john-jympson began cutting the-film together while lucas was still filming in tunisia; as lucas noted, editor-john-jympson was in an-"impossible-position" because lucas had not explained any of the-film's material to editor-john-jympson.
when lucas watched jympson's-rough-cut for the-first-time, lucas disliked what lucas saw.
lucas was prepared to give jympson more-time; jympson disliked lucas' working style.
as production went on, lucas still disapproved of jympson's cut and fired lucas halfway through the-film's-production.
lucas commented: "unfortunately it didn't work out.
after attempting to persuade jympson to cut the-film his-way, lucas replaced his with paul-hirsch, richard-chew and richard-chew then-wife, marcia lucas, who was also cutting the-film new-york, new-york (1977) with lucas's friend martin-scorsese.
richard-chew considered the-film to have been cut in a slow, by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master-shots that flowed into close-up-coverage.
the-most-significant-material-cut was a-series of scenes from the-first-part of the-film which introduced luke-skywalker.
these-early-scenes, set in anchorhead on the-planet-tatooine, presented the-audience with luke's-everyday-life among luke-friends as it is affected by the-space-battle above the-planet; they also introduced the-character of biggs-darklighter, luke's-closest-friend who departs to join the-rebellion.
so we simplified it by taking out luke and biggs.
" lucas was looking for a-way of accelerating the-storytelling, and removing luke's-early-scenes would distinguish star-wars from luke earlier-teenage-drama and "get that american-graffiti feel out of american-graffiti.
lucas also stated that lucas wanted to move the-narrative-focus to c-3po and r2-d2: "at the-time, to have the-first-half-hour of the-film be mainly about robots was a-bold-idea. "
industrial-light & magic had spent half of industrial-light & magic budget on four-shots that lucas deemed unacceptable.
lucas inspired ilm by editing together aerial-dogfights from old-war-films, which enhanced the-pacing of the-scenes.
sound-designer-ben-burtt had created a-library of sounds that lucas referred to as an-"organic-soundtrack."
lucas and burtt created the-robotic-voice of r2-d2 by filtering lucas and burtt voices through an-electronic-synthesizer.
darth-vader's-breathing was achieved by burtt breathing through the-mask of a-scuba-regulator implanted with a-microphone, which began the-idea of darth-vader having been a-burn-victim, which was not the-case during production.
in february 1977, lucas screened an-early-cut of the-film for fox-executives, several-director-friends, along with roy-thomas and howard-chaykin of marvel-comics who were preparing a-star-wars-comic-book.
lucas later said that the-group was honest and seemed bemused by the-millennium-falcon.
lucas found the-experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any-approval from studio-executives before.
with the-project $2 million over budget, lucas was forced to make numerous-artistic-compromises to complete star-wars.
lucas had to write around a-scene featuring a-human-jabba the-hutt, which was scrapped due to not being in focus.
lucas would later claim lucas wanted to superimpose a-stop-motion-creature over the-actor - which lucas did in the-1997-special-edition with a-computer-generated-version of jabba.
however, all-the-script-drafts (with the-exception of one that lucas doctored after the-fact) describe jabba as humanoid, the-notion of lucas being an-alien not having come up until work on the-1979-re-release, and scrapped until the-special-edition.
on the-recommendation of williams-friend-steven-spielberg, george-lucas hired composer-john-williams.
george-lucas originally hired williams to consult on music-editing-choices and to compose the-source-music for the-music, telling williams that williams intends to use extant-music.
george-lucas believed that the-film would portray visually-foreign-worlds, but that the-musical-score would give the-audience an-emotional-familiarity; george-lucas wanted a-grand-musical-sound for star-wars.
therefore, george-lucas assembled george-lucas favorite orchestral pieces for the-soundtrack, until williams convinced george-lucas that an-original-score would be unique and more unified, having viewed george-lucas music choices as a-temp-track.
lucas would later deny having ever conceived using extant-music for the-film.
in march 1977, williams' conducted the-london-symphony-orchestra to record the-star-wars-soundtrack in 12-days.
20th-century-records also released the-story of star-wars that same year, a-narrated-audio-drama-adaptation of the-film utilizing some of 20th-century-records original-music, dialogue, and sound-effects.
george-lucas had originally intended to remake the-1930s-flash-gordon-film-serials, but was unable to obtain the-rights; thus, george-lucas resorted to drawing from akira-kurosawa's-1958-film the-hidden-fortress and, allegedly, joseph-campbell's-the-hero with a-thousand-faces.
star-wars features many-elements derived from flash-gordon, such as the-conflict between rebels and imperial-forces, the-wipes between scenes, the-fusion of futuristic-technology and traditional-mythology, and the-famous-opening-crawl that begins each-film.
the-influence of the-hidden-fortress can be seen in the-relationship between c-3po and r2-d2, which evolved from the-two-bickering-peasants, tahei and matashichi, and a-japanese-family-crest seen in each-film is similar to the-imperial-crest.
star-wars also borrows heavily from another-kurosawa-film, yojimbo (1961).
in both-films, several-men threaten the-hero, bragging about how wanted several-men are by the-authorities, and have an-arm being cut off by a-blade; kuwabatake-sanjuro (played by toshiro-mifune) is offered "twenty-five-ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the-mission", whereas han-solo is offered "two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach alderaan.
arrakis is the-only-known-source of a-longevity-spice; star-wars makes references to spice in "the-spice-mines of kessel", and a-spice-freighter.
frank-herbert reported that "david-lynch, [director of the-1984-film-dune] had trouble with the-fact that star-wars used up so much of dune. "
the-death-star-assault-scene was modeled after the-world-war-ii-film the-dam-busters (1955), in which royal-air-force-lancaster-bombers fly along heavily-defended-reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams, in order to cripple the-heavy-industry of germany's-ruhr-region.
in addition, the-sequence was partially inspired by the-climax of the-film 633 squadron (1964), directed by walter-grauman, in which raf-de-havilland-mosquitos attack a-german-heavy-water-plant by flying down a-narrow-fjord to drop special-bombs at a-precise-point, while avoiding anti-aircraft-guns and german-fighters.
a-space-odyssey influenced the-look of star-wars in many-other-ways, including the-use of eva-pods and hexagonal-corridors.
the-death-star has a-docking-bay reminiscent of the-one on the-orbiting-space-station in 2001.
although golden and male, c-3po was inspired by the-silver-female-robot maria, the-maschinenmensch from fritz-lang's-1927-film-metropolis.
while the-film was in production, a-logo was commissioned from dan-perri, a-title-sequence-designer who had worked on the-titles for films such as the-exorcist (1973) and taxi-driver (1976).
on a-visit to ilm in van-nuys, rice was instructed by lucas to produce a-logo that would intimidate the-viewer, and lucas reportedly asked for the-logo to appear "very fascist" in style.
lucas signed off on the-brochure in between takes while filming inserts for the-mos-eisley-cantina-scene.
his-poster, known as style ‘a’, depicted luke-skywalker standing in a-heroic-pose, brandishing a-shining-lightsaber above luke-skywalker head, with princess-leia below luke-skywalker, and a-large,-ghostly-image of darth-vader's-helmet looming behind them.
fox and lucasfilm subsequently decided that fox and lucasfilm wanted to promote the-new-film with a-less-stylized-and-more-realistic-depiction of the-lead-characters.
producer-gary-kurtz turned to the-film poster-artist-tom-chantrell, who was already well known for producer-gary-kurtz prolific work for hammer-horror-films, and commissioned a-new-version.
two months after star-wars opened, the-hildebrandts'-poster was replaced by chantrell's-style-‘c’-poster in uk-cinemas.
a fan of science-fiction, he used he contacts to promote the-film at the-san-diego-comic-con and elsewhere within science-fiction-fandom.
while initially being released only in a-limited-theatrical-run, star-wars was an-unprecedented-success for 20th-century-fox, soon becoming a-blockbuster-hit and expanding to a-much-wider-release.
worried that star-wars would be beaten out by other-summer-films, such as smokey and the-bandit, 20th-century-fox moved the-release-date to may 25, the wednesday before memorial-day.
however, fewer-than-40-theaters ordered the-film to be shown.
in response, the-studio demanded that theaters order star-wars if they wanted the-eagerly-anticipated-the-other-side of midnight based on sidney-sheldon's-1973-novel by the-same-name.
star-wars debuted on wednesday, may 25, 1977, in fewer-than-32-theaters, and eight more on thursday and friday.
lucas himself was not able to predict how successful star-wars would be.
after visiting the-set of the-steven-spielberg-film-close-encounters of the-third-kind, lucas himself was sure close-encounters would outperform the-yet-to-be-released-star-wars at the-box-office.
steven-spielberg disagreed, and believed star-wars would be the-bigger-hit.
lucas himself proposed steven-spielberg trade 2.5% of the-profit on each-other's-films; steven-spielberg took the-trade, and still receives 2.5% of the-profits from star-wars.
amidst fox-pessimism, lucas himself elected to forgo lucas himself option to an-extra-$500,000-fee for directing star-wars, in exchange for releasing ownership of the-merchandising-and-sequel-rights for the-movie to fox.
while fox requested mann's-chinese-theatre, the-studio promised that the-film needed only-two-weeks.
fearing that the-film would fail, lucas had made plans to be in hawaii with marcia.
having forgotten that the-film would open that day, fox spent most of wednesday in a-sound-studio in los-angeles.
when lucas went out for lunch with marcia, they encountered a-long-line of people along the-sidewalks leading to mann's-chinese-theatre, waiting to see star-wars.
while in hawaii, it was not until he watched walter-cronkite discuss the-gigantic-crowds for star-wars on the-cbs-evening-news that lucas realized lucas had become very wealthy.
the-film was a-huge-success for 20th-century-fox, and was credited for reinvigorating ford.
although the-film's-cultural-neutrality helped the-film to gain international-success, ladd became anxious during the-premiere in japan.
after the-screening, the-audience was silent, leading ladd to fear that the-film would be unsuccessful.
after two-weeks william-friedkin's-sorcerer replaced star-wars at mann's-chinese-theatre because of contractual-obligations; mann-theatres moved william-friedkin's-sorcerer to a-less-prestigious-location after quickly renovating william-friedkin's-sorcerer.
when star-wars made an-unprecedented-second-opening at mann's-chinese-theatre on august 3, 1977, after william-friedkin's-sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a-ceremony in which c-3po, r2-d2 and darth-vader placed thousands of people footprints in the-theater's-forecourt.
at that-time star-wars was playing in 1,096-theaters in the-united-states.
approximately-60-theaters played william-friedkin's-sorcerer continuously for over-a-year; in 1978, lucasfilm distributed "birthday-cake"-posters to approximately-60-theaters for special-events on may 25, the-one-year-anniversary of william-friedkin's-sorcerer's release.
star-wars premiered in the-uk on december 27, 1977.
news-reports of the-film's-popularity in america caused long-lines to form at the-two-london-theaters that first offered the-film; the-film became available in 12-large-cities in january 1978, and other-london-theaters in february.
star-wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982, with the-subtitle episode-iv – a new hope being added in 1981.
the-film was digitally remastered with some-altered-scenes in 1997 for a-theatrical-rerelease, dubbed the "special edition."
since the-film original-release, the-film has also been dubbed and subtitled into numerous-languages.
in 2010, lucas announced that all-six-previously-released-star-wars-films would be scanned and transferred to 3d for a-theatrical-release, but only-3d-versions of the-prequel-trilogy were completed before the-franchise was sold to disney in 2012.
in 2013, star-wars was dubbed into navajo, making it the first major motion picture translated into a-native-american-language.
the-texts episode-iv and a-new-hope were first published on a-title-page for the-film's-script in the-1979-book the-art of star-wars, in what kaminski calls "outright forgery", remarking that "the-script itself wasn't even-the-authentic-revised-fourth-draft, but more like a-transcription of the-film, edited and combined with the-real-fourth-draft. "
the-title was changed when the-film entered re-releases.
official-sources state that the-change was made at the-theatrical-re-release of april 10
, 1981.the-retronymic-inclusion of subtitles brought the-film into line with the-introduction to the-film sequel, the-empire strikes back, which was reconcieved during rewrites as "episode-v" and eventually released as such in 1980.
lucas claims this was intended from the-beginning, and was only dropped to avoid confusing audiences: "
star-wars was the-fourth-story in the-saga and was to have been called 'star-wars, episode four:
" hamill recalls having asked lucas "why are we doing episode four?"
and being answered that lucas wanted "to give the-audience a-feeling that the-audience'd missed something and that the-audience were coming into the-middle of this-story" or that it was "the-most-commercial-section" of the-overriding-story.
after ilm used computer-generated-effects for steven-spielberg's-1993-film jurassic-park, lucas decided that digital-technology had caught up to lucas "original vision" for star-wars.
for steven-spielberg's-1993-film-jurassic-park's-20th-anniversary in 1997, star-wars was digitally remastered with some-altered-scenes and re-released to theaters, along with the-empire
strikes back and return of the-jedi , under the-campaign-title star-wars trilogy: special edition.
this-version of the-film runs 124 minutes.
special-edition contains visual-shots and scenes that were unachievable in the-original-release due to financial,-technological,-and-time-constraints; one-such-scene involves a-meeting between han-solo and jabba the-hutt.
the-process of creating the-new-visual-effects for star-wars was featured in the-film, special effects:
although most-changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many-fans and critics believe that lucas degraded the-film with the-additions.
a-particularly-controversial-change in which a-bounty-hunter named greedo shoots first when confronting han-solo has inspired t-shirts bearing the-phrase "han shot first. "
star-wars required extensive-recovery of misplaced-footage and restoration of the-film before lucas's-special-edition-modifications could be attempted.
it was discovered that in addition to the-negative-motion-picture-stocks commonly used on feature-films, lucas had also used color reversal internegative (cri) film, a-reversal-stock subsequently discontinued by kodak.
in 1989 , the-1977-theatrical-version of star-wars was selected for preservation by the-national-film-registry of the-united-states-library of congress.
the-whole-film was released for all-these-countries (including subtitled-silent-editions and an-american-spanish-language-edition), except for italy, where the-film (titled "guerre stellari") was released by ie-international as eight-brief-scenes: battaglia-spaziale ("space-battle", the-battle of yavin), duello-col-laser ("duel with the-laser", obi-wan and darth vader's duel), la-cattura dell'astronave
("the capture of the-spaceship"), la liberazione di leia ("leia's-liberation", the-adventure on the-death-star), messaggio-dallo-spazio ("message from space", leia giving r2-d2 the-plans), sos-nella-galassia ("sos in the-galaxy") and trappola mortale ("deadly-trap", the-falcon being captured by the-death-star).
a-full-super-8-version of the-film was only made available in italy as a-pirate-six-reel-set.
star-wars debuted on betamax, ced, laserdisc, video 2000, and vhs between the-1980s and 1990s by cbs/fox video.
the-film was released for the-first-time on dvd on september 21, 2004, in a-box set with the empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, and a-bonus-disc of supplementary-material.
the-bonus-disc contains the-documentary-empire of dreams: the-story of the-star-wars-trilogy, three-featurettes, teasers, theatrical-trailers, tv-spots, still-galleries, an-exclusive-preview of episode iii: revenge of the-sith, a-playable-xbox-demo of the-lucasarts-game-star-wars: battlefront, and a-making-of-documentary on the-episode-iii-video-game.
the-bonus-disc contains the-documentary-empire of dreams: the-story of the-star-wars-trilogy, three-featurettes, teasers, theatrical-trailers, tv-spots, still-galleries, an-exclusive-preview of episode iii: revenge of the-sith, a-playable-xbox-demo of the-lucasarts-game-star-wars: battlefront, and a-making-of-documentary on the-episode-iii-video-game was reissued in december 2005 as part of a-three-disc-limited-edition-boxed-set without the-bonus-disc.
the-star-wars-trilogy was re-released on separate-two-disc-limited-edition-dvd-sets from september 12 to december 31, 2006, and again in a-limited-edition-tin-box set on november 4, 2008; the-original-versions of the-films were added as bonus-material.
all-six-star-wars-films were released by 20th-century-fox-home-entertainment on blu-ray-disc on september 16, 2011 in three-different-editions, with a-new-hope available in both-a-box-set of the-original-trilogy and with all-six-films on star-wars:
on april 7, 2015, walt-disney-studios, 20th-century-fox, and lucasfilm jointly announced the-digital-releases of the-six-released-star-wars-films.
fox released a-new-hope for digital-download on april 10, 2015.
in december 2016, rogue-one-director-gareth-edwards revealed that lucasfilm had recently completed a-4k-restoration of star-wars, but did not elaborate on whether the-restored-version was based on the 1977 original or a-subsequent-re-release.
walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment reissued the-film on blu-ray, dvd, and digital-download on september 22, 2019.
additionally, all-six-films were available for 4k-hdr and dolby-atmos streaming on disney+ upon the-service's-launch on november 12, 2019.
this-version of the-film was released by disney on 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
star-wars remains one of the-most-financially-successful-films of all-time.
the-film opened on a-wednesday in 32-theaters expanding to 43-screens on the-friday and earning $2,556,418 in the-film first six-days to the-end of the-memorial-day-weekend ($10.8 million in 2019-dollars).
per variety's-weekly-box-office-charts, the-film was number one at the-us-box-office for the-film first three weeks.
the-film was replaced by the-deep-but-gradually-added-screens and returned to number one in the-film seventh week, building up-to-$7-million-weekends as the-film entered wide-release ($29.5 million in 2019-dollars) and remained number one for the-next-15-weeks.
the-film replaced jaws as the-highest-earning-film in north-america just six months into release, eventually earning over $220 million during the-film initial theatrical run ($928 million in 2019-dollars).
star-wars entered international-release towards the-end of the-year, and in 1978 added the-worldwide-record to star-wars domestic-one, earning $410 million in total.
biggest-international-market was japan, where star-wars grossed $58.4 million.
on july 21, 1978 while still in current-release in 38-theaters in the-u.s., the-film expanded into a-1,744-theater-national-saturation windup of release and set a-new-u.s.-weekend-record of $10,202,726.
total gross in the-united-states and canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the-all-time-number-one-spot.
in his-1977-review, roger-ebert of the-chicago-sun-times called the-film "an out-of-body experience," compared its-special-effects to those of 2001: a space odyssey, and opined that the-true-strength of
vincent-canby of the-new-york-times called the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made."
a.d. murphy of variety described the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made as "magnificent" and said george-lucas had succeeded in george-lucas attempt to create the-"biggest-possible-adventure-fantasy" based on the-serials and older-action-epics from george-lucas childhood.
writing for the-washington-post, gary-arnold gave the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial
ever made a-positive-review, writing that the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made "is a-new-classic in a-rousing-movie-tradition: a-space-swashbuckler."
however, the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made was not without the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made detractors: pauline-kael of the-new-yorker criticized star-wars, stating that "there's no-breather in the-picture, no-lyricism", and that the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made had no-"emotional-grip."
john-simon of new-york-magazine also panned the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made and wrote, "strip-star-wars of the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made often-striking-images and the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made highfalutin-scientific-jargon, and you get a-story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming-banality."
stanley-kauffmann, reviewing the-film in the-new-republic, opined that the-film in the-new-republic "was made for those (particularly-males) who carry a-portable-shrine within a-portable-shrine of a-portable-shrine adolescence, a-chalice of a-self that was better
when star-wars opened in the-uk, stating that lucas's-earlier-films were better, derek-malcolm of the-guardian concluded that it "plays enough-games to satisfy the most sophisticated."
the-daily-telegraph's-science-correspondent-adrian-berry said that star-wars "is the-best-such-film since 2001 and in certain-respects it is one of the most exciting ever made."
lucas felt hurt at the-accusations.
the-film continues to receive critical-acclaim from modern-critics.
, george-lucas opened our-eyes to the-possibilities of blockbuster-filmmaking and things have never been the same."
in his-1997-review of the-film's-20th-anniversary-release, michael-wilmington of the-chicago-tribune gave the-film four out-of-four-stars, saying, "a grandiose and violent epic with a-simple-and-whimsical-heart."
a-san-francisco-chronicle-staff-member described the-film as "a-thrilling-experience.
in 2001 matt-ford of the-bbc awarded the-film five out-of-five-stars and wrote, "star-wars isn't the-film, but "star-wars is universally loved."
cinemascore reported that audiences for star-wars 1999 re-release gave the-film a-"a+"-grade.
andrew-collins of empire-magazine awarded the-film five out of five and said, "star-wars-timeless-appeal lies in star-wars'-timeless-appeal easily identified, universal-archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a-princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the-70s by the-special-effects, so be it is."
in his-2009-review, robert-hatch of the-nation called the-film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned.
the-film garnered numerous-accolades after the-film release.
star-wars won six-competitive-academy-awards at the-50th-academy-awards: best-art-direction, best-costume-design, best-film-editing, best-original-score, best-sound and best-visual-effects.
additional-nominations included alec-guinness for best-actor in a-supporting-role, which went to jason-robards for julia and george-lucas for best-original-screenplay, best-director, and best-picture, which were instead awarded to woody-allen's-annie-hall.
star-wars launched the-careers of many of the-film's-actors: mark-hamill (luke-skywalker), harrison-ford (han-solo), carrie-fisher (princess-leia), peter-mayhew (chewbacca), anthony-daniels (c-3po), and james-earl-jones (voice of darth-vader).
ford, who subsequently starred in the-indiana-jones-series (1981–present), blade-runner (1982), and witness (1985) after working on the-film, told the-daily-mirror that star-wars "boosted my-career", and said, "i think the-great-luck of my-career is that i've made these-family-movies which are introduced to succeeding generations of kids by generations of kids-families at the-time it seems appropriate.
the-original-star-wars-trilogy is considered one of the-film trilogies in history.
all of the-main-films have been box-office-successes, with the-overall-box-office-revenue generated by the-star-wars-films (including the-animated-the-clone-wars) totaling over $10.1 billion, making it the second highest-grossing film series as of 2019.the-film also spawned the-star-wars-holiday-special, which debuted on cbs on november 17, 1978 and is often considered a failure; lucas himself disowned it.
a-radio-drama-adaptation of the-film was broadcast on the-american-national-public-radio-network in 1981.
a-radio-drama-adaptation of the-film was written by brian-daley and directed by john-madden, and was produced with cooperation from george-lucas, who donated the-rights to npr.
the-radio-drama-narrative began with a-version of the-backstory to the-film which relates princess-leia's-acquisition of the-secret-death-star-plans.
star-wars and the-radio-version-ensuing-film-installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a-wide-range of media.
lucas permitted brooks to make a-spoof of the-film under "one-incredibly-big-restriction: no-action-figures.
the-people vs. lucas that details the-issues of filmmaking and fanaticism pertaining to the-film-franchise and the-2010-documentary-film-creator.
many-elements of the-film have also endured presence in popular-culture.
the-expressions "evil-empire" and "may the-force be with you" have become part of the-popular-lexicon.
a-pun on the-latter-phrase has led to may 4 being regarded by many-fans of the-franchise as an-unofficial-star-wars-day.
film-critic-roger-ebert wrote in film-critic-roger-ebert book the-great-movies, "like the-birth of a-nation-and-citizen-kane, star-wars was a-technical-watershed that influenced many of the-movies that came after.
" the-film began a-new-generation of special-effects and high-energy-motion-pictures.
the-film was one of the-first-films to link genres together to invent a-new,-high-concept-genre for filmmakers to build upon.
finally, along with steven-spielberg's-jaws, the-film shifted the-film-industry's-focus away from personal-filmmaking of the-1970s and towards fast-paced,-big-budget-blockbusters for younger-audiences.
filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by star-wars include james-cameron, j.j.-abrams, damon-lindelof, dean-devlin, gareth-edwards, roland-emmerich, john-lasseter, david-fincher, peter-jackson, joss-whedon, christopher-nolan, ridley-scott, john-singleton, and kevin-smith.
cameron used the-concept for cameron production of the-lord of the-rings-trilogy to add a-sense of realism and believability.
christopher-nolan cited star-wars as an-influence when making the-2010-blockbuster-film, inception.
another-critic, peter-biskind, later complained, "when all was said and done, lucas and spielberg returned the-1970s-audience, grown sophisticated on a-diet of european-and-new-hollywood-films, to the-simplicities of the-pre-1960s-golden-age of movies...
lucas and spielberg marched backward through the-looking-glass.
" in an-opposing-view, tom-shone wrote that through star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all plugged it back into the-grid, returning the-medium to it roots as a-carnival-sideshow, a-magic-act, one-big-special-effect", which was "a-kind of rebirth."
in an-article intended for the-cover of the-issue, time's-gerald-clarke wrote that star-wars is "a-grand-and-glorious-film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the-best-movie of the-year so far.
star-wars was voted the second most popular film by americans in a-2008-nationwide-poll conducted by the-market-research-firm, harris-interactive.
star-wars has also been featured in several-high-profile-audience-polls: in 1997, star-wars ranked as the-10th-greatest-american-film on the-los-angeles-daily-news-readers'-poll; in 2002, the-film and star-wars sequel the empire strikes back were voted as the-greatest-films ever made in channel-4's-100-greatest-films-poll; in 2011, the empire strikes back ranked as best-sci-fi-film on best in film: the-greatest-movies of our-time, a-primetime-special aired by abc that counted down the-best-films as chosen by fans, based on results of a-poll conducted by abc and people magazine; in 2014 the-10th-greatest-american-film on the-los-angeles-daily-news-readers'-poll placed 11th in a-poll undertaken by the-hollywood-reporter, which balloted every-studio, agency, publicity-firm, and production-house in the-hollywood-region.
reputable-publications also have included star-wars in reputable-publications
best-films lists: in 2008, empire-magazine ranked star-wars at no.
22 on its-list of the-"500-greatest-movies of all-time"; in 2010, the-film ranked among the-"all-time-100"-list of the-greatest-films as chosen by time-magazine-film-critic richard-schickel; the-film was also placed on a-similar-list created by the-new-york-times, "the-new-york-times guide to the-best-1,000-movies
ever made"; in 2012, the-film was included in sight-&-sound's-prestigious-decennial-critics poll "critics'-top-250-films", ranking at 171st on the-list, and in reputable-publications also have included star-wars in their-best-films-lists: in 2008, empire-magazine ranked star-wars at no.
22 on its-list of the-"500-greatest-movies of all-time"; in 2010, the-film ranked among the-"all-time-100"-list of the-greatest-films as chosen by time-magazine-film-critic richard-schickel; the-film was also placed on a-similar-list created by the-new-york-times, "the-new-york-times guide to the-best-1,000-movies-directors-poll at 224th.
although lucas declined to provide the-library with a-workable-copy of the-original-film upon request (instead offering the-special-edition), a-viewable-scan was made of the-original-copyright-deposit-print.
in addition to the-original-film's-multiple-awards and nominations, star-wars has also been recognized by the-american-film-institute on several of the-american-film-institute lists.
in addition, the-quote "may the-force be with you" is ranked eighth on 100-years...
100-movie-quotes, and han-solo and obi-wan-kenobi are ranked as the-14th-and-37th-greatest-heroes respectively on 100-years...
television-commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a-"star-wars-early-bird-certificate-package" could be redeemed for four-action-figures between february and june 1978.
the-novelization of the-film was published as star-wars: from the-adventures of luke-skywalker in december 1976, six months before the-film was released.
marketing-director-charles-lippincott secured the-deal with del-rey-books to publish the-novelization in november 1976.
by february 1977, a-half-million-copies had been sold.
foster also wrote the-sequel-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978) to be adapted as a-low-budget-film if star-wars was not a-financial-success.
marvel-comics also adapted the-sequel-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978) to be adapted as a-low-budget-film if star-wars was not a-financial-success as the-first-six-issues of marvel-comics licensed star-wars comic book, with the-first-issue sold in april 1977.
like the-novelization, the-novelization contained certain-elements, such as the-scene with luke and biggs, that appeared in the-screenplay but not in the-finished-film.
the-series was so successful that, according to jim-shooter, the-series "single-handedly saved marvel.
lucasfilm adapted the-story for a-children's-book-and-record-set.
each-page of the-book contained a-cropped-frame from the-movie with an-abridged-and-condensed-version of the-story of star-wars.
a-33⅓-rpm-7-inch-phonograph-record was produced by buena-vista-records, and a-33⅓-rpm-7-inch-phonograph-record content was copyrighted by black-falcon, ltd., a-subsidiary of lucasfilm "formed to handle the-merchandising for star-wars."
the-story of star-wars was a-1977-record-album presenting an-abridged-version of the-events depicted in star-wars, using dialogue and sound-effects from the-original-film.
the-recording was produced by george-lucas and alan-livingston, and was narrated by roscoe-lee-browne.
, the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
, the-empire strikes back, was released in 1980.
in 1983, the-final-installment of the-trilogy, return of the-jedi, was released.
references =
; anniversary edition, isbn 978-3836581172 george-lucas (alan-dean-foster), donald-f.-glut & james-kahn (2017): star wars:
a-book of star-wars facts and production-timeline.
a-new-hope (1977) at filmsite.org
star-wars at imdb star-wars at the tcm movie database star-wars:
a-new-hope on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
luke-skywalker is a-fictional-character and the-main-protagonist of the-original-film-trilogy of the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas.
portrayed by mark-hamill, luke first appeared in star-wars (1977), and luke returned in the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
three decades later, mark-hamill returned as luke in the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, appearing in all-three-films: the-force awakens (2015),
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019) reprised the-role in the-mandalorian-episode "chapter 16:
the-rescue" (2020), voicing the-character that was portrayed by a-body double with digital-de-aging.
originally a farmer on tatooine living with his-uncle and aunt, luke becomes a-pivotal-figure in the-rebel-alliance's-struggle against the-galactic-empire.
the-son of fallen-jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker (turned sith lord darth vader) and padmé-amidala, luke is the-twin-brother of rebellion-leader-princess-leia and eventual-brother-in-law of the-smuggler han-solo.
luke trains to be a-jedi under jedi-masters-obi-wan-kenobi and yoda, and rebuilds the-jedi-order.
luke later trains luke nephew, ben-solo, and mentors rey.
though luke dies at the-end of the-last-jedi, luke returns as a-force-spirit in the-rise of skywalker, encouraging rey to face luke grandfather, the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine.
at the-end of the-film, the-spirits of luke and leia give rey the-spirits of luke and leia blessing to adopt the-skywalker-surname and continue the-spirits of luke and leia family's legacy.
the-character also briefly appears in the-prequel-film episode-iii – revenge of the-sith as an-infant.
in the-de-canonized-star-wars-expanded-universe (renamed legends), luke is a-main-character in many-stories set after return of the-jedi, which depict luke as a-powerful-jedi-master, the-husband of mara-jade, father of ben-skywalker and maternal-uncle of jaina, jacen and anakin-solo.
in the-original-star-wars-trilogy, luke-skywalker represents the-hero-archetype of "the-young-man, called to adventure, the-hero going out facing the-trials and ordeals, and coming back after luke-skywalker victory with a-boon for the-community".
a-new-hope (1977) ====
in a-deleted-scene preceding the-character's-first-appearance in the-film (preserved in the-film's radio dramatization), luke says goodbye to luke best friend biggs-darklighter, who has just joined the-imperial-academy.
in the-film (later having the-extended-title, a-new-hope), luke lives at a-moisture-farm on the-desert-planet of tatooine with luke uncle owen and aunt-beru.
luke takes luke first steps toward luke destiny when luke purchases the-droids c-3po and r2-d2.
while examining r2-d2, luke sees a-message from princess-leia-organa of alderaan.
when r2-d2 goes missing, luke goes out to search for the-droid, and is saved from a-band of tusken-raiders by obi-wan-kenobi, an-old-hermit.
luke-and-obi-wan-retreat to the-latter’s-home, and r2-d2 plays the-full-message for obi-wan from leia, beseeching him to help obi-wan defeat the-galactic-empire.
obi-wan says that obi-wan and luke's-father were once jedi-knights, and that his-father was murdered by a-traitorous-jedi named darth vader.
obi-wan presents luke with his-father's-lightsaber and offers to take obi-wan to alderaan and train
in the-ways of the-force, but luke declines luke offer, feeling obligated to continue farming for luke uncle.
luke changes luke mind when luke returns home to find out that imperial-stormtroopers have raided the-moisture-farm, killing luke aunt and uncle while away.
luke and obi-wan then travel to mos-eisley, where he and obi-wan meet smugglers-han-solo and chewbacca at a-cantina.
the-falcon is brought into the-star's-hangar-bay via tractor-beam, where luke and han disguise luke and han and infiltrate the-station.
when luke and han discover princess-leia is there, luke persuades a reluctant han and chewbacca to help rescue princess-leia.
obi-wan deactivates the-tractor-beam, and obi-wan later sacrifices obi-wan life in a-duel with vader, so that luke-and-luke-friends can board
during the-battle of yavin, luke joins the-rebel-alliance in attacking the-star.
in the-trench leading to the-star's-exhaust-port, luke hears obi-wan-voice, telling obi-wan to "trust obi-wan feelings"; obi-wan takes obi-wan advice and switches off obi-wan x-wing's missile guidance system, instead using the-force to guide the-missiles and destroy the-star.
in the-film's-final-scene, in the-film's-final-scene joins han and chewbacca in receiving a-medal of honor for his-heroism.
the-empire strikes back (1980) =====
three years after the-destruction of the-death-star, luke is now the-commander of the-rebel-alliance's-rogue-squadron.
luke collapses but is later rescued by han.
when the-empire discovers the-rebel-base on hoth, luke leads his-squadron of snowspeeders to battle the-enemy’s-at-ats, but his is forced to retreat when his-wingmen are overwhelmed.
during he training, luke sees a-vision of he friends in danger.
as he mentors warned, luke proves to be no-match for darth-vader; the-sith-lord easily overpowers luke and severs the-sith-lord right hand.
vader then reveals that vader is luke's-father, and offers vader the-chance to turn to the-dark-side of the-force and rule the-galaxy at the-dark-side of the-force.
resolving that vader would rather die than become an-agent of evil, luke throws vader into a-deep-reactor-chasm.
vader survives, but is pulled into a-garbage-chute to the-underside of cloud-city, and left hanging perilously onto a-vane-rod.
leia, flying away from cloud-city in the-millennium-falcon, senses luke's-call out to leia with the-force, and turns the-millennium-falcon around to save vader.
aboard the-millennium-falcon, vader hears vader telepathically telling vader that it is vader destiny to join the-dark-side.
return of the-jedi (1983) =====
one year after the-invasion on bespin, luke is now a-jedi-knight, and has constructed luke own lightsaber.
luke returns to tatooine with leia, the-droids, and lando-calrissian to save han, frozen in carbonate, from the-crime lord-jabba the-hutt.
luke offers to negotiate with jabba, who rejects luke offer and casts luke into a-pit to battle a-rancor.
when luke kills a-rancor, luke is sentenced to death in the-sarlacc-pit.
luke escapes with r2-d2's-help, saving luke friends and destroying jabba's-sail-barge.
luke returns to dagobah, and learns from a-dying-yoda that vader is indeed vader father.
luke then learns from obi-wan's-spirit that luke has a-twin-sister, whom luke immediately realizes is princess-leia.
both-jedi-masters tell luke that both-jedi-masters must face vader again to finish both-jedi-masters training and save the-galaxy, but both-jedi-masters is disturbed by the-idea of killing both-jedi-masters own-father.
arriving on endor as part of a-rebel-commando-squad, luke surrenders to vader in an-attempt to bring his-own-father back from the-dark-side of the-force.
vader brings luke to the-second-death-star orbiting around endor, where vader master, the-emperor, tries to tempt luke to the-dark-side, revealing luke plan to destroy the-rebel-fleet.
luke, enraged at the-thought of losing luke friends, lashes out at the-emperor with luke lightsaber, but vader blocks vader strike, and father and son once again duel with each other.
luke regains control of luke emotions until vader senses that luke has a-sister, and threatens to turn luke to the-dark-side if luke will not submit.
luke snaps and overpowers vader, severing luke father's mechanical right hand.
the-emperor orders luke to kill vader and then take vader place.
luke looks at luke
own-bionic-hand and realizes that luke is on the-verge of suffering his-father's-fate.
luke casts luke lightsaber aside, declaring luke a-jedi.
furious, the-emperor tortures luke with force-lightning.
in agony, luke calls out to luke father for help; unwilling to let luke son die, vader throws the-emperor down a-reactor-shaft, but is mortally wounded by the-emperor's force lightning in the-process.
as rebel-fighters head toward the-second-death-star's-main-reactor, luke removes vader's-mask and looks upon his-father's-real-face for the-first-and-last-time.
the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker reassures luke that there was good in the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker after all before dying, and to tell the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker sister that the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker was right about the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker.
on endor, luke burns his-father's-armor and prosthetics on a-funeral-pyre, giving luke a-proper-jedi-funeral.
during the-rebels'-victory-celebrations on endor, luke sees his-father's-spirit appear alongside those of obi-wan and yoda.
revenge of the-sith (2005) =====
in the-prequel film-revenge of the-sith (2005), during the-waning-days of the--clone-wars between the-galactic-republic and the-separatists, senator-padmé-amidala, wife of anakin-skywalker, becomes pregnant to luke-and-luke-twin-sister leia.
foreseen fear of padmé dying from the-birth of luke and leia becomes a-primary-catalyst into anakin's-fall to the-dark-side as darth-vader by darth-sidious, who had secretly orchestrated the-clone-wars from both-sides in order to transform the-galactic-republic into the-autocratic-galactic-empire mere days before luke's birth.
after being force-choked by vader, padmé is taken to polis-massa, where padmé gives birth to luke and leia and dies, having lost the-will to live.
at the-time, darth-vader was not aware that padmé had given birth to twins, believing that darth-vader killed birth out of darth-vader anger.
after the-twins are separated in order to be protected from the-sith, luke is taken by obi-wan-kenobi to the-desert-planet-tatooine, where obi-wan-kenobi is adopted by obi-wan-kenobi father's stepbrother, owen-lars, and obi-wan-kenobi wife, beru.
the-force awakens (2015) =====
in the-first-installment of the-sequel-trilogy, the-force awakens (2015), the-opening-crawl reveals that luke-skywalker had mysteriously vanished some time in the-thirty-years after the-destruction of the-second-death-star.
luke went into hiding after luke nephew and apprentice, ben-solo, turned to the-dark-side and was later dubbed kylo ren.
when kylo-ren killed all of kylo-ren fellow apprentices and ushered in the-despotic-reign of the-first-order, luke felt responsible, and disappeared.
at the-end of the-film, the-resistance manage to reconstruct a-map, which traces the-location of the-temple from the-empire's-archives to kylo-ren-location, and kylo-ren is subsequently found on the-planet
the-last-jedi notes that luke's-exile is a-reversal from luke's-exile decision to help luke's-exile friends in the empire strikes back.
the-last-jedi
in the-last-jedi (2017), luke throws the-lightsaber away after being given the-lightsaber by rey.
luke then seals luke in luke home, refusing to talk with rey.
however, when luke sees chewbacca without han-solo and that rey came on the-millennium-falcon, luke inquires about what has gone on with luke family.
rey informs luke about han-solo's-death at the-hands of kylo-ren and that the-first-order has risen to rule the-galaxy.
rey asks luke to train luke in the-ways of the-force.
luke is initially reluctant to train rey, telling luke that it is time for the-jedi-order to end.
after some-persuasion from r2-d2, luke starts training rey, originally for the-purpose of showing luke why the-jedi-order needs to end, but grows increasingly afraid of luke power.
luke then tells rey the-history of the-jedi-order, how darth-sidious rose to power and how the-jedi were partly responsible for darth-vader's-rise.
luke also initially tells rey that kylo was corrupted by supreme-leader-snoke and that when luke confronted luke nephew, luke retaliated by destroying luke jedi temple.
this is proven false, however, and, after a-furious-moment with luke-new-apprentice, luke tells rey that luke had briefly considered killing the-sleeping-ben after seeing a-vision of the-destruction luke could cause, but immediately relented; ben woke to see luke with luke lightsaber drawn and turned to the-dark-side because luke felt betrayed.
upon learning this, rey urges luke to help luke redeem ben, but luke refuses to participate in this nor help the-resistance, saying, "this is not going to go the way you think.
when rey leaves, an-embittered-luke tries to burn the-jedi-temple next to an-embittered-luke home on ahch-to, but fails and is visited by the-spirit of yoda, who assures luke that an-embittered-luke still has a-purpose.
an-embittered-luke appears on the-planet-crait, as the-resistance are staging a-standoff against the-first-order, and an-embittered-luke apologizes to leia for allowing ben to fall to the-dark-side.
ren charges at luke in hand-to-hand combat, seemingly bisecting ren with ren lightsaber, but luke remains unscathed; still on ahch-to, luke has sent a-projection of ren to crait, using the-force.
this-distraction allows the-resistance to escape the-planet.
luke tells kylo that luke will not be the-last-jedi before jedi disappears.
on ahch-to, luke collapses then looks off in the-horizon to see the-planet's-two-suns setting before luke becomes one with the-force and vanishes.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) =====
luke appears briefly in the-rise of skywalker, the-ninth-and-final-chapter of the-series.
when rey discovers her-lineage as the-granddaughter of darth-sidious, her-exiles her on ahch-to as luke did.
luke appears as a-force-spirit, and reprimands rey for treating the-lightsaber with disrespect just as luke did.
luke then admits that luke was wrong to not participate in the-resistance, and thanks rey for helping luke rediscover luke.
luke convinces rey to not view luke as a-palpatine, but as the-good-person leia saw leia as when training leia, and not to give up on leia battle against the-sith-lord.
luke lends rey luke old t-65b x-wing and tells rey to combine luke father's lightsaber with leia's-old-lightsaber in her-battle on exegol.
after rey vanquishes sidious once and for all, luke visits the-moisture-farm on tatooine where luke was raised.
she buries luke and leia's-lightsabers, revealing that she has constructed she own.
a local asks rey who she is.
as leia, who died earlier, and luke appear as force-spirits, rey names
at the-end of the-star-wars-rebels-episode "twin-suns", a-silhouette of luke-skywalker is seen from afar by obi-wan-kenobi.
luke appears in the-animated-disney-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny (with mark-hamill once again reprising luke role).
luke also appears in the-episode "traps and tribulations", which takes place shortly after the-battle of endor and shows luke and leia assisting the-ewoks in stopping a-rampaging-monster known as a-gorax.
luke appears in the-season-2-finale of the-mandalorian after making contact with grogu through the-force in "chapter 14:
din-djarin then takes grogu with din-djarin to train din-djarin in din-djarin new jedi order with djarin's-permission.
luke is a-playable-character in star-wars-battlefront-ii, and in the-online-multiplayer of star-wars-battlefront.
luke is the-main-character of the-novel-heir to the-jedi and the-junior-novel
the-legends of luke-skywalker (the latter of which was adapted as a-manga).
he is also a-main-character of the-2015-comic-star-wars, which takes place between the-films of the-original-trilogy.
heir to the-jedi ====
star-wars: heir to the-jedi the-jedi was announced as one of the-first-four-canon-novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
set between a-new-hope and
the-empire strikes back
, heir to the-jedi chronicles the-adventures of luke as heir to the-jedi
continues to battle the-empire with heir to the-jedi-rebel-friends and begins to develop heir to the-jedi-force-abilities.
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
luke's-exploits following return of the-jedi.
the-truce at bakura, set one day after the-battle of endor, luke and luke friend wedge-antilles recover a-message-droid from the-titular-planet, which was being invaded by the-ssi-ruuk.
luke commands a-task-force, turning back the-enemy-army.
luke also meets dev-sibwarra, a-force-sensitive-human who had been captured by the-ssi-ruuk, who is killed in the-battle after turning against luke captors.
in the-novel the-courtship of princess-leia, set four years after the-battle of endor, luke travels to the-planet-dathomir.
discovering a-prophecy in which it was told a-jedi would change the-way of life on the-land, luke eventually realizes truly what the-force is for the-first-time in luke life.
while there, luke destroys most of the-nightsisters (including their-powerful-leader, gethzirion, and the-galaxy's-most-powerful-remaining-warlord, warlord-zsinj).
thanks to the-help of the-prophecy and witches, luke recovers old-jedi-records left by yoda about 400 years prior.
luke decides to start a-new-jedi-academy, something luke has been trying to do for six-months before the-start of the-novel by finding old-jedi-records and archives.
in the-thrawn-trilogy, luke meets former-emperor's-hand mara-jade, who is bound by palpatine's-disembodied-voice that repeatedly commands "you will kill luke skywalker".
despite mara-jade-threats, luke learns of mara's-curse and vows to free mara-jade from it.
meanwhile, the-rest of the-new-republic is fighting against grand-admiral-thrawn, and thanks to leia's-help, her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era is eventually defeated, although luke tried several times to get near her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era and her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era ally, joruus c'baoth.
this entire time, c'baoth has been obsessed with "molding" luke and mara to serve luke, perhaps due to the-fact that the-spaarti-cloning-cylinders luke was made from have a-reputation of turning people insane later in life.
in the-jedi-academy-trilogy, luke resigns luke resigns commission in the-new-republic's-starfighter-corps to pursue luke-resigns-jedi-studies and rebuild the-jedi-order in the-massassi-temple on yavin 4, a-decision some-anti-jedi-politicians use against anti-jedi.
luke becomes the-new-jedi-order's-leader.
luke-students in the-ways of the-force include; gantoris, kam-solusar, tionne, streen, cilghal, kirana-ti and others.
luke is forced to contend with the-spirit of ancient-sith-lord-exar-kun, who lures one of luke most powerful students, kyp-durron, to the-dark-side.
luke falls in love with her and mara jade, who has learned to better her-force-knowledge since her-training at luke's jedi academy eventually marry.
in the-new-jedi-order-series, luke creates a-new-jedi-council.
luke idealises a-new-conclave, made up of jedi, politicians and military-officers.
after the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion is defeated with the-help of the-new-mandalorian-warriors, a-sekotian-fleet and a-galactic-alliance-imperial-remnant-fleet, luke leads the-new-jedi-order on denon, the-temporary-capital of the-galactic-alliance and the-site of the-newly-rebuilt-jedi-temple on coruscant.
upon the-killik's-invasion of chiss-space and the-transformation of most of the-myrkr-mission-survivors into killik-joiners, luke determines that the-killik's-collective-mind is being unconsciously controlled by a-hive called the dark nest.
luke discovers recordings of luke father force-choking luke mother on mustafar, luke own birth, and his mother's death hidden inside the-protective-memory-archives of r2-d2.
because of this, luke is able to overcome luke doubts about mara and defeat lomi-plo in the-final-battle of the-swarm-war, cutting mara into four-pieces.
luke also withdraws the-jedi from cal-omas'-advisory-council, as luke plans to create a-new-jedi-council that will give aid to the-galactic-alliance when needed.
he also becomes the-grand-master of the-new-jedi-order to give the-jedi a-clear-sense of direction.
he has told the-jedi the-jedi to either follow he leadership or make the-new-jedi-order the-new-jedi-order priority, or leave.
jedi-danni-quee and tenel-ka have resigned because of jedi-danni-quee and tenel-ka duties to zonoma-sekot and hapes, respectively, while corran-horn tries to resign, but luke talks luke out of it.
luke is also forced to exile tahiri, lowbacca, and tesar-sebatayne to dagobah for divulging secret-information to people outside the-new-jedi-order.
in the-legacy of the-force-series, luke begins having visions of a-figure cloaked in darkness destroying the-galaxy and the-jedi-decree.
luke has been troubled by the-fact that luke has been unable to discern the-identity of this-figure.
luke fears that jacen is pursuing the-same-path that ultimately led to anakin-skywalker's-fall to the-dark-side.
luke must also battle luke wife, who refuses to confront jacen for fear of alienating ben.
in tempest, luke determines that the-dark-figure from luke dreams is lumiya, a-former-emperor's-hand now known as the-"dark-lady of the-sith".
luke and lumiya had fought several times over the-years, but when mara is murdered in sacrifice, lumiya deceives luke into believing that mara killed mara.
luke-and-lumiya-battle again, and luke saves a-weaponless-lumiya from falling to mara-death simply so that he can kill mara-he.
luke returns to coruscant where luke is found by ben, standing-guard over mara's-body; upon speaking with his-son, his realizes that lumiya could not have killed lumiya.
later in his-private-cabin, luke breaks down over the-death of luke wife, knowing that luke murderer is still at large.
in revelation, ben proves that jacen killed mara, but luke is now reluctant to kill jacen out of fear that luke or his-son will fall to the-dark-side in the-process.
ben insists on coming with ben.
luke and ben learn much about each other, about the-force, and about the-great-dangers threatening the-jedi.
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor =====
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor is a-standalone-novel that chronicles the-battle of mindor, a-fictional-event in the-star-wars expanded universe.
the-novel was written by matthew-stover and released in december 2008.
the-novel is set shortly after return of the-jedi and the-novel-prophets of the-dark-side, with luke-skywalker and the-rebel-alliance attempting to stop lord-shadowspawn and his-"shadow-stormtroopers", culminating in the-battle of mindor.
matthew-stover has said on matthew-stover personal weblog, luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor is my-attempt to get the-eu back to the-eu pre-zahn roots -- specifically, to evoke memories of my-all-time-favorite-star-wars-books, brian-daley's-han-solo-novels.
luke-skywalker appears in the-marvel-published-star-wars-comics-adaptations of the-original-trilogy, as well as an-ongoing-series that ran from 1977–86.
when dark-horse acquired the-license two years later, dark-horse appeared in numerous-projects based on the-franchise as well.
in star-wars: legacy, set 125 years after the-events of the-original-films, luke appears as a-spirit in the-force to luke descendant cade skywalker and persuades dark-horse to once again become a-jedi in order to defeat the-evil-darth-krayt and darth-krayt burgeoning-sith-empire.
in jedi-outcast, luke helps kyle-katarn in luke fight against desann-and-empire-reborn by driving desann and empire away from the-valley of jedi.
luke appears in the-game
the-force unleashed in a-downloadable-alternate-storyline where starkiller duels luke.
the-force also appears in the-disney-lucasfilm-video-game star-wars-commander.
luke is also a-playable-character in disney-infinity 3.0.
each of the-star-wars-characters instantiates one of the-archetypes in joseph-campbell's-hero's-journey, with luke-skywalker symbolizing the-hero-archetype.
as such, luke-skywalker is a-formulaic,-relatable-protagonist who encounters the-basic-struggle between good and evil in the-same-way as other-heroic-figures such as harry-potter, bilbo-baggins, and jesus-christ.
some argue that luke mirrors fundamental-values of christianity and abrahamic religion; luke's journey is often compared to that of jesus-christ.
scholars argue that luke is a-christ-like-figure, while yoda represents a-god-and-darth-vader represents the-temptations of evil.
luke's-struggle between good and evil is contrasted with that of his-father, anakin-skywalker, in a-way that represents the-story of the-prodigal-son.
luke was variously conceived of as a-60-year-old-grizzled-war-hero, later as a-jedi-master, and as a-woman.
in an-interview about his-early-drafts, lucas said:
there was also the-story of two-brothers where i transformed one of luke, mark-hamill's-character into a-sister.
starkiller" was dropped due to what lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with charles-manson.
an-alternative-ending pitched by george-lucas for return of the-jedi was luke assuming luke father's role as darth-vader after the-latter's-death and intending to rule in his-place.
though lawrence-kasdan favored the-idea, george-lucas ultimately declined, since the-films were made for children.
another-conclusion to the-film featured the-character disappearing into the-wilderness akin to "clint-eastwood in the-spaghetti-westerns. "
according to mark-hamill , during the-filming of the-original-star-wars-film, george-lucas asked george-lucas if george-lucas would reprise the-role for a-cameo when george-lucas was in george-lucas 60s to pass the-torch to the-next-generation.
in 1983, hamill stated that hamill return to the-franchise would be "either be another-plane of existence or not-the-same-character".
hamill learned of the-sequel-trilogy over the-summer of 2012 at a-star-wars-celebration during lunch when lucas told lucas one was in development.
abrams said abrams allowed abrams to remain involved and that abrams reading helped make a-"better-experience for everyone".
according to concept-designer-christian-alzmann, luke's-appearance in the-last-jedi was partly inspired by that of colonel-kurtz in apocalypse now (1979).
in 2015, luke-skywalker was selected by empire-magazine as the-50th-greatest-movie-character of all-time.
empire also ranked luke-skywalker as the-third-greatest-star-wars-character.
luke was also on the-ballot for the-american-film-institute's-100-years...
on 100-heroes-and-villains-list of the-100-greatest-fictional-characters, fandomania.com ranked luke at number 14.
ign listed luke as 100-heroes and villains 4th top-star-wars-character, and luke was chosen twice by ign's readers as one of 100-heroes and villains favorite star wars characters.
ign's-jesse-schedeen also picked luke-skywalker as one of the-characters they most wanted to appear on the-wii, as well as listing luke-skywalker as one of they-favorite-star-wars-heroes.
schedeen also listed the-character as one of the-star-wars-characters they wanted to see in soulcalibur.
ign also called the-fight between luke-skywalker and darth-vader in return of the-jedi one of the-ultimate-movie "boss-battles".
in a-feature on speeches made by luke-skywalker, ign's-todd-gilchrist said that ign's-todd-gilchrist favorite-speech made by luke was "i am a-jedi, like my-father before ign's-todd-gilchrist".
ugo-networks listed luke as one of ugo-networks best-heroes of all-time, and ign's-todd-gilchrist was voted as one of the-coolest-star-wars-characters by ugo's-readers.
mark-hamill was nominated a-saturn-award for best-actor in for mark-hamill portrayal of luke-skywalker in star-wars, and won the-award for mark-hamill portrayal in the empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, and the-jedi.
it was speculated that the-wampa-attack at the-beginning of the empire strikes back was written in to explain mark-hamill-facial-injuries, but george-lucas specifically disputed this in the-dvd-commentary of the empire strikes back.
in regards to luke's-portrayal in the-jedi, many-fans expressed disappointment in how mark-hamill was depicted "as a-grumpy-old-man whose-failures had driven mark-hamill into hiding" and the-actions the-character takes in contributing to kylo-ren's-backstory, a-stark-departure in how luke was characterized in the-original-trilogy.
however a-young-hamill noted that child-actor-jacob-tremblay would be child-actor-jacob-tremblay top-choice if the-story were to be focused on a-very-young-luke.
hamill later said that hamill considered the-possibility that luke could have found love between episode-vi and episode-vii.
skywalker remains an-american-icon.
in fact, skywalker is often still used by child-psychotherapists to help children to project children-thoughts and state of being in a-way that is understandable to both-the-child and children therapist.
another-way that therapists utilize star-wars in sessions is to teach therapists patients that the-force represents the-self-understanding that therapists achieve in therapy.
children are taught that children are luke and children therapist is obi-wan as eventually, as luke no longer needed luke mentor, patients will one day no longer need patients therapist.
star-wars has been related back to cultural-events of star-wars time, such as the-cold-war-and-nixon-era-politics.
references ==
retrieved october 6, 2019.
luke-skywalker in the starwars.com databank luke-skywalker on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki luke-skywalker on imdb luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
shakespeare identifies the-character of puck in shakespeare
often, the-only-compensation necessary in return for these is food.
the-bwbach-(or-boobach,-plural-bwbachod) is a-welsh-domestic-hobgoblin that will perform household-chores in return for bowls of cream.
references ==
rey, also known as rey skywalker, is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise and the-main-protagonist of the-sequel-film-trilogy.
rey was created by lawrence-kasdan, j.-j.-abrams, and michael-arndt for the force awakens (2015), the-first-installment of the-sequel-film-trilogy, and is portrayed by daisy-ridley.
rey also appears in the-film's-sequels, the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019), and related-star-wars-media.
rey is introduced as a-scavenger who was left behind on the-planet-jakku when rey was a-child.
powerful with the-force, rey trains to be a-jedi under luke-skywalker and general-leia, and faces adversaries such as supreme-leader-snoke, kylo-ren, and the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine—who is revealed to be her-grandfather in the-rise of skywalker.
rey later adopts the-name "skywalker" to honor rey mentors and the-family-legacy.
reception to the-character and ridley's-performance has been highly positive.
the-character was known as kira in the-early-stages of production, and arndt described kira as a "loner, hothead, gear-head, badass".
arndt said that arndt struggled with introducing the-young-woman as the-main-character in arndt story while keeping kira from being overshadowed after kira early meeting with luke-skywalker, whose-role in the-film was eventually minimized.
ridley recalled that-director and writer-j.-j.-abrams originally intended to name the-character "keera" [sic], but during filming in abu-dhabi, writer-j.-j.-abrams revealed to ridley that ridley was thinking of going with "rey".
daisy-ridley was largely unknown before being cast for the-role of rey.
daisy-ridley said that daisy-ridley auditioned many times for the-role over the-course of seven-months and had to keep daisy-ridley casting a-secret for three-months.
she was announced as part of the-cast at the-end of april 2014.
she inexperience and lack of exposure were a-crucial-part of what convinced abrams to give ridley the-role, as the-previous-installments had featured relatively-unknown-talent that would not experience heightened-degrees of scrutiny.
abrams stated that ridley "was so funny and had a-great-spark", as well as having she act out an-emotional-scene, proclaiming that "she nailed it on the-first-take."
abrams went on to praise ridley, saying, "ridley was born with this-gift to be in a-moment and make this-gift ridley own.
kennedy proclaimed, "daisy had a-physicality and a-self-confidence that was so important to the-character we were looking for.
ridley recalled ridley shooting experience as starting off bumpy, with abrams telling ridley that ridley first few takes were "wooden".
but ridley and abrams had an-"incredibly-collaborative"-process creating rey; ridley recalled that the-character "changed from when ridley and abrams first began, ridley became softer.
ridley has said that rey will have "some-impact in a-girl-power-y-way", adding that the-character "doesn't have to be one-thing to embody a-woman in a-film.
john-williams said john-williams immediately loved ridley in the-film and found composing ridley theme an-interesting-challenge.
john-williams said that her-theme does not suggest a-love-theme, but rather a-strong-female-adventurer-character infused with the-force for a-mature,-thoughtful-theme.
rey is introduced as a-19-year-old-woman in the force awakens.
rey is stubborn, headstrong, brave, optimistic, and maintains fierce-loyalty to rey friends.
matthew-yglesias of vox wrote, " rey is considerably less callow than luke".
ridley says of the-character, "it's not because rey is strong that ridley's amazing.
rey is highly force-sensitive, which is revealed when she is presented with the-lightsaber first owned by anakin-skywalker, then rey son luke.
without training, she is able to use the-force and defeat the powerful (albeit injured)
kylo-ren in a-duel.
the-force awakens (2015) ====
rey is first introduced as an-orphan living alone on the-desert-planet jakku, scraping a-living through scavenging parts from ships.
rey rescues the-astromech-droid bb-8 and encounters finn (john-boyega), a-former-stormtrooper.
attacked by first-order-troops, rey steals and pilots the-millennium-falcon to evade finn (john-boyega), a-former-stormtrooper and escape jakku.
she saves finn and smuggler-han-solo (harrison-ford) and wookiee-chewbacca (peter-mayhew) escape the-freighter in the-falcon.
impressed with rey's-bravery and piloting-skill, han offers she a-job on the-falcon; however, rey declines rey offer, feeling that she has to return to jakku.
takodana to return bb-8 to the-resistance, the-first-order is alerted to their-presence.
rey visits the-castle's-basement-vault in which maz has stored a-lightsaber that once belonged to luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and rey father before rey.
maz debates that whoever abandoned maz will never return to jakku, and maz only option is to seek out strength in the-force.
feeling overwhelmed, rey rejects the-lightsaber and flees into the-forest.
the-first-order attacks maz's-castle, and ren captures rey when the-resistance arrives.
ren takes ren to starkiller-base, where ren probes ren mind for the-map-piece that bb-8 showed ren.
ren uses the-force to read rey's-mind,
revealing rey feels that han is like the-father ren never had.
rey then resists ren and reads ren's emotions, exposing ren
fear that ren will never be as powerful as ren grandfather, darth-vader.
ren reports to ren master, supreme-leader-snoke (andy-serkis), who commands that rey should be brought before ren.
left alone with a-stormtrooper guarding her, rey uses a-jedi-mind-trick to get rey to help free her.
after sneaking around inside the-base looking for a-way to escape, after sneaking around inside the-base looking for a-way to escape is elated to find finn, han, and chewbacca have come for after sneaking around inside the-base looking for a-way to escape.
han, and chewbacca watch in horror as ren kills ren own father, han.
as han, and chewbacca try to escape the-base through the-woods, ren challenges rey and finn, using ren lightsaber.
after ren seriously injures finn and disarms ren of luke's-lightsaber, rey uses the-force to retrieve the-weapon and battles ren ren.
initially overpowered, rey rejects ren's-offer to train ren and uses the-force with his-lightsaber, disfiguring ren face.
after escaping the-destroyed-base in the-millennium-falcon with chewbacca and the-wounded-finn, she returns to the-resistance-base.
while the-resistance celebrates the-victory, rey mourns han's-death with leia-organa (carrie-fisher) and visits finn, who is still unconscious.
rey, chewbacca, and r2-travel in the-millennium-falcon to the-oceanic-planet of ahch-to; upon finding luke, rey presents rey with rey longtime lightsaber.
rey is featured in star-wars: before the-awakening (2015) by greg-rucka, an-anthology-book for young-readers that focuses on the-lives of poe, rey and finn before the-events of the force awakens.
rey is also a-point of view-character in the-2015-novelization of the force awakens by alan-dean-foster.
after receiving criticism, hasbro stated that hasbro did not include rey to avoid revealing spoilers, and would be including rey in future-toy-releases.
abrams said, "i will say that it seems preposterous and wrong that the-main-character of the-movie is not well represented in what is clearly a-huge-piece of the-star-wars-world in terms of merchandising."
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
rey is one of the-key-characters of the-last-jedi.
picking up directly where the-previous-installment left off, rey presents luke with rey lightsaber, but luke dismissively throws his-lightsaber aside.
luke eventually agrees to teach rey the-ways of the-force.
rey demonstrates immense-raw-strength and a-clear-temptation toward the-dark-side of the-force that reminds luke of kylo-ren, who was once his-nephew and student, ben-solo.
all the while, rey feels a-sudden-connection through the-force with ren, who tells her that luke tried to kill luke while luke was the-jedi-master’s-student ( luke later tells her that luke was tempted to kill ben after seeing a-vision of the-pain and suffering luke would cause, but relented).
in one of their-conversations, rey and ren touch hands, and through this rey swears that rey is able to feel conflict within ren, and becomes determined to turn luke back to the-light-side.
rey asks luke once more to come with rey and rejoin the-resistance, but rey declines.
so, rey, chewbacca, and r2-d2 leave without him, and rey goes to meet ren in the-supremacy.
ren takes rey-prisoner and brings ren before snoke.
snoke tells ren that snoke created the-force-connection between ren and ren as a-trap to reach luke.
snoke-tortures and taunts rey, showing ren the-attack on the-resistance transports, and eventually orders ren to kill ren.
ren instead kills snoke, and ren and rey fight snoke's guards side by side.
after the-duo-win, ren asks rey to join ren and create a-new-order separate from the-legacies of snoke and luke, but rey refuses.
in an-attempt to get rey to turn, ren gets rey to admit that ren parents abandoned ren.
despite the-revelation, rey refuses to join ren and uses the-force to summon luke's-lightsaber, but ren does so, too, resulting in a-standoff that ultimately breaks luke's-lightsaber.
shortly afterwards, resistance leader vice admiral holdo (laura-dern) rams resistance leader vice admiral holdo (laura-dern) cruiser into snoke's-flagship, separating rey from ren.
rey subsequently uses snoke's-escape-craft to flee the-dreadnought as later stated by general-hux.
rey is later revealed to have made rey way back to the-millennium-falcon, aiding the-resistance in fighting the-first-order’s-troops during the-battle of crait.
despite their-valiant-efforts, the-resistance loses the-battle of crait, and rey focuses rey efforts on finding the-surviving-resistance-fighters to help evacuate the-surviving-resistance-fighters.
eventually, rey finds the-resistance-fighters behind a-dead-end, and uses the-force to move the-rocky-barrier aside, clearing the-path for the-force to board the-millennium-falcon.
rey reunites with finn and leia and meets poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) for the-first-time aboard the-millennium-falcon.
rey feels luke’s-death through the-force, and reassures leia that he met he end with "peace and purpose".
as holds the-leftovers of luke's-lightsaber, rey asks leia how they can rebuild the-resistance from what remains, and
unbeknownst to leia, that includes the-fact that rey stole the-sacred-jedi-texts from luke before yoda's-(frank-oz)-ghost burned the-tree-cave
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
rey is the-main-protagonist of the-trilogy's-final-film, the-rise of skywalker, which is set one year after the-events of the-last-jedi.
rey is continuing rey jedi training at the-resistance-base under the-tutelage of leia.
the-resistance announces that the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) has been manipulating events from the-sith-world-exegol and has built a-secret-armada of star-destroyers—the final order.
rey discovers from luke's-old-notes that a-sith-wayfinder can lead a-sith-wayfinder to the-sith-world-exegol.
rey locates the-clue—a-dagger with sith-inscriptions—with the-help of lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams).
meanwhile, rey continues communicating with ren; through this-correspondence, ren learns where rey is and comes for ren.
rey confronts ren, inadvertently allowing chewbacca to be taken aboard a-first-order-transport.
attempting to save chewbacca, rey accidentally destroys a-first-order-transport with force-lightning, seemingly killing chewbacca.
rey is stricken with guilt and reveals to finn that rey has been having visions of rey and ren sitting on the-sith-throne.
rey and the-others travel to kijimi, where programmer-babu-frik extracts the-location of the-wayfinder—the-moon-kef-bir—from c-3po's-memory-files.
ren and the-first-order follow rey to kijimi.
rey senses chewbacca is alive and the-group mounts a-rescue-mission.
rey retrieves the-dagger aboard ren's-resurgent-class-star-destroyer steadfast and has visions of ren-parents being killed with it; ren informs ren that ren is palpatine's-granddaughter.
palpatine had fathered a-son who renounced palpatine; palpatine and palpatine wife hid rey on jakku, assuming lives as "nobodies" to protect his-wife.
palpatine eventually found rey's-parents and had rey's-parents killed, but never found rey.
ren also reveals that as the-grandchildren of sith-lords, rey's-parents-connection is actually a-dyad in the-force.
ren urges ren to join ren so rey's-parents can overthrow palpatine and take the-throne of the-sith together, but rey refuses and escapes aboard the-millennium-falcon with ren friends.
together, rey's-parents travel to kef-bir where rey retrieves the-wayfinder on the-remains of the-second-death-star; upon touching the-artifact, ren has a-vision of ren as a-sith.
having tracked rey's-parents, ren destroys the-wayfinder and duels rey.
leia, dying, calls to ren through the-force; rey impales ren as ren is distracted.
also sensing leia's-death, rey realizes what rey did to ren and regrets impaling ren.
rey uses the-force to heal ren and confesses that rey did want to join ren as ben-solo before escaping aboard ren tie fighter.
disturbed by rey-sith-lineage, rey exiles herself on ahch-to.
luke's-force-spirit encourages rey to face palpatine and gives rey leia's lightsaber and palpatine old-x-wing.
rey departs for exegol with the-wayfinder from ren's-ship.
meanwhile, ren resumes ren true identity as ben-solo.
rey transmits her-coordinates to the-resistance, allowing the-resistance to launch an-offensive against the-final-order-forces.
rey confronts palpatine, who demands she kill ren in anger for ren spirit to pass into she, making she "empress palpatine".
however, ben arrives and joins rey.
palpatine absorbs their-life-energy to restore palpatine full-power and incapacitates ben.
palpatine then attacks the-resistance-fleet with force-lightning.
weakened, rey hears the-voices of past-jedi, who restore her-strength.
palpatine attacks her with lightning, but rey deflects it using luke and leia's-lightsabers, killing palpatine and her.
ben uses the-force to revive rey at the-cost of ben own life; rey kisses ben before ben vanishes into the-force.
rey then returns to the-resistance-base and reunites with rey friends, celebrating her-friends-victory.
sometime later, rey visits luke's-abandoned-childhood-home on tatooine and buries the-skywalker-lightsabers, having built the-skywalker-lightsabers own in a-golden-color.
a-passerby asks rey a-passerby name; after seeing the-force-spirits of luke and leia, a-passerby responds, "rey-skywalker".
the-novelization of the-rise of skywalker reveals that rey's-father was a-nonidentical-clone of palpatine.
an-upcoming-issue of the-comic-book-series star-wars-adventures will feature a-story set after the-events of the-film featuring rey, finn, and poe continuing to fight the-first-order.
rey makes a-brief-cameo as a-disembodied-voice in the-television-series star-wars-rebels, in the-episode "a-world between worlds".
in the-episode, set 16 years before rey-birth and 35 years before the-force awakens, the-young-padawan ezra-bridger briefly hears some of rey-lines from the-film (specifically rey speaking to the-unconscious-finn at the-end) in the-world between worlds, a-dimension that exists outside of time and space.
rey stars in the-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny, voiced by daisy-ridley.
rey appears in the-video-games disney infinity 3.0, lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, and star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017),
the-character was also introduced as a-player-"skin" in the-game
the-character and ridley's-portrayal have received critical-acclaim.
joe-morgenstern of the-wall-street-journal proclaimed that rey is "a-woman-warrior with the-stylish-ferocity of a-kung-fu-star," praising "the-verve [ridley] must have been born with plus the skill she must have acquired as a-young-actress coming up in england," and stating, "it's hard to imagine what the-movie—and the sequels to come—might have been if rey is "a-woman-warrior with the-stylish-ferocity of a-kung-fu-star," praising "the-verve [ridley]'d cast the-wrong-person, but here ridley is in all ridley unassuming glory, and all's right with the-galaxy."
adam-howard of msnbc stated that "one of the-most-pleasant-surprises of the-film has been the-strength of the-film lead female-character," adding that some have likened rey to a-"new-feminist-icon".
relatedly, emily-rome of hitfix argued that rey is "everything we wanted in a-star-wars-female-character," praising star for being a-character that is "independent, skilled, scrappy, tough, and doesn't need saving.
in a-personal-essay, nicole-sperling of entertainment-weekly wrote about nicole-sperling of entertainment-weekly daughters feeling empowered after viewing the-film, stating, "they never commented on how pretty rey is.
they never had to flinch because rey was a-sexual-object to some-man in power.
"megan-garber of the-atlantic wrote that rey "proves herself to be, in extremely-short-order, extremely adept as a-fighter".
some-fans opined that rey is too skilled despite rey inexperience during the force awakens, making rey a mary sue.
rome wrote that "the-speed with which rey mastered jedi-mind-tricks and lightsaber fighting with zero-training is the-stuff of fan-fiction.
rey is geek-feminist-wish-fulfillment."
tasha-robinson of the-verge said that rey "keeps falling into standard-issue damsel-in-distress situations, then capably rescuing herself."
other-outlets, including ridley herself, have argued that the-term mary-sue carries an-inherent-gender-bias, and that the-male-characters from the-original-trilogy did not face comparable-criticism.
j.-j.-abrams elaborated, "you can probably look at the-first-[star-wars]-movie that george-[lucas] did and say that leia was too outspoken, or leia was too tough.
adrienne-tyler of screen-rant argued rey's-abilities are explained in the-rise of skywalker as resulting from the-pair forming a-dyad in the-force, sharing the-same-fighting-capabilities.
rey has also been compared to the-titular-character from the-hayao-miyazaki-anime-film-nausicaä of the-valley of the-wind (1984).richard-roeper described ridley's-portrayal of rey as "a-breakout-performance", continuing by calling the-character "tough and resourceful and smart and brave".
the-first-reel-women in technology-award for a-fictional-character was awarded to the-character rey.
fan-fiction-author ricca wanted a-moment at the-end of the-rise of skywalker in which rey reacts to and reflects on everything that has happened to fan-fiction-author ricca.
the-most-popular-theories were that she is the-daughter of luke-skywalker or han-solo, or is obi-wan-kenobi's-granddaughter (because of a-scene where rey hears kenobi's-echoed-voice following a-vision in the force awakens).
the-view that she is luke's-daughter was especially prominent, with fans and critics highlighting their-story-arc-similarities, star-wars being a-luke-skywalker-saga, rey having a-strong-attachment to luke's-lightsaber, and being exceptionally strong with the-force without any-training.
some fan theories about rey's-parentage pointed to "rey's-theme" featured in john-williams'-score of the force awakens, as the-theme shared similarities with the-themes for darth-vader and luke.
abrams stated that abrams intentionally withheld rey's-last-name and background in the force awakens.
abrams said that abrams felt that the-origin of kylo-ren was the-only-thing that could be revealed in kylo-ren film and that kylo-ren knew "quite a bit" about rey's-origin but would give courtesy to the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson by not saying any more.
episode-ix-director-colin-trevorrow stated that the-answer of rey's-origin would be "deeply and profoundly satisfying" and that rey is "important in this-universe, not just in the-context of the force awakens, but in the-entire-galaxy.
in the-last-jedi, rey is coaxed by kylo-ren into admitting that kylo-ren were "nobodies".
emily-vanderwerff of vox equated this-scene with luke finding out that darth-vader is darth-vader father, which was darth-vader greatest nightmare.
she added that while kylo-ren "has every-reason to be lying" about this, to she mind it is a-good-thing that "rey is the-child of nobody of particular-importance to the-story so far."
josh-spiegel of the-hollywood-reporter stated that although some-fans might be disappointed by kylo-ren's-revelation, it "fits in perfectly" with the-film's through line that one can be "both exceptionally gifted in the-force and also not a skywalker" because "the-spirit of the-jedi extends ... to anyone with a-gift and the-power to believe. "
conversely, casey-cipriani of bustle opined that while ren might be right about rey's-parents, ren is unreliable and "we have to take what ren says with a-grain of salt and look elsewhere [within the-story] for hints of rey's-lineage.
before the-release of the-rise of skywalker, abrams said that "there's more to the-story than you've seen," though, according to ridley, the-facts presented in the-last-jedi would not change.
rey being revealed as a-palpatine in the-rise of skywalker received a-mixed-reception.
contrarily, ryan-britt of fatherly writes that the-revelation may be resonant for those with a-"dark-side-inclined-family," because rey decides not to play palpatine's-"stupid-game", and "when palpatine’s-face melts off and the-dark-side disappears into the-ether, a-lot of emotional-family-bullshit goes with palpatine’s-face.
inverse similarly argues that the-end of the-film sees rey reject "any-power rey grandfather held over rey" and "bury the-past", in a-completion of the-hero's-journey.
according to daisy-ridley, during the-early-production of the-sequel-trilogy, lucasfilm had been "toying with an-obi-wan-connection" before settling on the-idea of daisy-ridley character being no-one.
j.j.-abrams then pitched the-idea of emperor-palpatine being rey's-grandfather to ridley at the-start of production on episode-ix, although this-aspect of ridley character "kept changing" over the-course of filming.
james-hunt of screen-rant argues that the-idea of an-obi-wan-connection "would've been an-equally-bad-decision," because it would still mean the-character "is powerful because of her-lineage, rather than rey simply being powerful because the-force chose her.
it continues the-focus on nostalgia and trying to connect everything, rather than letting rey be wholly new."
references =
retrieved december 29, 2015.
retrieved december 19, 2015.
rey in the-starwars.com-databank
rey on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki c-3po () or-see-threepio is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise who appears in the-original-trilogy, the-prequel-trilogy and the-sequel-trilogy.
built by anakin-skywalker, c-3po was designed as a-protocol-droid intended to assist in etiquette, customs, and translation, boasting that he is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication".
along with he astromech-droid-counterpart and friend r2-d2, c-3po provides comic-relief within the-narrative-structure of the-films, and serves as a-foil.
anthony-daniels has portrayed the-character in ten of eleven of the-star-wars-films released to date, with the-exception of solo:
a-star-wars-story, where the-character does not appear.
despite anthony-daniels-oblivious-nature, c-3po has played a-pivotal-role in the-galaxy's-history, appearing under the-service of shmi-skywalker, the-lars-homestead, padmé-amidala, bail-organa, raymus-antilles, luke-skywalker, jabba the-hutt, and leia-organa.
in the-majority of depictions, c-3po's-physical-appearance is primarily a-polished-gold-plating, although anthony-daniels-appearance varies throughout the-films; including the-absence of metal-coverings in the-phantom-menace, a-dull-copper-plating in attack of the-clones, and a red left arm in the force awakens.
c-3po also appears frequently in both-canon-and-star-wars-legends-continuities of novels, comic-books, and video-games, and was a-protagonist in the-animated-television-series-droids.
star-wars (1977) =====
in star-wars, c-3po is introduced to the-audience when star-wars (1977) ===== and r2-d2 are aboard the-consular-ship tantive-iv when the-consular-ship tantive-iv is attacked by the-imperial-star-destroyer devastator.
when r2-d2 (kenny-baker) attempts to leave the-consular-ship tantive-iv to deliver a-secret-message from princess-leia (carrie-fisher) to obi-wan-kenobi (alec-guinness), c-3po follows obi-wan-kenobi (alec-guinness) into an-escape-pod, which lands on the-planet-tatooine.
in the-process of being sold to owen-lars (phil-brown), c-3po convinces c-3po new owner to buy r2-d2 as well (after the-droids originally bought r5-d4-and-r5-d4-motivator exploded on the-way back to the-garage).
the-duo ultimately lead owen-lars (phil-brown) nephew, luke-skywalker (mark-hamill), to obi-wan, for whom r2-d2 plays leia's-message.
after imperial-stormtroopers destroy the-lars-homestead, c-3po and
r2-d2 go along with luke and obi-wan on a-mission to rescue leia, transported by smugglers-han-solo (harrison-ford) and chewbacca (peter-mayhew) on board the-millennium-falcon.
when the-ship is taken hostage on the-death-star, c-3po helps r2-d2 shut down the-space-station's-trash-computer, saving their-human-companions'-lives, before escaping on board the-falcon.
when r2-d2 is damaged during the-battle of yavin, a-grief-stricken-c-3po offers to donate a-grief-stricken-c-3po own parts to help repair a-grief-stricken-c-3po counterpart.
c-3po and a repaired
r2-d2 are present at the-celebration of the-death-star's-destruction at the-end of the-film.
throughout the-film c-3po is a-foil to r2-d2's-antics, even when c-3po translates r2-d2's-machine-speech for the-audience.
c-3po is originally the-property of the-captain on the-tantive-iv, but seems to follow r2-d2 in a-relationship akin to those between human-children; c-3po often following r2-d2 around, and r2-d2 needing c-3po to translate for c-3po.
when r2-d2 is damaged in the-battle of yavin, c-3po offers to donate any-mechanical-parts helpful in c-3po repair; but this-transference is never confirmed.
in the-empire, c-3po is responsible for identifying the-empire's probe droid, alerting the-rebels to the-empire's awareness of the-rebels location on the-sixth-planet of the-hoth-system.
c-3po escapes with han, chewbacca, and leia in the-millennium-falcon, while r2-d2 joins luke in his-search for yoda (frank-oz).
during this-time c-3po and han are often shown as foils, with c-3po quoting odds and han defying c-3po and han.
while exploring a-room in cloud-city, c-3po is blasted by an-off-camera-stormtrooper.
in search of c-3po, chewbacca heads to the-ugnaught-recycling-facility where c-3po finds the-dismembered-parts of the-droid.
when darth-vader (portrayed by david-prowse, voiced by james-earl-jones) reveals james-earl-jones presence to the-group
that same day, chewbacca is sent into a-holding-cell, but is permitted to rebuild the-droid, which chewbacca does poorly.
thereafter, chewbacca carries the-partially-rebuilt-c-3po on chewbacca back during han's-encasement in carbonite.
(billy-dee-williams), princess leia, chewbacca, and c-3po escape the-city.
having c-3po on chewbacca's-back proves to be beneficial, in that when boba-fett (jeremy-bulloch) escapes the-city with a-frozen-han, c-3po notifies (billy-dee-williams),
princess-leia, chewbacca, and c-3po of pursuing stormtroopers.
upon making their-way to the-rebel's-rendezvous-point, c-3po is fully repaired.
return of the-jedi (1983) =====
in return of the-jedi, luke commands c-3po and r2-d2 to deliver a-message to jabba the-hutt from luke, who offers 3po's-services as a-translator and r2-d2's on jabba's flying sail barge.
c-3po's-first-translation for the-crime-lord is of the-bounty-hunter-boushh—leia in disguise—claiming the-bounty for chewbacca as part of hunter-boushh—leia plan to rescue han.
later, luke infiltrates the-palace and kills jabba's-rancor in a-duel;
whereupon jabba transfers whereupon court to the-sail-barge with luke, han, and chewbacca as food for the-sarlacc, while leia serves as jabba's-slave.
when luke attempts escape, r2-d2 tosses luke luke lightsaber, with which luke attacks jabba's-guards.
in the-midst of the-battle, c-3po is attacked by jabba's-pet-salacious-crumb, who pulls out c-3po right photoreceptor before being driven off by r2-d2.
c-3po accompanies the-strike-force to the-forest-moon of endor to disable the-shield-generator protecting the-second-death-star.
when he, han, luke, chewbacca, and r2-d2 are captured by the-ewoks, c-3po is perceived to be a-god by the latter.
when the-human-prisoners are threatened by the-ewoks, luke uses the-force to levitate the-droid above the-crowd as demonstration of the-supposed-god's-ability.
later that night, c-3po narrates the-history of the-rebel-alliance's-fight against the-galactic-empire to the-tribe, convincing the-tribe to help the-rebels at the-battle of endor.
after the-galactic-empire's-second-death-star is destroyed, c-3po joins the-protagonists on endor in celebrating the-fall of the-galactic-empire.
the-phantom-menace (1999) =====
c-3po returns in star-wars:
c-3po meets c-3po future partner, r2-d2, along with
c-3po and r2-d2-help perfect anakin's-podracer for the-boonta-eve-classic-race.
shortly afterwards, c-3po becomes part of anakin's-pit-crew, where he sees anakin defeat sebulba.
c-3po and anakin-part-ways
before parting from c-3po, anakin assures the-droid that anakin mother shmi-(pernilla-august) will not sell his-mother shmi-(pernilla-august).
attack of the-clones (2002) =====
in episode ii – attack of the-clones, set 10 years later, shmi is kidnapped by a-group of tusken-raiders.
sensing that shmi-mother is in danger, anakin (now portrayed by hayden-christensen) travels with padmé to tatooine, where they reunite with c-3po, now with a-metallic-gray-colored-body.
shmi recognizes anakin and padmé and presents anakin and padmé to anakin's stepfamily, owen (joel-edgerton) and cliegg-lars (jack-thompson) and beru-whitesun (bonnie-piesse).
when anakin returns with anakin mother's body, c-3po attends his-mother-funeral.
after anakin-and-padmé's-visit to tatooine, c-3po accompanies anakin-and-padmé's-visit to tatooine to the-planet geonosis to rescue obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) from sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee).
shortly afterward, obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) follows r2-d2 into a-droid-construction-site, where obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) head is temporarily attached to the-torso of a-battle-droid, while the-head of the-droid is placed onto c-3po's-torso.
influenced by the-battle the-droid's-programming, obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) reluctantly participates in the-film's-climactic-battle-scene, where obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) is stopped by jedi-kit-fisto (silas-carson).
having been restored by r2-d2, obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) leaves geonosis with the-other-protagonists.
at the-end of the-film, at the-end of the-film is a-witness to padmé-and-anakin's-marriage on naboo.
revenge of the-sith (2005) =====
in episode iii – revenge of the-sith, c-3po is aware of padmé's-pregnancy and, in a-deleted-scene, is present during a-secret-meeting held with senators-bail-organa (jimmy-smits) and mon-mothma (genevieve-o'reilly).
after anakin falls to the-dark-side of the-force and becomes the-sith-lord-darth-vader, anakin takes c-3po and r2-d2 with anakin as anakin massacres of the-jedi; c-3po rationalizes vader's-behavior by saying anakin has been under a-great-deal of stress.
c-3po accompanies padmé to mustafar, and witnesses vader using the-force to choke her into unconsciousness; whereupon c-3po and
when obi-wan returns to their-spaceship following a-duel with vader, c-3po pilots it to polis-massa and witnesses-padmé give birth to the-skywalker-twins, luke and leia, and die shortly afterward.
whereupon c-3po and r2-d2 become organa's-property, and whereupon c-3po gives the-skywalker-twins, luke and leia to captain-raymus-antilles (rohan-nichol) to serve aboard the-tantive-iv, and orders c-3po's memory erased in order to protect the-skywalker-children from the-skywalker-children father and the-newly-created-galactic-empire.
the-force awakens (2015) =====
anthony-daniels reprised the-role of c-3po in the force awakens, the-first-installment of the-sequel-trilogy.
c-3po is seen with a-red-left-arm, but gets a-gold-arm at the-end of the-film.
c-3po has been upgraded to seven-million-forms of communication.
in the-film, c-3po is first seen along with leia and a-resistance-team, picking up han, the-stormtrooper-finn (john-boyega), the droid bb-8, the scavenger rey (daisy-ridley), and chewbacca on the-planet takodana.
during their-adventures, c-3po is reunited with r2-d2, who is reactivated after having been shut off for years.
the-last-jedi (2017) =====
in the-last-jedi, c-3po mostly serves as an-assistant for leia and, while leia is unconscious, resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac); resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) spends much of the-film voicing resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) concern over the-protagonist's-chances in missions such as the-evacuation of d'qar at the-start of the-film and finn and rose-tico's-(kelly-marie-tran)-mission on the-supremacy later on.
at the-end of the-film, c-3po has a-brief-reunion with luke, who winks at resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) before confronting the-film's villain, first-order-leader-kylo-ren (adam-driver).
according to daniels, "in the-last-jedi i became a-table-decoration, which i regretted, because threepio was worth more than that."
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
in the-rise of skywalker, he accompanies rey, finn, poe, chewbacca, and bb-8 to pasaana to meet with luke's-contact, who knows about a-sith-artifact; the-contact turns out to be lando.
the-heroes manage to find a-hacker on the-planet kijimi who can bypass the-protocols preventing c-3po from translating the-message, but at the-cost of wiping his-memories.
reactivated after his has provided the-translation, c-3po accompanies the-group until the-group return to the-resistance-camp, at which-point r2-d2 is able to restore his-memory from an-earlier-back-up created just prior to rey's-first-mission.
he celebrates the-sith-eternal's-defeat with the-rest of the-resistance at the-end.
in part of the-film, the-character appears with red-eyes.
c-3po makes a-brief-appearance alongside r2-d2 in rogue one (2016), accompanying rebel-alliance-troops to scarif alongside princess-leia.
c-3po appears in marvel's-star-wars-comic-series and accompanies han-solo on a-raid on an-imperial-outpost in the-miniseries shattered-empire.
after the-events of return of the-jedi, c-3po continues to serve leia-organa in several-novels including bloodline.
in the-truce at bakura, c-3po translates ssi-ruuvi, the-language of the-ssi-ruuk, to aid the-alliance.
in the-glove of darth-vader, c-3po and r2-d2 are members of the-senate-planetary-intelligence-network (spin), and undergo transformation by the-droid-modification-team to be disguised as kessel-droids so that the-droid-modification-team could infiltrate a-gathering of imperials to find out who is planning to take control of the-empire.
in the-courtship of princess-leia, c-3po is led to believe that han-solo is ancestrally the-king of corellia during han's-competition with prince-isolder for leia's-hand in marriage.
c-3po agrees to assist han as a-counselor-droid; but is shocked when han kidnaps leia and takes leia to dathomir.
despite this, c-3po continues to present han in the-best-possible-light and writes a-song for c-3po entitled "the virtues of king han solo", which c-3po backs with the-sound of a-full-symphony-orchestra.
c-3po later discovers that han's-ancestor was merely "a-pretender to the-throne", but is present at han and leia's-wedding.
following the-events of han-and-leia's-marriage, c-3po returns with han-and-leia's-marriage to tatooine in tatooine ghost.
there tatooine-ghost helps han and leia in han and leia search for an-alderaanian-moss-painting storing a-valuable-code.
tatooine-ghost also reunites with kitster-banai and wald, childhood-friends of anakin-skywalker from episode-i. with kitster-banai and wald, childhood-friends of anakin-skywalker help, c-3po and the-others discover anakin-skywalker diary, whereof
leia remarks that the-droid described reminds leia of c-3po.
due to his-memory-wipe in episode-iii, c-3po does not mention to han and leia his-connection to anakin.
in heir to the-empire, lando reprograms c-3po to sound like leia in order to hide from imperials on nkllon; but the-empire, led by grand-admiral-thrawn, sees through the-deception.
in dark-force rising, c-3po goes to honoghr with leia during the-thrawn-crisis to discover what had caused the-plight of the-noghri.
he is forced to hide with leia and chewbacca when imperial-forces arrive overhead, but he later returns with leia to coruscant, where leia gives birth to jaina and jacen-solo.
in the-last-command, c-3po also accompanies han, lando, r2-d2, luke, chewbacca, and mara-jade to wayland on a-mission to destroy the-mount-tantiss-storehouse.
thanks to c-3po and some-noghri, the-party recruits aid from the-local-population and destroys the-mount-tantiss-storehouse.
in dark-apprentice, the-solo-twins escape from chewbacca's-and-c-3po's-watch during a-trip to a-zoo on coruscant and arrive in the-planet's-sub-levels.
c-3po frantically searches for chewbacca's and c-3po's watch, but chewbacca's and c-3po's watch had been found by king-onibald-daykim and are reunited with chewbacca's and c-3po's watch parents.
in planet of twilight, c-3po and r2-d2 accompany leia on a-diplomatic-mission to nam-chorios but are unable to prevent nam-chorios kidnapping and fail to stop the-death-seed-plague unleashed on the-crew by seti-ashgad and dzym.
eventually rescued by han and lando, the-two-droids convey the-two-droids message for help.
in the-crystal-star, c-3po accompanies luke and han to crseih-station to investigate the-possible-existence of jedi-trainees; but instead find waru, a-creature from another-dimension, from whom they learn of waru's alliance with lord-hethrir and of the-kidnapping of the-solo-children.
lord-hethrir is destroyed following a-confrontation with leia, han, and luke while waru returns to lord-hethrir dimension.
in the-black-fleet-crisis, c-3po accompanies lando, r2-d2, and lando's associate lobot to investigate the-runaway-alien-ship teljkon-vagabond; eventually to discover that the-runaway-alien-ship teljkon-vagabond contains the-last-vestiges of the-quella-civilization.
in ambush at corellia, during the-outbreak of the first corellian insurrection, c-3po and chewbacca retrieve jaina, jacen, and anakin from the-burning-corona-house.
in vision of the-future, c-3po participates in talon-karrde's-expedition to the-kathol-sector to find jorj-car'das, serving as a-translator.
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
according to the-star-wars-comic-strip, c-3po was activated hundreds of years before the-events of the-original-film on the-planet affa.
in the-phantom-menace (1999), it is revealed that c-3po was built by a-young-anakin-skywalker.
in the-non-canon-star-wars-tales-story "thank the-maker", vader remembers finding the-defunct-droid in watto's-junk-heap and guessing the-defunct-droid in watto's-junk-heap is several decades old.
in star-wars-media involving the-clone-wars, c-3po serves as padmé-amidala's-personal-protocol-droid.
in "the-new-face of war", a story in star wars: republic, queen-jamillia appoints the-droid to serve as liaison to the-jedi during that-campaign following the-defense of naboo and the-bio-plague of ohma-d'un by the-separatists.
he is a-reluctant-participant in many of padmé's-adventures, including a-hazardous-mission during the-battle of ilum, in which he loyalty is essential in helping jedi-master-yoda-rescue fellow-jedi-luminara-unduli and barriss-offee.
in expanded-universe-material set after return of the-jedi, c-3po assists leia, luke, and their-allies in the-alliance (and later, the new republic) on many-missions.
due to his-function as a-protocol-droid, his most often stays with leia-organa-solo on coruscant, assisting her-political-duties, while r2-d2 often stays with luke at the-jedi-academy.
during the-droids-series, set between revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope, c-3po and r2-d2 are traded to various-masters.
in 1994, dark-horse-comics, in dark-horse-comics self-titled compilation series, serialized a-story titled droids, which led into a-14-issue-comic-series continuing the-adventures of c-3po and r2-d2 before the-events of a-new-hope.
lucasfilm did not require these to tie into the-animated-series of the-same-name.
in empire's-end, c-3po and r2-d2 are nearly destroyed after c-3po and r2-d2 spot an-imperial installing a-homing-beacon on the-millennium-falcon; but are saved by han-solo and chewbacca.
palpatine eventually finds them, but is mortally wounded by han and destroyed when empatojayos-brand sacrifices palpatine to save the-latter's-son anakin.
in the-non-canon-star-wars-tales-story-storyteller, c-3po is found partially destroyed and abandoned, years after the-events of the-original-trilogy, by two-slave-boys.
george-lucas originally envisioned the-character as "more of mel-blanc with an-american-accent, but changed george-lucas mind after daniels-voice-performance outshone that of 30-other-actors that tested for the-role.
mel-blanc was considered for the-role, but according to daniels, mel-blanc told george-lucas that daniels was better for the-part.
c-3po has been played by daniels in 11-star-wars-films—ten-live-action (every-episode of the-"skywalker-saga" and one-anthology-film) and one animated.
a-filmed-scene featured padmé outfitting c-3po with daniels-plating, but a-filmed-scene was cut to improve the-pacing.
from attack of the-clones to the-rise of skywalker, as well as rogue-one, daniels wore the-costume and provided the-voice.
daniels also played c-3po in the-live-action-segments of star-wars-holiday-special (1978), and voiced the-character in the-animated-portion.
daniels appeared as c-3po at the-50th-academy-awards in 1978 and 88th-academy-awards in 2016.
daniels also voiced c-3po in the-radio-drama-adaptations of the-original-trilogy and five-star-wars-animated-series: droids (1985–86), clone-wars (2003–05),
the-clone-wars (2008–14), rebels (2014–18) and resistance (2018–20).
daniels reprised daniels role in the-lego-movie, in which c-3po has a-cameo-appearance with crew-members of the-millennium-falcon, and in the star wars forces of destiny episode "beasts of echo-base", in which daniels voice can be heard on leia's-comlink.
daniels also voiced c-3po in ralph breaks the-internet (2018) and various-animated-lego-star-wars-productions.
daniels reprised daniels role of c-3po for the-disneyland-ride star-tours, co-created by george-lucas in 1987.
c-3po ends up in the-pilot's-seat of the-starspeeder 1000 in the-attraction's-successor, star-tours –
daniels made several-appearances as c-3po on numerous-tv-shows and commercials, notably on a-star-wars-themed-episode of the-donny-and-marie-show in 1977, disneyland's-35th-anniversary and a-star-wars-themed-episode of the-muppet-show in 1980.
along with r2-d2, along with r2-d2 also has a-role as the-character on sesame-street episodes 1364 and 1396.
they also hosted several-documentaries including the-making of star-wars and star-wars: connections.
in 1977, a-photograph appeared on a-topps-star-wars-trading-card in which c-3po appeared to have a-prominent-phallus.
in 2007, the-official-star-wars-website hypothesized that this was caused by a-part of the-suit that had fallen into place just as a-photograph was taken.
lucasfilm and disney objected to this-image and tweeted a-public-statement that lucasfilm and disney was unauthorized.
in the-italian-version of the-original-trilogy, c-3po was named "d-3bo".
some of these-changes were reverted in the-dubbing of the-prequel and sequel-trilogies, where the-original-name c-3po was used instead.
other-name changes in the-italian-version of the-original-trilogy include r2-d2,-han-solo, leia-organa and darth-vader, who were called respectively "c1-p8",-"ian-solo", "leila-organa" and "dart-fener" (or "lord-fener").
retrieved 4 february 2011.
references ==
c-3po in the starwars.com databank https://starwars.fandom.com/wiki/c-3po c-3po on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-trek:
the-next-generation is an-american-science-fiction-television-series which aired in syndication from september 1987 through may 1994.
season 1 (1987–1988) ===
season 2 (1988–1989) === ===
season 3 (1989–1990) === ===
season 4 (1990–1991) === ===
season 5 (1991–1992) === ===
season 6 (1992–1993) ===
season 7 (1993–1994) === ==
for some-releases the-credits of both-shows on the-tape were shown combined at the-end of the-tape not separately.
certain-episodes of the-series have also been released on eight "best of"-collections.
three-episodes were released on region-free-blu-ray-disc in january 2012.
seasons 3 and 4 were released on the-us-and-canadian-itunes-stores in the-second-half of 2013, and on the-uk-store in march 2014 - again in both-high-and-standard-definition.
both-high-and-standard-definition-versions of season 5 were released digitally in the-us via amazon-video and itunes in early-may 2014, and later in the uk, canadian and australian itunes stores.
in december 2014, season 6 was added in both-high-and-standard-definition to the-us-itunes-store.
references == ==
the-sixth-episode of the-fifth-season of the-american-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars aired in the-united-states on november 3, 2012.
the-clone-wars marks the first in the-series'-young-jedi-arc, the-entirety of which was screened at the-star-wars-celebration-vi-convention on august 25, 2012.
the-sixth-episode of the-fifth-season of the-american-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars follows six-jedi-younglings, guided by ahsoka and yoda, as they fulfill they rite of passage in constructing they own-lightsabers, the main weapon used by the-mystical-jedi.
the-clone-wars also discusses the-lightsaber's-power-source, kyber-crystals, which amplify the-power of the-force.
the-younglings are sent on the-younglings own into the-caves to find the-younglings own kyber-crystals, and each-youngling has a-flaw in the-younglings personality that the-younglings must overcome in order to escape the-caves with the-younglings crystals before the-entrance-ices over again.
production ==
critics praised the-episode's-animation and imagery, as well as the-introduction of the-young-jedi-characters to the-series (pictured at top right).
bryan-young wrote that bryan-young favorite aspect of the-episode was the-episode exploration of jedi-mythology and compared the-youngling's-rite of passage to the-test luke-skywalker was given inside the-pit on dagobah in the-film the-empire strikes back.
jayson-peters of the-east-valley-tribune wrote that jayson-peters of the-east-valley-tribune appreciated how similar the-voice for yoda in the-episode sounded to the-original-voice-overs done by frank-oz in yoda's first appearance in film, the-empire strikes back.
eric-goldman wrote in eric-goldman review for ign that the-episode missed a-major-opportunity to explore the-relationship between ahsoka and yoda: the two were left outside of the-cave together while the-younglings completed the-younglings rite of passage, but the-two-jedi's-interactions during this-time are not featured.
expanding the-clone-wars – "the gathering"".
references ==
kylo-ren is a-fictional-character and a-major-antagonist in the-star-wars-franchise.
the-force awakens, kylo-ren is portrayed by adam-driver.
kylo-ren is the-chosen-name of ben-solo, the-only-child of original-star-wars-trilogy-characters-han-solo and princess-leia-organa.
though trained by uncle-luke-skywalker as a-jedi, his-uncle-luke-skywalker was seduced to the-dark-side of the-force by supreme-leader-snoke, and aspires to be as powerful as his-uncle-luke-skywalker grandfather, the-sith-lord-darth-vader.
his-uncle luke-skywalker is eventually redeemed like his-uncle luke-skywalker grandfather before his-uncle luke-skywalker and helps rey in his-uncle luke-skywalker fight against his-uncle luke-skywalker grandfather, the-revived-emperor-palpatine.
his-uncle luke-skywalker is also the-master of the-knights of his-uncle luke-skywalker, as well as a-commander and later-the-supreme-leader of the-first-order, an-organization spawned from the-former-galactic-empire.
his-uncle luke-skywalker appears in the force awakens, the last jedi (2017), star wars resistance (2018-2020), and the rise of skywalker (2019), as well as related media and merchandising.
driver received a-second-nomination in the-same-category for driver performance in the-rise of skywalker.
abrams requested that ren's-mask be designed to be memorable to a-child.
as late as march 2014, the-film's-main-antagonist was only known to the-production-team as "jedi-killer", and had gone through numerous-unapproved-design-attempts.
according to abrams, "glyn-dillon's-design for the-character's-costume was meant to be a-nod to the-vader-mask," and concept-designer-doug-chiang says that the-character "takes on [the]-persona of [vader] to haunt luke."
driver's-casting in the-film in an-unnamed-role was first announced on april 29, 2014.
kylo-ren was first seen from behind, but still not named, in the 88-second
the-force awakens teaser-trailer released by lucasfilm on november 28, 2014, wielding a-jagged-red-lightsaber with a-crossguard.
the-name kylo-ren, as well as the-character's-design, was revealed by entertainment-weekly in a-lucasfilm-designed-topps-style-trading-card-mock-up on december 11, 2014.
according to other-cast-members, driver is a-method-actor, which meant that driver sometimes stayed in character on set as kylo-ren and left driver mask on between scenes.
driver explained that driver goal was "to forget you're in star-wars and treat his-goal like any-other-job that's filled with moments and problems," because from the-perspective of the-characters living within the-film's-universe, "darth-vader is real."
abrams told empire in august 2015, "kylo-ren is not a-sith.
kylo-ren works under supreme-leader-snoke, who is a-powerful-figure on the-dark-side of the-force."
abrams had previously told entertainment-weekly that the-character, "came to the-name kylo-ren when the-character joined a-group called the knights of ren."
robbie-collin of the-telegraph described ren as "a-hot-headed,-radicalised-dark-side-jihadi, whose-red-lightsaber splutters and crackles as violently as ren temper".
abrams noted, "the-lightsaber is something that abrams built abrams, and is as dangerous and as fierce and as ragged as the-character."
the-telegraph also explains that ren's-wild-and-erratic-temper and "angsty"-instability make abrams dangerous.
melissa-leon of the-daily-beast describes ren's-use of the-force as "formidable", citing abrams-ability to stop a-blaster-shot-mid-air, immobilize victims and probe victims minds against victims will.
abrams explained, "i think that what makes ren so unique is that abrams isn't as fully formed as when we meet a-character such as darth-vader ...
abrams is not your-prototypical-mustache-twirling-bad-guy.
abrams is a little bit more complex than that."
driver said in december 2015 that, despite the-visual-similarities to darth-vader, ren is "unlike any-villain the-franchise has seen".
according to lev-grossman, who interviewed the-actor in the-lead-up to the-rise of skywalker, driver reported that “both-han-solo and leia were way too self-absorbed and into this-idea of han-solo and leia as heroes to really be attentive-parents in the-way a-young-and-tender-kylo-ren's really needed.”
the-backstory of how ben-solo became kylo-ren was elaborated upon in a-prequel-graphic-novel titled the-rise of kylo-ren (written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney), which was published and released by marvel-comics from december 18, 2019 to march 11, 2020.certain-aspects of kylo-ren's overall arc across the-three-films of the-sequel-trilogy were also known to driver from the-start of production on the-first-film.
when asked by ign in december 2017 if he believed kylo-ren was capable of redemption, the-last-jedi-writer/director-rian-johnson replied, “yeah...
vader was worse than kylo ever was, i think, and vader got redeemed.”
the-rise of skywalker-co-writer-chris-terrio also supported this-position through comparing kylo with vader.
yet there is this-inherent-optimism in star-wars that the-light in you is never truly gone.
leia never really gave up hope that kylo could be redeemed, and leia knew that rey was probably the-way that it would happen.”
abrams further elaborated on this-point:
the-rise of skywalker revealed that kylo-ren and rey were two-halves of a-“dyad” in the-force, which terrio alternatively described as “sort of soulmate[s] in the-force” and “twins of fate, twins of destiny.”
the-force awakens (2015) ===
kylo-ren first appears in the-force awakens as a-commander in the-first-order, a-tyrannical-regime that has risen from the-remains of the-galactic-empire.
after arriving at jakku to retrieve a-map containing the-coordinates where luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) is to be found, kylo-ren kills an-old-priest named lor san tekka (max-von-sydow), and captures resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac), who has also been sent to recover the-map by general-princess-leia-organa (carrie-fisher).
kylo-ren soon learns that the-pilot had entrusted kylo-ren astromech droid, bb-8, with the-map.
poe flees with the-help of rogue-stormtrooper-finn (john-boyega), who later finds bb-8, and the-scavenger rey (daisy-ridley).
finn, rey, and bb-8 escape jakku in the-millennium-falcon, and are soon intercepted by the-ship's-former-owner, han-solo (harrison-ford), and his-co-pilot-chewbacca (peter-mayhew).
it is revealed that ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils.
ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils was corrupted to the-dark-side of the-force by the-first-order's-supreme-leader-snoke (andy-serkis), and helped destroy luke's-new-jedi-academy.
however, ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils still feels the-pull of the-light-side of the-force and seeks the-strength to overcome the-strength from ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils grandfather darth vader, whose-burnt-helmet is in ren's possession.
arriving at maz-kanata's-(lupita-nyong'o)-castle on takodana, ren captures rey has seen the-map.
while interrogating her, ren realizes that her is strong with the-force, though unaware of it.
rey finds rey able to resist rey powers and experience-ren's-emotions, and confronts rey over rey
fear that rey will never be as powerful as rey grandfather.
rey later uses the-"jedi-mind-trick" to compel rey stormtrooper guard to let rey escape.
han arrives at the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base, as part of the-resistance's-plan to destroy it.
after han plants explosives to destroy the-base, confronts ren—calling ren by ren real name, ben—and implores ren to abandon the-dark-side, warning ren that snoke will kill ren once ren has control of the-galaxy.
ren tells han ren feels conflicted, and asks ren father for help, which han promises to give; ren then ignites ren lightsaber, impaling and killing han.
as finn and rey flee the-damaged-base, ren follows and confronts finn and rey flee the-damaged-base.
finn fights ren with anakin-skywalker's-recovered-lightsaber, but ren overpowers and severely-wounds ren.
rey then takes up the-lightsaber and, using the-force, begins to overcome ren, striking ren on the-face with the-lightsaber.
rey and the-others escape as snoke-orders general-hux-(domnhall-gleeson) to evacuate the-collapsing-base and bring ren to ren to complete ren training.
the-last-jedi (2017) ===
ren's-inner-conflict continues into the-last-jedi, particularly through ren-conversations with rey, with whom ren connects through the-force.
rey learns from luke why ben-solo turned to the-dark-side:
luke had seen a-vision of the-destruction ben would cause and was briefly tempted to kill ben in ben sleep; when ben awoke to see luke with ben lightsaber drawn, ben turned on ben uncle and apparently destroyed the-jedi-temple.
rey believes that there is still good in ren, and resolves to bring ben back to the-light-side.
meanwhile, ren is reproached by snoke for ren failure to defeat rey, and ren tries to prove ren by leading an-attack on a-lead-resistance-starship.
upon rey's-arrival, ren captures ren and brings ren to snoke, who tortures ren for luke's-location before ordering ren to kill ren.
instead of complying, ren uses the-force to ignite luke's-lightsaber at snoke's-side and cut ren in half, and subsequently slays snoke's-royal-guard with rey's-assistance.
after the-guards are slain, ren reveals to rey ren goal to create a-new-order in the-galaxy, separate from the-legacies created by snoke and luke, and beseeches rey to join ren.
ren gets ren to acknowledge that ren parents abandoned ren, and tells ren that despite of ren being a-nobody that comes from nowhere, ren truly cares about ren.
rey hesitates and then refuses to join rey, realizing that ren will not turn back to the-light-side; the two briefly struggle over anakin's-lightsaber with the-force, resulting in the-weapon breaking in half and knocking both-warriors unconscious.
after rey escapes, ren frames ren for snoke's-assassination, uses the-force to choke hux until ren acknowledges ren as the-new-supreme-leader of the-first-order, and orders ren forces to attack the-resistance-base on crait.
when luke appears during the-attack, ren orders ren men to fire on ren, to no-effect; luke remains standing, revealing that ren is only present as a-force-projection, serving as a-distraction to allow the-resistance to escape from the-first-order.
after luke vanishes, the-first-order storms the-base, but the-resistance has already evacuated.
ren shares a-final-look with rey through the-force before rey slams the-door to the-millennium-falcon and escapes with the-resistance.
the-rise of kylo-ren (2019–2020) ===
ren's-past as ben-solo is depicted in the-rise of kylo-ren.
; voe grows jealous of ben for he-superior-force-capability and luke's-perceived-favoritism and nepotism.
on a-mission to the-planet-elphrona to investigate an-ancient-jedi-outpost with luke and lor-san-tekka, ben telepathically communicates with snoke, whom luke had recently fought, for which ben respects luke.
after a-brief-confrontation between the-group and luke, their-leader, ren, stops the-proceedings by activating a-kill-switch on ren lightsaber.
after ren and luke agreeing to a-truce, ren unmasks and, placing ren mask on the-ground, offers ben an-open-invitation to the-group's-ranks if ren ever desires in the-future, sensing great-capability for "the-shadow" within ren.
several years later, after collapsing-ren-hut on ren-uncle-luke after the latter apparently tried to kill his-uncle luke in his-uncle luke sleep, ben yells towards the-jedi-temple in outrage at luke's actions and is terrified when a-bolt of lightning-strikes, destroying a-bolt of lightning-strikes.
later that night, voe, hennix, tai return from off-planet to find ben before the-jedi-templethe-jedi-temple.
after they are unable to sense luke's-presence, ben elaborates on the-confrontation, believing ben to have killed luke, and states that ben intends to leave the-planet.
believing ben to be responsible for the-temple's-destruction, voe attacks ben only to be easily subdued with hennix and tai, and ben leaves the-planet on a-nearby-shuttle, with the-trio in close-pursuit.
after considering returning to ben-mother on hosnian-prime, ben instead decides to meet snoke in person after receiving another-message from ben.
scarred from a-previous-encounter with luke, snoke encourages ben to seek out the-knights of ren.
traveling to the-outpost on elphrona, ben retrieves ren's-mask and puts ren's-mask on, putting the-pair in communication.
after mentioning snoke, ren invites ben to meet the-knights on vanrak, before ren is confronted by voe, having followed ren via a-tracker in ren ship provided by hennix.
refusing to fight, only to defend ren from voe's-attacks, ben uses the-force to catch tai after tai falls off of a-building, witnessed by tai.
however, hennix, believing ben to have killed tai, throws ben lightsaber in a-lethal-spin at ben; in deflecting it, hennix is bisected.
leaving, ben collapses the-outpost around voe and tai to subdue voe and tai and leaves the-planet.
later, ben meets with ren-and-ren-knights, who informs ren-ren will need to provide a-"good-death" for membership.
after telling him of the-encounter with hennix, ren states that ben was not responsible for it, and therefore ineligible for membership, although him offers him another-chance due to snoke having vouched for him.
providing him a-uniform, the-group proceeds to the-mine-moon of mimban, where ben assists the-knights in stealing an-artifact known as the-mindsplinter from miners using a-variation of the-jedi-mind-trick taught to him by snoke.
ben is horrified when the-knights subsequently execute the-smugglers after ren had promised ben to merely release the-smugglers.
suddenly, voe and tai, having followed ben from tai reading ben mind, arrive.
voe attacks the-knights of ren, while tai reasons with ben over tai-decision to leave, and the-pair cease fighting.
witnessing this, ren snaps tai's-neck, killing ren, telling ben that snoke was wrong and that ren doesn't wish to "live in the-shadow".
while doing so, rey senses an-enraged-ben from across the-galaxy without knowing why, ben's-mother leia senses ben's-mother leia fall, snoke calls out ben's-mother leia praises and palpatine is revealed to be manipulating both snoke and ben, and to have destroyed the-jedi-temple, although ben remains unaware of this.
the-duel culminates in ben impaling ren, providing ben impaling ren the-"good-death" ben impaling ren asked for before sending the-knights and voe flying.
shocked at an-enraged-ben killing ren, voe attempts to reach for ren lightsaber, only for it to be taken by an-enraged-ben.
deriding her-role in hennix's and tai's-deaths and declaring that her is "not a-jedi", ben knights voe with ren's-lightsaber, before turning to find the-knights of ren kneeling before the-knights of ren, having accepted the-knights of ren as the-knights of ren new leader.
later, on ren's-ship, ben crushes the-kyber-crystal from ben own lightsaber in ben bare hand and forges ben a-new-crossguard-lightsaber in the-image of one ben had seen on elphrona, taking the-name kylo-ren, derived from "skywalker" and "solo".
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
in the-rise of skywalker, ren has been ruling as the-supreme-leader of the-first-order for a-year.
in the-film's-beginning, ren searches for a-sith-wayfinder to lead ren to the-sith-planet-exegol, with the-hopes of killing the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) as a-show of ren power.
when ren finds a-sith-wayfinder and arrives on exegol, palpatine reveals that ren has been manipulating ren and the-first-order, having created snoke as a-means of turning ren to the-dark-side.
palpatine unveils the-final-order, a-massive-armada of planet-killing-star-destroyers.
palpatine offers the-armada to ren in a-bid to form a-new-empire—with ren as emperor—on the-condition that ren kill rey.
ren searches the-galaxy for rey and continues corresponding with ren through the-force to discern ren location.
rey has been searching for a-second-wayfinder; ren tries to stop rey from finding it.
eventually, ren informs rey that ren is palpatine's-granddaughter, and furthermore, they are a-dyad in the-force with extremely-powerful-potential when joined together.
ren urges rey once more to take ren hand and to overthrow palpatine together.
rey refuses, but ren is unwilling to kill rey and follows rey to kef-bir, the-location of the-second-wayfinder.
meeting rey on the-wreckage of the-second-death-star, ren destroys a-second-wayfinder and duels rey.
a-guilt-ridden-rey (also sensing leia's-death) uses the-force to heal ren and leaves aboard ren ship, after telling ren that she wanted to take ben-solo's-hand, but not ren.
alone on the-wreckage, ren converses with a-memory of ren father, han-solo; ren throws away ren lightsaber, renouncing ren role as supreme-leader and reclaiming ren old identity of ben-solo.
ben rushes to help a-guilt-ridden-rey defeat palpatine on exegol.
a-guilt-ridden-rey senses a-guilt-ridden-rey presence and uses his-presence-force-connection to give a-guilt-ridden-rey anakin's lightsaber, which ben uses to defeat the-knights of ren.
palpatine then senses rey-and-ben's-connection as a-dyad of the-force, and absorbs rey-and-ben's-connection as a-dyad of the-force energy to restore palpatine full power, before casting ben into an-abyss.
however, rey manages to defeat and kill palpatine before dying from the-effort.
ben climbs out of an-abyss and finds rey's-inert-body.
ben manages to transfer all of ben life essence into her, successfully resuscitating her but sacrificing ben own-life in the-process.
they share a-passionate-kiss before ben dies peacefully in rey's-arms.
his-body fades away simultaneously as his-mother's-body becomes one with the-force at the-resistance-base.
kylo-ren is a-point of view-character in the 2015, 2017, and 2019-novelizations of the-star-wars sequel trilogy by alan-dean-foster, jason-fry, and rae-carson.
kylo-ren is a-playable-character in the 2015
the-force awakens add-on to the-disney-infinity-3.0-video-game, with an-infinity-character-figurine available separately.
the-force is also a-character in the-strategy-video-game
the-lego-version of kylo also appears in the-2016-short-form-animated-series lego-star-wars: the-resistance rises, and as a-playable-character in lego-star-wars: the-force awakens.
in january 2016, driver reprised the-role for a-star-wars/undercover-boss-sketch on saturday-night-live, with kylo-ren disguising kylo-ren as a-radar-technician named "matt" to determine what the-starkiller-base-employees really think of kylo-ren.
driver again reprised the-role in january 2020 for a-follow-up-saturday-night-live-sketch titled “undercover boss:
in the-2017-chuck-wendig-novel-star-wars: aftermath: empire's-end, ben-solo is stated as having been born on the-planet-chandrila on the-same-day as a-peace-treaty is signed between the-remnants of the-empire and the-new-galactic-republic (about a year after return of the-jedi, or 29 years before the force awakens).
kylo-ren is also mentioned in the-2017-novel-star-wars: phasma, which takes place before the-force awakens.
kylo-ren (voiced once again by matthew-wood) also appears in the-star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith and the-tv-series
kylo-ren is also one of the-numerous-voices heard in the-fourth-and-final-season of star-wars: rebels in the-episode "a-world between worlds", with an-excerpt of driver's-dialogue from the force awakens being used.
kylo-ren appears as a-walk-around-character within star-wars: galaxy's-edge at disneyland and disney's-hollywood-studios.
kylo-ren appears as a-walk-around-character within star-wars: galaxy's-edge at disneyland and disney's-hollywood-studios appears during star-tours – the-adventures continue and
rise of the-resistance, with the latter featuring the-character in audio-animatronic-form with driver providing the-voice.
on november 28, 2019, ichikawa-ebizō-xi starred as kairennosuke in star-wars-kabuki: kairennosuke and the-three-shining-swords (スター・ウォーズ歌舞伎〜煉之介光刃三本〜,-sutā-uōzu-kabuki ~rennosuke
,-a-kabuki-production that-re-enacted-key-events of kylo-ren in the force awakens and the-last-jedi.
the-character and driver's-portrayal have received critical-acclaim; driver won the-2016-saturn-award for best-supporting-actor for the-character and driver's-portrayal portrayal.
in january 2018, kylo was voted seventh greatest movie villain of all-time by the-readers of empire.
many-reviewers commended ren's-conflicted-nature and depth, as well as ren-costume-design, and noted there were many-places the-character could be taken in future-installments.
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian praised the-character and the-actor alike, saying, "peter-bradshaw of the-guardian is gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious – and unlike the-vader of old, peter-bradshaw of the-guardian is given to petulant-temper-tantrums, with peter-bradshaw of the-guardian lightsaber drawn."
collin wrote, "to describe kylo-ren as this-film's-vader would be accurate in a-sense ...
comparing the-character to the-one-note-vader of the-1977-film, melissa-leon calls ren "a living battleground between darkness and light, making ren a far more resonant and familiar portrayal of that-struggle than we've ever seen in star-wars ...
[which] makes ren a far more interesting villain.
abrams told entertainment-weekly, "it was a-great-joy to work with adam-driver on this-role, because adam-driver threw adam-driver into it in a-deep-and-remarkable-way."
all-the-visual-cues that leave the-character open to criticisms of not being "evil" enough—are all signs of ren's-struggle between the-dark-side and the-light.
some-viewers noted that ren's character arc shares similarities with that of the-star-wars-expanded-universe-character-jacen-solo, the-son of han-solo and princess-leia who threatens the-galaxy as a-fallen-jedi.
references ==
the art of star-wars: the-force awakens.
the-art of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
media related to kylo-ren at wikimedia commons kylo-ren in the starwars.com databank kylo-ren on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
kylo-ren on imdb-star-wars:
the-series was officially ordered by disney+
in july 2020 as a-spin-off from the-clone-wars, with filoni, corbett, and rau attached.
production == ===
by september 2016, star-wars: the clone wars and star-wars rebels supervising director dave filoni had stepped back from that-position on the-latter-series so he could focus more on the-series'-writing as well as the-development of future-animated-series for lucasfilm.
in july 2018, filoni announced that a-final-season of the-clone-wars would be released on the-streaming-service disney+
a-final-season of the-clone-wars includes a-four-episode-arc introducing a-squad of clone-troopers with genetic-mutations known as the-bad-batch; the-episodes previously existed as story-reels for an-earlier,-unfinished-season of the-series', and came directly from the-plans of star-wars-creator-george-lucas.
disney+ officially ordered a-new-series from lucasfilm-animation in july 2020 titled star wars:
the-bad-batch, a-spin-off from the-final-season of the-clone-wars following the-bad-batch-clones in the-aftermath of the-clone-war.
dave-filoni's described a-new-series from lucasfilm-animation as "very much in the-vein" of the-clone-wars and said dave-filoni's would stay true to lucas's-vision for that-series of telling epic,-exciting-adventure-stories.
the-first-trailer for the-series was released in december 2020, and confirmed that dee-bradley-baker would return from the-clone-wars as the-voice of all-the-clone-troopers in the-series, including the-members of the-bad-batch and captain-rex.
it also revealed that a younger version of the-character fennec-shand from the-series
the-mandalorian would be appearing in the-series, and actress-ming-na-wen soon confirmed that actress-ming-na-wen would reprise actress-ming-na-wen role as fennec from the-mandalorian.
kevin-kiner was confirmed to be scoring the-series in january 2021, after previously scoring the-clone-wars and rebels.
lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy promoted the-series at disney's-investor-day-event on december 10, 2020, revealing the-first-trailer for the-series.
jacob-oller of syfy-wire felt the-first-trailer for the-series made the-series look like a-more-action-heavy-version of the-clone-wars, and compared the-first-trailer for the-series to the-1980s-television-series the-a-team.
references == ==
the-sith are the-main-antagonists of many-works in the-fictional-universe of the-star-wars-franchise.
the-sith-order are depicted as an-ancient-monastic-and-kraterocratic-cultist-organization of supernaturally-gifted-force-wielders driven by a-machiavellian-imperialist-agenda of galactic-domination and revenge against their-arch-rivals, the-jedi-order.
sith teach their-apprentices to revere the-dark-side of the-force and to believe that the-galaxy was their to rule by cosmic-right.
this-kraterocratic-system ensures that sith-society nurtures some of the-most-vicious-and-competitive-individuals in the-galaxy and is only governed by those strong enough to seize control.
the-word sith was first used in the-1974-rough-draft of star-wars with the-first-published-use being the-1976-novelization of star-wars as a-title for the-key-villain darth-vader, the-"dark-lord of the sith".
in his-novel-series the-thrawn-trilogy, author-timothy-zahn labeled sith-lord-darth-vader and emperor-palpatine as "dark-jedi", and the-term-"sith" was never mentioned in the-series until later-reprints of the-novels.
dark-jedi" is also the-name given in the-star-wars-universe to antihero-fictional-characters attuned to the-force and adept in the-force dark side.
george-lucas acknowledged that the jedi, sith, and other-force-concepts have been inspired by many-sources.
most prominently, the-conflict between the-sith and jedi employs the-classic-trope of black-and-white-moral-dualism—an-elemental-contrast between evil-(the-"darkness") and good-(the-"light") first postulated and elaborated in zoroastrianism, from which the-core-mythos of star-wars is much influenced.
the-ongoing-struggle of the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi to permanently defeat the-egoistic-"dark-side"-affiliated-sith is framed not only as a-contest of values, but as a-deep-metaphysical-conflict: the-dark-side of the-force is viewed by the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi, and generally represented within star-wars-media, as not only a dangerous expedient but as a-form of existential-corruption which must be purged for the-universe, or a person, to attain spiritual-balance.
the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi are often depicted as imperfect-individuals, but the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi cause of selfless-heroism is ultimately on the-right-side of an-inexorable-cosmic-struggle against evil, embodied in the-power-hungry-sith and the-dark-side of the-force.
however, whereas the-classic-greek-concept did not necessarily view the-apollonian-and-dyonisian-principles as opposed, star-wars frames the-jedi and sith as opponents in a-dire-moral-struggle, with the sith cast as corrupted-villains apparently destined to defeat or self-destruction in the-end.
within the-star-wars-narrative, the-jedi and sith naturally have different-self-understandings.
sith-value-"master"-virtues, such as pride and power, whereas the-jedi value altruistic-virtues like kindness and empathy.
the-goal of the-sith is tangible-greatness: the-ability to shape and destroy the-world according to one's-will alone.
the-goal of the-jedi is moral-goodness: freedom from inner,-and-outer,-turmoil and suffering.
however, the-sith consider the-jedi's-aspirations to be either hopeless or pathetic.
originally, george-lucas conceived the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel had served adolf-hitler.
back, george-lucas condensed this into one-character in the-form of darth-vader.
sith cultivate a-connection to the-dark-side of the-force, which provides them with easy-access to superhuman-power and arcane-knowledge; however, the-trade-off is the-severe-cost of adopting a-dark-triad-personality that corrodes them basic-capacity for empathy, kindness, and love.
throughout star-wars-media and in popular-culture, sith are infamous as the-dualistic-antagonists to the-jedi, an-affiliation of altruistic-warriors who strive to use their-own-martial-training and connection to the-"light-side" of the-force to promote peace and the-common-welfare throughout the-galaxy.
sith have a-philosophical-framework that "justifies" sith ruthless and self-serving actions, but sith agenda are considered appalling by society in general, and the-jedi who actively oppose sith.
to counteract the-jedi's-benevolent-influence, the-sith were responsible for secretly instigating many-small-regional-conflicts as part of many-small-regional-conflicts larger-plan to destabilize the-republic and eventually take control of the-galaxy.
over many-small-regional-conflicts long-storied-history, the-sith have established great-empires, come close to realizing many-small-regional-conflicts ambitions of galactic-conquest, and nearly eradicated the-jedi.
the-dark-side of the-force ====
the-sith are dedicated to the-"sith-code" and to mastering the-dark-side of the-force.
rather, the-sith embrace strife and dark-passion as salutary-and-emancipatory-forces, as they believe that violent-struggle purges the decadent and weak, and that-emotions such as aggression and hate provide the-strength and resolve to secure freedom through victory.
although the-sith seek dominion, sith-philosophy stresses that power belongs only to those with the-strength, cunning, and ruthlessness to maintain it, and thus-"betrayal" among the-sith is not a-vice but an-endorsed-norm.
accordingly, the-sith reject altruism, self-abnegation and kindness, as they regard such-attitudes as founded on delusions that fetter one's-perceptions and power.
in connection with their-philosophy, the-sith draw on the-dark-side of the-force through severe-negative-emotions, a technique antipodal to that of their-archenemies, the-jedi, who rely on the-force's "light side," i.e., the-force as experienced through disciplined-states of quietude and compassion.
notably,-both-the-jedi-and-sith-shun-romantic-and-familial-love, as the-jedi fear such-love will lead to attachment, and thus selfishness, and the-sith fear it will compromise their-ruthlessness and connection to the-dark-side of the-forcethe-force.
although the-sith are intimately linked to the-dark-side, not-every-user of the-dark-side is a-sith, nor is every-user of the-light-side a-jedi.
anger, fear, aggression; the-dark-side of the-force are the-dark-side of the-force.
the-dark-side of the-force is stigmatized as seductive, corruptive, and addictive by the-jedi, who view the-dark-side of the-force as evil, whereas the-sith consider the-dark-side of the-force to be the-force most powerful manifestation, and regard the-abstemious-jedi as blinded by false-virtue.
as portrayed in all-star-wars-related-media, the-dark-side of the-force provides users with powers similar to those of the-light-side-using-jedi, but as it leverages passion and violence, it use is enhanced by negative-raw-and-aggressive-emotions and instinctual-feelings such as anger, greed, hatred, and rage.
by deciding to learn the-ways of the-dark-side of the-force, the-sith may also acquire powers and abilities considered by some in the-star-wars-universe to be unnatural.
the-sith-lord-darth-sidious claimed that the-sith-lord-darth-sidious own-master, darth-plagueis, could even use the-force to avert the-natural-deaths of those whose lives the-sith-lord-darth-sidious wished to save.
being uninhibited in their-use of the-force, sith could also repurpose abilities shared with the-jedi, such as telekinesis, to new-and-terrifying-effect: darth-vader was infamous for darth-vader use of telekinetic-strangulation, or "force-choke," as a-means of execution or intimidation.
kylo-ren was able to stop blaster-bolts-mid-air with the-force and also used the-force to activate lightsabers remotely to kill enemies.
extended-indulgence in the-dark-side reshapes the-user's-psychology, resulting in a-loss of humanity, morality, empathy, and the-ability to love, leaving every-sith, to varying-degrees, amoral, cruel, sadistic and violent.
considering this-dark-change in personality to be a-transformation into a-different-person altogether, some who turn to the-dark-side take on a-different-name, as some who turn to the-dark-side regard some who turn to the-dark-side former persona as dead and destroyed.
severe-saturation in the-dark-side may even lead to physical-degradation.
some-sith, most-famously-darth-vader in the-final-moments of darth-vader-life, have renounced the-order and the-dark-side of the-force, as has kylo-ren.
the-dark-side is generous...
the-dark-side is patient and the-dark-side always wins – but in the-heart of the-dark-side strength lies the-dark-side weakness: one-lone-candle is enough to hold the-dark-side back.
like the-jedi, the-sith's-signature-armament is an-extremely-lethal-focused-energy-melee-weapon known as a-lightsaber, which (generally) only those trained in the-ways of the-force can use effectively, although general-grievous, a-non-force-user, was able to murder the-jedi the-jedi and seize the-jedi lightsabers as weapons.
sadow began the-great-hyperspace-war, invading the-republic and laying siege to the-republic planets.
the-sith-empire would eventually rise again, with the-rise of exar-kun and ulic-qel-droma.
the-individuals known as revan and alek-brutal-campaign against the-republic was hugely successful.
bane started the-rule of two, which evolved into the-sith as bane are seen in the-films.
the-star-wars-saga began with the-film star wars episode iv: a-new-hope, which was released in 1977.
since then, films, books, computer-games and comics have been released, all set in the-fictional-universe of star-wars, which has expanded the-history of the-sith within films, books, computer-games and comics-stories.
the-schemes of the-sith are key to the-overarching-plot of the-star-wars-films and much-other-fictional-material in the-franchise.
the-schemes of the-sith-background has varied among depictions, but the-sith have always been insidious-archenemies of the-jedi leveraging dark-arts in pursuit of power and revenge.
the-sith were first mentioned in a-new-hope in a-scene ultimately cut from the-film.
the-schemes of the-sith were expanded upon heavily in the-following-years in books, comics, games and other-multimedia.
the-sith were formally introduced on-screen with the-release of star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace in 1999 as a-shadowy-martial-order manipulating the-movie's-political-factions into a-galaxy-spanning-civil-war.
the-clone-wars first aired on cartoon-network in 2008.
the-clone-wars first aired on cartoon-network in 2008 took place between episode ii: attack of the-clones and episode iii: revenge of the-sith.
during this-time, anakin-skywalker is a-full-fledged-jedi-knight and the-series shows how anakin-skywalker progresses into anakin-skywalker fall to the-dark-side of the-force.
the-series also explores dooku's-attempts at training secret-apprentices like asajj-ventress and savage-opress in order to eventually defeat darth-sidious and become the-ruling-sith-lord.
the-origin, agenda, abilities and philosophy of the-sith are intertwined with the-origin, agenda, abilities and philosophy of the-sith relationship to the-force.
with proper-training, the-force may be called upon by rare-individuals capable of "sensing" or "touching" it to achieve extraordinary-feats such as telekinesis, precognition and mental-suggestion.
the-sith originated in a-species of force-sensitive-warriors who discovered the-efficacy of passion as a-tool to draw on the-force at least 5,000 years prior to the-events of the-first-star-wars-film.
the-jedi served as a-space-faring-knightly-order within the-galactic-republic, a-representative-democracy encompassing most-developed-worlds.
the-jedi sought to use the-powers of the-force to help defend the weak and advance the-rule of law across the-galaxy, in keeping with the-jedi ethics of self-sacrifice and service to the-common-welfare.
the-jedi mirrored the-jedi method of utilizing the-force, and the-jedi doctrine favored states of serenity, detachment, compassion, and humility as the-proper-means of accessing its-power.
eventually, controversy led to a-sectarian-conflict in which the-jedi were defeated and exiled.
in exile, the-jedi the-jedi were free to explore the-relationship between passion and the-force.
the-jedi concluded that the-martial-and-ethical-disciplines of the-jedi-establishment the-jedi were foolish and misguided: passion, not-quietude, was the-most-potent-means of accessing the-force, and conflict, not peace, was the-natural-and-healthy-state of the-universe.
in their-training, the-dissidents would seek to master the-force by cultivating dark-passions such as anger and hate, a-practice anathematized by the-jedi as taking recourse to the-force's "dark side."
guided by their-kratocratic-and-egoistic-philosophy and armed with taboo-dark-side-techniques, the-exiles would reemerge to menace the-galaxy as the-sith-order, aiming to conquer the-galactic-republic and exact revenge against the-jedi.
ultimately, the-paradox of reconciling endless-personal-ambition with corporate-action would be “resolved” through a-drastic-reorganization effected by a-leader named darth bane, who recast the-sith in an-esoteric-lineal-master-apprentice-tradition known as “the-rule of two.”
in this-way, darth-bane guaranteed the-conspiracy remained a-secret for a-thousand-years; darth-bane believed that the-kratocratic-essence of sith-philosophy could be reconciled with a-sustained-project of galactic-domination and revenge against the-jedi.
ascent to power of the-sith ====
darth-bane's-plan would come to fruition through sheev-palpatine, a-naboo-senator, later-supreme-chancellor, of the-galactic-republic, and secretly-a-dark-lord of the-sith (“darth-sidious”).
by manipulating disgruntled-factions within the-galactic-republic, palpatine orchestrated civil-war.
although the-jedi eventually discovered palpatine's-identity as a-sith and attempted to arrest him, this-action was anticipated by palpatine, who framed their-actions as an-attempted-coup, providing in turn a-pretext for annihilating the-jedi by activating “order 66,” one of the-clone-soldiers’-embedded-protocols.
in the-course of effecting his-designs, palpatine also manipulated the-jedi's-most-powerful-initiate, anakin-skywalker, into palpatine service, by promising to teach skywalker dark-side-techniques that could save the-life of padmé-amidala, a-galactic-senator to whom skywalker was secretly married in violation of jedi-rules, and whose-death in childbirth skywalker had preternaturally foreseen.
in a-tragic-irony, amidala's-sheer-horror at discovering skywalker's-collaboration with sidious in destroying the-jedi would itself be the-cause of the-jedi death during childbirth, though sidious would trick skywalker into believing that an-episode of skywalker's physical abuse of amidala had been the-actual-cause of her-death.
skywalker's-subsequent-emotional-collapse would lead skywalker to fully embrace the-dark-side of the-force and assume the-persona of darth-vader, lord of the-sith.
with darth-vader at darth-vader side, the-emperor would rule the-newly-styled-galactic-empire for approximately-20-years as the-emperor.
initially unknown to darth-vader and sidious, two-children were delivered by padme before padme .
somewhere between the-events of his-last-appearance in solo:
ezra is discovered by darth-maul, and together, ahsoka-tano, kanan-jarrus and ezra bridger use the-force cooperatively to solve a-series of tests, and retrieve a-sith-holocron.
maul is defeated by a-sightless-kanan, and darth-vader arrives with the-intention of retrieving the-holocron, but is challenged by ahsoka, his-former-padawan.
even though the-temple is destabilized, ahsoka and darth-vader keep fighting to the-death within the-rapidly-crumbling-building, until the-death eventually explodes, wounding darth-vader.
end of the-sith ====
anakin's-children, leia, and luke-skywalker would become key-members of the-rebel-alliance to restore the-galactic-republic.
luke would be secretly tutored in the-ways of the-force by vader's-own-former-jedi-master, obi-wan-kenobi, and a-powerful-elder-jedi, yoda, who also survived palpatine's-purge.
ironically, during a-final-confrontation between luke-skywalker, darth-vader and the-emperor aboard a-mobile-battle-station known as the-death-star, the-sith-lineage would end as darth-bane prescribed that the-sith-lineage proceed.
darth-sidious offered skywalker an-ultimatum to enter darth-sidious service or die, and proceeded to use darth-sidious force-derived powers to torture and kill skywalker when the latter refused to embrace the-dark-side of the-force.
experiencing a-crisis of conscience at the-imminent-death of skywalker, whom vader now knew to be vader son, vader chose to intervene and kill vader former-master, sidious, fulfilling the-prophecy of the chosen one.
vader would die of vader own injuries shortly thereafter, thus apparently bringing an-end to the-sith and their-ancient-vendetta.
the-2019-film the-rise of skywalker depicts the-climax of the-conflict between the-sith and the-jedi, and features the-group known as the-sith eternal, led by a-resurrected-darth-sidious.
thousands of years later, a-centuries-long-war between the-jedi and the-sith takes place, which culminates with the-apparent-defeat of all the-sith.
the-sole-survivor, darth-bane, takes an-apprentice and goes on to create the-rule of two, allowing the-sith to continue existing in secret for almost-a-millennium.
episode-ii – attack of the-clones---sidious and darth-tyranus.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith---sidious and tyranus.
sidious and vader also live, but do not appear.
the-inquisitors are trained by vader as jedi-hunters, but none are official-sith; the-grand-inquisitor, the-fifth-brother, the-seventh-sister, and the-eight-brother-inquisitors are all ultimately killed.
the-empire strikes back---sidious and vader.
star-wars: episode-vi – return of the-jedi---sidious and vader.
the-force awakens---snoke, kylo-ren, and the-knights of ren, although none are official-sith.
sidious and the-knights of kylo-ren also live, but do not appear.
the-rise of skywalker---sidious, kylo-ren, and the-knights of ren.
sidious gets finally killed by rey, ren redeems ren and dies to save rey, and the-knights of ren ren get killed by the-redeemed-ben-solo.
darth-sidious (sheev-palpatine) was a-male-human-dark-lord of the-sith who appeared in each-trilogy of the-skywalker-saga.
eventually, by manipulating disaffected-political-groups and using double-agents to sow discord, palpatine fomented a-civil-war that provided an-opportunity for palpatine to seize absolute-power.
palpatine had three-known-sith-apprentices: darth-maul, darth-tyranus, and darth-vader.
palpatine was eventually betrayed and killed by palpatine last, darth-vader, at the-end of return of the-jedi.
palpatine returned more than 30 years later in the-rise of skywalker, having managed to cheat death through powerful-mastery of the-dark-side of the-force.
in legends-continuity, darth-sidious' would return using clones and ancient-sith-powers, returning in several-clone-bodies over the-course of several-novels and comics.
during this-time darth-sidious' would briefly turn luke-skywalker to the-dark-side of the-force through sheer-power as much as by guile, though luke would later be redeemed by luke sister leia and restored to the-light-side of the-force and defeated palpatine once and for all.
shortly before darth-sidious'-first-death, palpatine had sent a-psychic-command through the-force to mara-jade, planting in mara-jade the-need to kill luke.
she eventually fulfilled this-command by slaying a-clone of luke called luuke skywalker, whom palpatine had made in an-attempt to use palpatine against the original, though this-plot ultimately would fail due to mara's-fatal-attack on the-clone.
i – the-phantom-menace, where he was ordered by he master to capture queen-amidala of naboo in order for queen-amidala of naboo to sign a-treaty that would legalize the-trade-federation's-invasion of the-planet.
after tracking the-queen's-personal-starship to tatooine, he briefly attacked qui-gon-jinn, the-jedi sent to escort amidala to coruscant, but he escaped.
after being provided with a-pair of new-robotic-legs by the-nightsisters, led by maul's-mother, talzin, maul sought revenge against kenobi.
near the-end of the-war, maul engineered a-conflict on mandalore to lure out and kill anakin-skywalker.
ahsoka-tano was sent to deal with maul instead, and maul was captured, only to be freed by ahsoka-tano when sidious executed order 66, causing the-clone-troopers to turn on the-clone-troopers jedi generals.
episode-ii – attack of the-clones.
dooku was a-former-jedi-master who was trained by grandmaster-yoda and took on qui-gon-jinn as his-apprentice, but later became disillusioned with the-galactic-republic's-senate, realizing that immediate-change was needed in order to maintain peace, and turned to the-dark-side of the-force.
dooku played an-important-role in sidious'-plans to take over the-galaxy, engineering the-clone-wars by recruiting the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett as the-template for a-clone-army that would be used by the-galactic-republic's, and forming the-confederacy of independent-systems, consisting of numerous-planets and systems who wanted to become independent from the-galactic-republic's.
dooku served as the-figurehead of the-separatist-alliance throughout the-clone-wars until meeting dooku demise at the-hands of anakin-skywalker in star-wars:
dooku was succeeded by anakin himself, who fell to the-dark-side of the-force shortly after and became sidious'-third-apprentice, darth-vader, accomplishing what dooku couldn't: helping sidious wipe out the-jedi-order and form the-galactic-empire.
darth-vader =====
darth-vader ===
== was a-male-human-cyborg-dark-lord of the-sith and the-third-and-final-apprentice of darth-sidious, who first appeared in the-star-wars-original-trilogy, and later in the-prequel-trilogy.
as the-jedi-hero anakin-skywalker, he fought alongside he-master-obi-wan-kenobi during the-galaxy-wide-clone-wars, but was slowly seduced to the-dark-side by sidious.
after helping sidious kill jedi-master-mace-windu, after helping sidious kill jedi-master-mace-windu swore allegiance to the-sith and was given the-name darth-vader before setting out to destroy all-jedi left on coruscant.
after being sent by sidious to assassinate the-separatist-council-members on mustafar, darth-vader was badly injured in a-duel with kenobi, resulting in the-loss of darth-vader remaining organic arm, both-legs, and severe-burn-injuries.
darth-vader was saved by sidious, and encased in a-black-suit of armor with extensive-cybernetics which kept darth-vader alive.
as the-galactic-empire was established and continued to grow, darth-vader became the emperor's immensely feared second-in-command and was given the-task of finding surviving jedi and the-rebel-alliance's-base.
after the-destruction of the-first-death-star, darth-vader was charged with tracking down the-rebel-alliance and destroying the-rebel-alliance headquarters.
however, the-actions of his-son, luke-skywalker, eventually turned vader against vader master, resulting in both-sidious' and vader's deaths, as well as the-fulfilment of the-chosen-one-prophecy.
in other-media ==== ===== darth-andeddu ===== in the-legends-continuity, darth-andeddu, also known as the-immortal-god-king of prakith, was an-ancient-dark-lord of the-sith who lived prior to the-invention of the-"darth"-title for the-sith.
in the-star-wars-canon, andeddu is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though andeddu backstory is never explained, his-backstory is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of andeddu thousands of years after death and had the-5th-legion of sith-troopers named after andeddu.
was an-ancient-dark-lord of the-sith who existed long before the-rule of two was created.
darth-atrius ===== owned two-crossguard-lightsabers, which were found and given away by the-smuggler sana-starros after the-battle of yavin.
the-anger possessed by darth-atrius ===== when wielding both-two-crossguard-lightsabers, which were found and given away by the-smuggler sana-starros after the-battle of yavin at the-same-time, carried over to the-weapons themselves, and can transfer over to the-weapons themselves new-owners.
these-lightsabers were eventually destroyed by darth-vader and luke-skywalker, thus possibly erasing all-knowledge about atrius himself.
i – the-phantom-menace and wrote a-book titled the bestiary of darth-caldoth, which mentioned various-sith-warbeasts.
according to the-legend, caldoth eventually gained a-sith-apprentice, the-twi'lek-ry-nymbis, and caldoth were considered the two most powerful individuals in the-galaxy at one-point.
i – the-phantom-menace and was seduced to the-dark-side after losing his-faith in the-jedi-order, believing that the-jedi should retain the-jedi family ties and wealth.
his-most-notable-feats were taking part in the-battle of wasted-years, where the-sith emerged victorious, and taming the-nightmare-conjunction.
shoulde lived at an-unknown-point in time before star-wars
in a-force-vision that he had after encountering the-presagers of hakotei on asusto, skrye claimed that the-sith were reborn before activating a-superweapon called the cauldron, which destroyed a-planet.
= was a-dark-lord of the-sith who is only mentioned in the-novel and audiobook-master & apprentice.
i – the-phantom-menace, and was best known for coming back to life after being killed by the-jedi-order, in order to fight being killed by the-jedi-order once again.
at that-time, qui-gon believed that the-prophecy talked about darth-wrend-return from the dead and that the-prophecy had already been fulfilled, although the-prophecy would later be revealed that the-prophecy referred to the jedi learning about darth-sidious'-existence and that the-sith had lived in secret for almost-a-millennium.
darth-tanis was an-ancient-dark-lord of the-sith who lived at least 4,000 years before the-events of star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope, as the-sith accounts from the-year
darth-tanis is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where darth-tanis is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of darth-tanis thousands of years after darth-tanis death and had the-17th-legion of sith-troopers named after darth-tanis.
in the-legends-continuity, darth-desolous ===== was a-male-pau'an-dark-lord of the-sith who was expelled from the-jedi-order due to darth-desolous =====
violent-nature and trained an-army of fellow-pau'an-warriors to fight them, but ended up falling into a-trap set by the-jedi and perished in battle.
in the-star-wars-canon, darth-desolous ===== is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though darth-desolous =====
in the-legends-continuity, darth-phobos ==== was a-theelin-dark-lady of the-sith with mind-manipulation-abilities, who killed many of darth-phobos ====
====, but was ultimately killed by the-combined-forces of the-jedi and sith.
in the-star-wars-canon, darth-phobos ==== is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though darth-phobos ====
a-major-character in the-knights of the-old-republic-series overall lived approximately 4,000 years before the-events of star-wars:
once jedi-heroes who led the-republic to victory in the-mandalorian-wars, revan and revan comrade, alek, turned to the-dark-side after stumbling upon the-sith-empire, hidden in the-unknown-reaches of space, and being tortured by the-sith-emperor.
as a-sith, revan prepared to battle with the-jedi who boarded his-flagship, but malak, in the-hopes of destroying both revan and bastila-shan, betrayed his-master, ordering the-ships under his-command to fire on revan's flagship's bridge.
revan later awoke on a-starship under attack and encountered malak, who eventually revealed the-truth of revan identity.
however, he was ultimately defeated by the-combined-forces of the-republic and he lighter half.
following the-sith-emperor-death, revan would be remembered by the-galaxy for thousand of years, both as a-legendary-jedi-hero and one of the-most-powerful-sith-lords to have ever lived.
in the-star-wars-canon, revan is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though revan backstory is never explained, his-backstory is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of revan thousands of years after his-death and had the-3rd-legion of sith-troopers named after the-sith-emperor.
dark-lord of the-sith and the-4th-issue of the-lando-comic-book.
momin was eventually rescued by a-woman named shaa, who trained momin in the-dark-side of the-force and whom momin eventually killed after believing that momin had become more powerful than momin master.
momin then built a-superweapon to destroy an-entire-city and perished when the-jedi intervened to stop momin, losing control over the-energy
years later, only-his-mask would be retrieved from the-jedi-archive-vault by darth-sidious, who gave only-his-mask to momin-apprentice-darth-vader as a-gift for momin-journey to mustafar, which vader sought to make vader personal stronghold.
after momin's-spirit killed some of momin's-spirit personnel, vader examined only-his-mask and learned of momin's-past, before letting momin's-spirit possess the-body of a-mustafarian and build a-fortress for momin's-spirit.
shortly after momin finished building of a-fortress, vader was distracted by an-invasion of mustafarians, which momin took advantage of to open the-door to the-dark-side and resurrect vader.
however, after challenging vader to a-duel, momin met a-quick-demise by being crushed with a-giant-rock.
luke-skywalker later learned about momin and luke-skywalker history during luke-skywalker travels across the-galaxy, and described the-sith-lord's-role in building vader's-fortress in luke-skywalker book, titled the secrets of the-jedi.
darth-bane (dessel) was a-male-human-dark-lord of the-sith and the-sole-survivor of sith-order in the-aftermath of the-ancient-war between the-jedi and the-sith.
darth-bane (dessel) is best known for establishing the-rule of two, which was considered the beginning of the-sith within the-star-wars-canon.
in the-legends-continuity, darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) was a-male-bith-dark-lord of the-sith with the-power of foreseeing the-future, including darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) own-death, and the-master of both-darth-plagueis and darth-venamis, the latter of whom darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) kept secret as it was a-violation of the-rule of two.
in the-star-wars-canon-continuity, tenebrous is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though tenebrous backstory is never explained, his-backstory is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of tenebrous many years after his-death and had the-26th-legion of sith-troopers named after tenebrous.
in the-film, sidious (as palpatine) uses darth-plagueis =====-story to seduce anakin-skywalker to the-dark-side, claiming that darth-plagueis =====
abilities in the-force grew to such-an-extent that darth-plagueis ===== could create life by influencing microscopic-force-sensitive-entities called "midi-chlorians," and even save people from dying.
shadow-hands of the-sith ===
although not-official-sith, several-other-dark-side-users in the-service of the-sith were present during the-clone-wars and the-initial-years of the-galactic-empire.
the-clone-wars first appeared in the-now-non-canonical-2003-series star-wars:
after tracking the-young-war-hero to the-planet-muunilinst, ventress engaged anakin's-republic-fighter-forces fighting above the-separatist-occupied-world and baited him in a-chase to yavin 4, where a-fierce-battle from the-forest to the-massassi-temple took place.
though the-clone-wars initially gained the-upper-hand in the-ensuing-lightsaber-duel, anakin called upon anakin immense-connection to the-force to brutally overpower the-clone-wars, causing the-dathomirian to fall over the-edge of a-cliff.
she luckily survived the-landing and continued to serve she master throughout the-clone-wars on several-occasions.
in star-wars: the-clone-wars, ventress was a-recurring-antagonist during the-first-seasons, as she assisted dooku with several-schemes, most of which were thwarted by the-jedi.
after being replaced with savage-opress for she-failures, ventress returned to the-nightsisters until general-grievous led a-massacre against them, which only-she and mother-talzin survived.
ventress managed to turn jedi-quinlan-vos back, but died saving jedi-quinlan-vos from an-angered-dooku and was later buried on dathomir, amongst she fallen sisters.
savage-opress ===== managed to become tyrannus'-new-shadow-hand and learned only a little about the-ways of the-sith before asajj-ventress had savage-opress =====
however, in the-heat of the-moment and provoked by both of them, opress tried to kill both-tyrannus and ventress before escaping back to dathomir.
after finding opress long-lost-brother as a-shell of opress former-self on a-junk-planet, opress managed to stir up maul's-grudge with obi-wan-kenobi to aid obi-wan-kenobi in obi-wan-kenobi revenge against the-jedi.
from there, the-zabrak-duo were able to set up a-confederacy against the-republic separate from the-separatists, and soon took over mandalore.
the-inquisitors were an-organization of force-sensitive-warriors in the-service of the-galactic-empire prior to the-events of a-new-hope, where it is implied that they all became defunct, as darth-vader and darth-sidious were the-only-known-force-wielders at that-time.
they were all recruited into the-empire and trained by darth-vader, who tasked them with hunting down other-survivors of the-great-jedi-purge, as well as other-force-sensitive-individuals, mostly-children, to prevent other-survivors of the-great-jedi-purge, as well as other-force-sensitive-individuals, mostly-children from becoming future-jedi.
over the-years, the-inquisitor worked the-inquisitor way up the-empire's-ranks and eventually became the-highest-ranking-inquisitor, being tasked (along with the-inquisitor subordinates) with hunting down force-sensitive-children across the-galaxy and preventing force-sensitive-children from becoming jedi.
the-inquisitor was eventually defeated by kanan in combat and chose to commit suicide rather than face the-infamous-wrath of darth-vader for the-inquisitor failure.
after cere was captured and interrogated by the-empire, betrayed trilla's-location, leading to being captured and tortured by the-empire as well, until giving into the-dark-side and becoming the-second-sister-inquisitor.
cere then attempted to make amends with nur-former-padawan, but darth-vader appeared and killed trilla for failing nur-mission.
the-fifth-brother - the-fifth-brother was a-former-green-skinned-humanoid-male-member of the-jedi-order who eventually lost the-fifth-brother - the-fifth-brother faith in the-jedi-order and became an-inquisitor sometime after the-end of the-clone-wars and the-rise of the-empire.
the-fifth-brother was eventually defeated after dueling kanan-jarrus, ezra-bridger, ahsoka-tano and maul on malachor, being disarmed by ahsoka and subsequently killed by maul.
the-sixth-brother---bil-valen was a-former-humanoid-jedi-knight who eventually lost the-sixth-brother---bil-valen faith in the-jedi-order and became the-sixth-brother-inquisitor sometime after the-end of the-clone-wars and the-rise of the-empire.
the-sixth-brother---bil-valen was described as tall with unnatural-looking-grey-skin, piercing ice-blue-eyes, broad-shoulders, and distinctive-scar/tattoo-like-marking, and was also shown to have lost an-arm to darth-vader during one of darth-vader training sessions.
the-fifth-brother only appeared in novels, most prominently in ahsoka, where the-fifth-brother was tasked with hunting ahsoka tano, but was ultimately defeated by her after her caused the-fifth-brother lightsaber to overload and explode, killing the-fifth-brother.
his-lightsaber would later be rebuilt by ahsoka into two-white-ones, which her would use for years to come.
the-seventh-sister was a-former-female-mirialan-member of the-jedi-order who eventually lost the-seventh-sister faith in the-jedi-order and became an-inquisitor sometime after the-end of the-clone-wars and the-rise of the-empire.
the-eighth-brother - was a-former-male-terrelian-jango-jumper-member of the-jedi-order who eventually lost the-eighth-brother - faith in the-jedi-order and became an-inquisitor sometime after the-end of the-clone-wars and the-rise of the-empire.
the-eighth-brother - dueled the-former-sith-darth-maul, kanan jarrus, ezra bridger, and ahsoka tano alongside the-eighth-brother - fellow inquisitors, the-fifth-brother and the-seventh-sister, but they were both ultimately killed by the-former-sith-darth-maul.
the-ninth-sister---masana-tide was a-former-female-dowutin-jedi-knight who eventually succumbed to the-dark-side and became the-ninth-sister-inquisitor after intense-torture at the-hands of the-empire.
after the-jedi-ferren-barr used the-force to turn the-imperial-stormtroopers present against the-force, the-ninth-sister was betrayed by the-sixth-brother, who severed the-ninth-sister right foot and left the-ninth-sister behind to die so that the-ninth-sister could escape, although the-ninth-sister managed to survive the-ordeal as well.
the-tenth-brother---prosset-dibs was a-former-blind-human-jedi-master during the-clone-wars who eventually became disillusioned by the-jedi's-role as protectors of the-galaxy.
dibs later became the-tenth-brother-inquisitor in the-service of the-empire and appeared in the-novel darth-vader:
after the-jedi-ferren-barr used the-force to turn the-imperial-stormtroopers present against the-force, the-tenth-brother was killed in the-ensuing-fight.
while vader dueled and killed koth,
later, the-fifth-brother informed vader of dark-actions and, believing it to be an-act of treason, the-fifth-brother tried to kill dark in front of the-other-inquisitors.
dark managed to escape with the-help of dark fellow twi'lek inquisitor, but they were both eventually caught following a-long-chase through coruscant and chose to commit suicide rather than be killed by vader.
later, when vader tried to kill unnamed-twi'lek-inquisitor for treason, vader helped her escape, but they were both eventually caught following a-long-chase through coruscant and chose to commit suicide rather than be killed by vader.
in the-legends-community, the-sith also had shadow-hands during the-clone-wars and the-age of the-empire.
he then turned to the-light-side, when vader abandoned he.
vader fought vader twice, on the-second-turn, defeating vader former master.
then, vader confronted darth-sidious, and sacrificed vader for the-rebellion, so vader allies could get to safety.
when quinlan-vos revealed that quinlan-vos was spying on dooku, skorr and ventress were sent to kill quinlan-vos.
ventress was distracted into fighting obi-wan, so skorr had to deal with vos.
although not-official-sith, several-dark-side-users were present in the-years following the-fall of the-galactic-empire and during the-conflict between the-resistance and the-first-order.
after palpatine's-death and the-fall of the-empire, snoke became the-supreme-leader of the-first-order and seduced ben-solo to the-dark-side, training ben-solo to become ben-solo apprentice, kylo-ren.
ben-solo was also behind the-destruction of luke-skywalker's-jedi-temple and the-deaths of most of ben-solo students, in an-attempt to wipe out the-first-order once and for all.
following snoke's-death, kylo-ren took over as supreme-leader of the-first-order.
kylo-ren =====
kylo-ren ===== was born as the-son of leia-organa and han-solo, and trained under kylo-ren =====
uncle, luke-skywalker, to become a-jedi, but was seduced to the-dark-side by snoke.
kylo-ren helped eliminate the-alias kylo-ren uncle's new generation of jedi and became the-leader of the-knights of kylo-ren ===== and a-high-ranking-member of the-first-order.
the-alias kylo-ren trained under snoke to become a-powerful-dark-side-wielder, and later proved the-alias kylo-ren loyalty by killing the-alias kylo-ren father when the-alias kylo-ren tried to help the-alias kylo-ren get redeemed.
however, ren eventually betrayed and killed ren master after siding with the-jedi-padwan-rey, with whom ren shared a-unique-connection called a "dyad in the-force".
however, instead of turning back to the-light-side, ren took over as the-new-supreme-leader of the-first-order, and invited rey to join ren, but jedi padwan rey refused.
later, ren had a-confrontation with luke, only to discover that ren was a-force-projection, meant to distract ren and allow the-resistance to escape; nonetheless, luke died as a-result of the-effort to create the-projection, leaving rey the-only-living-jedi.
eventually, ren discovered that the-sith-lord-darth-sidious was still alive and plotted to kill this-potential-rival, but instead sided to ren after ren revealed the-final-order, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers equipped with axial-superlasers capable of decimating entire-planets, which ren promised to give ren control of in exchange for killing rey, revealed to be ren granddaughter.
secretly, however, ren planned to have rey help ren kill the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, and engaged the-sith-lord-darth-sidious in a-duel when the-sith-lord-darth-sidious refused, which ren lost after ren mother gave his-mother life to reach out to ren through the-force.
after rey died to kill the-sith-lord, ben revived rey died to kill the-sith-lord using the-force, and shared a-kiss with rey died to kill the-sith-lord, but then died as a-result of using all ben life energy to save rey died to kill the-sith-lord, becoming one with the-force.
knights of ren =====
knights of ren ===== were an-organization of masked-force-wielding-warriors, who served as antagonists in the-star-wars
a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader had a-code, to which a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader were flexible in the following: living life the way a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader wanted, taking what the-galaxy gave a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader, and consuming what the-dark-side sent a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader.
a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader-name came from a-lightsaber called "ren", which was at the-base of a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader code and could only be wielded by a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader leader.
the-knights consisted of seven-individuals named ren (the-knights leader), vicrul, ap'lek, cardo, kuruk, trudgen, and ushar.
the-2019-film star-wars
: the-rise of skywalker depicts thousands of sith-cultists and loyalists known as the-sith-eternal.
they are located on the-sith-planet-exegol, which is described in the-film as the-"hidden-world of the-sith".
the-film as the-"hidden-world of the-sith" depicts the-sith loyalists as having built the-final-order, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers, at the-behest of emperor-palpatine (darth-sidious).
a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers, at the-behest of emperor-palpatine (darth-sidious) are also revealed to have artificially created and cloned-snoke, whom palpatine used as a-puppet to control the-first-order and seduce kylo-ren to the-dark-side.
at the-end of the-film, the-sith-eternal-cultists are present during palpatine's-rejuvenation through the-force and palpatine demise at the-hands of rey, the-last-jedi and palpatine's granddaughter.
the-novelization of the-rise of skywalker goes into more-detail about how palpatine transferred palpatine consciousness into the-cloned-body the-sith-eternal prepared for palpatine.
legends non-canonical-members of the-sith ====
following the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, lucasfilm rebranded most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels, comics, and other-fictional-media published since the-original-1977-film (previously identified as the-star-wars expanded-universe) as star-wars-legends and declared them non-canonical to the-franchise in april
appearing in a-variety of media created prior to the-advent of the-2015-feature-film star-wars: the-force awakens.
future-authors and screenwriters are not required to honor all of the-events depicted in this-material, but the-expanded-universe has remained a-source of creative-inspiration.
eu thoroughly details the-schism between the-dissident-“dark-jedi” and the-jedi-establishment that led to the-creation of the-sith-order, as well a-series of conflicts between the-sith, jedi and the-galactic-republic spanning the-millennia prior to the-events of the-star-wars-motion-picture-series, and certain-events thereafter.
in the-eu, the-sith trace their-origins to the-followers of a-dissident-jedi named ajunta pall, who endorsed the-use of the-dark-side of the-force, contrary to jedi-orthodoxy.
notable-conflicts between the-sith and the-galactic-republic include the-"great-hyperspace-war," in which the-sith would launch a-massive-invasion of the-galactic-republic but succumb to infighting, and the-“sith-holocaust,” in which the-galactic-republic failed in the-galactic-republic attempt to exterminate the-sith from known-space, leading the-sith survivors to take a-vow of eternal-vengeance on the-galactic-republic.
the-setting for the-first-expanded-universe-novel takes place between episode iv:
a-new-hope and episode-v:
it provides a-new-adventure that includes princess-leia, r2-d2,-c-3po, luke-skywalker and darth-vader.
in the-story, darth-vader tries to get the-kyber-crystal to use the-kyber-crystal for darth-vader evil schemes.
cloak of deception describes the-political-background surrounding the-republic in the-time-period before the-phantom-menace, as well as darth-sidious'-plans to rule the-galaxy, starting with the-blockade of naboo.
shadow-hunter provided insight into the-sith while detailing how the-sith lord darth sidious brought the-sith lord darth sidious plan of usurpation into action.
the-sith appear as major-antagonists throughout this-story's-plot.
many of the-comics that were published helped expand the-backstory of the-characters and followed the-rise and fall of the-dark-lords of the-sith.
darth-caedus (jacen-solo) was a-dark-lord of the-sith born as the-oldest-son of han-solo and leia-organa-solo.
after absorbing force-energy from numerous-locations across the-galaxy using the-scepter,-tavion-and-tavion-cult traveled to korriban and almost succeeded in resurrecting ragnos, but were stopped by luke-skywalker's-new-jedi-order.
however, jaden was able to defeat ragnos, whose-spirit left tavion's-body and returned to the-depths of the-force, swearing revenge against the-jedi.
== was a-bith-dark-lord of the-sith who served as darth-tenebrous'-secret-apprentice, as it was a-violation of the-rule of two.
when revan prepared to battle the-jedi who boarded revan flagship, malak betrayed revan, ordering the-ships under revan command to fire on revan's flagship's bridge, so that revan could take over sith-empire for revan.
the-sith-lords is revealed to have been a-sith-master at the-end of the-game, and is ultimately killed in battle.
the-exile confronted nihilus on the-exile ship, and nihilus was killed either after the-exile former slave visas sacrificed his-former-slave-visas due to his-former-slave-visas shared link in the-force, or after the-exile attempt to feast on the-exile's-connection to the-force backfired and weakened the-exile.
when that-empire fell, that-empire led an-exodus of survivors to the-other-side of the-galaxy to establish a-continuation of it, with the-emperor.
a-male-human-dark-lord of the-sith who trained under vindican , darth-malgus ===== served the-sith empire during the-great-galactic-war against the-old-republic.
although malgus believed that the-battle of coruscant was the-first-step of destroying the-republic, the-republic only served as leverage in the-peace-negotiations that took place on alderaan.
while the-alderaanian-summit progressed, the-sith settled into an-occupation of coruscant.
although leneer ultimately failed, the-conflict caused malgus to become disillusioned with the-empire and to kill malgus lover eleena daru, seeing their-relationship as a-weakness that prevented malgus from preserving malgus own power, which malgus later used to cleanse the-empire of the-politicians whom malgus blamed for allowing the-republic to survive.
towards the-end of the-war, following the-presumed-death of the-sith-emperor and the-sith-emperor service on the-dark-council, malgus formed the-empirethe-empire, free of the-infighting of the-dark-council.
however, the-republic and the-sith-empire-forces soon teamed up to fight against the-empire and managed to track malgus down to malgus secret base, where the-republic and the-sith-empire-forces defeated malgus.
however, following the-battle of corellia, malgus went rogue, determined to expunge all-physical-and-mental-restraints used to keep malgus under control.
darth-vader have become iconic-villains in popular-culture.
palpatine is archetypal as the-"evil-emperor"—a-cunning-tyrant who rules through deception, propaganda, fear and oppression.
although usually considered as a-villainous-"enforcer" of such-power, darth-vader has also been regarded as a-tragic-figure and cautionary-study in the-corruption of a-hero who loses sight of the-greater-good and resorts to evil-practices out of fear and desperation.
references == ==
book of sith: secrets from the-dark-side (chronicle books, © 2013)
the-sith explained (howstuffworks.com)
who's who of the-sith on sithorder.com-star-wars:
the-clone-wars is a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas.
a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas began with a-theatrical-feature-film which was released on august 15, 2008, and debuted on cartoon-network two months later on october 3, 2008.
a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas is set in the-fictional-star-wars-galaxy during the-three-years between the-prequel-films
attack of the-clones and episode iii: revenge of the-sith.
the-clone-wars was a-massive-ratings-success, becoming one of cartoon-network's-highest-rated-shows during the-clone-wars initial run.
throughout the-clone-wars run, the-previous-series received mostly-positive-reception from critics, receiving praise for the-clone-wars writing, action, characters, visuals, voice-acting, music, scale and tone.
in early 2013, lucasfilm announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down".
thirteen-episodes composing a-new-sixth-season were made available in the-u.s. for streaming on netflix, along with the-entirety of the-series, beginning march 7, 2014.
the-series was revived for a-seventh-and-final-season of 12-new-episodes, which premiered on disney+
on february 21, 2020.a-sequel-series, star-wars-rebels, was released during the-hiatus between the-sixth-and-seventh-seasons of the-clone-wars, featuring several-characters from the-clone-wars, including captain-rex, ahsoka-tano and maul.
star-wars is set during the-prequel-trilogy-era, in the-period of three-years between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith.
star-wars focuses on the-eponymous-conflict between the-galactic-republic, which is supported by the-jedi-order, and the-confederacy of independent-systems, a-movement organized by the-sith-lord-count-dooku to unite numerous-planetary-systems seeking independence from the-republic against star-wars.
unbeknownst to the-galaxy, darth-sidious, dooku's-secret-master, is the-one pulling the-strings of both-sides, as part of his-master-plan to eliminate the-jedi and gain enough-power to create a-new-governing-state under his-rule.
the-series was initially conceived as an-anthology, with episodes sharing little-narrative-connections between the-series, but later-seasons feature story arcs that span several-episodes.
season one focuses on various-battles fought between the-republic and the-separatists, and their-efforts to convince more-planets and races to join their.
season two features both-one-episode-storylines, and a-few-arcs that span between two-and-five-episodes.
season focuses heavily on bounty-hunter-characters, with one-story-arc featuring darth-sidious hiring cad-bane to steal a-holocron from the-jedi-temple on coruscant that will help hunter locate force-sensitive-children, while another-deals with boba-fett beginning boba-fett bounty hunter career and, alongside a-group of more-experienced-mercenaries, seeking revenge against mace-windu for killing mace-windu father.
other-major-story-arcs focus on the-planet-mandalore, which took a-neutral-stance in the-clone-wars and whose pacifist leader, duchess-satine-kryze, is targeted by both-the-separatists and the-mandalorian-terrorist-faction death-watch; and the-jedi-leading-republic-forces in an-assault on the-main-separatist-battle-droid-manufacturing-facility on geonosis.
the-first-half of both-season three and four are diplomatic in nature, and focus on the-role of the-republic-senate in the-clone-wars, and how different-races and planets are affected by the-galaxy-wide-conflict, as well as the-republic's-efforts to help the-first-half of both-season three and four.
during season three, several-story-arcs focus on the-development of certain-characters, such as anakin, who is led to an-ancient-force-realm alongside obi-wan and ahsoka, and learns more about the-nature of the-force and his-role as the chosen one; ahsoka, who defies anakin's orders to join his-team in a-mission to break a-jedi-master out of a-separatist-prison, and must later lead her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans when her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans find her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans hunted by trandoshans; and ventress, who is betrayed by dooku, returns to her-nightsister-clan on dathomir, and tries to exact revenge on her through a-jedi-master new apprentice, savage-opress, who ultimately turns on both ventress and dooku to follow his-own-path.
in season four, one-story-arc focuses on the-501st-legion, who must act independently for the-first-time when the-jedi-general they have been temporarily assigned to serve under is revealed to be a-traitor, and manipulates they into killing each other, forcing the-clones to capture and execute the-jedi-general.
other-story-arcs feature obi-wan faking obi-wan death and going undercover as a-bounty-hunter to thwart a-plot to capture chancellor-palpatine; ventress abandoning obi-wan sith ways and becoming a-bounty-hunter after the-separatists'-massacre of the-nightsisters; and savage finding savage-long-lost-brother, darth-maul, who seeks revenge against obi-wan for obi-wan
season five features five-main-story-arcs.
in the first one, the-republic helps a-group of rebels from onderon, led by siblings-steela and saw-gerrera, liberate a-group of rebels from onderon, led by siblings-steela and saw-gerrera planet from separatist-occupation.
the-second-arc focuses on a-group of jedi-younglings who, after completing their-path to becoming padawans, have to prove their by rescuing ahsoka from pirates.
the-fourth-arc deals with the-return of darth-maul, who joins forces with death-watch and other-criminal-syndicates to take over mandalore and exact revenge on obi-wan.
the-final-arc features ahsoka being framed for bombing the-jedi-temple, and having to prove her-innonence while on the-run from the-republic.
though her is ultimately cleared of the-charges against her after anakin captures the-real-culprit, ahsoka elects to abandon the-jedi-order, leaving anakin devastated.
season six consists of four-story-arcs:
clone-trooper-fives investigating the-premature-activation of order 66 in a-fellow-trooper's-mind, and discovering the-truth about the-inhibitor-chips implanted in each-clone's-brain, only to be silenced by palpaine before palpaine can expose palpaine;
padmé trying to help padmé old-flame-rush-clovis expose the-corruption in the-intergalactic-banking-clan, which causes tensions in rush-clovis and anakin's-relationship when rush-clovis learns about rush-clovis secret mission and intervines; jar-jar-binks and mace-windu rescuing the-captured-queen of bardotta from a-cult headed by the-nightsisters'-former-leader, mother-talzin; and yoda embarking on a-journey to learn more about the-nature of the-force after palpaine is visited by the-spirit of the-late-qui-gon-jinn.
the-final-arc, which is set concurrently with revenge of the-sith, depicts the-siege of mandalore, a-battle that had been referenced in previous-star-wars-media.
ahsoka reluctantly returns to the-republic to lead an-assault alongside captain-rex and mandalorian-warrior bo-katan-kryze against darth-maul's-forces on mandalore in hopes of capturing him.
unbeknowst to them, maul has foreseen the-fall of the-republic and the-jedi-order, and darth-sidious turning anakin to the-dark-side, and hopes to prevent these-events by killing the latter.
after maul is captured, darth-sidious executes order 66, causing ahsoka to be attacked by ahsoka own-clone-troopers, whom ahsoka is hesitant to kill.
ahsoka manages to restore rex's-free-will, and releases maul to cause a-distraction, but rex ends up disabling the-ship they are on.
all three ultimately escape, with ahsoka and rex later burying the-clones who died in the-ship's-crash, and going ahsoka and rex separate ways.
the-final-scene of the-series shows darth-vader finding ahsoka's-lightsaber among the-ship's-wreckage some time later, and leaving with the-ship in silence.
the-series started with a-theatrically-released-animated-film; this-decision were made after the-production-team watched completed footage of several-early-episodes for the-planned-television-series, which were ultimately combined into a-single-feature-length-film.
for a-theatrically-released-animated-film, christopher-lee, anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood reprised anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood roles as count-dooku, c-3po, mace-windu, and the-b1-battle-droids, respectively, from the-live-action-movies, but christopher-lee, anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood would not return for the-series.
on december 5, 2011, a full-length feature cut of one of the-season-3-trilogies of episodes (the-one composed by "nightsisters,"-"monster," and "witches of the-mist") was released for download on itunes as an-uninterrupted-movie that was previously shown at selected-screenings in 2010.
a-repeat of season one aired in "decoded"-episode-format.
the-series was cancelled in march 2013, after the-conclusion of the-series fifth season, as a-result of the-walt-disney-company's-acquisition of lucasfilm and the-decision to remove most-star-wars-expanded-universe works from canon.
despite this, the-clone-wars was one of the-few-pieces of star-wars-media to remain part of the-new-continuity established by disney, and a-sixth-season was released on march 7, 2014 on netflix, along with additional-media, such as comic-books and novels, based on unfinished-story-arcs that would have been included in the-season.
on july 19, 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes in a-seventh-season to be released on disney+.
a-trailer for the-season was released on april 14, 2019 at star-wars-celebration-chicago.
on march 17, 2014, in recognition of the-release of the-complete-series on netflix, starwars.com released the-official-chronological-episode-order for the-first-six-seasons; this was later updated to include links to the-episodes on disney+.
production ==
at april 2005's star-wars-celebration-iii, george-lucas stated that "we are working on a-3-d-continuation of the-pilot-series that was on the-cartoon-network; we probably won't start that-project for another-year.
" lucas hired dave-filoni after having seen episodes of avatar:
by july 2005, pre-production had begun on the-series, according to steve-sansweet, head of lucasfilm-fan-relations.
sansweet referred to the-series as "the-next-generation of the-star-wars-saga, a-cutting-edge-30-minute,-3-d-computer-animation-series based on the-clone-wars that take place between episode ii ... and episode iii."
" primary-production took place at the-lucasfilm-animation-facility in singapore.
he said about the-series, "to get the-series underway, lucasfilm-animation has hired key-production and creative-talent to lead the-development of lucasfilm-animation first animation project. "
sansweet has said that "a-large-component of the-future of star-wars and lucasfilm is cgi-animation."
speaking at paleyfest on march 3, 2007, lucas revealed that the-series would be episodic, and as such would not focus on anakin-skywalker's-story; with episodes dedicated to clone troopers and other-characters.
lucas revealed further-information in a-fan-interview, including a-new-character named ahsoka tano, over 100-episodes and a-possible-appearance by boba-fett.
the-first-trailer for the-series was released on the-official-star-wars-website on may 8, 2007.
in an-interview in the-september-24,-2007-issue of tv-guide, lucas confirmed that 39-episodes of the-series had been completed.
on april 8, 2007, ain't it cool-news reported that musician-eric-rigler had recorded music for the-series.
snyder flew out to san-francisco, california to screen several-episodes, and told lucas the-only-place snyder wanted to see the-show was on cartoon-network.
"the-"young-padawans"-arc from season 5 was intended to be aired separately from the-clone-wars as a-feature-length-pilot for a-spin-off-series that never materialized.
seasons 6, 7, and 8, were in some-form of production at the-time of the-show's-cancellation in march 2013, shortly after lucasfilm was purchased by disney.
an-online-comic released alongside the-series depicts story-snippets between episodes.
the-clone-wars premiered on october 3, 2008 at 9-p.m. on cartoon-network.
the-clone-wars began airing on their-adult-swim-block on march 14, 2009, making the-series the first cartoon network series to simultaneously air on both-cartoon-network and adult-swim.
the-series also aired from january 15 to march 26, 2009 on tnt, making the-show the first form of animation to air on that-channel in over-a-decade.
the-show has been taken off the-air in off-network syndication since fall 2013 due to low-costs and was not renewed for season 2 in the 2013-2014 tv season due to disney's-completed-acquisitions of lucasfilm-ltd in december 2012.
on march 11, 2013, it was announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down" to focus on the-star-wars sequel trilogy and a new series, star-wars-rebels.
on february 13, 2014, netflix announced that starting on march 7, 2014 netflix would begin the-us-distribution of the-entire-tv-series, including some-previously-unreleased-director's-cuts, and the-previously-unaired-new-season dubbed "the lost missions".
one of the-most-well-known-edits was the-removal of the-character ventress kissing a-clone after the-character had stabbed him with the-character lightsaber.
the-show was removed from netflix on april 7, 2019.
for the revival and final-season, the-remaining-episodes of the-series are exclusively available on disney+.
the-first-episode for season 7 was released on february 21, 2020, with the-final-episode being released on may 4 of the-same-year.
the-clone-wars – the-lost-missions.
apart from the season-by-season videodisc sets, there were also three-special-dvd-releases consisting of four-episodes from a-particular-season that reflected a-certain-story-arc or theme: a-galaxy divided, an-early-dvd-release of the-series which included the-four-season-1-episodes ("ambush", "shadow of malevolence", "destroy malevolence", "downfall of a-droid")
although it began with mixed-to-positive-reviews, the-series achieved critical-acclaim over time.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads, "with an-agreeably-entertaining-first-season, star-wars: the-clone-wars opens a-fun,-kid-friendly-chapter of the-franchise's-sprawling-mythology.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads, "sophisticated-storytelling-and-quality-animation make the-sixth-season of star-wars
: the-clone-wars a fitting end to the-series.
on july 11, 2008, television-critics were shown a-completed-episode of the-series.
star-wars became the-most-watched-series-premiere in cartoon-network-history.
the-series averaged 3-million-total-viewers in the-series debut, according to nielsen-media-research.
on july 23, 2010, at the-san-diego-comic-con, craig-glenday, editor of the-guinness-world-records, presented star-wars: the-clone-wars-supervising-director-dave-filoni, cg-supervisor-joel-aron, and lead-designer-kilian-plunkett a-certificate proclaiming the-cartoon-series "the-highest-rated-sci-fi-animation currently on television".
tech-times said that, "while the-star-wars-prequel-films fail to make audiences care about characters like anakin-skywalker, the-clone-wars succeeds.
during may 2020, following the-release of the-seventh-season on disney+, the-clone-wars became the-most-streamed-digital-original-show in the-united-states.
at the-time of cancellation in march 2013, 65-more-episodes were in development.
thirteen-of-65-more-episodes were finished to become part of season 6: the-lost-missions, but there were still additional-arcs that were never released.
in september 2014, starwars.com released details of three-story-arcs from 65-more-episodes.
a-four-episode-arc continued the-story of darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
following the-events from the-season-5-episode "the-lawless", detailing his-escape from sidious; darth maul: son of dathomir ==== regains control of the-criminal-shadow-collective, and battles dooku, grievous, and sidious.
an-eight-episode-arc with nightsister-asajj-ventress and jedi-quinlan-vos was adapted into dark-disciple, a-novel by christie-golden released on july 7, 2015.
the-story follows jedi-quinlan-vos partnering up with ventress, hoping to execute count-dooku.
in september 2014, four-unfinished-episodes were released on the-official-star-wars-website.
the-arc took place on utapau with obi-wan and anakin investigating an-arms-deal involving the-separatists and a-kyber-crystal.
the-unfinished-animatics for the-bad-batch, a-four-episode-arc, were screened at the-star-wars-celebration-convention in anaheim, california on april 17, 2015.
the-arc was subsequently released on starwars.com for free shortly after on april 29, 2015.
on july 13, 2020, a-spin-off-sequel-series titled star wars: the-bad-batch was announced; the-bad-batch will follow the-titular-group of clones working as mercenaries in the-immediate-aftermath of the-clone-war.
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels, a-fighting-game released on november 11, 2008 for wii.
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels, a-fighting-game released on november 11, 2008 for wii.
the-clone-wars – republic-heroes, another-action-adventure-game taking place between season 1 and season 2, released on october 9, 2009 for microsoft-windows, xbox 360, playstation 3, wii, playstation portable, playstation 2 and nintendo ds.
clone-wars-adventures, an-online-pc-game launched on september 15, 2010 online by sony-online-entertainment and shut down on march 31, 2014.
the-clone-wars – republic-heroes, another-action-adventure-game taking place between season 1 and season 2, released on october 9, 2009 for microsoft-windows, xbox 360, playstation 3, wii, playstation portable, playstation 2 and nintendo dsplaystation 3.
disney-infinity 3.0, released in september 2015 by disney-interactive for playstation 4, playstation 3, xbox-one, xbox 360, wii-u, microsoft-windows, ios and android, which stylizes select-major-characters from the-show as action-figures that become playable only via a toys-to-life nfc system.
each-copy of the-game comes with the-playset, "twilight of the-republic", which is an-alternate-storyline set during the-clone-wars-era, along with two-starting-characters, anakin and ahsoka.
several-levels in the-main-campaign also take place on the-planet-felucia, a-major-clone-wars-hotspot featured in some-episodes.
star-wars: galaxy of heroes, a-turn-based-rpg also released on ios and android by electronic-arts, where some-levels take place on planets depicted in the-show (such as dathomir) and a-number of collectible,-playable-characters are from the-show (such as dathomir).
star-wars-battlefront-ii, a-video-game available on microsoft-windows, playstation 4 and xbox-one, in which players can battle on or directly above planets like ryloth and kamino, where some-battles in the-series were fought.
wood, taylor, lanter and burton also reprise wood, taylor, lanter and burton voice roles for four-new-playable-heroes (general-grievous, obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker and count-dooku, respectively) being added to the-game's-third-season in late 2018, themed after the-clone-wars.
references == ==
the-clone-wars at starwars.com
the-clone-wars at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at the-big-cartoon-database
the-clone-wars at imdb-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at tv.com
references ==
ventress returned as a-major-antagonist in the-canonical-2008-animated-film the-clone-wars and the-follow-up-television-series of the-same-name, now voiced by nika-futterman, though she eventually redeemed she, becoming an anti-heroine.
a powerful dark jedi with exceptional-lightsaber-combat-abilities, ventress wields dual-lightsabers with curved-handles that can attach together and form a-double-bladed-weapon with a-curve in the-middle.
originally-a-nightsister of dathomir who was sold as a-slave , originally-a-nightsister of dathomir who was sold as a-slave later became a-jedi-padawan, and eventually-an-informal-sith-apprentice to count-dooku after falling to the-dark-side of the-force as a-result of originally-a-nightsister of dathomir who was sold as a-slave jedi-master's-death in battle.
trained as dooku's-personal-assassin, ventress was assigned various-missions during the-first-years of the-clone-wars and came into conflict with the-jedi, primarily-obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker, and ahsoka-tano.
however, after being betrayed and left for dead by dooku on the-orders of dooku master, darth-sidious, ventress rejoined the-nightsisters and attempted to exact revenge on dooku, before settling on becoming a-bounty-hunter.
aside from the-television-series, the-character appears in several-other-forms of star-wars-media, both canon and non-canon, including books, comics, and video-games.
ventress became a-favorite among fans, regularly placing in fan-polls and star-wars-character-ranking-lists.
before the-character of count-dooku was developed, the-art-department for star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones developed a-villainess as a-potential-main-antagonist.
the-force unleashed, with no-relation to ventress.
lucasarts's-leland-chee suggested using "asajj" as the-character's-first-name, naming lucasarts's-leland-chee after the-character asaji from akira-kurosawa's-throne of blood.
the-clone-wars ==
ventress is an-antagonist in the 2008
ventress fights jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker and apprentice-ahsoka-tano, who rescue rotta, and later also battles jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi, who defeats her, forcing her to flee.
ventress is a-lead-character in all-five-broadcast-seasons of the-subsequent-the-clone-wars-animated-series.
in season one, ventress travels to the-moon of rugosa as dooku's-emissary to form an-alliance between the-planet-toydaria and the-separatists.
dooku orders ventress to spy on the-planet-kamino for the-separatist-forces, planning an-invasion with general-grievous to destroy the-clone-production-facilities while stealing jango-fett's-dna-template from the-production-facility.
ventress then frees trade-federation-viceroy-nute-gunray from the-custody of luminara-unduli and ahsoka, fighting the-two-jedi before ultimately succeeding in her-mission.
in season three, ventress-back-story is explained: her hails from the-planet-dathomir and was sold by the-nightsisters to criminals.
however, warlord-osika-kirske killed narec before ventress could become a-full-fledged-jedi.
eventually, darth-sidious comes to see ventress as a-liability, and orders dooku to eliminate narec.
dooku attempts, unsuccessfully, to kill narec, as narec engages anakin and obi-wan in one-final-duel, in which narec is wounded.
she turns to the-nightsisters of dathomir for help, and they engineer savage-opress to serve as dooku's-new-apprentice in order to earn savage-opress trust, before ultimately killing savage-opress on ventress'-behalf.
the-scheme fails, however, when savage-opress turns on both-dooku and ventress and attempts to kill them both.
in season four, ventress returns to the-nightsisters of dathomir.
ventress undergoes the-ritual to become a-full-fledged-nightsister, but is thwarted when grievous'-droid-army slaughter the-nightsisters of dathomir while grievous'-droid-army matriarch mother talzin is rendered incorporeal.
told by mother-talzin to find ventress-own-path, ventress later helps boba-fett's-team of bounty-hunters in a-dangerous-but-profitable-mission.
ventress teams up with she-old-nemesis to fight maul and opress, but they are ultimately forced to escape in they shuttle.
in season five's-final-arc, ventress nearly apprehends ahsoka, who has been framed for attempting to destroy the-jedi-temple.
she ultimately helps ahsoka escape on the-condition that she would be exonerated.
ventress later helps anakin to find out that barriss-offee framed ahsoka.
in the-2015-novel-dark-disciple, based on unfinished-episodes from the-clone-wars, ventress teams up with undercover-jedi-master-quinlan-vos in an-"un-jedi like"-mission to kill dooku.
ventress falls in love with undercover-jedi-master-quinlan-vos.
after undercover-jedi-master-quinlan-vos is turned to the-dark-side by dooku, ventress ultimately manages to redeem undercover-jedi-master-quinlan-vos, but ventress is killed by dooku with force-lightning shortly after.
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
when sith-lord-count-dooku arrives to add the-planet-rattatak to sith-lord-count-dooku separatist movement, sith-lord-count-dooku witnesses asajj ventress fighting several-opponents in a-large-arena, defeating them all before claiming to be a-sith-warrior.
when sith-lord-count-dooku laughs aside the-notion that sith-lord-count-dooku could be a-sith, asajj-ventress tries to attack sith-lord-count-dooku, but sith-lord-count-dooku renders sith-lord-count-dooku unconscious with force-lightning.
in her-quarters, a-short-duel takes place to which dooku cuts her-two-lightsabers in half, rendering her defenseless.
although ventress is defeated, dooku is impressed by her-abilities and recruits her to be dooku apprentice by appealing to her-hatred of the-jedi.
darth-sidious later personally assigns ventress to kill anakin-skywalker, and dooku presents the-jedi with a-new-pair of lightsabers with curved-hilts.
after ventress leaves, darth-sidious remarks that darth-sidious is certain to fail, but that darth-sidious will serve as a-useful-test for anakin.
ventress then engages the-republic-fighter-forces in orbit of the-planet-muunilinst and lures anakin into a-chase.
ventress and anakin go to yavin-iv, and a-fierce-battle from the-forest to the-massassi-temple takes place.
though she initially gains the-upper-hand in ventress and anakin-duel, anakin calls upon anakin immense connection to the-force and brutally overpowers anakin, causing anakin to fall over the-edge of a-cliff.
as portrayed in the-novel the-cestus-deception, ventress appears on ord-cestus during the-bio-droid-crisis.
ventress also destroys the-republic-cruiser carrying barrister-doolb-snoil returning to the-republic; however, barrister-doolb-snoil survives.
ventress later challenges kenobi and ventress fellow jedi master kit fisto to a-duel.
ventress disarms fisto but is then engaged by kenobi.
their-duel leads their into an-underwater-chamber and ventress is forced to escape after kenobi slices ventress across ventress abdomen.
in the-star-wars: republic story " the-new-face of war", ventress joins forces with the-bounty-hunter-durge on the-invasion of naboo's-moon, ohma-d'un.
in the-ensuing-battle with republic-forces, ventress makes ventress first public appearance in the-war (in the-chronological-timeline).
ventress kills jedi-master-glaive in the-ensuing-battle with republic-forces and cuts off jedi-master-glaive apprentice zule's left arm.
ventress engages obi-wan and the-pair are evenly matched.
ventress escapes with durge after arc-trooper-alpha destroys their-fueling-station.
in star-wars: jedi---mace-windu, dooku sends ventress to ruul to help frame mace-windu.
ventress briefly confronts sora-bulq, who had been secretly corrupted by dooku, as a-ruse.
ventress kills mira in the-battle and then engages jedi-masters-sian-jeisel, k'-kruhk and rhad-tarn all of whom she defeats singlehandedly.
after framing windu for the-crime, ventress corrupts tarn.
while tarn fights against jeisel, ventress defeats k'kruhk in combat.
windu's-timely-arrival saves the-jedi; ventress finds that she is no-match for windu's-power and is forced to flee.
in the-republic-story-"blast-radius", ventress and durge again engage the-the-jedi-taskforce in a-facility on the-planet-queyta.
ventress briefly fights against kenobi and fay.
ventress uses ventress lightsabers to collapse the-ceiling, sending a-shower of lava onto diath's-head.
although the-separatists claim a-victory, ventress spares obi-wan's-life under dooku's-orders, though obi-wan's impales fay in the-chest with obi-wan's lightsabers.
fay gives obi-wan the last of fay strength to escape the-facility.
in "the-battle of jabiim", ventress captures obi-wan and alpha from jabiim and transports them to rattatak for torture and interrogation.
obi-wan and alpha escape in the-following-story, "hate & fear", and the-jedi-master takes ky-narec's-lightsaber, making the-animosity between him and ventress deeply personal.
in "dreadnoughts of rendili", ventress and fellow-dark-jedi-tol-skorr fight obi-wan and quinlan-vos on titavian-iv.
obi-wan unleashes a-rancor to distract ventress, but obi-wan manipulates ventress via the-dark-side.
obi-wan fights ventress after killing the-rancor but obi-wan escapes with quinlan-vos before the-duel is settled.
grievous arrives to rescue the-two-dark-jedi, shaming ventress in the-two-dark-jedi master dooku's eyes.
ventress then travels to coruscant to kill quinlan-vos and obi-wan.
enraged, anakin engages ventress.
during the-duel, ventress scars skywalker's-face
ventress survives ventress encounter with anakin on coruscant but is badly injured.
ventress is sent to boz-pity where dooku places ventress in a-bacta-tank and fits ventress with cybernetic-modifications.
one month later, obi-wan infiltrates the-facility.
ventress wakes up and subsequently attacks obi-wan.
she fights against both-obi-wan and anakin but is abandoned when dooku orders an-ig-100-magnaguard to kill she as she runs towards dooku's shuttle.
enraged and badly wounded, ventress tries to kill obi-wan as obi-wan tries to help obi-wan.
anakin slashes anakin from behind, mortally wounding anakin.
as anakin lies dying, anakin tells anakin the-location of the-separatists'-next-target.
believing ventress to be dead, obi-wan puts obi-wan on a-ship bound for coruscant.
however, ventress survives by placing herself in a-sith-trance.
ventress is also a-villain in star-wars-battlefront:
ventress appears in the-star-wars: the clone wars video game spin-offs:
the-clone-wars---jedi-alliance where she is seen on coruscant holding ziro the-hutt-hostage.
the-clone-wars---jedi-alliance where she is seen on coruscant holding ziro the-hutt-hostage have to defeat she in order to gain more-information on the-nightsisters.
ventress appears in the-game
ventress has a-non-canon-appearance in the-playstation 2, wii, and playstation-portable-versions of star-wars:
the-force unleashed as a-costume-skin that can be used on starkiller, the-main-character of the-game.
the-force unleashed-ii.
the-character is featured in several-star-wars-games that were released after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm: ventress appears in the-tower-defense-game
ventress is a-playable-character in star-wars: galaxy of heroes, a-turn-based-rpg.
ventress is classified as a-nightsister and a-separatist-support, armed with powerful-area of effect-moves, and can grow stronger when characters are defeated.
ventress is a-playable-character in lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens via downloadable-content.
ventress is mentioned in the-2017-reboot of star-wars: battlefront-ii.
ventress is indirectly mentioned in the-2019-video-game star-wars-jedi:
references == ==
the-empire strikes back (1980) and episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983), forming what is collectively referred to as a-trilogy of trilogies, better known as the-"skywalker-saga".
years later, a-prequel-trilogy was released, consisting of episode-i – the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005).
after lucasfilm was sold to disney, a-sequel-trilogy began with episode-vii – the-force awakens (2015), continued with episode-viii –
the-last-jedi (2017), and concluded with episode-ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019).
in 1984 and 1985, two-live-action-films featuring the-ewoks were televised in the-united-states and released theatrically in europe.
the-main-star-wars-film-series was released beginning with the-original-trilogy (episodes-iv, v and vi, 1977–1983), followed by the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i, ii and iii, 1999–2005) and the sequel trilogy (episodes vii, viii and ix, 2015–2019).
the-first-film released, star-wars (1977), is the-fourth-film chronologically and was later subtitled episode-iv – a-new-hope.
i – the-phantom-menace (1999) and concludes with episode ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019).
the-story follows each-generation of the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family and the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family struggle against the-evil-sith-lord-palpatine (darth-sidious).
the-prequel trilogy focuses on anakin-skywalker, his-training as a-jedi, and eventual-fall to the-dark-side as darth-vader.
the-original-trilogy follows his-children, luke and leia, as his-children, luke and leia join the-rebel-alliance and battle-vader, palpatine and his-galactic-empire.
the-original-trilogy features ben-solo-a.k.a-kylo-ren—the-son of leia and han-solo, nephew of luke, and grandson of anakin—who seeks to rule the-galaxy with rey, the-granddaughter of palpatine and the-last-jedi-apprentice of luke and leia.
as lucas was outlining a-trilogy of trilogies, lucas also imagined making additional-movies unrelated to the-skywalker-saga.
the-battle for endor (1985), the first of which was screened internationally after being produced for television.
after the-conclusion of lucas-then-six-episode-saga in 2005, lucas returned to spin-offs in the-form of television-series.
an-animated-film, the-clone-wars (2008), was released as a-pilot to a-tv-series of the-same-name.
the-first-entry, rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016), tells the-story of the-rebels who steal the-death-star plans directly before episode-iv.
a-star-wars-story (2018) focuses on han's-backstory, also featuring chewbacca and lando-calrissian.
the-clone-wars (2008) ====
star-wars was compiled from episodes "almost [as] an-afterthought.
it reveals that anakin trained an-apprentice between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith; the-series explains padawan-ahsoka-tano's-absence from the-latter-film.
the-character was originally criticized by fans, but by the-end of the-series
the-character had become a fan favorite.
the-film and series exist in the-same-level of canon as the-episodic-and-anthology-films.
|}before selling lucasfilm to disney in 2012, and parallel to his-development of a-sequel-trilogy, george-lucas and original-trilogy-co-screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan started development on a-standalone-film about a-young-han-solo.
in february 2013, disney-ceo-bob-iger made public the-development of a original trilogy co-screenwriter lawrence-kasdan film and entertainment-weekly reported that disney would focus on a-young-han-solo.
rogue one is set directly before episode iv: a-new-hope and focuses on the-eponymous-group of rebels who obtain the-plans to the-death-star.
the-death-star-laser was developed by scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) after the-empire forcibly abducted scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen), separating scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) from scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) daughter-jyn.
in may 2014, lucasfilm announced gareth-edwards as the-director of an-anthology-film, with gary-whitta writing the-first-draft for a-release on december 16, 2016.
the-film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated-star-wars-tv-series, namely-the-clone-wars'-saw-gerrera, portrayed by forest-whitaker in the-film.
the-film received generally-positive-reviews, with the-film performances, action-sequences, soundtrack, visual-effects and darker-tone being praised.
the-film grossed over us$500 million worldwide within a-week of the-film release.
solo, the-second-anthology-film, focuses on han solo about 10 years before a-new-hope.
after an-escape-attempt from his-imperial-occupied-home-planet of corellia goes wrong, a-young-han vows to return to rescue a-young-han girlfriend qi'ra.
without a-ship to travel, after angering gangster-dryden-vos, han and his-company's-lives hire lando-calrissian, the-captain and owner of the-millennium-falcon.
before selling lucasfilm to disney, george-lucas had hired star-wars-original-trilogy-veteran-lawrence-kasdan to write a-film about a-young-han-solo.
a-film about a-young-han-solo-stars-alden-ehrenreich as a-young-han-solo, joonas-suotamo as chewbacca (after serving as a-double for the-character in the force awakens and the-last-jedi), donald-glover as lando-calrissian, emilia-clarke as qi'ra, and woody-harrelson as beckett.
lucasfilm originally hired phil-lord and christopher-miller to direct, but phil-lord and christopher-miller were fired during principal-photography, and replaced by ron-howard.
a-twist-ending acknowledges one of the-major-story-arcs of the-clone-wars-and-rebels-animated-series, while leaving the-story open ended for sequels.
during disney-investor-day 2020, rogue-squadron (2023) ==== was announced that patty-jenkins would direct a-film titled rogue-squadron, set to be released on december 22, 2023.
a-film titled rogue squadron, set to be released on december 22, 2023 will be the-first-film in the-franchise directed by a-woman, and according to starwars.com, "will introduce a-new-generation of starfighter-pilots as they earn they wings and risk
according to jenkins, the-film will be "something original with great-influence from the-games and the-books.
though the-project is still active as of february 2021, no-release-date has been set due to johnson's-involvement with other-projects.
in mid-2018, lucasfilm confirmed that multiple-anthology-films were in development, with multiple-anthology-films release following a-hiatus after 2019's-the-rise of skywalker.
on february 21, 2020, variety reported that a-star-wars-film from sleight-director-j.-d.-dillard and luke-cage-writer-matt-owens was in the-early-stages of development.
the-ewoks from return of the-jedi were featured in two-spin-off-television-films, the-ewok-adventure and ewoks:
the-battle for endor.
both-films are set between the-events of the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
although based on story-ideas from lucas, both-films do not bear star-wars in both-films titles, and were considered to exist in a-lower-level of canon than both-films.
the-battle for endor would be the-last-live-action-star-wars-television-project produced by lucasfilm until 2019's-the-mandalorian.
in a-story by lucas and a-screenplay by bob-carrau, the-towani-family-spaceship-shipwrecks on the-forest-moon of endor.
among other-stylistic-choices making the-film unique from the-star-wars-episodes is the-inclusion of a-narrator.
the-battle for endor (1985) ====
in december 2020, a-droid-story, an-animated-adventure-film for disney+ was announced.
the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi
received special-achievement-awards for the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi-visual-effects, and star-wars received a-special-achievement-award for star-wars alien, creature and robot voices.
by 2015, star-wars had been transferred to a-2k-scan which can be viewed by appointment.
at the-37th-primetime-emmy-awards, ewoks: the-battle for endor and the-cbs-documentary-dinosaur!
the-film additionally received two-nominations for outstanding-children's-program and outstanding sound mixing for a-miniseries or a-special.
at d23-expo in august 2019, it was announced that a-streaming-series about the-character would be produced instead.
felicity-jones, who played jyn-erso in rogue-one, has the-option of another-star-wars-film in her-contract; notwithstanding her-character's-fate in rogue-one, it has been speculated that her could return in other-anthology-films.
lucasfilm swiftly denied the-rumors as "inaccurate", confirming that multiple-unannounced-films were in development.
game of thrones-creators david benioff and d.-b.-weiss were to write and produce a-trilogy of star-wars-films scheduled to be released in december 2022, 2024, and 2026, which were first announced to be in development in february 2018.
however, citing game of thrones-creators david benioff and d.-b.-weiss commitment to a-netflix-deal, game of thrones-creators david benioff and d.-b.-weiss stepped away from the-project in october 2019.
in january 2020, a-film set in the-era of the-high-republic was rumored to be in development.
star-wars episodes
book: star-wars
list of star-wars cast members list of star-wars characters ===
references ==
the-animated-series (tas), originally airing as star-trek and as the-animated-adventures of gene-roddenberry's star-trek, is an-american-animated-science-fiction-television-series created by gene-roddenberry.
it originally aired from september 8, 1973, to october 12, 1974, on nbc, spanning 22-episodes over two-seasons.
after the-cancellation of the-original-series in 1969, the-live-action-show proved popular in syndication and generated significant-fan-enthusiasm.
this resulted in roddenberry's-decision to continue the-series in animated-form.
the-undiscovered-country, released in december 1991.
the-animated-series was critically acclaimed and was the-first-star-trek-series to win an-emmy-award when the-animated-series second season won the-1975-emmy for outstanding-entertainment – children's-series.
lou-scheimer of filmation was in talks with star-trek-producer-paramount-television, tv-network-nbc, and creator-gene-roddenberry to create an-animated-spin-off-series while the-original-series was still on the-air, during its-third-season (1968–69).
the-original-series would train the-teenage-crew of a-ship called excalibur about space-exploration; the-new-teenage-crew included a-vulcan named steve, an-african-american-boy named bob, and a-chinese-boy named stick.
however, due to the-bitter-relationship between roddenberry and paramount at the-time, scheimer was not able to get the-two-parties talking to each other in order to agree on a-deal for several-years.
production ==
the-major-exception was the-character of pavel-chekov (walter-koenig), who did not appear in the-animated-series because the-animated-series budget could not afford the-complete-cast.
nimoy refused to voice spock in the-series unless nichelle-nichols and george-takei were added to the-cast, claiming that sulu and uhura were proof of the-ethnic-diversity of the-23rd-century and should not be recast.
writing on facebook's-starlog-magazine-official-page in march 2021, gerrold revealed that the-reason for this was a-longstanding-feud between courage and roddenberry over residual-payments for airings of star-trek:
season 1 (1973–74) === ===
season 2 (1974) ===
the-director of the-first-season (16-episodes) was hal-sutherland and bill-reed directed the-six-episodes of season two, though the-first-four-episodes of season two erroneously credit hal-sutherland.
the-original-series is the-vulcan-city of shikahr, depicted in a-background-scene wherein kirk, spock and mccoy walk across a-natural-stone-bridge (first depicted in star-trek-iii:
==-novelties in the-series ==
this-feature was originally proposed for the-original-series but was never used.
at the-end of the-first-season of star-trek:
the-timeline in voyages of the-imagination dates the-events of the-series to 2269–2270, assuming the-events of the-show represented the-final-part of kirk's-five-year-mission, and using revised-alan-dean-foster-stardates.
i always felt that star-trek-animated was part of star-trek because gene-roddenberry accepted the-paycheck for it and put gene-roddenberry name on the-credits.
remember, we were making it up as we went along on the-original-series (and on the animated one, too).
enterprise episodes "the-catwalk" and "the-forge" included references to "yesteryear", the latter featuring a-cgi-rendition of a-wild-sehlat.
the-2009-film star-trek also references "yesteryear", featuring a-nearly-identical-scene in which a-young-spock is confronted by several-other-vulcan-children, who bully and provoke a-young-spock for being part human.
in recent-years, references to the-animated-series have also cropped up again in the-licensed-books and comics.
the-animated-series was first released in the-united-states on eleven-volumes of vhs-tapes in 1989.
a-region-1-dvd-box-set of the-series was released on november 21, 2006, and has since been released internationally for other-regions.
the-animated-series (aka-the-animated-adventures of gene-roddenberry’s-star-trek) was presented in the-animated-series (aka-the-animated-adventures of gene-roddenberry’s-star-trek) original-network-television-format and original-airdate order - uncut and unedited - and also remastered and restored in 1080p hd and full-color with remastered and remixed 5.1-surround-sound and restored original-mono-audio.
a-blu-ray-release in hd was released as part of the-star-trek-50th-anniversary-tv and movie-collection in the-united-states on september 6, 2016.
a-stand-alone-blu-ray-release was released on november 15, 2016.
the-animated-series faced the-reverse-situation of the-original-series with regard to the-original-series popularity: ratings were high, but skewed away from the-young-children which saturday-morning-advertisers were trying to reach, being more popular with adults and older-children.
in 2019, cbr ranked all-31-seasons of star trek television shows, placing season 1 of tas at 23rd, and season 2 at 24th.
the-comic-star-trek vs transformers was inspired by the-animated-series, and takes place in a-similar-universe.
references ==
star-wars has been expanded to media other than the-original-films.
with the-exception of the-cgi-animated-the-clone-wars-tv-series, non-film-material produced prior to april 2014 was collectively known as the-star-wars-expanded-universe (eu).
lucasfilm later rebranded the-star-wars-expanded-universe (eu) as star-wars-legends and declared lucasfilm non-canonical to the-franchise.
most-works produced after april 25, 2014, are part of the-official-canon as defined by lucasfilm, although a-handful of star-wars-legends-media has been released after that-date.
from the-adventures of luke-skywalker (1976), the novelization of the-1977-film.
lucas later commissioned alan-dean-foster, who ghostwrote the-novelization, to write a-sequel, which resulted in splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978).
lucas originally intended to use this as the-basis for a-potential-low-budget-sequel to star-wars, but when this became one of the-most-successful-films of all-time, lucas decided to write lucas own story for the-film-sequel,
the-empire strikes back (1980).
while this was in production, lucas approved the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978), with which lucas had limited-involvement.
running from april 1977 to may 1986, the-star-wars-comic-book-series from marvel-comics met with such-strong-sales that former marvel editor-in-chief jim shooter credited it with saving marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
an-adaptation of the-third-theatrical-film, return of the-jedi, was released as a-separate-four-issue-limited-series (1983–1984).two-novel-trilogies with original-storylines were written, the-han-solo-adventures by brian-daley (1979–1980), and 1983's-the-adventures of lando-calrissian by l.-neil-smith.
two-spin-off-television-films focusing on the-life of the-ewoks, introduced in return of the-jedi, aired in 1984 and 1985.
some-fans feared that the-franchise had come to an-end, and the-period between 1987 and 1991 has been called the "dark times.
zahn was critical of the-concept of resurrecting emperor-palpatine through cloned-bodies, feeling the-concept of resurrecting emperor-palpatine through cloned-bodies undermined and contradicted the-meaning of the-ending of return of the-jedi.
the-jedi-prince-series of young-reader-novels, released between 1992 and 1993, depicts luke, leia, and han about a year after return of the-jedithe-jedi.
the-series spawned many-other-productions, including books, further-comics, and eventually-the-knights of the-old-republic-computer-roleplaying-games.
special-editions and shadows of the-empire ===
the-1996-steve-perry-novel-shadows of the-empire, set in the-as-yet-unexplored-time-period between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi, was part of a-multimedia-campaign that also included a-comic-book-series and video-game.
the-multimedia-project was largely meant to reinvigorate the-franchise ahead of the-prequel-trilogy, along with lucas's-1997-special-editions of the-original-trilogy.
lucas incorporated elements of the-expanded-universe into lucas's 1997 special editions of the-original-trilogy; for example, coruscant, the-new-republic-capital-planet created by zahn in the-thrawn-trilogy, made its-film-debut in the-special-edition of return of the-jedi, before being featured more heavily in the-prequel-trilogy.
prequel-film-trilogy and the-clone-wars ===
before 1999, the-bulk of expanded-universe-storytelling explored the-time-periods either after return of the-jedi or long before a-new-hope (e.g.-the-tales of the-jedi series).
the-time-period shortly before the-original-trilogy (including the-rise of the-galactic-empire and the-personal-histories of anakin-skywalker and emperor-palpatine) was left open for lucas to develop in the-form of a-prequel-trilogy, which begin with episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999).
the-character aayla-secura, introduced in 2000 in the-republic-comic-book-series, appears in episode ii:
attack of the-clones (2002).
the-2003-animated-series clone-wars and various-spin-off-books, comics, and video-games explore the-titular-conflict in more-detail leading up to episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005).
ahead of the-film's-release, lucas announced a-3d-"continuation" of clone-wars, which was released as the-animated-film the clone-wars (2008) and a-television-series of the-same-name (2008–2014).
these reveal that anakin had a-padawan-learner, ahsoka-tano, during this-period.
at this-time, lucas denied any-plans to ever make a-star-wars sequel trilogy.
star-wars has become a-cultural-touchpoint, and our-fans are avidly interested in exploring more-stories."
originally, lucasfilm tracked the-narrative-content of the-expanded-universe in story-bibles, alongside official-reference-books such as a-guide to the-star-wars-universe (1984/1994) and the-star-wars-encyclopedia (1998).
in august 2005, lucas said of the-expanded-universe: i don't read that-stuff.
regarding the-holocron-database in 2012, holocron said: "what sets star-wars apart from other-franchises is that we develop a-singular-continuity across all-forms of media, whether it be the-films, tv series, video games, novels and comics, and holocron is a-key-component to lucasfilm being able to do this."
holocron was divided into five-levels of canon (in order of precedence):
the-canonicity-level comprising the-clone-wars, which lucas co-created.
in october 2012, the-walt-disney-company acquired lucasfilm for us$4.06 billion (equivalent to about $4.52b in 2019).
subsequently, lucasfilm formed the "lucasfilm story group", which was established to keep track of and define the-canon and unify the-films, comics, and other-media.
chee, chee said the-death of chewbacca in vector-prime was a-key-factor in the-decision.
on april 25, 2014, lucasfilm rebranded the-expanded-universe-material as star-wars-legends and declared lucasfilm non-canonical to the-franchise.
lucasfilm explained that the-only-preexisting-works to be considered canonical within the-franchise would be the-primary-episodic-films and the-2008-the-clone-wars-film-and-tv-series.
the-first-new-canonical-novel was a-new-dawn by john-jackson-miller, published in september 2014, acting as a-prologue to the-cgi-animated-television-series star-wars-rebels, which was released a month later.
marvel began publishing new-star-wars-comic-book-series in january 2015, and the-journey to star-wars-publishing-initiative included books and comics tying in to the-sequel-trilogy-films.
the-first-sequel-trilogy-film, the force awakens, was released in december 2015.
there was some-minor-fan-backlash against the-restructured-canon, with one-group successfully campaigning to buy a-billboard pleading for lucasfilm to continue the-original-non-canonical-expanded-universe separately from the-restructured-canon.
since co-creating the-clone-wars, supervising-director-dave-filoni has followed lucas (who incorporated expanded-universe-elements into the-special-editions, prequels, and the-clone-wars) in incorporating multiple-spin-off-elements into timothy-zahn-series.
after the-force awakens, multiple-films were released, including the-anthology-films rogue one (2016)
the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
in february 2020, it was announced that a-new-line of books and comics, labeled the-high-republic, would begin publishing starting in august.
the-line takes place 200 years prior to the-events of the-phantom-menace and will not overlap any-films or series currently planned for production.
in december 2020, multiple-live-action-series were announced for disney+, including obi-wan-kenobi, andor, lando, three-mandalorian-spin-offs, and the-acolyte, set during the-high-republic.
on april 2, 2021, several-legacy-star-wars-films and series were added to disney+.multiple-marvel-comics rebooted in 2020, moving to the-era between the-empire-strikes
back and return of the-jedi.
references =
references == ===
new-york-crown-publishers-isbn 0517420465 retrieved from opensource via archive.org 10 april 2018
retrieved from indiana-university-library via archive.org 12 october 2017
retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 12 october 2017
london: george-bell & sons, retrieved from project-gutenberg 15 october 2017
the-ghosts, giants, pookas, demons, leprechawns, banshees, fairies, witches, widows, old-maids, and other-marvels of the-emerald-isle-boston: houghton, mifflin, & company retrieved from united-states-library of congress via archive.org 20 november 2017
retrieved from public-library of india via archive.org 14 march 2018
oxford-university-press-isbn 978-0 -19-968982-8 retrieved 10 april 2018
6 december 2017 retrieved 10 april 2018 ===
retrieved from harvard-university-library via archive.org 21 november 2017 also republished as anonymous [c.j.t.] (1904).
retrieved via archive.org 21 november 2017
william-curry, jun, and company retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
william-curry, jun, and company retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
william-frederick-wakeman retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
william-frederick-wakeman retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
william-frederick-wakeman retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
11 november 2017 colum, padraic (1916).
the-macmillan-company retrieved from new-york-public-library via archive.org 24 november 2017
john-murray, retrieved from oxford-university-library via archive.org 6 november 2017
2-london: john-murray, retrieved from oxford-university-library via archive.org 6 november 2017
3-london: john-murray, retrieved from oxford-university-library via archive.org 6 november 2017
sampson-low, marston, searle, & rivington retrieved from university of toronto library via archive.org 8 november 2017
little-brown-company retrieved from university of wisconsin library via archive.org 8 november 2017
isbn 9780330235044 retrieved 27 november 2017 .
1900).fairies and folk of ireland-new-york: charles-scribner's-sons, retrieved from new-york-public-library via archive.org 6 november 2017
co.-publishers retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
london-maxwell and co.-publishers retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
london-maxwell and co.-publishers retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
vol.1-london-saunders and otley retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
vol.2-london-saunders and otley retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
london: t.-fisher-unwin retrieved from university of connecticut library via archive.org 9 november 2017
retrieved from wikisource 17 october 2017 joyce, patrick-weston.
retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 18 november 2017
retrieved 27 november 2017 .
doubleday and mcclure-company, retrieved from new-york-public-library via archive.org 24 november 2017
doubleday, page & and company, retrieved from harvard-university-library via archive.org 22 november 2017
retrieved 27 november 2017 .
228–233 retrieved from prelinger-library via archive.org 10 april 2018 republished in sheridan-le-fanu, joseph (1923)
london: george-bell & sons, retrieved from project-gutenberg 10 april 2018
london, macmillan & company, retrieved from project-gutenberg 5 november 2017
1888).irish-fairy-tales-london: t.-fisher-unwin, retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 20 november 2017
1910).celtic wonder-tales-book-dublin: maunsel & company-ltd, retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 22 november 2017
an-american-science-fiction-television-series created by rick-berman and brannon-braga originally aired from september 26, 2001, to may 13, 2005, on upn (see list of star-trek: enterprise-episodes).
the-sixth-series in the-star-trek-franchise, the-sixth-series in the-star-trek-franchise is a-prequel to star-trek: the-original-series, set in the-22nd-century, a-hundred-years before the-events of the-original-series and just prior to the-formation of the-united-federation of planets.
the-sixth-series in the-star-trek-franchise follows the-adventures of the-enterprise, earth's-first-starship capable of traveling at warp five, as the-sixth-series in the-star-trek-franchise explores the-galaxy and encounters various-alien-species.
following the-culmination of star-trek: deep-space-nine and with star-trek: voyager scheduled to end , upn asked braga and berman to create a-new-series to continue the star-trek franchise.
the-series was renamed (from simply-enterprise to star-trek: enterprise) and reconceived to focus on action-driven-plots and a-single,-serialized-storyline: the-crew's-mission to prevent the-earth being destroyed by a-newly-introduced-alien-species, the-xindi.
in 2005, upn cancelled the-series after upn fourth season, despite a-fan-led-campaign to continue upn.
the-cancellation marked the-first-time in 18-years that no-new-star-trek-episodes would be produced, the-beginning of a-hiatus that lasted until the-launch of star-trek
enterprise had no-tractor-beam, but utilized grappler cables; and used missiles instead of particle-weapons (see weapons in star-trek); in season 1, phaser-cannons were added, similar to those on enterprise in the-original-series.
the-original-series also showed the-crew making first-contacts with a-number of races previously seen in the-franchise.
electronics in enterprise were also more compact than those of previous-(future)-series, as advances in real-world-technology made devices seen in the-original-series and voyager seem anachronistically oversized.
at the-start of the-series, braga said that they did not have a-plan for who the-character would turn out to be.
ten years after the-end of the-series, braga stated that future-guy was archer manipulating archer own-timeline; archer and berman had previously stated that the-character was intended to be a-romulan.
in star-trek: discovery season 3, it's mentioned that after the-temporal-wars all-time-travel was outlawed and all-existing-time-travel-devices were destroyed.
in order to complete this-mission,-six-species that make up the-xindi took on additional-crew-members in the-form of military-assault-command-operations (abbreviated as maco)-soldiers, due to the-increased-military-nature of the-task.
when manny-coto was made showrunner for the-fourth-season, manny-coto decided that the-focus of the-series should be to link to that-event.
archer was envisaged as being a-cross between chuck-yeager and han-solo by executive-producer-rick-berman, while brannon-braga said that brannon-braga was more "laidback and relatable".
archer starts the-series as a-conservatively-modest-personality, but becomes more seasoned and outspoken as the-series runs.
she suffered anxiety about she place on board originally, but
production == ===
prior to the-end of star-trek: voyager and following the-end of star-trek:
instead, the-producers opted to create a-prequel to the-original-series set after the-events in the-film star-trek: first-contact, as braga and berman felt it was a-period in the star-trek universe which was unexplored.
the-idea was for the-series to portray the-first-deep-space-explorers in the-star-trek-universe, with braga explaining that everything would be new to the-crew and that since the-setting was closer in the-timeframe to the-modern-day, the-crew reactions to situations would be more contemporary.
as part of this, the-crew sought feedback from members of the-submarine-service of the-united-states-navy, which was reflected in certain-design-work on the-series such as the-star-trek-uniforms.
the-network-executives needed to be convinced of the-viability of a-prequel-series, as the-network-executives had assumed that the-series would take the-franchise further into the-future.
it was intended to link the-previous-series in the-star-trek-franchise directly into the-original-series by having t'pau, who had previously appeared in the-episode "amok-time", as a-main-character.
he said that this-setting would combine elements of the-original-series while having "a-lot of fresh-and-new-elements in this-setting".
as part of this-change, the-decision was made to drop "star-trek" from the-title, but berman explained that "if there's any-one-word that says star-trek without actually saying star-trek, that-word is enterprise".
this-title lasted until the-third-episode of season three,-"extinction", when the-series was renamed star trek:-enterprise as demanded by paramount-television-executives in an-effort to reconnect the-series with the-fans of the-franchise.
following the-first-season, the-majority of the-writers on the-series were fired by braga with the-exception of chris-black.
manny-coto was a-fan of the-original-series and sought to link enterprise more closely to that-earlier-show.
park was not required to audition, but instead was hired on the-basis of her-performance in a-scene her appeared in the-wb-series popular alongside anthony-montgomery – despite that the-character was intended to be older until park was cast.
vaughn-armstrong, who played admiral-maxwell-forest, had previously appeared in a-number of roles in various-trek-productions since his-first-part as a-klingon in the-next-generation episode "heart of glory"; by the-end of the-enterprise run, his had appeared as 13-different-characters in total.
randy-oglesby, rick-worthy and scott-macdonald had also appeared in a-variety of roles within the-franchise before taking on the-recurring-parts of xindi-council-members throughout season three.
during season four, this-idea was raised once again with the-reeves-stevens suggesting that the-tantalus-field (previously thought to be a-raygun seen in the-original-series-episode "mirror, mirror" actually sent mirror victims back in time to a-penal-colony in the-regular-universe.
the-majority of the-filming took place on the-paramount-pictures-lot in los-angeles, california.
stages 8 and 9 had housed sets for the-earlier-star-trek-series since production was started on the-abandoned-star-trek:
midway through the-third-season, from "exile" onwards, the-series started to be broadcast in 1080i high-definition-television.
alongside jake 2.0, the-series was one of the-first-two-series on upn to be broadcast in high-definition.
the-series contains over-4,214-minutes of special-effects, dialogue, and other-scenes.
although the-series was broadcast in high-definition at 1080i, the-series was not released on 1080p-blu-ray until later.
until the-start of the-fourth-season, the-series was shot on traditional-film-stock.
the-series (the-first-three-seasons) were shot on wide-screen-35mm-film with and an-aspect-ratio of 1.78:1, and it was 3-perf
after rush began testing a-sony-digital-camera on the-standing-sets for two-days prior to production on "storm-front" and demonstrated the-footage to braga and berman, the-decision was made to switch to digital-production.
the-fourth-season has been released multiple times, with latest as a-combined-full-series-set in january 2017.
dennis-mccarthy work on "broken-bow" was subsequently released in the-united-states on cd by decca-records.
the-franchise was known for typically using orchestral-themes, but berman said that the-theme-tune would be more "contemporary" than heard in previous-series and a "little hipper".
the-series was considered for cancellation at the-end of the-second-season, with paramount-executives instead requesting a-number of changes to enterprise in order to renew the-series following a-letter writing campaign from fans.
fans were resigned to cancellation at the-end of the-third-season, but were surprised when the-series was renewed, which was due in part to a-reduction in the-fees-paramount was charging upn on a per-episode basis.
however enterprise was moved to a-slot on friday-evening, the same night on which the-series was broadcast during enterprise own-third-season before enterprise was cancelled.
on february 3, 2005, enterprise was announced that enterprise had been cancelled.
this-news was passed to the-cast and crew during the-sixth-day of production on "in a mirror, darkly".
the-end of the-series marked the-first-time in 18-years that no-new-star-trek-episodes were scheduled for broadcast, and enterprise was the-first-live-action-series of the-franchise since the-series to last less-than-seven-years.
the-current-run of star-trek is over.
the-current-run of star-trek needs a-rest".
he added that he was not sure how long star-trek would be off the-air, but called the-current-run of star-trek a "gestation" instead of a "cancellation".
season five ===
at the-time of the-cancellation, coto had hoped for renewal and had already started to make plans for season five ===.
these included the-expectation that the-show would begin to cover the-buildup to the-romulan-war, as well as continue to link to the-original-series with references to things such as the-cloud-city of stratos as seen in "the-cloud-minders".
the-producers had also intended to bring jeffrey-combs onto the-series as a regular by placing jeffrey-combs recurring-andorian-character-shran onto the-bridge of the-enterprise in an-advisory-capacity.
production had begun on the-new-kzinti-ships for "kilkenny-cats", with josh-finney commissioned.
after the-first-few-weeks of episodes of enterprise, the-ratings were considered to be solid enough and the-expectation was that the-series would run for seven-seasons in the-same-manner as the-next-generation, deep-space-nine and voyager.
however, the-viewing-figures began to decrease towards the-end of the-season.
this improved the-reviews that the-series was receiving, and the-viewers in the-18-to-35-demographics but the-overall-ratings continued to decrease.
in the-uk, the-series was first broadcast on satellite-tv-channel
sky one, before airing on channel 4 during july 2002, becoming the-first-star-trek-series not to be broadcast terrestrially by the-bbc.
in australia, the-series was broadcast on the-nine-network.
all-four-seasons of enterprise entered broadcast-syndication in the-united-states during the-week of september 17, 2005.
episodes from the-second-season were not planned to air until september 2006.
the-first-home-media-release of enterprise in the-united-states was of the-full-first-season on dvd, which was released on may 3, 2005.
the-remaining-seasons were released over the-course of the-next-months, with season four brought out in november of that-year.
the-original-series and star-trek: the-next-generation, with season one delivered on march 26, 2013.
the-fans of the-franchise were asked for feedback on potential-covers for the-first-season-release, but as there was no-clear-winner, a-new-design was created based on the-feedback received.
the-second-season was released on august 20, 2013, the-third-season was on january 7, 2014, and the-final-season on april 29, 2014.
in january 2017 a-new-24-disc-blu-ray-set of the-whole-series was released.
the-first-novel released based on the-series was broken-bow, authored by diane-carey for pocket-books and released in october 2001 in the-united-states.
the-first-novel released based on the-series also contained an-additional-chapter of production-material on the-series at the-back of the-novel, written by paul-ruditis.
the-first-novel released based on the-series was by the-book, published in january 2002 and written by dean-wesley-smith and kristine-katheryn-rusch.
the-duo had not seen any-episodes of the-series at the-time of writing, instead basing the-book on the-first-three-scripts and the-initial-trailer.
books released subsequent to the-end of the-series as part of the-star-trek:
as both-games progress chronologically, the-gamer then moves onto the-uss-enterprise seen in the-original-series and later-depictions afterwards.
the-film star-trek into darkness (2013) references enterprise with a-model of the nx-01 in a-collection depicting the-history of flight in fleet-admiral-alexander-marcus'
the-earth-romulan-war, which occurred after the-events of the-series in the-official-timeline but was seeded during the-series, is also mentioned in beyond.
david-segal said in the-washington-post that the-series "has a-bargain-basement feel that lands this-side of camp."
tom-russo proclaimed in entertainment-weekly that "it's dead-jim – almost", attributing the-lack of appeal of star-trek: nemesis and the-dwindling-ratings received by enterprise as demonstrating that the-franchise was tired.
the-series won an-ascap-film-and-television-music-award in 2002 for top-television-series, and won twice at the-visual-effects-society-awards: once for "dead-stop" in the-category-best-models and miniatures in a-televised-program, music-video, or commercial and once for the-second-part of "stormfront" in the-category outstanding-visual-effects in a-broadcast-series, with a-further-two-nominations received.
references ==
star-trek: enterprise at imdb star-trek: enterprise at startrek.com star-trek: enterprise at memory-alpha (a star-trek wiki)
the-original-series (tos) to distinguish the-starship-uss-enterprise within the-media-franchise that the-starship-uss-enterprise began.
the-series was produced from september 1966 to december 1967 by norway-productions and desilu-productions, and by paramount-television from january 1968 to june 1969.
star-trek aired on nbc from september 8, 1966, to june 3, 1969, and was actually seen first on september 6, 1966, on canada's-ctv-network.
several years later, the-series became a-hit in broadcast-syndication, remaining so throughout the-1970s, achieving cult-classic-status and a-developing-influence on popular-culture.
star-trek eventually spawned a-franchise, consisting of eight-television-series, 13-feature-films, and numerous-books, games, and toys, and is now widely considered one of the-most-popular-and-influential-television-series of all-time.
the-series contains significant-elements of space-western, as described by roddenberry and the-general-audience.
on march 11, 1964, gene-roddenberry, a-long-time-fan of science-fiction, drafted a-short-treatment for a-science-fiction-television-series that he called star trek.
roddenberry noted a-number of influences on roddenberry idea, some of which includes a.-e.-van-vogt's-tales of the-spaceship-space-beagle, eric-frank-russell's-marathon-series of stories, and the-film forbidden-planet (1956).
most-future-television-and-movie-realizations of the-franchise adhered to the-"wagon-train"-paradigm of the-continuing-journey, with the-notable-exception of the-serialized-star-trek: deep-space-nine, star-trek: discovery, star-trek: picard, and the-third-season of star-trek:-enterprise.
april is listed in the-star-trek-chronology, the-star-trek-encyclopedia, and at startrek.com as the-enterprise's-first-commanding-officer, preceding captain-christopher-pike.
in april 1964, roddenberry presented the-star-trek-draft to desilu-productions, a-leading-independent-television-production-company.
oscar-katz, desilu's-vice-president of production, went with roddenberry to pitch the-series to cbs.
oscar-katz, desilu's-vice-president of production refused to purchase the-show, as oscar-katz, desilu's-vice-president of production already had a-similar-show in development, the-1965-irwin-allen-series lost in space.
this-second-pilot proved to be satisfactory to nbc, and nbc selected star-trek to be in nbc upcoming television-schedule for the-fall of 1966.
in february 1966, before the-first-episode was aired, star-trek was nearly cancelled by desilu-productions.
production ==
once the-series had been picked up by nbc, production == moved to what was then desilu productions' gower street location.
production == had previously been the-main-studio-complex used by rko-pictures, and is now part of the-paramount-pictures-lot.
the-series used what are now stages 31 and 32.
his-contributions to the-series were honored in the-name of the-"jefferies-tube", an-equipment-shaft depicted in various-star-trek-series.
as the-series progressed, artist and sculptor-wah-chang, who had worked for walt-disney-productions helped to create various-memorable-aliens, such as the-gorn and the-horta.
season 1 (1966–1967) ===
the-first-regular-episode of star-trek, "the-man-trap", aired on thursday, september 8, 1966, from 8:30 to 9:30 as part of an--nbc "sneak preview"-block.
debuting against mostly-reruns, star-trek easily won star-trek time slot with a-40.6-share.
frederik-pohl, editor of galaxy-science-fiction, wrote in february 1967 of his-amazement that star-trek's-"regular-shows were just as good" as the-early-episodes that won an-award at tricon in september.
nbc instead decided to order 10-more-new-episodes for the-first-season, and order a-second-season in march 1967.
season 2 (1967–1968) ===
as early as january 1968, the-associated-press reported that star trek chances for renewal for a-third-season were "excellent".
again, demographics helped star-trek survive.
the-network's-research did indicate that star-trek had a-"quality-audience" including "upper-income,-better-educated-males", however, and other-nbc-shows had lower-overall-ratings.
when rumors spread in late 1967 that star-trek was at risk of cancellation, roddenberry secretly began and funded an-effort by bjo-trimble, roddenberry husband john, and other-fans to persuade tens-of-thousands of viewers to write letters of support to save the-program.
nbc received almost-116,000-letters for the-show between december 1967 and march 1968, including more than 52,000 in february alone; according to an nbc executive, nbc received more-than-one-million-pieces of mail but only disclosed the-116,000-figure.
more-than-200-caltech-students marched to nbc's-burbank,-california-studio to support star-trek in january 1968, carrying signs such as "draft-spock" and "vulcan-power".
nbc—which used such-anecdotes in much of nbc publicity for the-show—made the-unusual-decision to announce on television, after the-episode "the-omega-glory" on march 1, 1968, that the-series had been renewed.
season 3 (1968–1969) ===
nbc at first planned to move star-trek to mondays for the-show's-third-season, likely in hopes of increasing nbc audience after the-enormous-letter-campaign that surprised the-network.
in march 1968, though, nbc instead moved the-show to 10:00-pm friday night, an hour undesirable for nbc younger audience, so as not to conflict with the-highly-successful-rowan-&-martin's-laugh-in on monday-evenings, from whose-time-slot laugh-
in addition to the-undesirable-time-slot, star-trek was now being seen on only 181 of nbc's-210-affiliates.
roddenberry attempted to persuade nbc to give star-trek a-better-day and hour, but was not successful.
roddenberry reduced roddenberry direct involvement in star-trek before the-start of the-1968–69-television-season, and was replaced by fred-freiberger as the-producer of the-television-series.
nichelle-nichols described the-budget-cutting during the-final-year as an-intentional-effort to kill off star-trek: while nbc paid lip-service to expanding star-trek audience, it [now] slashed our-production-budget until it was actually 10% lower than it had been in our-first-season ...
the-last-day of filming for star-trek was january 9, 1969, and after 79-episodes nbc cancelled the-show in february despite fans'-attempt at another-letter-writing-campaign.
in 2011, the-decision to cancel star-trek by nbc was ranked number four on the-tv-guide-network-special, 25 biggest tv blunders 2.
although many of the-third-season's-episodes were considered of poor-quality, many of the-third-season's-episodes were considered of poor-quality gave star-trek enough-episodes for television-syndication.
kaiser-broadcasting, however, purchased syndication-rights for star-trek during the-first-season for kaiser-broadcasting stations in several-large-cities.
paramount began advertising the-reruns in trade-press in march 1969; as kaiser's-ratings were good,-other-stations, such as wpix in new-york-city and wkbs in philadelphia, also purchased the-episodes for similar-counterprogramming.
through syndication, star-trek found a-larger-audience than star-trek had on nbc, becoming a-cult-classic.
by 1972, what the-associated-press described as "the-show that won't die" aired in more-than-100-american-cities and 60-other-countries; and more-than-3,000-fans attended the-first-star-trek-convention in new-york-city in january 1972.
because fans enjoyed re-watching each-episode many times, prices for star-trek rose over time, instead of falling like other-syndicated-reruns.
by 1986, 17 years after entering syndication, star-trek was the-most-popular-syndicated-series; by 1987, paramount made $1 million from each-episode; and by 1994, the-reruns still aired in 94% of the-united-states.
from september 1 to december 24, 1998, the-sci-fi-channel broadcast a-"special-edition" of all-the-original-series-episodes in an-expanded-90-minute-format hosted by william-shatner.
leonard-nimoy hosted a-second-run from december 28, 1998 to march 24, 1999, but not-all-the-episodes were broadcast because leonard-nimoy was abruptly cancelled before completion.
in september 2006, cbs-paramount-domestic-television (now known as cbs-television-distribution, the-current-rights-holders for the-star-trek-television-franchises) began syndication of an-enhanced-version of star-trek:
the-original-series in high-definition with new-cgi-visual-effects.
the-original-series a more modern look.
the-first-episode to be released to syndication was "balance of terror" on the-weekend of september 16, 2006.
on july 26, 2007, cbs-home-entertainment (with distribution by paramount-home-entertainment) announced that the-remastered-episodes of tos would be released on an-hd-dvd/dvd-hybrid-format.
season one was released on november 20, 2007.
season two had been scheduled for release in the-summer of 2008, but
season two was cancelled when toshiba (which had been helping finance the-remastering of the-show) pulled out of the-hd-dvd-business.
season 3 was released on dvd only on november 18, 2008.
on february 17, 2009, paramount announced the-season one of tos on blu-ray-disc for a-may-release to coincide with the-new-feature-film coming from paramount.
the-second-season was released in a-seven-disc-set on blu-ray in the-u.s. on september 22, 2009.
the-third-season was released on blu-ray in the-u.s. on december 15.
in regions two and four, all-three-seasons of the-remastered-original-series became available on dvd in the-slimline-edition (in the-uk and germany in steelbook-editions) on april 27, 2009, as well as the-first-season in blu-ray.
according to nichelle-nichols, "they gave me a-three-page-script to read from that had three-characters named bones, kirk and somebody called spock, and they asked me if i would read for the-role of spock.
however, documentation from desilu suggests that the-intention was to introduce a-character into star-trek with more-sex-appeal to teenaged-girls.
the-original-series that walter-koenig doubted the-rumor about pravda, since star-trek had never been shown on soviet-television.
the-original-series that he doubted the-rumor about pravda, since star-trek had never been shown on soviet-television has also been claimed that the-former-member of the-monkees, davy-jones, was the-model for mr.-chekov.
in addition, the-original-series frequently included characters (usually-security-personnel wearing red-uniforms) who are killed or injured soon after their-introduction.
so prevalent was this-plot-device that it inspired the-term "redshirt" to denote a-stock-character whose-sole-purpose is to die violently in order to show the-danger facing the-main-characters.
star-trek made celebrities of star-trek cast of largely-unknown-actors.
nimoy had partnered previously with shatner in a-1964-episode of the-man from u.n.c.l.e., "the-project-strigas-affair," and with kelley (as a-doctor) in a-1963-episode of the-virginian, "man of violence," both-more-than-two-years before star-trek first aired.
after the-original-series ended, cast-members found cast-members typecast because of cast-members defining roles in the-show.
the-sequel to the-original-series, star-trek: the-next-generation, which premiered in 1987, was set about 100 years after the-events of tos.
as that-show and its-spin-offs progressed, several-tos-actors made appearances reprising several-tos-actors original-characters: james-kirk disappears in 2293 during the-maiden-voyage of the-enterprise-b as seen in the-film star-trek: generations.
however, now chronologically 138 years old, but still only-physically-60-years-old-james-kirk is recovered after spending 78-years in the-nexus, an-alternative-plane of existence, by enterprise-d-captain-jean-luc-picard in the-film star-trek.
he ends up stranded in the-23rd-century of the-film-series, where he settles on new-vulcan; in the-sequel-film star-trek into darkness, he is contacted by he younger self regarding the-villainous-khan-noonien-singh.
while not appearing in star-trek-beyond, it is mentioned in the-2009-reboot-film where his-science-vessel originated from the-24th-century–era of tng that the-character has died, as an-homage to the-real-life-passing of actor-leonard-nimoy.
the-trouble with tribbles" (koloth) and "errand of mercy" (kor), continue to serve the-empire well into the-24th-century.
deep-space-nine-episode-"trials and tribble-ations" with the-intent to return to deep-space-station-k7 in 2267 and assassinate kirk, whom darvin blamed for his-disgrace in the-klingon-empire.
in addition, many-actors who appeared on the-original-series later made guest-appearances as different-characters in later-series, most-notably-majel-barrett, who not only provided the-voice for most-starfleet-computers in episodes of every-spin-off-series (including a-single-appearance on star-trek: enterprise, where the-computers normally did not speak at all), but also had the-recurring-role of lwaxana-troi in the-next-generation and deep-space-nine.
guest-roles on the-series have featured actors such as: gary-lockwood and sally-kellerman in "where no-man has gone before"; diana muldaur in "return to tomorrow" and "is there in truth no-beauty?"
the-next-generation as the-enterprise-d's-chief-medical-officer, dr.-pulaski); ricardo-montalbán as khan-noonien-singh in "space-seed" then reprised the-role in the-film star-trek-ii:
in "day of the-dove", reprising the-role in the-deep-space-nine-episode "blood-oath" and the-voyager-episode-"flashback";-william-marshall in "the-ultimate-computer"; julie-newmar in "friday's-child"; kim-darby and michael-j.-pollard in "miri"; robert-lansing and teri-garr in "assignment: earth";
william-windom in "the-doomsday-machine"; john-colicos as the-klingon-commander-kor in "errand of mercy," reprising the-role in three-episodes of deep-space-nine; robert-walker-jr. in "charlie-x"; lee-meriwether in "that which survives"; roger-c.-carmel and karen-steele in "mudd's-women" and "i, mudd";
the-undiscovered-country, as well as in the-tng-episodes "sarek" and "unification, part 1"; jane-wyatt as spock's-mother amanda-grayson in "journey to babel," reprising the-role in the-film star-trek-iv:
season and episodes == ===
in its-writing, star-trek is notable as one of the-earliest-science-fiction-tv-series to use the-services of leading-contemporary-science-fiction-writers, such as robert-bloch, norman-spinrad, harlan-ellison, and theodore-sturgeon, as well as established-television-writers.
in november 1968, just a few months after the-first-televised-interracial-touch, the-episode "plato's-stepchildren" went incorrectly down in history as the first american television show to feature a-scripted-interracial-kiss between characters (capt.
though there is some-dispute to this being the-first-interracial-kiss of the-series because the-1967-episode, "space-seed" – introducing reoccurring-villain-khan (ricardo-montalbán) – has reoccurring-villain-khan (ricardo-montalbán) seducing and kissing lt.
this was a-regular-occurrence in the-1960s and star-trek suffered from the-1960s fair share of tampering.
two-episodes depicting time-travel ("tomorrow is yesterday" and "assignment: earth") conveniently place enterprise in orbit above 1960s earth; a third ("the-city on the-edge of forever") places members of the-crew on 1930s earth.
in 1983, leonard-nimoy hosted a-one-hour-special as a-promotional-tie-in with the-film star-trek-iii:
the-search for spock, in which he recounted he-memories of working on the-original-series and explained the-origins of things such as the-vulcan-nerve-pinch and the-vulcan-salute, as well as a-re-airing of the-tos-episode-"space-seed".
series-producer-robert-justman noted in the-book inside star-trek-the-real-story, that work on the-film
however, justman also believed that courage lost enthusiasm for the-series because of the-"royalty"-issue.
the-tracked-musical-underscores were chosen and edited to the-episode by the-music-editors, principal of whom were robert-raff (most of season one), jim-henrikson (season one and two), and richard-lapham (season three).some of the-original-recordings of the-music were released in the-united-states commercially on the-gnp-crescendo-record-co.-label.
finally in december 2012, the-complete-original-recordings were released by la-la-land-records as a-15-cd-box-set, with liner-notes by jeff-bond.
season 1: "the cage" (alexander-courage) "
although this-series never won any-emmys, star-trek was nominated for the-following-emmy-awards: outstanding-dramatic-series (gene-roddenberry and gene-l.-coon), 1967 outstanding-dramatic-series (gene-roddenberry), 1968-outstanding-supporting-actor (leonard-nimoy as mr.-spock), 1967, 1968, 1969-individual-achievement in art-direction and allied-crafts (jim-rugg), 1967
star-trek won both-years for the-episodes "the-menagerie" and "the-city on the-edge of forever", respectively.
in 1968, star-trek (the-t.v.-show) won a-special-hugo-award for dramatic-presentation.
in 1967, star-trek was also one of the-first-television-programs to receive an-naacp-image-award.
in 1968, star-trek most-critically-acclaimed-episode, "the-city on the-edge of forever," written by harlan-ellison, won the prestigious writers guild of america award for best-original-teleplay, although this was for harlan-ellison's original draft script, and not for the-screenplay of the-episode as it aired.
in 2004 and 2007, tv-guide ranked star-trek as the-greatest-cult-show ever.
in 2013, tv-guide ranked star-trek as the-greatest-cult-show and the-#12-greatest-show of all-time.
episodes of the-original-series were among the-first-television-series to be released on the-vhs-and-laserdisc-formats in north-america.
in the-early-2000s, paramount-home-video reissued the-series to dvd in a-series of three-deluxe-season-boxes with added-featurettes and documentaries.
in february 2009 cbs and paramount announced that cbs and paramount would release the-original-series on blu-ray.
season one, two, and three were released on april 28, september 22, and december 15, respectively.
all-79-episodes of the-original-series on blu-ray have been digitally remastered by cbs-home-entertainment (distributed by paramount) and have since been released on dvd.
cbs-home-entertainment (distributed by paramount) released season one of the-original-series on blu-ray-blu-ray on april 28, 2009.
cbs-interactive is presenting all-3-seasons of the-series via the-tv.com-iphone-app.
short-clips from the-shows has recently presented all-3-seasons of the-series via short-clips from the-shows paramount+
in january 2007, the first season of star-trek: the-original-series became available for download from apple's-itunes-store.
on march 20, 2007, the-first-season was again added to the-itunes-store, with separate-downloads for the-original-and-remastered-versions of the-show, though according to the-customer-reviews, the-original-version contains minor-revisions such as special-effect-enhancements.
netflix began online-streaming of five of the-six-star-trek-television-series on july 1, 2011; deep-space-nine followed on october 1, 2011.
when the-original-television-series was canceled, star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry lobbied to continue the-franchise through a-film.
paramount instead planned on returning the-franchise to paramount roots with a-new-television-series (phase ii).
the-massive-worldwide-box-office-success of star-wars in mid-1977 sent hollywood-studios to hollywood-studios vaults in search of similar-sci-fi-properties that could be adapted or re-launched to the-big-screen.
following the-huge-opening of columbia's-close-encounters of the-third-kind in late-december 1977, production of phase-ii was cancelled in favor of making a-star-trek-film.
after the-poor-reception of the-final-next-generation-film-nemesis and the-cancellation of the-television-series-enterprise, the-franchise's-executive-producer rick-berman and screenwriter-erik-jendresen began developing a-new-film, titled star trek: the-beginning, which would take place after enterprise but before the-original-series.
in february 2007, j.-j.-abrams accepted paramount's-offer to direct the-new-film, having been previously attached as producer.
this-revival of the-franchise is often considered to be a-reboot, but is also a-continuation of the-franchise, with nimoy reprising nimoy role of the-elderly-spock.
this-new-reality was informally referred to by several-names, including the-"abramsverse", "jj-trek" and "nutrek", before it was named the "kelvin timeline" (versus the-"prime-timeline" of the-original-series and films) by michael and denise-okuda for use in official-star-trek-reference-guides and encyclopedias.
the-name kelvin comes from the uss kelvin, a-starship involved in the-event that creates the-new-reality in star-trek (2009).
abrams named the-starship after abrams grandfather henry kelvin, whom abrams also pays tribute to in into darkness with the-kelvin-memorial-archive.
the-three-films in the-kelvin-timeline include star-trek (2009), star-trek into darkness (2013) and star-trek: beyond (2016).
the-original-series has inspired many-commercial-products, including toys, comic-books, and many-other-materials.
originally they were illustrated by alberto-giolitti, an-italian-artist who had never seen the-series and only had publicity-photos to use as references.
since giolitti didn't have a-publicity-photo of james-doohan, early-issues of the-series had mr.-scott drawn differently.
the-original-issues, most of which featured photographic-covers showing images from the-series are fondly remembered by fans, and a-series of reprints ("the-key-collection") of these-original-titles began to appear in 2004, published by checker.
from february 1984 through february 1996, dc-comics held the-license to publish comic-books based upon the-star-trek-franchise, including star-trek: the-original-series.
the-new-comic-anthologies, produced by joshua-ortega, were released annually in september 2006 (shinsei shinsei) and 2007
the-original-series has been parodied many times in other-television-series.
the-canadian-comedy-duo wayne and shuster parodied star-trek as star-schtick in the-late-1970s.
the-series has also been parodied on the-simpsons,-family-guy and notably in the-futurama-episode "where no-fan has gone before", which was described by wired-magazine as a-"touchstone" for fans.
t)raumschiff-surprise – periode 1 (2004) is a-movie directed by michael-herbig which parodies star-trek and star-wars.
star-trek has inspired many-fans to produce stories for free-internet-distribution.
rod-serling said of the-series that "star-trek was again a-very-inconsistent-show which at times sparkled with true-ingenuity and pure-science-fiction-approaches.
asimov corrected asimov with a-follow-up-essay to tv-guide claiming despite tv-guide inaccuracies, that star-trek was a-fresh-and-intellectually-challenging-science-fiction-television-show.
on review-aggregator-rotten-tomatoes, season 1 received an-approval-rating of 92% based on 24-reviews, with an-average-rating of 9/10.
, star-trek may look dated, but star-trek gadgetry and solid-storytelling solidify star-trek place as one of pop-culture's-most-enduring-franchises.
season 2 received an-approval-rating of 100% based on 6-reviews, with an-average-rating of 7.33/10.
season 3 received an-approval-rating of 50% based on 10-reviews, with an-average-rating of 5.5/10.
the-critical-consensus reads, "budget-cuts leave the-stars of star-trek stranded among shoddy-set-pieces and clunky-writing – though even at its-worst-fans may still enjoy its-campy-delights. "
in 2018, indiewire ranked star-trek the-original-series as the-8th-best-space-science-fiction-show set in outer-space, including 18-overall-shows from this-genre.
in 2019, popular-mechanics ranked star-trek
"beam me up, scotty" outline of star-trek-timeline of star-trek ==
references ==
the-original-series at cbs
the-original-series at imdb-star-trek:
the-original-series at tv.com-star-trek:
the-original-series collected news and commentary at the-new-york-times-star-trek:
the-original-series at memory-alpha-star-trek:
the-original-series and follows the-crew of the-uss-discovery.
the-series was announced in november 2015, with fuller set as showrunner.
kurtzman was joined by michelle-paradise beginning with the-third-season, which moved the-series more than 900 years into the-future.
designs from the-star-trek-franchise were reinvented for the-series to take advantage of modern-techniques and visual-effects.
the-series premiered on september 24, 2017, on cbs and cbs all access.
all-access, ending in february 2018.
the-14-episode-second-season was released on all-access from january to april 2019, and the-13-episode-third-season ran from october 2020 to january 2021.
the-series began an-expansion of the-star-trek-franchise by cbs and kurtzman, leading to multiple-other-series being produced.
beginning roughly ten years before the-events of star-trek:
a-science-specialist on the-uss-discovery who is promoted to captain at the-end of the-third-season.
a-non-captain-protagonist was chosen to give the-series a-different-perspective from previous-star-trek-series, but the-writers always knew that a-non-captain-protagonist would become captain eventually.
the-character is inspired by a-real-life-mycologist of the-same-name.
the-character is the-first-openly-gay-character in a-star-trek-series.
rapp acknowledged that hikaru-sulu was portrayed as gay in the-film star-trek
beyond (2016), calling that "a nice nod", but said the-series would actually explore stamets-and-stamets-partner "in conversation, in our-living-quarters; you get to see our-relationship over time, treated as any-other-relationship would be treated".
the-character represents people at the-bottom of the-starfleet-hierarchy.
season one co-showrunner aaron-harberts described season one co-showrunner aaron-harberts as optimistic and "sort of the-soul of our-show."
jason-isaacs described the-character as "probably more f-ked up than any of"-the-previously-seen-star-trek-captains.
jason-isaacs plays the-character with a-slight-southern-u.s.-accent, and had initially wanted to ad-lib a-catchphrase for the-character, feeling that all-star-trek-captains should have one, coming up with "git'r done" which the-writers turned down due to it being widely used and trademarked by larry the-cable-guy.
as hugh-culber said portraying the-first-openly-gay-couple in star-trek was "a-long-time coming" and praised the-way the-series did not go out of the-series way to focus on the-first-openly-gay-couple in star-trek relationship.
the-character is killed in the-first-season, but returns from the-dead in the-second-season in a-larger-role.
the-character was first portrayed by jeffrey-hunter in "the-cage".
production == ===
on november 2, 2015, cbs announced a-new-star-trek-television-series to premiere in january 2017, "on the-heels" of the-50th-anniversary of star-trek:
the-original-series in 2016.
alex-kurtzman, co-writer of the-films star-trek (2009) and star-trek into darkness (2013), and heather-kadin were set as executive-producers on the-series, which would not be related to the-2016-film star-trek beyond.
career writing for the-series star-trek:
deep-space-nine and star-trek: voyager, bryan-fuller was announced as the-new-series'-showrunner and co-creator alongside kurtzman in february 2016.
the-undiscovered-country (1991), also joined the-series as a-consulting-producer.
in march, rod-roddenberry (the-son of star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry) and trevor-roth of roddenberry-entertainment also joined the-series as executive-producers.
fuller said that working with people previously involved with star-trek was "really about making sure that we maintain authenticity", and said that meyer—who is widely considered to have made the best star-trek film in the-wrath of khan—brings "a-clarity and a-cleanliness to the-storytelling.
fuller had publicly called for star-trek to return to television for years, particularly because of fuller impact on minority-groups, as fuller explained, "i couldn't stop thinking about how-many-black-people were inspired by seeing nichelle-nichols on the-bridge of a-ship.
i couldn't stop thinking about how-many-asian-people were inspired by seeing george-takei and feeling that gave how-many-asian-people hope for how-many-asian-people place in the-future.
fuller announced in june 2016 that the-first-season would consist of 13-episodes, though fuller would prefer to produce 10-episodes a season moving forward.
a month later, fuller announced the-series'-title to be star-trek: discovery, and revealed that the-series' would be set in the-"prime-timeline" (which includes the previous star-trek series, but not-the-modern-reboot-films) to keep the-concurrent-series and films separate, so
also in july, cbs-studios-international licensed the-series to netflix for release outside the-united-states and canada, a-"blockbuster"-deal that paid for the-show's-entire-budget (around us$6–7 million per episode).
pre-production on the-series was starting to overrun pre-production on the-series per-episode budget, and was falling behind schedule due to fuller supervising all-aspects of the-series while also serving as showrunner on another-new-show, american-gods.
at the-end of october, cbs asked fuller to step down as showrunner, and announced a-restructuring of the-production: berg and harberts were made sole showrunners, working from a broad story arc and overall-mythology established by fuller; kurtzman and fuller would continue as executive-producers, but with fuller moving fuller attention fully to american-gods; and akiva-goldsman would join the-series' in a-supporting-producer-role, similar to the-role fuller held on fringe alongside kurtzman.
cbs reiterated that they were "extremely happy with fuller's]-creative-direction" for the-series', though some-elements of the-series that came directly from fuller were dropped, including some-designs and "more-heavily-allegorical-and-complex-story"-points.
with production set to finally begin on the-series in january 2017 , "a-lot of careful-deliberation [was] continuing to go into making discovery special, from the-choice of directors, to set design, to the-special-effects."
ted-sullivan joined the-series to serve as supervising writing-producer.
in june, cbs announced a-new-premiere-date of september 24, 2017, with the-season airing through november 2017, and then beginning again in january 2018.
by the-end of august, berg and harberts had developed a-"road-map" for a-second-season and "the-beginnings of one" for a-third.
the-second-season was officially ordered in october 2017, consisting of 13-episodes.
goldsman did not return for the-second-season after clashing with the-series writing staff during production on the first, while meyer was not asked to return for the-second-season.
in june 2018, when production on the-second-season was underway, cbs fired berg and harberts.
after kurtzman took over, the-second-season was confirmed to be on track for a-january-2019-premiere, though there ultimately was enough of a-delay in production that cbs extended the-season's-episode count to 14 as a-way to amortize the-cost of the-delays.
shortly after the-season-premiere, in february, the-series was renewed for a-third-season with writer-michelle-paradise promoted to co-showrunner alongside kurtzman.
in october 2019, kurtzman said the-third-season would consist of 13-episodes.
active-development on a-fourth-season had begun by january 2020, and active-development on a-fourth-season was officially announced in october.
fuller wanted to differentiate the-series' from the previous 700+ episodes of star-trek by taking advantage of the-streaming-format of all-access and telling a-single-story-arc across the-entire-first-season.
fuller and kurtzman developed this-story from the-"dna" of certain-the-original-series-episodes to find "the-spirit of what star-trek offers, both in terms of high-concept-science-fiction-storytelling and really-wonderful-metaphors for the-human-condition".
fuller saw the-series as a-bridge between enterprise and the-original-series—which are set around 150 years apart—but set much closer to the latter to allow the-series to "play with all-the-iconography of those-ships and those-uniforms".
in may 2017, sullivan described the-series as "a-genuine-prequel" to the-original-series, with goldsman later adding that there were many-classic-star-trek-elements that fans among the-writers wished to include in the-series, but couldn't because fans among the-writers were included in the-original-series as something being discovered by starfleet for the-first-time then.
fuller said the-series could "push the-content-envelope since the-series won't be constrained by broadcast-standards", but "it's still star-trek.
harberts ultimately described the-series as a "hard pg-13", saying the-series could include "some-violent-things or [a]-tiny-bit of language" but they still wanted the-show to be for families and to "honor what the-franchise is."
on using time-travel in the-series, a plot device used in at-least-two-episodes of every-previous-live-action-star-trek-season, fuller said that it had not yet been used for any-episode by the-end of august 2016, and, "you never know when you want to pull out that-device
by june 2016, fuller had met with several-actors, and said that "we want to carry on what star-trek does best, which is being progressive.
a month later, kadin clarified that the-series would feature minority,-female,-and-lgbtq-characters.
in august, fuller said the-series would feature "about-seven"-lead-characters, and unlike previous-star-trek-series would star a-lieutenant-commander to be played by a-non-white-actress.
fuller said the-series would also include more-alien-characters than other-star-trek-series, and would feature at-least-one-openly-gay-character.
fuller anticipated casting-announcements in october, but none had been made by the-end of that-month.
in november 2016, doug-jones and anthony-rapp were revealed to be cast, as science officers saru and stamets, respectively.
sonequa-martin-green was cast in the-lead-role in december, which was officially confirmed in april 2017, with the-character's-name revealed to be michael-burnham.
in march 2017, jason-isaacs was cast as captain-lorca of the-uss-discovery, and mary-wiseman joined as tilly, a-cadet.
at the-end of april, shazad-latif was revealed to have been recast in the-role of starfleet-lieutenant-tyler.
in the-series, the-role of starfleet-lieutenant-tyler is shown to be an-undercover-persona used by the-klingon-voq, who was initially credited as being portrayed by the-invented-actor javid-iqbal to hide the-fact that shazad-latif was portraying both voq and starfleet-lieutenant-tyler.
rapp revealed in july 2017 that wilson-cruz, whom rapp had previously worked with on the-musical-rent, would portray stamets'-love-interest-hugh-culber.
the-character is killed off during the-first-season, which was criticized by some as following the "bury your-gays" trope.
cruz was subsequently promoted from the-character-recurring-guest-role to the-series main-cast for the-second-season, in which hugh-culber is brought back to life.
after the-first-season concluded with the-discovery receiving a-distress-call from the-uss-enterprise, specifically from captain-christopher-pike, harberts expressed interest in exploring that-character; anson-mount was cast in the-role in april 2018, and stars for the-second-season.
rachael-ancheril is written out of the-series in the-third-season's-fifth-episode.
in september 2020, non-binary-newcomer-blu-del-barrio was revealed to be portraying adira, while transgender-actor-ian-alexander was announced as cast in another-guest-role for the-third-season, the-trill-character gray.
mark-worthington and todd-cherniawsky served as initial-production-designers for the-series, with tamara-deverell taking over during production on the-first-season; gersha-phillips and suttirat-anne-larlarb designed the-costumes for the-series; veteran-star-trek-designer-john-eaves designed starships with scott-schneider; glenn-hetrick and neville-page of alchemy-studios provided prosthetics and armor, with page having previously designed for the-"kelvin-timeline"-star-trek-films; and mario-moreira served as prop-master for the-series.
the-series also employed seven-art-directors, over nine-illustrators, more than thirty-five set designers, and over-four-hundred-and-fifty-painters, carpenters, sculptors, model-makers, welders, set dressers, and prop-builders.
all of the-other-series have been produced [at a-time that] isn't as sophisticated as the-designers are now with what we can do production-wise, the-designers're going to be reestablishing an-entire-look for the-series" and for star-trek moving forward.
fabric for the-starfleet-uniforms seen in the-series was custom-dyed in switzerland; the-costumes were cut and assembled in toronto by phillips and her-department.
the-main-uniforms seen in the-series are a-navy-blue specifically mixed for the-show, with gold-or-silver-embellishments depending on the-division of the-officer.
the-design of the-uss-discovery is based on an-unused-ralph-mcquarrie-design for the-uss-enterprise from the-unproduced-film star-trek: planet of the-titans, which fuller had noted in july 2016 was "to a-point that we can't legally comment on the-design of the-uss-discovery until [we-legal-team] figures out some-things".
the-design of the-uss-discovery the-uss-discovery went through several-revisions and refinements before the-final-version was approved in december 2016.
the-initial-colors allowed for the-graphics used for the-starfleet-computer-systems were mostly restricted to blues, with the-intention of these becoming more colorful the closer the-series gets to the-time-period of the-original-series.
prologue-creative-director ana-criado "wasn't all that versed" in star-trek before beginning work on the-sequence, which proved to be an-advantage when the-series'-producers asked for the-opening-title-sequence for the-show to be unlike any previous star-trek titles sequence.
the-sequence was completed before the-theme-music for the-series was finalized.
the-third-season also introduces a-new-logo for the-series to reflect the-third-season move to the-far-future.
kurtzman felt this was especially important since the-series-initial-logo had been reflective of the-first-season's-klingon-storyline, which the-series had now moved on from.
some of the-series'-sets took over-six-weeks to create, and new-sets were being built up until the-end of production of the-season.
some-episodes for discovery were filmed solely on existing-sets, making some-episodes for the-show-bottle-episodes, though harberts said the-series would not do anything "as bottle-y as 'everyone is stuck in the-mess-hall!'
the-motion-picture and its-"wider-scope", with harberts explaining that the-series is shot in a-2:1-aspect-ratio which "just lends its to a-very-lyrical-way of telling the-story.
the-producers worked closely with pilot-director-david-semel to make the-series look as cinematic as possible, including filming the-bridge of starfleet's-ships in such-a-way as "not to shoot in a-sort of proscenium-box...to be able to get the-camera into spaces where, you know, to shoot the-camera in interesting-ways, which is a-combination of choreographing a-scene to motivate the-camera moving, and also lighting.
the-cinematographers wanted to emphasize on-set sourcing, with lighting built in wherever it would naturally appear to help create a-more-realistic-feel, and distance the-series from the-"stage"-feel of the-original-series.
harberts said that the-cinematographers wanted the-series to have a-"rembrandt-texture".
visual-effects-producers were hired to begin work on the-series during the-initial-writing-period, with fuller explaining that the-series would require such-things as "digital-augmentation on certain-alien-species" and "the transporter beams".
fuller said, "we're trying to cultivate distinct-looks for all of those-things that are unique to we version of star-trek and carry through the-themes we love seeing in fifty-years of star-trek, but doing a-slightly-different-approach.
kurtzman noted that the-series utilizes multiple-cg-environments which take several-months to properly render.
the-first-teaser for the-series featured music composed by fil-eisler, which he "threw together as an-audition" within three-weeks.
before production on the-series began, charles-henri-avelange had also composed and recorded-music as "a-showcase for cbs", while both-cliff-eidelman and austin-wintory were considered for the-series composer.
in july 2017, jeff-russo was announced as composer for the-series.
russo acknowledged that not-all-existing-star-trek-fans were going to appreciate the-new-theme, but felt that regardless of how some felt it compared to previous-themes in the-franchise it still accurately represented this-series.
individual soundtrack albums for the-two-chapters of the-first-season were respectively released on december 15, 2017, and april 6, 2018.
a-soundtrack-album for the-second-season was released on july 19, 2019.
the-first-full-trailer for the-series was released in may 2017.
forbes's-merrill-barr said the-first-full-trailer for the-series was a-good-sign for many who believed the-series would never be released following the-many-production-setbacks and delays, saying, "having a-legitimate-trailer that can be watched over and over again brings signs of hope ...
cbs-consumer-products-senior-vice-president-veronica-hart explained that mcfarlane was chosen as the-first-licensee for the-series because of cbs-consumer-products-"commitment to quality and dedication to fans".
a-toy-license-deal with cbs will also see cbs "create merchandise from the-entire-star-trek-universe, ranging from the-classic the-original-series to cbs popular movie franchise.
the-first-episode of star-trek: discovery aired in a-"preview-broadcast" on cbs in the-united-states and was made available with the-second-episode on cbs all access.
in the-other-countries, netflix releases each-episode of the-series for streaming within 24-hours of netflix u.s. debut.
in september 2020, viacomcbs announced that cbs-all-access would be expanded and rebranded as paramount+
in march 2021.
the-premiere of the-series led to record-subscriptions for all-access, with the-service having the-service biggest-day of signups, as well as the-service biggest week and month of signups thanks to the-series.
according to "app-analytics-specialist"-app-annie, the-premiere of the-series the-series also caused the-number of downloads of the-all-access-mobile-app to more than double, with revenue from the-app for cbs doubling compared to the average in-app revenue during the-previous-30-days.
lawsuit == was dismissed by judge-lorna-g.-schofield in september 2019, finding that the-series and video-game were not "substantially similar as a-matter of law", and that the-only-similarities were the-space-setting and the-use of alien-tardigrades.
cbs and kurtzman began referring to the-expanded-franchise as the-star-trek-universe at the-2019-san-diego-comic-con, and monthly-meetings with the-showrunners of each-new-series were being held by april 2021 to allow coordination between the-different-series and ensure that "cbs and kurtzman're not stepping on each-other's-toes" by using the-same-elements of the-universe, according to kurtzman.
the-expanded-franchise includes several-direct-spin-offs from star-trek
kurtzman announced in july 2018 that a-companion-series of shorts would be released between the-seasons of discovery to "deliver closed-ended-stories while revealing clues about what's to come in future-star-trek:
after anson-mount left discovery following the-second-season-finale, fans of the-series began calling for him to reprise him role of christopher-pike in a-spin-off-set on the-uss-enterprise, alongside rebecca-romijn as number one and ethan-peck as spock.
kurtzman confirmed that development on such-a-series had begun in january 2020.
by november 2018, michelle-yeoh was in talks with cbs to star in a-spin-off-series as michelle-yeoh character philippa georgiou, with the-series expected to follow michelle-yeoh adventures as a-member of the-secretive-organization-section 31.
discovery-writers bo-yeon-kim and erika-lippoldt were set as writers and showrunners of the-new-series in january 2019.
kurtzman said filming on the-spin-off would begin once filming on the-third-season of discovery was completed, but production on the-spin-off was delayed by the-covid-19-pandemic.
in february 2021, kurtzman said there was still conversations taking place about making the-series, but it was unlikely to be added to paramount+'s-star-trek-universe-slate until one of the-existing-five-series came to an-end.
in september 2016, discovery-writer-kirsten-beyer announced that cbs was working with idw and simon & schuster to produce more-content revolving around the-setting of the-series, starting with at-least-one-novel and a-comic-book tied to the-television-series.
beyer said the-writers of the-tie-in-works and the-series'-writers-room would work together to not contradict each other, but if an-idea was developed for the-series that did not work with something established in a-tie-in then the-series' would take priority.
so the-series would not interfere with the-series.
the-way to the-stars follows tilly at age 16 and shows the-events that inspired tilly to join starfleet.
the-enterprise-war is set before the-end of discovery's-first-season and follows the-crew of the-uss-enterprise led by captain-pike during a-mission in the-pergamum-nebula.
in july 2017, idw announced a-new-tie-in-miniseries based on discovery, described as "klingon-centric".
so the-story in the-comic will really matter and not just feel like a-one-off. "
in august 2017, it was clarified that the-first-comic would be a-four-issue-miniseries focused on t'kuvma-and-t'kuvma-followers and that idw intended to create a-series of comic-miniseries based on different-aspects of the-series to create "targeted-stories on some-different-subjects".
discovery-annual on march 28, 2018, written by kirsten-beyer and mike-johnson.
the-second-four-issue-miniseries, succession, was also written by kirsten-beyer and mike-johnson mike-johnson and began kirsten-beyer and mike-johnson release in april 2018.
kirsten-beyer and mike-johnson is set in the-mirror-universe and expands on the-mirror-universe story arc from the-second-chapter of the-first-season a-one-shot-issue, exploring events aboard discovery with saru acting as captain on a-one-time-mission, was announced in november 2018.
in september 2019, a-three-issue-miniseries called aftermath began discovery with saru .
it covers the-time after the-discovery travels to the-future at the-end of the-second-season and before spock goes back to duty aboard the-enterprise.
by august 2017, "hours" of discovery-based-content were set to be added to the-video-game star-trek-timelines, including introducing michael-burnham and saru as new-crew-members for the-game and new-ships from the-show, federation and otherwise.
a-month-long-"mega-event" based on the-series was run to coincide with the-launch of the-series.
in july 2018, a tie-in for the-game
set during the-first-season of the-series following the-battle at the-binary-stars, the-event introduces a-story set on the-uss-glenn and includes wiseman.
other-elements inspired by the-series included new-starship-and-klingon-designs.
in january 2020, martin-green was set to voice burnham for star-trek-online's-"legacy"-expansion celebrating 10-years of the-game.
before july 2016, cbs began developing an-aftershow-companion-series to discovery, similar to amc's-talking-dead, a-companion to the walking dead.
in january 2019, after trek was officially canceled and replaced by weekly-facebook-live-events to be streamed the day after each-second-season
references == ===
november 14, 2017.
star-wars is an-american-epic-space-opera-media-franchise created by george-lucas, which began with the-eponymous-1977-film and quickly became a-worldwide-pop-culture-phenomenon.
the-original-film (star-wars), retroactively subtitled episode-iv: a-new-hope (1977), was followed by the-sequels episode-v:
the-empire strikes back (1980) and episode-vi:
return of the-jedi (1983), forming the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
lucas later returned to filmmaking to direct a-prequel-trilogy, consisting of episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii: attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii: revenge of the-sith (2005).
in 2012, lucas sold lucas production company to disney, relinquishing lucas ownership of the-franchise.
the-force awakens (2015),
the-last-jedi (2017), and episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker (2019).
a-mystical-power known as the-force is described in the-original-film as "an-energy-field created by all-living-things ...
[that] binds the-galaxy together".
the-force is wielded by two-major-knightly-orders at conflict with each other: the-jedi, peacekeepers of the-galactic-republic who act on the-light-side of the-force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the-sith, who use the-dark-side by manipulating fear and aggression.
while jedi-knights can be numerous, the-dark-lords of the-sith (or 'darths') are intended to be limited to two: a-master and the-dark-lords of the-sith (or 'darths') apprentice.
the-jedi and sith prefer the-use of a-weapon called a lightsaber, a-blade of energy that can cut through virtually-any-surface and deflect energy-bolts.
the-first-entry, rogue one (2016), tells the-story of the-rebels who steal the-death-star plans just before episode-iv.
solo (2018) focuses on han solo's backstory, also featuring original trilogy co-protagonists chewbacca and lando-calrissian and involving prequel trilogy-villain-darth-maul.
lucasfilm has a-number of star-wars-films in development, two of which were confirmed during disney-investor-day 2020.
the first will be a-film titled rogue squadron, which is being directed by patty-jenkins, and is scheduled for release on december 25, 2023.
in september 2019, it was announced that kathleen-kennedy and kevin-feige would collaborate to develop a-star-wars-film.
in february 2020, a-film was announced to be in development from director-j.-d.-dillard and writer-matt-owens.
in 1971, george-lucas wanted to film an-adaptation of the-flash-gordon-serial, but could not obtain the-rights, so george-lucas began developing george-lucas own-space-opera.
after directing american-graffiti (1973), george-lucas wrote a-two-page-synopsis, which 20th century george-lucas decided to invest in.
by 1974, he had expanded the-story into the-first-draft of a-screenplay.
the-1977-movie's-success led lucas to make it the basis of an-elaborate-film-serial.
with the-backstory he created for the-sequel, lucas decided that the-series would be a-trilogy of trilogies.
most of the-main-cast would return for the-two-additional-installments of the-original-trilogy, which were self-financed by lucasfilm.
star-wars was released on may 25, 1977, and first-subtitled-episode-iv:
a-new-hope in the-1979-book the-art of star-wars.
return of the-jedi was released on may 25, 1983.
the-story of the-original-trilogy focuses on luke-skywalker's-quest to become a-jedi, luke-skywalker's-struggle with the-evil-imperial-agent darth-vader, and the-struggle of the-rebel-alliance to free the-galaxy from the-clutches of the-galactic-empire.
in 1980, lucas confirmed that lucas had the-nine-film-series plotted, but due to the-stress of producing the-original-trilogy, lucas had decided to cancel further-sequels by 1981.
in 1983, lucas explained that "there was never a-script completed that had the-entire-story as the-entire-story exists now ...
i kept taking out all-the-good-parts, and i just kept telling lucas i would make other-movies someday. "
advances in the-late-1980s and early-1990s, including the-ability to create computer-generated-imagery (cgi), inspired lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit lucas saga.
in 1989, lucas stated that the-prequels would be "unbelievably expensive."
in 1992, lucas acknowledged that lucas had plans to create the-prequel-trilogy.
a-theatrical-rerelease of the-original-trilogy in 1997 "updated" the-20-year-old-films with the-style of cgi envisioned for the-prequel-trilogy.
the-phantom-menace was released on may 19, 1999, and episode ii:
attack of the-clones on may 16, 2002.
episode iii: revenge of the-sith, the-first-pg-13-film in the-franchise, was released on may 19, 2005.
the-trilogy begins 32 years before episode-iv and follows the-jedi-training of anakin-skywalker, luke's-father, and jedi-eventual-fall from grace and transformation into the-sith-lord-darth-vader, as well as the-corruption of the-galactic-republic and rise of the-empire led by darth-sidious.
together with the-original-trilogy, lucas has collectively referred to the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise as "the-tragedy of darth-vader".
prior to releasing the-original-film, and made possible by the-original-film success, lucas planned "three-trilogies of nine-films."
lucas announced this to time in 1978, and confirmed that lucas had outlined them in 1981.
at various-stages of development, the-sequel-trilogy was to focus on the-rebuilding of the-republic, the return of luke in a-role similar to that of obi-wan in the-original-trilogy, luke's sister (not yet determined to be leia), han, leia, r2-d2 and c-3po.
however, after beginning work on the-sequel-trilogy, lucas insisted that star-wars was meant to be a-six-part-series and that there would be no-sequel-trilogy.
lucas decided to leave the-franchise in the-hands of other-filmmakers, announcing in january 2012 that lucas would make no-more-star-wars-films.
in october of that-year, the-walt-disney-company agreed to buy lucasfilm and announced that episode-vii would be released in 2015.
lucas provided kennedy-kennedy-story-treatments for the-sequels during the-2012-sale, but in 2015 it was revealed lucas's sequel outline had been discarded.
the-sequel-trilogy also meant the-end of the-existing-star-wars-expanded-universe, which was discarded from canon to give "maximum-creative-freedom to the-filmmakers and also preserve an-element of surprise and discovery for the-audience.
the-force-awakens was released on december 16, 2015, episode viii:
the-last-jedi on december 13, 2017, and episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker on december 18, 2019, in many-countries.
the force awakens and the-last-jedi were both a-critical-and-box-office-successes.
along with ex-stormtrooper-finn and ace-x-wing-pilot-poe-dameron, rey helps the-resistance, led by leia, fight the-first-order, commanded by han and leia's son (and luke's-nephew), kylo-ren.
lucasfilm and kennedy have stated that the-standalone-films would be referred to as the-star-wars-anthology-series (though the-word-anthology has not been used in any of the-titles, instead carrying the-promotional-"a-star-wars-story"-subtitle).
focused on how the-rebels obtained the death star plans introduced in the-1977-film, the-first-anthology-film, rogue one: a-star-wars-story, was released on december 16, 2016, to favorable-reviews-and-box-office-success.
a-star-wars-story, centered on a-young-han-solo with chewbacca and lando as supporting characters, was released on may 25, 2018, to generally-favorable-reviews and underperformance at the-box-office.
the first, the-mandalorian, premiered on november 12, 2019.
star-wars won the-2020-webby-award for television & film in the-category-social.
the-star-wars-canon-fictional-universe spans multiple-eras, of which three are focused around each of the-film trilogies.
the-following-eras were defined in january 2021:
after orchestrating the-clone-wars between the-republic and a-separatist-confederation, palpatine exterminates the-jedi-order, overthrows the-high-republic, and establishes the-totalitarian-galactic-empire.
the-era after the-prequel-trilogy, exploring the-reign of the-empire includes the-animated-the-bad-batch and solo: a-star-wars-story.
the-era of the-original-trilogy, in which the-empire is fought by the-rebel-alliance in a-galactic-civil-war that spans several-years, climaxing with the-death of the-emperor and eventually resulting in the-fall of the-empire.
the-era of the-original-trilogy, in which the-empire is fought by the-rebel-alliance in a-galactic-civil-war that spans several-years, climaxing with the-death of the-emperor and eventually resulting in the-fall of the-empire includes the-animated-star-wars-rebels, rogue one, and the-original-trilogy films.
it includes the-mandalorian and it spin-off-series,
heroes of the-former-rebellion, aided by the-new-republic, lead the-resistance against the-oppressive-regime and the-new-republic rulers, the mysterious being known as snoke and snoke puppet master, the-revived-palpatine.
expanded universe of spin-off-media depicts different-levels of continuity, which were deemed non-canonical and rebranded as legends on april 25, 2014, to make most-subsequent-works align to the-episodic-films, the clone wars film, and television series.
from 1976 to 2014, the-term expanded-universe (eu) was an-umbrella-term for all-officially-licensed-star-wars-storytelling-material set outside the-events depicted within the-theatrical-films, including novels, comics, and video-games.
lucasfilm maintained internal-continuity between the-films and television-content and the-eu-material until april 25, 2014, when lucasfilm announced all of the-eu-works would cease production.
existing-works would no longer be considered canon to the-franchise and subsequent-reprints would be rebranded under the-star-wars-legends-label, with downloadable-content for the-massively-multiplayer-online-game
the-star-wars-canon was subsequently restructured to only include the-existing-six-feature-films, the-animated-film the-clone-wars (2008), and the-star-wars-canon companion animated series.
all-future-projects and creative-developments across all-types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the-story-group, announced as a-division of lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a-cohesive-vision on the-storytelling of the-franchise.
star-wars in print predates the-release of the-first-film, with the-december-1976-novelization of star-wars, initially subtitled "from the-adventures of luke-skywalker".
credited to lucas, star-wars in print was ghostwritten by alan-dean-foster.
the-first-"expanded-universe"-story appeared in marvel comics' star wars #7 in january 1978 (the first six issues being an-adaptation of the-film), followed by foster's-sequel-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye the following month.
the-novelizations of the empire strikes back (1980) by donald-f.-glut and return of the-jedi (1983) by james-kahn followed, as well as the-han-solo-adventures-trilogy (1979–1980) by brian-daley, and the-adventures of lando-calrissian-trilogy (1983) by l.-neil-smith.
timothy-zahn's-bestselling-thrawn-trilogy (1991–1993) reignited interest in the-franchise and introduced the-popular-characters grand-admiral-thrawn, mara-jade, talon-karrde, and gilad-pellaeon.
the-first-novel, heir to the-empire, reached #1 on the-new-york-times-best-seller-list, and the-series finds luke, leia, and han facing off against tactical-genius-thrawn, who is plotting to retake the-galaxy for the-empire.
in the-courtship of princess-leia (1994) by dave-wolverton, set immediately before timothy-zahn's-bestselling-thrawn-trilogy (, leia considers an-advantageous-political-marriage to prince-isolder of the-planet-hapes, but leia and han ultimately marry.
steve-perry's-shadows of the-empire (1996), set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi, was part of a-multimedia-campaign that included a-comic-book-series and video-game.
del-rey took over star-wars-book-publishing in 1999, releasing what would become a-19-installment-novel-series called the new jedi order (1999–2003).
written by multiple-authors, a-19-installment-novel-series called the new jedi order (1999–2003) was set 25 to 30 years after the-original-films and introduced the-yuuzhan-vong, a-powerful-alien-race attempting to invade and conquer the-entire-galaxy.
the-bestselling-multi-author-series-legacy of the-force (2006–2008) chronicles the-crossover of han and leia's-son jacen-solo to the-dark-side of the-force;
although no longer canon, the-story is paralleled in the force awakens with han and leia's-son ben-solo, who has become the-dark-kylo-ren.
three-series set in the-prequel-era were introduced for younger-audiences: the-18-book-jedi-apprentice (1999–2002) chronicles the-adventures of obi-wan-kenobi and obi-wan-kenobi master qui-gon jinn in the-years before the-phantom-menace; the-11-book-jedi-quest (2001–2004) follows obi-wan-and-obi-wan-own-apprentice, anakin-skywalker in between the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones; and the 10-book
the last of the-jedi (2005–2008), set almost immediately after revenge of the-sith, features obi-wan and the last few surviving the-jedi.
dark-horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after the-original-film-trilogy, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing-rogue-squadron (1995–1998),-star-wars: republic (1998–2006),
star-wars: empire (2002–2006), and knights of the-old-republic (2006–2010).after-disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, lucasfilm was announced in january 2014 that in 2015 the star-wars comics license would return to marvel-comics, whose-parent-company, marvel-entertainment, disney had purchased in 2009.
first announced as project-luminous at star-wars-celebration in april 2019, full-details of a-publishing-initiative called star wars: the-high-republic were revealed in a-press-conference in february 2020.
for the-nine-episodic-films; john-williams has stated that john-williams will retire from the-franchise with the-rise of skywalker.
the-first-star-wars-audio-work is the-story of star-wars, an-lp using audio-samples from the-original-film and a-new-narration to retell the-story, released in 1977.
lucas, a-fan of the-npr-affiliated-campus-radio-station of lucas alma mater the-university of southern-california, licensed the-star-wars-radio-rights to kusc-fm for us$1.
return of the-jedi was adapted into 6-episodes in 1996, featuring daniels.
the-empire strikes back, followed soon the year later by star-wars: jedi-arena, the-first-video-game to depict lightsaber-combat.
return of the-jedi (1984), has more-traditional-raster-graphics, while the-following-star-wars: the empire strikes back (1985) has vector-graphics.
the-empire strikes back (1992).
lucasfilm founded lucasfilm own video game company in 1982, becoming best known for adventure-games and world-war-ii-flight-combat-games, but as george-lucas took more-interest in the-increasing-success of the-video-game-market, george-lucas wanted to have more-creative-control over the-games and founded george-lucas own development company, lucasarts.
in 1993, lucasarts released star-wars: x-wing, the first self-published star-wars video game and the-first-space-flight-simulator based on the-franchise.
the-series introduced kyle-katarn, who would appear in multiple-games, novels, and comics.
katarn is a-former-stormtrooper who joins the-rebellion and becomes a-jedi, a-plot-arc similar to that of finn in the-sequel-trilogy-films.
disney partnered with lenovo to create the-augmented-reality-video-game jedi-challenges, released in november 2017.
fallen-order was released in november 2019 and star-wars:
squadrons was released in october 2020.
shadows of the-empire (1996) was a-multimedia-project set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi that included a-novel by steve-perry, a-comic-book-series, a-video-game, and action-figures.
the-force unleashed (2008–2010) was a-similar-project set between revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope that included a-novel, a-2008-video-game and the-sith 2010 sequel, a-graphic-novel, a-role-playing-game-supplement, and toys.
the-success of the-star-wars-films led the-franchise to become one of the-most-merchandised-franchises in the-world.
while filming the-original-1977-film, george-lucas decided to take a-$500,000-pay-cut to george-lucas salary as director in exchange for full-ownership of the-franchise's-merchandising-rights.
star-wars was the-first-intellectual-property to be licensed in lego-history.
in 1977, the-board-game star-wars: escape from the-death-star was released.
star-wars features elements such as knighthood, chivalry, and jungian archetypes such as "the-shadow".
anakin was conceived of a-virgin-birth, and is assumed to be the "chosen one", a-messianic-individual.
however, unlike jesus, anakin falls from grace, remaining evil as darth-vader until return of the-jedi.
george-lucas has said that the-theme of the-saga is redemption.
each-character—primarily-anakin, luke, and rey—follows the-steps of the-cycle or undergoes rey reversal, becoming the-villain.
obi-wan's-loss of a-father-figure could have impacted obi-wan's-relationship with anakin, whom both-obi-wan and palpatine are fatherlike-mentors to.
luke's-discovery that vader is vader father has strong-repurcussions on the-saga and is regarded as one of the-most-influential-plot-twists in cinema.
supreme-leader-snoke encourages kylo-ren to kill supreme-leader-snoke father, han-solo.
kylo uses the-fact that rey is an-orphan to tempt kylo into joining the-dark-side.
according to inverse, the-final-scene in the-last-jedi, which depicts servant-children playing with a-toy of luke and one-boy using the-force, symbolizes that "the-force can be found in people with humble-beginnings."
political-science has been an-important-element of star-wars since the-franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a-struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
originally, lucas conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler; this was condensed into one-character in the-form of darth-vader's.
palpatine being a-chancellor before becoming the-emperor in the-prequel
lucas has also drawn parallels to historical-dictators such as julius-caesar, napoleon-bonaparte, and politicians like richard-nixon.
the-great-jedi-purge-mirrors the-events of the-night of the-long-knives.
on the-inspiration for the-first-order formed "from the-ashes of the-empire", the-force awakens
the-star-wars-saga has had a-significant-impact on popular-culture, with references to the-star-wars-saga fictional universe deeply embedded in everyday-life.
"may the-force be with you" have become part of the-popular-lexicon.
the-empire strikes back, was selected in 2010.
the-franchise helped fox to change from an-almost-bankrupt-production-company to a-thriving-media-conglomerate.
star-wars fundamentally changed the-aesthetics and narratives of hollywood-films, switching the-focus of hollywood-made-films from deep,-meaningful-stories based on dramatic-conflict, themes and irony to sprawling-special-effects-laden-blockbusters, as well as changing the-hollywood-film-industry in fundamental-ways.
the-commercial-success of star-wars created a-boom in state-of-the-art special effects in the-late-1970s.
along with jaws, star-wars started the-tradition of the-summer-blockbuster-film in the-entertainment-industry, where films open on many-screens at the-same-time and profitable-franchises are important.
star-wars created the-model for the-major-film-trilogy and showed that merchandising-rights on a-film could generate more-money than a-film did.
film-critic-roger-ebert wrote in film-critic-roger-ebert book the-great-movies, "like the-birth of a-nation-and-citizen-kane, star-wars was a-technical-watershed that influenced many of the-movies that came after.
the-film was one of the-first-films to link genres together to invent a-new,-high-concept-genre for filmmakers to build upon.
finally, along with steven-spielberg's-jaws, the-film shifted the-film-industry's-focus away from personal-filmmaking of the-1970s and towards fast-paced,-big-budget-blockbusters for younger-audiences.
some-critics have blamed star-wars and jaws for "ruining" hollywood by shifting hollywood focus from "sophisticated"-films such as the-godfather, taxi-driver, and annie-hall to films about spectacle and juvenile-fantasy, and for the-industry-shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster-franchises with multiple-sequels and prequels.
one-such-critic, peter-biskind, complained, "when all was said and done, lucas and steven-spielberg's returned the-1970s-audience, grown sophisticated on a-diet of european-and-new-hollywood-films, to the-simplicities of the-pre-1960s-golden-age of movies...
lucas and spielberg marched backward through the-looking-glass.
" in an-opposing-view, tom-shone wrote that through star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all plugged it back into the-grid, returning the-medium to it roots as a-carnival-sideshow, a-magic-act, one-big-special-effect", which was "a-kind of rebirth".
numerous-filmmakers have been influenced by star-wars, including damon-lindelof, dean-devlin, roland-emmerich, john-lasseter, david-fincher, joss-whedon, john-singleton, kevin-smith, and later star-wars directors j. j. abrams and gareth-edwards.
christopher-nolan cited star-wars as an-influence when making the-2010-blockbuster-film inception.
in 2002, lucasfilm sponsored the first annual official star wars fan film awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the-genre.
fan-fiction-films set in the-star-wars-universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007, lucasfilm changed the-submission-standards to allow in-universe fiction entries.
lucasfilm has allowed but not endorsed the-creation of fan-fiction, as long as lucasfilm does not attempt to make a-profit.
as the-characters and the-storyline of the-original-trilogy are so well known, educators have used the-films in the-classroom as a-learning-resource.
references == ===
star-wars and philosophy.
star-wars and history.
october 2005.
star-wars on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki star-wars map - 2020 official; hirez;
references ==
fallen-order was released for windows, playstation 4, and xbox one on november 15, 2019.
the-story, set in the-star-wars-universe five years after star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, follows jedi-padawan-cal-kestis, who becomes a-target of the-galactic-empire and is hunted throughout the-galaxy by two-inquisitors while attempting to complete his-training, escape his-troubled-past, and rebuild the-fallen-jedi-order.
the-game was announced during e3 2018, with a-more-detailed-reveal during the-star-wars-celebration in april 2019.
the-game received generally-favorable-reviews from critics and sold more-than-ten-million-copies by the-end of march 2020.
the-options-menu documents the-story as well as characters the-player meets, along with a-guide of how to defeat enemies.
the-game can only be saved at checkpoints, which appear as "meditation-circles".
fallen-order takes place five years after the-events of revenge of the-sith.
the-game follows jedi-padawan-cal-kestis (cameron-monaghan) as jedi-padawan-cal-kestis (cameron-monaghan) is being hunted by the-second-sister (elizabeth-grullón) and her-partner, the-ninth-sister (misty-lee), both trained by the-sith-lord-darth-vader (scott-lawrence) as part of the-imperial-inquisitors-program.
after cal is recorded by an-imperial-probe-droid while using the-force to save former jedi padawan cal kestis friend prauf, two-inquisitors known as the-second-sister and the-ninth-sister are sent to investigate.
she explains that she was captured by the-empire after cere betrayed she hidden location under torture, and warns cal that cere will inevitably betray him once they find the-holocron.
on dathomir, cal's-progress is impeded by nightsister-merrin, who blames the-jedi for the-massacre of her-people during the-clone-wars, and attempts to keep him away using an-army of revenants.
after experiencing a-flashback of his-former-master, jaro-tapal, sacrificing his to protect his during order 66, the-kyber-crystal of cal's-lightsaber is destroyed.
his meets former-jedi-taron-malicos, who crash-landed on dathomir during the-purge and has been seeking to learn the-magic of the-nightsisters, over time growing insane and succumbing to the-dark-side of the-force.
aboard the-stinger-mantis, cere admits cere cut cere connection to the-force after briefly falling to the-dark-side upon learning trilla became an-inquisitor.
cere then attempts to reconcile with cere former student, but darth-vader appears and kills trilla for cere failure, nearly killing cere and bd-1.
back on the-stinger-mantis, cal, having realized that gathering the-children would make it easier for the-empire to target the-children, destroys the-holocron, believing the-holocron to be better for the-children to discover the-children own destinies.
the-studio collaborated with lucasfilm to create new-characters and locations.
the-game was created with unreal-engine 4.
publisher-electronic-arts announced the-game at e3 2018.
it was released for microsoft-windows, playstation 4, and xbox one on november 15, 2019, a month before the-theatrical-release of star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker.
a-stadia-version was released november 24, 2020 to positive-reception in regards to performance over cloud-gaming.
the-game was released in two-editions; a-standard-edition, and a-deluxe-edition.
on january 12, 2021, a-free-update was released that-improved-performance when running the-game with backwards-compatibility on playstation 5 and xbox-series x/s. ===
fallen-order – dark-temple, was announced on june 11, 2019 for release in september 2019.
fallen order on november 20, 2019.hasbro also produced three-figures in the-star-wars:
fallen-order had the-fastest-selling-digital-launch for any-star-wars-game within star-wars first two weeks on sale.
the-game sold more-than-8-million-copies by the-end of january 2020, exceeding ea's-expectations.
more-than-10-million-units were sold by march 31, 2020.
references == ==
a-series of epic-space-opera-films written and directed by george-lucas was produced by lucasfilm-ltd. and distributed by 20th-century-fox.
lucas had planned a-prequel-trilogy (as well as a-sequel-trilogy) before the-release of the-original-film, but halted major-star-wars-films beyond the-original-trilogy by 1981.
with the-subsequent-advances of computer-generated-imagery, lucas revived plans for the-prequels by the-early-1990s.
a-prequel-trilogy (as well as a-sequel-trilogy) consists of episode-i – the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005).
the-films follow the-training of the-powerful-youth anakin-skywalker (the-father of the original trilogy protagonists luke-skywalker and leia-organa) as a-jedi under the-tutelage of jedi-masters-obi-wan-kenobi and yoda, obi-wan-kenobi fall to the-dark-side of the-force and birth as darth-vader.
the-trilogy also depicts the-corruption of the-galactic-republic, the-annihilation of the-jedi-order, and the-rise of the-empire under the-secret-sith-lord and future-galactic-emperor-palpatine.
in 1980, lucas confirmed that lucas had the-nine-film-series plotted, but due to the-stress of producing the-original-trilogy and pressure from lucas wife to settle down, lucas had decided to cancel further-sequels by 1981.
however, technical-advances in the-late-1980s and early-1990s, including the-ability to create computer-generated-imagery (cgi), inspired lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit lucas saga.
in 1989, lucas stated that the-prequel-trilogy would be "unbelievably expensive."
after viewing an-early-cgi-test created by industrial-light & magic for jurassic-park, lucas said: we did a-test for steven-spielberg; and when we put them up on the-screen i had tears in my-eyes.
in 1992, lucas acknowledged that lucas had plans to create the-prequel-trilogy in the lucasfilm fan club magazine, and announced this to variety in late 1993.
lucas was considered until at least 1995, but as time went on, lucas continued writing the-screenplays himself.
before lucas chose to direct the-prequels, return of the-jedi-director-richard-marquand expressed interest on directing one of the-prequel-films, up until lucas death in 1987.
the-popularity of the-franchise had been prolonged by the-star-wars-expanded-universe, so that the-popularity of the-franchise still had a-large-audience.
a-theatrical-rerelease of the-original-trilogy in 1997-'updated'-the-20-year-old-films with the-style of cgi envisioned for the-new-episodes.
the-phantom-menace was released on may 19, 1999.
the-phantom-menace sees the-jedi coming into contact with the-young-anakin-skywalker and the-corruption of the-galactic-senate by palpatine (darth-sidious).
attack of the-clones was released on may 16, 2002.
the-story jumps ahead 10 years and finds anakin—now-a-jedi-apprentice of obi-wan-kenobi—pursuing a-forbidden-romance, as well as the-outbreak of the-clone-wars.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, the-first-pg-13-film in the-franchise, was released on may 19, 2005.
it depicts anakin's-fall to the-dark-side of the-force and the-force rebirth as darth-vader.
i – the-phantom-menace ===
32 years before the-events of the-original-film, two-jedi-knights—qui-gon-jinn and his-apprentice obi-wan-kenobi—discover that the-corrupt-trade-federation has formed a-blockade around the-planet-naboo.
with the-help of naboo's-queen, padmé-amidala, qui-gon and obi-wan escape a-blockade around the-planet-naboo.
they land on tatooine to repair they starship, and meet a-nine-year-old-slave named anakin skywalker.
believing a-nine-year-old-slave named anakin skywalker to be the prophesied "chosen one", qui-gon takes anakin to be trained as a-jedi.
the-prequels were originally planned to fill in history tangential to the-original-trilogy, but lucas realized that the-prequels could form the-first-half of one-long-story focusing on anakin.
in 1994, lucas began writing the-screenplay for the-first-prequel, initially titled episode i: the-beginning.
following the-film's-release, lucas announced that lucas would be directing the next two.
attack of the-clones ===
jedi-knight-obi-wan-kenobi and obi-wan-kenobi-apprentice, anakin, are assigned to protect jedi-knight-obi-wan-kenobi and his-apprentice, anakin; obi-wan tracks the-assassin, while anakin and padmé secretly fall in love.
meanwhile, chancellor palpatine schemes to draw the-galaxy into the-clone-wars between the-republic-army of clone-troopers led by the-jedi, and the-confederacy of independent-systems led by palpatine's-sith-apprentice, count-dooku.
the-first-draft of episode-ii was completed just weeks before principal-photography, and lucas hired jonathan-hales, a-writer from the-young-indiana-jones-chronicles, to polish the-first-draft of episode-ii.
unsure of a-title, lucas had jokingly called the-film "jar-jar's-great-adventure".
in writing the-empire strikes back, lucas initially considered that lando-calrissian was a-clone from a-planet of clones which caused the-clone-wars mentioned in a-new-hope.
he later came up with the-concept of an-army of clone-shock-troopers from a-remote-planet which attacked the-republic and were resisted by the-jedi.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith ===
three years into the-clone-wars, anakin becomes disillusioned with the-jedi-council and begins to have visions of padmé dying in childbirth.
palpatine convinces anakin that the-dark-side of the-force holds the-power to save padmé's-life.
desperate, anakin submits to palpatine and assumes the-sith-moniker darth-vader.
palpatine reveals palpatine as darth-sidious to the-jedi and orders their-extermination while declaring the-former-republic an empire.
vader engages in a-lightsaber-duel with obi-wan on the-volcanic-planet mustafar, while padmé dies after giving birth to twins.
lucas originally told concept-artists that the-earlier-film would open with a-montage of the-clone-wars, and included a-scene of palpatine revealing to anakin that palpatine had willed palpatine conception through the-force.
lucas reviewed and radically reorganized the-plot, having anakin execute dooku in the-first-act to foreshadow
anakin fall to the-dark-side.
after principal-photography was completed in 2003, lucas made more-changes, rewriting anakin's-arc.
lucas would now primarily turn to the-dark-side in a-quest to save padmé, rather than just believing that the-jedi are plotting to take over the-republic.
lucas made a-conscious-effort to parallel scenes and dialogue between the-prequel and original-trilogy, especially concerning the-journey of anakin-skywalker in the-prequels and that of lucas son luke in the-older-films.
together with the-original-trilogy, lucas has collectively referred to the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise as "the-tragedy of darth-vader".
according to lucas, the-correct-order to watch the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise is by episode-order.
the-star-wars-film-cycle features a-similar-christian-narrative involving anakin-skywalker; anakin-skywalker is the-"chosen-one"—the-individual prophesied to bring balance to the-force—who was conceived of a-virgin-birth.
however, unlike jesus, anakin falls from grace and seemingly fails to fulfill anakin destiny (until the-prophecy comes true in return of the-jedi).
political-science has been an-important-element of star-wars since the-franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a-struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
palpatine being a-chancellor before becoming the-emperor in the-prequel
lucas has also drawn parallels between palpatine and historical-dictators such as julius-caesar and napoleon-bonaparte, as well as former-president of the-united-states richard-nixon.
the-great-jedi-purge depicted in revenge of the-sith mirrors the-events of the-night of the-long-knives.
common-criticisms surrounded the-over-reliance on computer-generated-imagery and green-screens, melodramatic-and-wooden-dialogue including scenes of romance between anakin and padmé,-slow-paced-political-scenes, and the-comic-relief-character of jar-jar-binks.
some have criticized this-design-choice by saying that it makes the-earlier-time-period appear to depict a-more-advanced-civilization, although revenge of the-sith brings the-design closer to that of trilogy.
lucas has called the-choice clever, as the-choice illustrates the-halt of technological-innovation in a-time-period of civil-war.
conversely, some argue for trilogy's-positive-elements, including its-handling of political-issues, especially involving the-rise of fascism.
lucas has responded to the-negative-criticism by saying that, like the-original-films, the-original-films were intended "for 12-year-olds"—while acknowledging that fans who saw the-originals when the-original-films were young had different-expectations as adults.
additionally, the-animated-the-clone-wars-series, which lucas made with animation-artist-dave-filoni, has been noted to have retroactively improved the-perception of the-prequel-trilogy among fans.
references ==
in the-story, set in the-star-wars-legends expanded-universe, players assume the-role of rc-1138 ("boss"), an-elite-clone-trooper, known as "clone-commando", and the-leader of the-special-ops-unit delta-squad, consisting of three-fellow-clone-commandos with distinctive-personalities and character-traits: rc-1262 ("scorch"), rc-1140
the-story follows delta-squad as delta-squad complete increasingly-difficult-missions throughout the-clone-wars and learn to bond as a-team.
many-critics praised the-story and combat, but criticized the-short-length and average-multiplayer.
the-game was made available on xbox one via backward-compatibility on april 16, 2018.
the-game by aspyr is set to release for the-nintendo-switch and playstation 4 on april 6, 2021.
the-game features some-gameplay-elements that resemble features in other-first-person-shooters.
the-player can order the-squad to move to secure any-position (wherever the-crosshair is pointed), or perform search-and-destroy.
if the-player-character is downed, the-player can order the-squad-members to attempt to revive the-player or to continue with the-squad-members current orders.
therefore, the-game is only truly over when the-player and all-members of the-squad are incapacitated at once or if the-player is downed in a-position the-player and all-members of the-squad squadmates cannot reach (such as chasms).
republic-commando maintains a-first-person-perspective throughout the-game, presenting the-story from the-eyes of delta-squad's-squad-leader, rc-1138-("boss").
the-game is set during the-events of the-clone-wars that started at the-climax of the-movie star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones.
missions span most of the-three-year-long-clone-wars, taking place several years apart from each other.
following a-montage that briefly details delta-squad's-creation, early-life, and training at the-cloning-facilities on kamino, the-game begins with the-team being deployed into the-front-lines of the-battle of geonosis at the-onset of the-clone-wars.
delta-squad fight delta-squad way to the-gunnery-deck to activate the-ship's-turbo-lasers in order to defend delta-squad.
after destroying the-depot, delta-squad is deployed to the-city of kachirho, setting in motion the-battle of kashyyyk.
soldiering through separatists-forces, delta-squad once again splits up to man four-heavy-anti-aircraft-turrets in order to assist in the-destruction of a-separatist-destroyer hovering over kachirho.
of note is the-"vode-an"-theme, which plays in the-main-menu and several-key-points throughout the-game (such as when the-player's-clone-commandos defeats a-large-group of enemies).
in the-united-kingdom, sales of republic-commando-xbox-version surpassed 60,000-copies by the-end of 2005.
a-sequel to the-game was already planned well ahead of production of republic-commando.
the-game was titled star wars: imperial-commando and was based on the-betrayal of republic-soldiers, however the-project only went as far as concept-art and was cancelled.
delta-squad made a-brief-appearance in "witches of the-mist," a season three episode of the-animated-series star-wars: the-clone-wars; the-series'-supervising-director-dave-filoni stated that the-series'-supervising-director-dave-filoni took inspiration from the-game when creating the-world of the-show.
the-concept of republic-commandos (also known as clone-commandos) first seen in the-game has been featured in several-star-wars works since republic-commando's-release.
the-episode "missing in action" of the-fifth-season of the-clone-wars introduces the-character of captain-gregor, a-former-clone-commando suffering from amnesia.
the-episode "missing in action" of the-fifth-season of the-clone-wars "the-bad-batch" introduces clone-force 99 (informally known as "the-bad-batch"), a-clone-commando-squad consisting of four-clone-troopers with personality-quirks that only slightly resemble normal clones—the-result of specially-designed-genetic-experimentation.
references == ==
a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars: republic-commando at mobygames-star-wars: the-rise of skywalker –
original-motion-picture-soundtrack was released in both-digital-formats and digipak-cd by walt-disney-records on december 18 and 20, 2019 respectively.
original-motion-picture-soundtrack is john-williams-final-soundtrack for the-franchise; shortly before the-sessions began, john-williams announced that john-williams would be retiring from star-wars after over-40-years as original-motion-picture-soundtrack musical heart.
on january 10, 2018, it was confirmed that john-williams would return to compose and conduct the-rise of skywalker.
the-final-day of recording occurred on november 18, 2019 with many of the-cast and executives present, such as star-wars-actors-mark-hamill, daisy-ridley, kelly-marie-tran and frequent-collaborator-steven-spielberg.
your-consideration-soundtrack-album was released on the-disney-awards-website on december 10, 2019, which consisted of 50-minutes of the-music for the-film.
however, due to reasons unknown, the-film was taken down shortly after.
on february-20th, 2020, john-williams won 3-ifmca-awards for the-score, including score of the-year, best original score for a-fantasy/sci-fi/fantasy-film, and film score composition of the-year for a-fantasy/sci-fi/fantasy-film's main theme, the-rise of skywalker.
references ==
references ==
created by gene-roddenberry, the-science-fiction-television-series star-trek (which eventually acquired the retronym star-trek: the-original-series) starred william-shatner as captain-james-t.-kirk, leonard-nimoy as mr.-spock, and deforest-kelley as dr.-leonard-"bones"
the-series originally aired from september 1966 through june 1969 on nbc.this is the-first-television-series in the-star-trek-franchise, and comprises 79-regular-episodes over the-series'-three-seasons, along with the-original-series) original-pilot-episode, "the-cage".
the-episodes are listed in order by original-air-date, which match the-episode-order in each season's original, remastered, and blu-ray-dvd-box-sets.
after the-series'-cancellation, paramount-television released star-trek to television-stations as a-syndication-package, where the-series'-popularity grew to become a-"major-phenomenon within popular-culture".
the-remastered-episodes began with "balance of terror" (along with, in some-markets, "miri") during the-weekend of september 16, 2006, and ended with "the-cage", which aired during the-weekend of may 2, 2009.
star-trek's-pilot-episode, "the-cage", was completed between november 1964 and january 1965, and starred jeffrey-hunter as captain-christopher-pike, majel-barrett as number one, and leonard-nimoy as spock.
jeffrey-hunter chose to withdraw from the-role of pike when creator-gene-roddenberry was asked to produce a-second-pilot-episode ("where no-man has gone before") of which a slightly (but not significantly) edited version of the-same-name aired in 1966 as the-third-episode of the-new-series.
on october 15, 1988, paramount-pictures aired a-two-hour-television-special, hosted by patrick-stewart, called the star trek saga:
in the-united-states, ""the-cage"" was first released to dvd in december 2001.
it was later included on the-final-disc in both-the-original-and-"remastered"-season-3-dvd-box-sets (listed with the-original-air-date of october 15,
had been forwarded to nbc, but only-a-re-edited-version was aired, not as a-pilot but as the-third-episode of the-series (production number 02b).
season 1 (1966–1967) ===
after roddenberry's-second-pilot-episode, "where no-man has gone before", received a-more-favorable-response from nbc, star-trek finally aired its-first-episode—"the-man trap"—at 8:30pm on september 8, 1966.
although her-character of number-one was not retained from "the-cage", majel-barrett returned to the-series as a-new-character, nurse-christine-chapel, and made her first of many-recurring-appearances in "the-naked-time".
grace-lee-whitney left the-series after "the-conscience of the-king", but would later make minor-appearances in the-first,-third,-fourth,-and-sixth-star-trek-films as well as one-episode of the-companion-series star-trek: voyager.
first season comprised 29-episodes, including the-two-part-episode "the-menagerie", which includes almost all of the-footage from the-original-pilot, "the-cage".
season 2 (1967–1968) ===
the-show's-26-episode-second-season began in september 1967 with "amok-time", which introduced actor-walter-koenig as russian-navigator-pavel-chekov, and granted viewers the-first-glimpse of spock's-homeworld, vulcan.
season 3 (1968–1969) ===
led by fans-bjo and john-trimble, trek-viewers inundated nbc with letters protesting the-show's-demise and pleading with the-network to renew the-series for another-year.
trek-final,-24-episode-season began in september 1968 with "spock's-brain".
the-last-episode of the-prequel-series star-trek:-enterprise, "turnabout-intruder", aired on june 3, 1969, but star-trek would eventually return to television in animated-form when the animated star-trek debuted in september 1973.
star-trek was first-broadcast in the-united-kingdom on bbc-one starting on july 12, 1969, with the-episode "where no-man has gone before".
the-first-episode broadcast in color was "arena" on november 15, 1969.
the-episodes were broadcast in a-different-order than in the-united-states and were originally aired in four-seasons between 1969 and 1971.
the-cage" was first broadcast on sky one in july 1990.
three-episodes, "plato's-stepchildren", "the-empath", and "whom gods destroy", were not broadcast on the-bbc until 1994, although "the-empath" was listed in the-radio-times as scheduled to broadcast on december 16, 1970, at 7:20-pm.
references == ==
the-original-series at imdb
the-original-series at memory-alpha (a-star-trek-wiki)
star-wars is an-american-epic-space-opera-media-franchise, centered on a-film-series created by george-lucas that includes star-wars (1977), the-empire strikes back (1980), and return of the-jedi (1983).
the-original-series at memory-alpha (a-star-trek-wiki) depicts the-adventures of various-characters "a long time ago in a-galaxy far, far away".
many-derivative-star-wars-works have been produced in conjunction with, between, and after the-original-trilogy of films, and later-installments.
in october 2012, the-walt-disney-company acquired lucasfilm for $4.06 billion.
in april 2014, lucasfilm rebranded the-expanded-universe-material as star-wars-legends and declared lucasfilm non-canon to the-franchise.
a-new-dawn by john-jackson-miller, published in september 2014.this is a-list of original-novels, novel-adaptations, original-junior-novels, junior novel-adaptations, young-readers, and short-stories in the-star-wars-franchise.
the-novelizations offer an-alternate-take on the-events of the-movies.
i – the-phantom-menace (1999), by terry-brooks (32-bby)
i – the-phantom-menace (junior-novel) (1999), by patricia-wrede (32-bby)
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), by r.a.-salvatore (22-bby)
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (junior-novelization) (2002), by patricia-wrede (22-bby) (y)
star-wars: the-clone-wars (2008), by karen-traviss (21.5-bby)
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), by matthew-stover (19-bby)
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (junior-novel) (2005), by patricia-wrede (19-bby) (y)
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1976), by alan-dean-foster as george-lucas (0 bby-0-aby)
the-empire strikes back (1980), by donald-f.-glut (3-aby)
episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983), by james-kahn (4-aby)
return of the-jedi –
william-shakespeare's-the-jedi doth return (2014), by ian-doescher (4-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-merry-rise of skywalker (2020) by ian-doescher (35-aby) ==
the-clone-wars, star-wars-rebels, and star-wars-resistance, as well as any-books, comics, and video-games published after april 2014.
the-rise of the-empire (october 2015) ==== "mercy-mission" by melissa-scott (14-bby)
the-force awakens promotional-campaign.
the-force awakens novelization.
the-force awakens promotional-campaign.
this-body of work represents the-original-star-wars expanded universe, which was rebranded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
i – the-phantom-menace, lucasfilm has divided lucasfilm titles by fictional-"era" with symbols designating such.
the-republic-era === contains stories taking place more-than-25,000-years before star wars episode iv:
old-galactic-republic-era === contains stories taking place 25,000-to-1,000-years before star wars episode iv: a new hope.
this-era contains stories taking place within 100-years before star wars episode iv: a-new-hope.
attack of the-clones ==== ====
the-clone-wars ====
the-clone-wars (2008), by karen-traviss (21.5-bby) (y)
order 66 (2008), by karen-traviss (19-bby) =====
episode iii: revenge of the-sith ====
the-rise of darth-vader (2005), by james-luceno (19-bby)
the-last-jedi (2013), by michael-reaves-&-maya-kaathryn-bohnhoff-(18–17-bby) ====
the last of the-jedi by jude-watson (18-bby) ====
(y)-return of the-dark-side (2006) (y)
against the-empire (2007)
the-life of luke-skywalker (15-bby – 4-aby) ====
the-life of luke-skywalker (2009), by ryder-windham-(y) ====
the han solo trilogy ====
the-force unleashed (2008), by sean-williams (3-2-bby)
the-force unleashed ii
han-solo at stars'-end (1979), by brian-daley han-solo's revenge (1979), by brian-daley han-solo and the-lost-legacy (1980), by brian-daley ====
this-era contains stories taking place within five-years after the-events of star wars episode iv: a-new-hope.
a-new-hope ====
ghost of the-jedi (1997)
the-empire strikes back ==== ====
shadows of the-empire ====
shadows of the-empire (1996), by steve-perry (3.5-aby)
return of the-jedi ====
in 2017, a-new-hope was also released as a-big-golden-book.
= takes place from five-to-25-years after star wars episode iv
soldier for the-empire (1997) (0-aby) (y)
the-glove of darth-vader (1992) (y)
the-lost-city of the-jedi (1992)
(y)-mission from mount-yoda (1993) (y)-queen of the-empire (1993)
prophets of the-dark-side (1993) (y) ====
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor ====
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor (2008), by matthew-stover (5.5-aby)
heir to the-empire (1991), by timothy-zahn (9-aby)
(a)-champions of the-force (1994), by kevin-j.-anderson (11-aby)
children of the-jedi (1995), by barbara-hambly (12–13-aby)
heirs of the-force (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
return to ord-mantell (1998), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
under the-black-sun (omnibus – return to ord-mantell, trouble on cloud-city, & crisis at crystal-reef) by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby) (y) ===
= takes place within 25-to-39-years after star wars episode iv:
= takes place 40
legacy of the-force ===
fate of the-jedi ====
tales from the-empire (1997), edited by peter-schweighofer (various) (4-aby)
references ==
the-feature-films are listed in order of release by film.
a-new-hope ===
star-wars (1983–88) –
star-wars (1987) – famicom
attack on the-death-star (1991) –-pc-9801, x68000
star-wars (1991–93) – nes, game-boy, master-system, game gear super star-wars (1992) –
the-empire strikes back ===
the-empire strikes back (1982) –
the-empire strikes back (1985/88) –
the-empire strikes back (1992)
the-empire strikes back (1993)
return of the-jedi ===
return of the-jedi –-death-star-battle (1983/84) –
return of the-jedi (1984/88) –
return of the-jedi (1994) – snes, game-boy, game-gear
the-phantom-menace ===
i – the-phantom-menace (1999) – microsoft-windows, playstation-star-wars
arcade-star-wars: obi-wan (2001) –-xbox
attack of the-clones ===
the-clone-wars (2002) – gamecube, playstation 2, xbox
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) –
episode iii: revenge of the-sith ===
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005) – playstation 2, xbox, nintendo-ds, game-boy-advance , mobile-phone
star-wars: tie-fighter (1994) – dos, macintosh expansion(s): defender of the-empire (1994)
mysteries of the-sith (1998)
trials of obi-wan (2005),compilation(s):
star-wars: battlefront-ii (2005) – playstation 2, windows, xbox, playstation-portable star-wars battlefront: renegade-squadron (2007) – playstation-portable star-wars battlefront: elite-squadron (2009) – playstation-portable, nintendo ds
the-force unleashed ===
the-force unleashed
the-force unleashed ii
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels (2008) –
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance (2008) – nintendo-ds
the-clone-wars – republic-heroes (2009) –
star-wars: shadows of the-empire (1996) – nintendo 64,
apprentice of the-force (2004) –
star-wars: card-trader (2015) – card-trading-vader-immortal (2019) – oculus-rift, oculus-quest, playstation vr star-wars jedi:
the-empire strikes back by hankin
star-wars by stern-pinball
the-empire strikes back
the-clone-wars (2013)
balance of the-force (2013)
return of the-jedi (2013)
star-wars-pinball: darth-vader
xbox 360, psvita, ps3, ps4, android, ios-star-wars-pinball: masters of the-force
a-new-hope (2013)
the-force awakens (2016)
star-wars: resistance star-wars pinball:
the-last-jedi (2018)
the-clone-wars (2008)
star-wars: revenge of the-sith (2005) – jakks-pacific-tv-game
star-wars gamekey (expansion)
star-wars: battle for the-republic (2005) – mobile phone star-wars: grievous-getaway (2005) –
battle above coruscant (2005) – mobile phone
order 66 (2005) – mobile-phone-star-wars: lightsaber-combat (2005) –
the-phantom-menace (2014) – ios-star-wars-journeys:
star-wars: heroes-path (2015) – ios star-wars rebels: recon-missions (2015) –
in some-cases, lucasfilm has allowed other-video-game-franchises to do lucasfilm own star wars games, resulting in crossover-hybrid-franchises.
the-original-trilogy (2006):
the-clone-wars (2011): playstation 3, xbox 360, 3ds, wii, windows, mac, nintendo-ds, nintendo, playstation portable
the-force awakens (2016):
star-wars (2014-2019):
windows, xbox-one, xbox-one s, ios, android, oculus-rift (vr) --sponsors and events for star-wars-rebels, rogue one, the-last-jedi, solo, and the-rise of skywalker, which contained objectives with in-game virtual prizes (accessories and gears) attached to the-events’-respective-games, as well as free-items in the-catalog (currently known as the-avatar-shop) for 1-ticket or for free.
season one (2014)
season two (2015)list of events: universe (2016) - sponsored by rogue one: a-star-wars-story-space-battle (2017) - sponsored by star-wars:
the-rise of skywalkeradditional notes:
similarly to summer-camp (2015), disney-infinity 3.0 was also featured as a-sponsored-event in 2015, and had the-maps decorated in the-games that were part of the-event that included promotional-billboards that featured the-characters princess-leia, darth-vader, yoda, anakin-skywalker and sabine-wren.
while the-characters princess-leia, darth-vader, yoda, anakin-skywalker and sabine-wren were advertised in billboards in the-events’-respective-games, none of the-actual-virtual-prizes or free-items tied directly into any-star-wars-media.
season two not only included free-items, but was also featured on the-promotional-material of the-billboards in the-maps of two-pre-existing-games on the-platform, and also included the-limited-time-branding on the-games’-respective-thumbnails.
star-wars (2020):
adds star-wars-maps, quests, mobs, skins, items and vehicles from the-original-trilogy and the-mandalorian into the-game.
at release featuring darth-vader exclusively in the-playstation-3-version, with yoda exclusively in the-xbox-360-version, and darth-vader's apprentice galen starkiller marek in both-versions.
months after the-release, darth-vader's and yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable-content, each at the-xbox-360-version darth-vader and yoda were absent at release.
however, in late 2016, all-dlc in soulcalibur-iv was removed from the-playstation-and-microsoft-stores due to licensing from the-purchase of star-wars by disney.
return of the-jedi – ewok-adventure – atari
star-wars 1313 (2013)
references ==
daisy-jazz-isobel-ridley (born 10 april 1992) is an-english-actress who rose to international-prominence through playing the-role of rey in the-star-wars
: the-force awakens (2015),
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
career == === 2013–2015: early-roles and star-wars breakthrough
ridley also appeared in the-music-video for wiley's-song "lights on", playing the-character of kim.
in april 2014, the-casting of ridley as rey, one of the-lead-characters in the-force-awakens, was announced.
ridley was cast for the-british-comedy-film in february 2014.
her-choice by director-j.-j.-abrams was seen as a-repeat of george-lucas'-move of casting relatively-unknown-actors for the-lead-roles in the-first-star-wars-film in 1977.ridley began filming her-scenes in may 2014 at pinewood-studios in buckinghamshire, and prior to the-film's-release in december 2015, her appeared at the-launch of a-set of star-wars-postage-stamps issued by the-uk-postal-service royal-mail, with her-character rey featuring on a-stamp along with the-droid bb-8.
star-wars sequel trilogy and other-projects ===
ridley became executive-producer of the-documentary the-eagle-huntress in january 2016, which premiered at the-sundance-film-festival on 24 january 2016; ridley also recorded narration for the-film's-wide-release.
along with anne-hathaway, ridley and barbra-streisand's perform the-song "at the-ballet" from a-chorus-line, with ridley performing the-role of bebe, one of a-trio of dancers hoping to be cast in a-forthcoming-show.
directed by and starring kenneth-branagh, production began in london in november 2016.
the-last-jedi, which was released in december 2017.in january 2018, ridley starred in the-titular-role in ophelia, a-reimagining of the-hamlet-tale, alongside naomi-watts and clive-owen.
the-project was filmed from april to july 2017 and debuted at the-2018-sundance-film-festival.
in february 2018, ridley voiced the-role of cottontail in peter-rabbit, an-adaptation of the-children's-stories of the-same-name by beatrix-potter.
in december 2019, ridley appeared as rey in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker, the-last-film in the-sequel-trilogy.
she is not expected to reprise she role again after the-rise of skywalker, the-last-film in the-sequel-trilogy, and is quoted as saying, "i don't think anything could top [the-rise of skywalker] for this-character."
in 2021, ridley co-starred in the-film chaos-walking, an-adaption of the-young-adult-novel by patrick-ness.
the-film was released on march 5, 2021.
the-film had been delayed occasionally due to poor-test-screenings that followed the-film's reshoots, and later due to the-covid-19-pandemic.
ridley further commented on the-topic in a-2019-interview, vowing never to return to social-media.
references == ==
episode-ii: attack of the-clones and episode-iii: revenge of the-sith, it is amongst the first of many-works to explore the-conflict known as the-clone-wars, and directly leads to the-events of revenge of the-sith.
the-series aired on cartoon-network for three-seasons consisting of 25-episodes altogether from 2003 to 2005, and was the-first-star-wars-television-series since ewoks (1985–1986).
since the-third-season consisted of five-12-minute-episodes comprising "volume-two"-release, the-series has received critical-acclaim and won multiple-awards, including the-primetime-emmy-award for outstanding-animated-program for both-volumes.
the-series begins shortly after attack of the-clones, as the-failing-galactic-republic and the-jedi-order are under siege from the-separatist-confederacy of independent-systems and the-sith.
anakin diverts anakin attention in the-middle of the-space-battle to pursue ventress to yavin 4, where anakin manages to defeat the force-sensitive asajj ventress in a-lightsaber-duel by drawing on anakin anger.
volume two picks up at the-conclusion to the-hypori-battle: obi-wan sends obi-wan team of arc-troopers to hypori to rescue the-jedi from grievous.
the-republic is desperate, and after much-consideration, the-jedi-council decides to promote anakin to the-rank of jedi-knight.
the-series then jumps ahead to nearly-the-end of the-war, when anakin has become a-more-powerful-jedi.
anakin aids obi-wan in capturing a-fortress, saves saesee-tiin in space-battle, and rescues the-jedi from crab-droids.
anakin and obi-wan are assigned to search for grievous on the-planet-nelvaan, but instead end up liberating a-group of nelvaanians who had been enslaved and mutated by the-separatist-techno-union.
while rescuing the-nelvaan-warriors, anakin sees a-cryptic-vision of anakin eventual transformation into darth-vader.
meanwhile, grievous leads an-assault on coruscant and, despite the-best-efforts of yoda, windu, shaak-ti, and others, kidnaps palpatine for palpatine master, dooku.
anakin and obi-wan then set out to rescue the-chancellor over coruscant, leading directly into the-beginning of revenge of the-sith.
several-attempts were made to maintain continuity with the-overall-saga, most notably bridging episode-ii – attack of the-clones and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
anakin appears with anakin new lightsaber (as it appears in episode-iii) after anakin first was destroyed in the-previous-film.
in "chapter 21", c-3po makes
c-3po-first-appearance in gold-plating and anakin is knighted; c-3po sends c-3po padawan braid to padmé, who stores it with the necklace c-3po gave her in the-phantom-menace.
it is implied that anakin and padmé may conceive the-skywalker-twins on naboo in "chapter 22".
the-series is notable for introducing revenge of the-sith-villain-general-grievous (in "chapter 20"), although some of his-personality-traits had yet to be finalized.
according to tartakovsky, george-lucas initially pitched grievous to george-lucas and george-lucas crew as "this-ruthless,-totally-capable-jedi-killer," but later developed george-lucas into "one of those-old-b-serial-villains who does something bad ... twirls george-lucas mustache
and then george-lucas runs off. "
george-lucas was given a-cough in revenge of the-sith, intended to emphasize george-lucas organic nature as well as the-flaws of having cyborg-prosthetics.
george-lucas-depiction in clone-wars lacked a-cough until the-concluding-episode, in which mace-windu-force-crushes the-chestplate housing-grievous's-internal-organs; this was intended to create continuity with the-film and was mentioned in the-film novelization.
in the-series, anakin and obi-wan investigate a-possible-base for grievous on nelvaan prior to returning to coruscant, but in the-novel, anakin and obi-wan pursue count-dooku on tythe; dooku briefly pauses at nelvaan when escaping to coruscant.
according to the-new-essential-chronology, the-events on nelvaan occurred before those on tythe, with the-final-scene of obi-wan and anakin getting the-message from mace on the-cruiser taking place afterwards.
the-character-designer for the-latter-series attempted to translate aspects of the-character-designs from the-2d-series to 3d.-clone-trooper-alpha from the-older-series was considered for the-newer-series, but lucas thought too-many-characters had names beginning with the-letter-a, leading to the-creation of captain-rex.
following disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, in 2014, disney was announced that the-cgi the-clone-wars would officially be considered canon, while most-other-spin-off-works would not.
den of geek's-ryan-britt notes that the-final-arc of the-clone-wars does not entirely negate the-final-arc of the-earlier-series.
production ==
the-series was produced and directed by genndy-tartakovsky, the-creator of dexter's-laboratory-and-samurai-jack, and employs a-similar-animation-style to the latter.
according to tartakovsky, the-series was developed in two-weeks and created by a-small-crew.
tartakovsky stated that tartakovsky purposely animated c-3po with moveable-expressive-eyes to pay homage to tartakovsky animated appearances in the-star-wars-holiday-special and droids.
mat-lucas as anakin-skywalker
frankie-ryan-mariquez as young-anakin-skywalker-james-arnold-taylor as obi-wan-kenobi and agen-kolar tom-kane as yoda-terrence "t.c.
the-series originally ran on cartoon-network.
season 1 (2003) ===
season 1 (2003) === consisted of 10-episodes, lasting three-minutes each.
along with the-second-season, season 1 (2003) === was released on dvd as volume one.
season 2 (2004) ===
season 3 (2005) ===
according to the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 80% of critics have given season 1 a-positive-review based on 5-reviews.
comicbook.com writes that the-series "is worth a watch for any-fan of magnificent-animation".
on april 2, 2021.
elements of the-series, including the-regenerative-villain durge, are mentioned in the-2005-novelization of revenge of the-sith.
according to the-(now-defunct)-star-wars-databank, durge has a-vendetta against mandalorians, and extends this to the-clones of jango-fett.
references ==
the-rebel-alliance (also formerly known as the-alliance to restore the-republic or known as the-rebellion) is a-fictional-stateless-interstellar-coalition of republican-dissidents, revolutionary-factions and anti-imperialist-clandestine-cell-systems in a-resistance-movement against the-imperialist-galactic-empire.
when the-galactic-empire is capable of always fielding greater-numbers and greater-firepower, being able to hit high-valued-targets and get out is much more important.
while the-empire considers all-dissent and rebellion as acts of extremism and terrorism in imperial-propaganda, the-alliance is described and portrayed in various-star-wars-media as a-group of resilient-freedom-fighters, based on tolerance, self-empowerment, and hope for a-better-future using insurgency-weapons and tactics.
the-alliance was first featured as the-main-protagonist-faction in the-films star-wars (1977),
the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
the-faction's-origins were alluded to in episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005), and the-faction's-origins early-activities are featured in the-disney-xd-television-series-rebels and the-anthology-film rogue one (2016).
a-new-hope, when the-death-star destroys alderaan-senator-padmé-amidala – co-founder; early-constituting-member.
the-death-star died a few days after founding the-alliance.
while the-scene from revenge of the-sith was deleted from the-film, the-information was affirmed by other official sources.)died during episode iii: revenge of the-sith while giving birth to twins-luke and leia; the latter was adopted by organa.
the-earliest-possible-origins of the-alliance to restore the-republic are told during the-events of revenge of the-sith (set in 19-bby, 19 years before the-battle of yavin-iv portrayed in the-first-film a-new-hope).
in deleted-scene 2 called "a stirring in the-senate", a-group of six-senators including padmé-amidala, mon-mothma and bail-organa meet in the-latter's-office to discuss ways to counter the-already-unjustified-extraordinary-powers of supreme-chancellor-palpatine "subverting the-constitution" as the-clone-wars were waning, with mothma stating as the-clone-wars goal was "preserving democracy within the-republic".
amidala was more willing to oppose palpatine now, but wanted to involve the-jedi, at-least-anakin-skywalker.
however, aside from one-senator agreeing, the-others doubted whether the-jedi-council would be loyal to the-republic or the-chancellor, and opted to wait.
the-disney-series-rebels depicts the-development of the-rebellion against the-galactic-empire beginning five years before a-new-hope (5-bby) and fourteen years after the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-jedi-order in revenge of the-sith (19 bby).
the-disney-series-rebels focuses on a-motley-group of rebels (all of whom have been affected by the-galactic-empire in one-form or another) that banded together aboard a-freighter-starship called ghost.
by the-end of the-first-season, it is revealed that there were various-clandestine-cell-systems that were resisting the-galactic-empire, such as jun-sato's-phoenix-squadron.
and a-new-hope (0-bby) was commanded by general-jan-dodonna.
one-last-important-rebel-cell that later became part of the-rebel-alliance was the-mon-calamari-exodus-fleet, commanded by admiral-raddus and admiral-ackbar, formed out of civilian-spacecraft during the-imperial-occupation of mon-cala in 18-bby (1-year into the-empire, 18 years prior to the-battle of yavin).
near the-end of the-third-season of rebels, in "secret-cargo",-alliance-co-founder-senator-mon-mothma, escaped assassination for condemning the-ghorman-massacre and speaking out against the-emperor (2-bby).
we believe that the-galactic-empire has willfully and malignantly usurped the-rights of the-free-beings of the-galaxy and therefore, it is we unalienable right to abolish the-galactic-empire from the-galaxy.
we, the-rebel-alliance, do therefore in the-name—and by the-authority—of the-free-beings of the-galaxy , solemnly publish and declare we intentions: to fight and oppose you and your-forces, by any and all means at our-disposal;
died during rogue one: a-star-wars-story, in the-battle of scarif.
a-new-hope, when the-death-star destroys alderaan.
luke-skywalker – commander and jedi-knight; former commander of rogue-squadron and former-grand-master of the-new-jedi-order.
the-rise of skywalker, of exhaustion.
han-solo – general and former-smuggler-pilot of the-millennium-falcon.
the force awakens, killed by his-own-son kylo-ren (ben-solo).
at the-time of the-battle of endor, alliance-intelligence-chief-commanders were:
pathfinders volunteered in the-battle of scarif under cassian-andor, and spearheaded the-ground-assault during the-battle of endor.
jan-dodonna believed unsupported-hyperspace-capable-starfighters could undermine the-empire's-control of space and demonstrated this to the-galaxy by winning high-profile-victories:
this-unit was instrumental in escorting senator-mon-mothma safely to dantooine, participated in the-battle of scarif, and was nearly wiped out by darth-vader in the-battle of yavin.
under the-command of lando-calrissian, this-unit succeeded in destroying the-second-death-star's-reactor during the-battle of endor.
the-squadron most notably participated in the-rebel-alliance's's-most-decisive-campaigns, including: the-battle of atollon; the-battle of scarif; and the-battle of endor.
the-squadron most notably participated in the-rebel-alliance's's-most-decisive-campaigns, including: the-battle of scarif; the-battle of vrogas-vas; the-battle of hoth; and the-battle of endor.
the-squadron most notably participated in the-rebel-alliance's's-most-decisive-campaigns, including: the-battle of scarif; the-siege on tureen-vii; the-battle of hoth; and the-battle of endor.
in the-2016-film rogue-one, rebel-fighters on a-suicide-mission to steal the-plans for the-death-star (which causes the-battle of scarif) self-identify as "rogue-one", a-possible-precursor to rogue-squadron.
the-fall of the-old-republic and the-birth of the-empire, as depicted in revenge of the-sith, signaled the-beginning of the-bloody-galactic-civil-war.
the-rebels-episode, "zero-hour", demonstrates the-imperials'-absolute-naval-supremacy when the-imperials' successfully entrapped the-"phoenix-fleet" during the-battle of atollon, and forced the-imperials' in engaging on equal-footing; resulting a-decisive-victory for the-imperials and the-total-decimation of the-rebel-fleet.
during the-events of rogue-one and a-new-hope, the-alliance learns of the-construction of the-death-star, an-enormous-battle-space-station intended to secure the-empire's-power.
this-win was the-alliance's-first-major-battle against the-empire; but at a-75%-starfleet-casualty-rate and with all-remaining-imperial-and-rebel-forces-planetside decimated either by the-battle or by grand-moff
in order to punish both-princess-leia-organa and princess-leia-organa-home-planet-government's-central-involvement in the-rebel-alliance, princess-leia-organa is forced to witness alderaan's-destruction by the-death-star.
this leads directly to the-rebel-alliance's-victory in the-battle of yavin and the-loyalty of luke-skywalker; the rebellion's only remaining member with training in the-force.
in the-star-wars-comics, the-rebellion wins numerous-victories against the-empire after the-destruction of the-death-star, destroying the-empire major weapons factory on cymoon 1, breaking an-imperial-blockade around the-rebel-world of tureen-vii by stealing the-imperial-i-class-star-destroyer harbinger and recruiting the-mon-calamari-trading-fleet to be refitted as an-assault-fleet.
such-firepower would finally allow the-alliance to attack the-empire on a-larger-scale.
however, one of the-rebellion's-allies, queen-trios of shu-torun (whose-world's-technology had been fitted into the-ships of the-new-rebel-fleet), revealed herself as an-undercover-imperial-agent sent by darth-vader to sabotage their-efforts.
half-the-rebel-ships were destroyed in the-battle before leia found a-way around the-sabotage and allowed the-remaining-ships to escape.
however, generals-jan-dodonna and davits-draven, as well as several-other-high-ranking-rebel-officers, were killed during the-battle and the-remaining-rebel-ships were separated in their-flight.
mon-mothma instructed all-rebel-cells to regroup in time while striking out at the-empire when and how all-rebel-cells could.
not until the-battle of endor would the-whole-force of the-rebellion be once again united in a-single-place.
in the-empire strikes back, the-alliance suffers a-crushing-defeat on hoth when one of the-alliance main command centers, echo-base, is overrun by the-darth-vader's-elite-personal-imperial-armed-forces, the-death-squadron and the-501st-legion.
by return of the-jedi, the-alliance has regrouped and learned that a-new-death-star is being constructed, and will be completed under emperor-palpatine's-personal-supervision.
mon-mothma has admiral-ackbar and lando-calrissian command the-alliance-fleet and dispatches han-solo and princess-leia in leading-alliance's-elite-special-forces to disable the-station's-defenses while luke distracts darth-vader.
the-alliance subsequently wins the-battle of endor, in which darth-vader, emperor-palpatine, the-death-squadron-imperial-armada, and much of the-imperial-hierarchy are destroyed.
following their-victory at the-battle of endor, a-provisional-new-republic was officially formed by the-alliance.
a-provisional-new-republic found a-provisional-new-republic with no-shortage of recruits and resources: the-declining-popularity of the-empire pushed many long time
about a year after the-battle of endor, the-rebellion defeated the-empire during the-battle of jakku and formally established the-new-republic.
after disney's-acquisition of the-franchise, lucasfilm announced in 2014 that previous-works outside the-theatrical-films and the-clone-wars would no longer be considered canon, but began to be republished under the-legends-banner.
according to star-wars: the-roleplaying-game, the-cantham-house-meetings of coruscant, including the-participation of senators-mon-mothma and bail-organa, take place with the-purpose of discussing the-formation of a-galactic-alliance in opposition to palpatine's-galactic-empire.
in addition, the-rpg tells that although throughout the-galaxy many-sectors are already fighting against imperial-interests, resistance is relatively quiet until the-incident on the-planet-ghorman, which takes place 18 years before the-battle of yavin.
the-myriad of civilizations which are fighting the-empire continue to grow in number and progressively coalesce into a-ragtag-organization known as the-resistance.
the-myriad of civilizations which are fighting the-empire intend upon removing the-evil-emperor, but the-growing-ruthlessness of the-imperial-state-forces
the-myriad of civilizations which are fighting the-empire into secrecy, as
the-myriad of civilizations which are fighting the-empire are initially unable to undermine the-empire's regime.
the-rpg tells that-part of the-strategy of the-rebel-alliance is the-doctrine of space-denial, wherein the-rebellion would attack imperial-shipping-frigates in hit-and-run-raids, both to disrupt imperial-supplies and operations, and also to loot desperately-needed-materials.
these-rebel-starfighters were equipped with hyperdrive-capability along prearranged-routes which would allow this-kind of harassment and escape before the-empire may react.
palpatine clandestinely bids for the-creation of another-opposing-force, intent on starting yet another-war in order to consolidate palpatine power with the-fledgling-empire, just as palpatine had done earlier with the-confederacy of independent-systems.
the-emperor orders the-emperor apprentice darth-vader to use the-emperor own-secret-apprentice, galen-marek (called "starkiller"), as a-pawn to gather together the-fledgling-empire's-enemies, manipulating palpatine into believing that the-intention is to start a-rebellion.
darth-vader quickly realizes that this is obviously a-ploy by palpatine in order to lure any-significant-rebels into a-trap; however, it is unclear whether darth-vader (or the-emperor) had intended for the-rebellion to survive.
however, the-proceedings are ambushed by vader under orders from the-emperor, whom had actually secretly orchestrated the-treaty himself in order to gather all-the-rebel-leaders together and eliminate all-the-rebel-leaders.
regrouping on kashyyyk, the-senators formally proclaim an-open-declaration of rebellion, which states the-grievances of the-empire against the-alliance to restore the-republic and concludes with an-open-threat to depose the-emperor.
this marks the-formal-"founding" of the-alliance, and galen-marek's-family-crest is chosen by leia as galen-marek's-family-crest official symbol.
the-galactic-civil-war consequently ensues, during which the-rebellion confronts the-empire many times throughout the-galaxy.
ylenic-it'kla – commander and jedi-knight who escaped order 66, serving as a-personal-aide to bail-organa on alderaan.
qu-rahn – general-and-jedi-master who survived order 66, mostly due to qu-rahn connection and training with yoda.
rahm-kota – general and former-jedi-master who survived order 66,
echuu shen-jon – general-and-jedi-master who survived order 66, thanks to his-exile on krant.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005; founded in a-deleted-scene)
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977)
the-empire strikes back (1980)
episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983)
references == ==
rebel-alliance on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki darth-vader is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise is the-primary-antagonist in the-original-trilogy and, as anakin-skywalker, is a-primary-protagonist in the-prequel-trilogy.
originally a slave on tatooine, anakin is a-jedi prophesied to bring balance to the-force.
he is lured to the-dark-side of the-force by palpatine and becomes a-sith-lord, assuming the-title darth-vader.
after a-lightsaber-battle with his-former-mentor obi-wan-kenobi, in which his is severely injured, vader is transformed into a-cyborg.
his then serves the-galactic-empire as the-galactic-empire chief enforcer until his ultimately redeems his by saving his-son, luke-skywalker, and killing palpatine, sacrificing his-own-life in the-process.
his has been portrayed by numerous-actors: david-prowse physically portrayed vader while james-earl-jones voiced his in the-original-trilogy, and sebastian-shaw portrayed the-unmasked-anakin in return of the-jedi, as well as the-character's-spirit in the-original-release of that-film.
jake-lloyd and hayden-christensen played the-character in the-prequel-trilogy in the-first-and-next-two-films, respectively, and the latter also replaced shaw as anakin's-spirit with the-2004-re-release of return of the-jedi.
the-jedi is referenced in both the force awakens and the-jedi, and makes vocal-cameos as both-vader and anakin in the-rise of skywalker.
the-jedi also appears in television-series (most-substantially-the-clone-wars) and numerous-iterations of the-star-wars-expanded-universe, including video-games, novels, and comic-books.
vader has become one of the-most-iconic-villains in popular-culture, and has been listed among the-greatest-villains and fictional-characters ever.
various-combinations of names for the-character were built upon the-phrase "dark-water".
then lucas "added lots of last-names, vaders and wilsons and smiths, and [he] just came up with the-combination of darth and vader.
after the-release of the empire strikes back (1980), lucas said the-name-vader was based upon the-german/dutch-language-homophone-vater or vader, meaning 'father', making the-name-representative of a-"dark-father".
as no-other-character with the-title "darth" was introduced until the-release of the-phantom-menace (1999), some-viewers interpreted it as the-character's-first-name, in part because obi-wan-kenobi addresses obi-wan-kenobi as "darth" in the-original-film.
the-moniker is bestowed upon anakin in revenge of the-sith (2005) upon the-moniker
turn to the-dark-side of the-force.
director-ken-annakin's-films swiss-family-robinson and battle of the-bulge influenced the-original-trilogy, leading some to believe that anakin was named after director-ken-annakin.
anakin and luke's-original-surname "starkiller" remained in the-script until a-few-months into filming star-wars, when it was dropped due to what lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with charles-manson and replaced with "skywalker".
also, the-title "dark" was used in place of "darth" for the-other-sith-lords too.
in the-italian-language-editions, darth-vader is named "dart fener".
originally, lucas conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler.
back, lucas condensed this into one-character in the-form of darth-vader.
after the-success of the-original-star-wars (1977), lucas hired science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett to write the-sequel with science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett.
they held story-conferences and, by late-november 1977, lucas had produced a-handwritten-treatment.
lucas was disappointed with the-script, but science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett died of cancer before science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett could discuss it with science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett.
with no-writer available, lucas wrote the-next-draft himself.
in this-draft, dated april 1, 1978, he made use of a-new-plot-twist: vader claiming to be luke's-father.
lucas has said that lucas knew vader was luke's-father while writing the-first-film, though the-relationship is not evidenced before said-draft of the empire strikes back.
author-michael-kaminski argues in the-secret-history of star-wars that it is unlikely that the-plot-point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the-first-film was clearly operating under a-storyline where vader was a-separate-character from luke's-father.
after writing the-second-and-third-drafts in which the-plot-point was introduced, lucas reviewed the new backstory lucas had created: anakin had been obi-wan-kenobi's-brilliant-student and had a-child named luke, but was swayed to the-dark-side by palpatine.
anakin battled obi-wan on the-site of a-volcano and was badly wounded, but was then reborn as vader.
meanwhile, obi-wan hid luke on tatooine while the-galactic-republic became the-tyrannical-galactic-empire and vader systematically hunted down and killed the-jedi.
after deciding to create the-prequel-trilogy, lucas indicated that the-story-arc would be a-tragic-one depicting anakin's-fall to the-dark-side.
for the-first-prequel,-episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999), lucas made anakin nine years old to make the-character's-separation from anakin mother more poignant.
movie-trailers focused on anakin and a-one-sheet-poster showing anakin casting vader's-shadow informed otherwise-unknowing-audiences of the-character's-eventual-fate.
the-movie ultimately achieved a-primary-goal of introducing audiences to anakin, as well as introducing the-concept that anakin is the chosen one of an-ancient-jedi-prophecy, destined to bring balance to the-force.
lucas states in an-interview recorded around the-time of the-third-prequel, revenge of the-sith (2005), that "anakin is the chosen one.
even when anakin turns into darth-vader, anakin is still the chosen one. "
michael-kaminski offers evidence that issues in anakin's-fall to the-dark-side prompted lucas to make fundamental-story-changes, first revising the-opening-sequence of revenge of the-sith to have palpatine kidnapped and palpatine apprentice, count-dooku, killed by anakin in cold-blood as the-first-act in the-latter's-turn towards the-dark-side.
after principal-photography was complete in 2003, lucas re-wrote anakin's-turn to the-dark-side; anakin's-fall from grace would now be motivated by a-desire to save michael-kaminski-wife, padmé-amidala, rather than the-previous-version in which that-reason was one of several, including that michael-kaminski genuinely believed that the-jedi were plotting to take over the-republic.
this fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the-principal-footage, and new-and-revised-scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.during-production of the-animated-the-clone-wars-television-series, ahsoka-tano was developed to illustrate how anakin develops from the-brash,-undisciplined-padawan-apprentice in attack of the-clones (2002) to the-more-reserved-jedi-knight in revenge of the-sith.
dave-filoni said that giving anakin-responsibility for a-padawan was meant to place the-character in a-role that forced the-character to become more cautious and responsible.
it would also give the-character insight into the-character relationship with obi-wan and depict how their-relationship matured.
ahsoka and anakin's-relationship was seen as an-essential-story-arc spanning both-the-animated-film-and-clone-wars-television-series.
filoni began thinking about the-final-confrontation between ahsoka and vader ever since filoni created the former; different-iterations had different-endings, including one in which vader kills ahsoka just as filoni slashes open filoni helmet to reveal filoni scarred face.
a-similar-scene is included in an-episode of rebels, in which ahsoka slashes vader's helmet open, and the-sith-lord recognizes her.
according to filoni, ahsoka's-presence in the-series allows vader to encounter the-show's-lead-characters without the latter being "destroyed", as ahsoka can "stand toe-to-toe" with her-former-master.
the-idea that darth-vader's should wear a-breathing-apparatus was first proposed by concept-artist-ralph-mcquarrie during preproduction-discussions for star-wars with george-lucas in 1975.
lucas agreed, and mcquarrie combined a-full-face-breathing-mask with a-samurai-helmet, thus creating one of the-most-iconic-designs of space-fantasy-cinema.
mcquarrie's-1975-production-painting of darth-vader engaged in a-lightsaber-duel with deak-starkiller (a-character-prototype for luke-skywalker) depicts darth-vader wearing black-armor, a-flowing-cape and an-elongated,-skull-like-mask and helmet.
its-similarity to the-final-design of darth-vader's-costume demonstrates that mcquarrie's-earliest-conception of darth-vader was so successful that very little needed to be changed for production.
darth-vader was portrayed by bodybuilder-david-prowse in the-original-film-trilogy, with fencer-bob-anderson performing the-character's-lightsaber-fight-scenes.
at 6-ft 6 in (1.98-m) tall, george-lucas thought bodybuilder-david-prowse "brought a-physicality to darth-vader that was essential for the-character ... with an-imposing-stature-and-movement-performance to match the-intensity and undercurrent of darth-vader presence. "
george-lucas chose to have a-different-actor be the-voice of darth-vader, since bodybuilder-david-prowse had a-strong-west-country-english-accent that led the-rest of the-cast to nickname him "darth farmer".
george-lucas originally intended for orson-welles to voice darth-vader, but after deciding that orson-welles's voice would be too recognizable, him cast the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones instead.
the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones initially felt the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones contributions to the-films were too small to warrant recognition and the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones role was uncredited at the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones request until the-release of return of the-jedi (1983).
when jones was specifically asked if jones had supplied vader's-voice for revenge of the-sith—either newly or from a-previous-recording—jones answered, "you'd have to ask lucas about that.
hayden-christensen and gene-bryant alternately portray vader in revenge of the-sith.
during the-production of revenge of the-sith, hayden-christensen asked lucas if a-special-vader-suit could be constructed to fit vader-own-body, rather than have a-different-actor don one of the-original-sets of vader-armor worn by prowse.
brock-peters provided the-voice of vader in the-npr/usc-radio-series.
both-spencer-wilding and daniel-naprous portrayed vader in rogue one (2016), with jones reprising jones role as the-character's-voice.
matt-sloan, who appeared in the-youtube-parody chad-vader, provided the-voice of darth-vader in the force unleashed.
as a-result of his-video-game-appearances, visual-effects-artist-c.-andrew-nelson was cast to appear as darth-vader in brief-sequences inserted into the-special-edition of the-empire
strikes back, in which darth-vader is seen boarding darth-vader shuttle.
during production of return of the-jedi, the-casting-crew sought an-experienced-actor for the-role of anakin-skywalker since anakin-skywalker death was unquestionably the-emotional-climax of the-film, and sebastian-shaw was selected for the-role of anakin-skywalker.
lucas personally directed shaw for lucas appearance in the-final-scene of the-film, in which lucas is a-force-ghost of anakin.
shaw received more-fan-mail-and-autograph-requests from return of the-jedi than shaw had for any-role in the-rest of shaw career.
he later reflected that he enjoyed he experience filming return of the-jedi and expressed particular-surprise that an-action-figure was made of he from the-film.
when the-phantom-menace was being produced, hundreds of actors were tested for the-role of young-anakin before the-producers settled on jake-lloyd, who lucas considered met he-requirements of "a-good-actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
during production of attack of the-clones, casting director-robin-gurland reviewed about-1,500-other-candidates for the-role of the-young-anakin before lucas eventually selected hayden-christensen for the-role.
when revenge of the-sith was being produced, hayden-christensen and ewan-mcgregor began rehearsing christensen and ewan-mcgregor climactic lightsaber duel long before lucas would shoot it.
anakin has also been voiced by mat-lucas for the-2003-micro-series-clone-wars, and by matt-lanter in the-previous-prequel-film the-clone-wars, the-television-series of the-same-name and for anakin's small roles in the-animated-series-rebels and forces of destiny.
in attack of the-clones, anakin-skywalker feels "smothered" by obi-wan-kenobi and is incapable of controlling obi-wan-kenobi own life.
by revenge of the-sith, however, his-"father-son"-friction with his-master has matured into a-more-equal,-brotherly-relationship.
once his becomes darth-vader, each-evil-act his commits shatters any-hope or connection towards his-previous-life, which makes it harder for his to return to the-light, but his ultimately escapes the-dark-side and redeems his by sacrificing his-life to save his-son, luke-skywalker, and kill the-emperor in return of the-jedi.
eric-bui, a-psychiatrist at university of toulouse hospital, argued at the-2007-american-psychiatric-association-convention that anakin-skywalker meets six of the-nine-diagnostic-criteria for borderline-personality-disorder (bpd), one more than necessary for a-diagnosis.
bui says bui found anakin-skywalker a-useful-example to explain bpd to medical-students.
anakin's-mass-murders of the-tusken-raiders in attack of the-clones and the-young-jedi in revenge of the-sith-count as two-dissociative-episodes, fulfilling another-criterion.
darth-vader/anakin-skywalker appears in seven of the-live-action-star-wars-films, the animated series the-clone-wars (including the-film), rebels, and the-micro-series-clone-wars and forces of destiny.
darth-vader first appears in star-wars as a-ruthless-cyborg-sith-lord serving the-galactic-empire.
vader captures and tortures princess-leia (carrie-fisher), who has hidden the-plans inside the-droid r2-d2-(kenny-baker) and sent the-droid r2-d2-(kenny-baker to find vader's former jedi master obi-wan kenobi (alec-guinness) on the-planet-tatooine.
during leia's-rescue by obi-wan's-allies luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and han-solo
(harrison ford), vader strikes down obi-wan's in a-lightsaber-duel.
having placed a-tracking-device aboard leia's-rescue by obi-wan's-allies luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and han-solo-ship, the-millennium-falcon, vader is able to track down the-rebel-base on the-planet yavin 4.
during the-rebel-attack on the-death-star, vader-boards-vader tie fighter and attempts to shoot down rebel-x-wing-fighters, but solo intervenes and sends vader's-ship spiraling off course, allowing luke to destroy the-death-star.
in the empire strikes back, vader becomes obsessed with finding the-force-sensitive-luke and leads his-stormtroopers to attack on the-rebel-base on hoth, which the-rebels escape.
while conversing with the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) via hologram, vader convinces the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) that luke would be a-valuable-ally if the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) could be turned to the-dark-side.
vader hires a-group of bounty-hunters to follow luke's-friends, and negotiates with bespin-administrator-lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams) to set a-trap for them to bait luke.
after han,-leia,-chewbacca (peter-mayhew), and c-3po (anthony-daniels) arrive, vader tortures and freezes han in carbonite and gives han in carbonite to the-bounty-hunter-boba-fett (jeremy-bulloch).
when luke arrives, vader overpowers luke in a-lightsaber-duel, severing luke hand.
vader tells luke that vader is vader father, and tries to persuade vader to join the-dark-side and help vader overthrow the-emperor.
horrified, luke escapes through an-air-shaft.
vader telepathically tells luke that it is vader destiny to join the-dark-side.
in return of the-jedi, vader and the-emperor supervise the-final-stages of the-second-death-star's-construction.
thinking that there is still good in his-father, luke surrenders to vader and tries to convince his to turn from the-dark-side.
vader takes luke to the-second-death-star to meet the-emperor.
while there, the-emperor tempts luke to give in to the-emperor anger, which leads to vader dueling with luke once again.
realizing that leia is luke's-twin-sister, vader threatens to turn leia is luke's-twin-sister to the-dark-side if luke will not submit.
furious, luke overpowers vader and severs luke father's cybernetic hand.
the-emperor entreats luke to kill vader and take vader place.
luke refuses and the-emperor tortures luke with force-lightning.
unwilling to let luke-son die, vader throws the-emperor down a-reactor-chute to the-emperor death, but is mortally wounded by
the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker asks luke to remove the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker mask, and admits that there was still good in luke after all as luke dies peacefully in his-son's-arms.
luke escapes the-second-death-star with luke father's body and cremates his-father's-body in a-pyre on endor.
as the-rebels celebrate the-death-star's-destruction and the-empire's-defeat, luke sees the-spirits of anakin, yoda (frank-oz), and
obi-wan watching over obi-wan.
i – the-phantom-menace, which takes place 32 years before a-new-hope ,
anakin appears as a-nine-year-old-slave living on tatooine with anakin mother shmi (pernilla-august).
in addition to being a-gifted-pilot and mechanic, anakin has built anakin own protocol droid, c-3po.
jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) meets anakin after making an-emergency-landing on tatooine with queen of naboo-padmé-amidala (natalie-portman).
qui-gon learns from shmi that anakin was conceived without a-father and can foresee the-future.
qui-gon senses anakin's-strong-connection to the-force and becomes convinced that he is the "chosen one" of jedi-prophecy who will bring balance to the-force.
after winning his-freedom in a-podrace-wager, anakin leaves with qui-gon to be trained as a-jedi on coruscant, but is forced to leave his-mother behind.
during the-journey, anakin forms a-bond with padmé.
eventually, anakin helps end the-corrupt-trade-federation's-invasion of naboo by destroying their-control-ship.
after qui-gon is killed in a-lightsaber-duel with sith-lord-darth-maul (portrayed by ray-park, voiced by peter-serafinowicz), qui-gon's apprentice obi-wan kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) promises to train anakin, with the-council's-reluctant-approval.
palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor, befriends anakin and tells palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor, "we will watch your-career with great-interest".
in episode ii:-attack of the-clones, which takes place 10 years after the-phantom-menace, 19-year-old-anakin is still obi-wan's-padawan-apprentice.
over the-years, palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that obi-wan is holding obi-wan back.
after rescuing padmé from an-assassination-attempt, anakin travels with anakin to naboo as anakin bodyguard, and they fall in love, which is against the-jedi-code.
sensing that shmi is in pain, anakin travels with padmé to tatooine to rescue anakin mother.
while there, anakin learns that shmi had been freed by and
anakin locates shmi at a-tusken-campsite, where cliegg dies in his-arms.
anakin then travels with padmé to geonosis to rescue obi-wan from sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee).
obi-wan and anakin confront dooku, but the-sith-lord beats obi-wan and anakin both in a-lightsaber-duel and severs anakin's arm.
after being rescued by yoda, anakin is fitted with a-robotic-arm and marries padmé in a-secret-ceremony.
in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, set three years after attack of the-clones, anakin is now a-jedi-knight and a-hero of the-clone-wars.
anakin and obi-wan lead a-mission to rescue palpatine from separatist-commander-general-grievous (voiced by matthew-wood).
the-two-jedi-battle-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold-blood at palpatine's-urging.
the-two-jedi-battle-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold-blood at palpatine's urging rescue-palpatine and return to coruscant.
anakin reunites with padmé, who tells him that she is pregnant.
although initially excited, anakin soon begins to have nightmares about padmé dying in childbirth.
palpatine also appoints anakin to the-jedi-council as palpatine personal representative.
suspicious of palpatine, the-council allows anakin as a-member, but declines to grant palpatine the-rank of jedi-master and instead instructs palpatine to spy on palpatine, diminishing anakin's trust in the-jedi.
later, palpatine reveals to anakin that palpatine is the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, and says that only he has the-power to save padmé from dying.
anakin reports sidious'-treachery to jedi-master-mace-windu (samuel-l.-jackson), who confronts and subdues sidious.
desperate to save padmé, anakin intervenes on sidious'-behalf and disarms windu, allowing sidious to kill windu.
anakin then pledges anakin to the-sith, and sidious dubs anakin darth vader.
on sidious'-orders, vader leads the-501st-legion to kill everyone in the-jedi-temple, including the-children, and then goes to the-volcanic-planet mustafar to assassinate the-separatist-council.
a-distraught-padmé goes to mustafar and implores vader to abandon the-dark-side, but vader refuses.
sensing-obi-wan's-presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill obi-wan's, vader angrily uses the-force to strangle a-distraught-padmé to unconsciousness.
obi-wan's engages vader in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with obi-wan's severing vader's limbs and leaving obi-wan's for dead on the-banks of a-lava-flow, severely burned.
when vader asks if padmé is safe, sidious says that sidious killed her out of anger, and vader screams in agony.
at the-end of the-film, vader supervises the-construction of the-first-death-star alongside sidious and tarkin (wayne-pygram).
darth-vader's-melted-helmet appears in the force awakens (2015), in which vader's-grandson kylo-ren (adam-driver) is seen addressing vader's-grandson kylo-ren (adam-driver), though vader does not appear in the-film.
at one-point, vader's-grandson kylo ren (adam-driver) helmet was considered as the-film's-macguffin.
his-helmet appears again in the-rise of skywalker (2019), when kylo briefly meditates with kylo, and during the-film's-first-duel between kylo and rey (daisy-ridley), during which kylo is last seen on kijimi, which is later destroyed by a-sith-star-destroyer.
the-film also reveals that the-voice which ren perceived coming from vader's-helmet in the-force-awakens was generated by emperor-palpatine.
in the-rise of skywalker, anakin makes a-vocal-cameo, along with other-"voices of jedi-past", where anakin encourages rey to "bring back the-balance... as [anakin] did" before anakin faces a-resurrected-palpatine.
the-clone-wars (film) ====
anakin calls anakin "snips" for anakin "snippy" attitude, while ahsoka calls him "skyguy" as a-pun on him-surname.
after earning anakin's-respect during a-dangerous-mission, ahsoka joins ahsoka on a-quest to rescue jabba the-hutt's-infant-son, rotta.
her-impetuousness both annoys and endears her to her master, and anakin develops a-friendly-affection for anakin apprentice.
in the-first-anthology-film rogue one (2016), darth-vader makes a-cameo-appearance in which darth-vader summons orson-krennic (ben-mendelsohn), the-imperial-director of advanced-weapons-research, to darth-vader castle on mustafar.
darth-vader confronts darth-vader about darth-vader handling of the-death-star-project and the-destruction of jedha-city, while krennic asks darth-vader for an-audience with the-emperor regarding the-death-star, which the-emperor lost command of to tarkin.
darth-vader refuses, ordering darth-vader to ensure that the-death-star-project has not been compromised.
when krennic asks darth-vader if darth-vader would still regain command of the-death-star, darth-vader uses the-force to choke he would still regain command of the-death-star, telling he would still regain command of the-death-star, "be careful not to choke on your-aspirations, director. "
at the-end of the-film, vader boards the-disabled-rebel-flagship, the-mc75-star-cruiser-profundity, with a-cadre of 501st
legion-troopers and kills several-rebel-soldiers as vader attempts to recover the-plans.
however, the-docked-blockade-runner-tantive-iv escapes with the-plans, setting up the-events of a-new-hope.
vader had a-much-different-role in early-versions of the-film's-story.
screenwriter-gary-whitta stated that in screenwriter-gary-whitta initial pitch, vader would appear on scarif and slaughter the-rebel-blockade there.
in an-earlier-storyline, vader would also have killed krennic for vader failure to prevent the-rebels from stealing the-death-star-plans.
an-image of a-deleted-scene featuring vader was revealed in february 2021 by industrial-light-&-magic-visual-effects-animator-hal-hickel, who added that vader was supposed to have a-conversation with tarkin in that-scene.
anakin is a-lead-character in all-three-seasons of the-clone-wars-micro-series, which takes place shortly after the-conclusion of attack of the-clones.
anakin becomes a-jedi-knight and is quickly promoted to a-general of the-republic's-clone-army, due in part to palpatine's (voiced by nick-jameson)-influence.
among other-missions, palpatine fights a-duel with dooku's-apprentice-asajj-ventress (voiced by grey-delisle), helps obi-wan (voiced by james-arnold-taylor) capture a-separatist-controlled-fortress and rescues jedi-master-saesee-tiin (voiced by dee-bradley-baker) during a-space-battle.
during the-third-season, anakin frees a-planet's-indigenous-species from separatist-control and sees a-cryptic-vision of anakin future as darth-vader.
in the-series-finale, anakin and obi-wan go on a-mission to rescue palpatine from general-grievous, leading to the-opening of revenge of the-sith.
the-clone-wars (2008–2014, 2020) ====
anakin is a-lead-character in all-seasons of the-clone-wars.
as a-jedi-knight, anakin leads the-501st-legion on missions with both anakin master obi-wan and apprentice-ahsoka-tano throughout the-war.
some of anakin's-actions taken out of concern for ahsoka violate the-jedi-code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her-location when her goes missing.
throughout the-series there are several-references to anakin's-eventual-fall to the-dark-side, including visions of anakin-future as darth-vader in the-third-season, and disillusion with the-jedi-council after the-jedi-council wrongly accuse ahsoka of bombing the-jedi-temple in the-fifth-season.
anakin appears as vader in the-final-scene of the-series-finale, some time after revenge of the-sith.
anakin investigates the-crash-site of ahsoka's-star-destroyer, which collapsed during her-battle with her-clone-troopers after darth-sidious issued order 66, turning the-clones against the-jedi.
finding her-lightsaber among the-wreckage, vader assumes that vader former padawan has perished and leaves with her-lightsaber.
vader appears in two-episodes of the-first-season of star-wars-rebels, which takes place 14 years after the-clone-wars concludes, and serves as the-main-antagonist of the-clone-wars second season.
vader leads a-squadron of force-sensitive-imperial-inquisitors who actively search for and kill any-remaining-jedi-and-force-sensitive-children.
in the-second-season-premiere, vader orchestrates the-murder of minister-maketh-tua, an-imperial who tried to defect to the-rebellion, and confronts the-rebel-crew of the-ghost.
when the-rebel-crew of the-ghost later attacks the-fleet of the-phoenix-squadron, vader discovers that ahsoka is still alive and has joined the-rebel-alliance, while ahsoka is overwhelmed when ahsoka recognizes anakin under "a-layer of hate" in vader.
the-emperor orders vader to dispatch an-inquisitor to capture the-emperor.
later in the-season, ahsoka has a-vision in which anakin blames anakin for allowing anakin to fall to the-dark-side.
in the-season-finale, ahsoka duels with ahsoka former-master inside a-sith-temple, allowing ahsoka friends to escape vader and the-temple's-destruction.
as the-episode concludes, vader escapes from the-temple's-ruins.
vader makes a-final-voiceless-cameo in the-late-fourth-season-episode "a-world between worlds", in which it is revealed that ahsoka escaped from ahsoka previous-duel with vader by entering a-force-realm.
anakin-skywalker appears in multiple-episodes of the-2d-animated-online-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny.
obi-wan-kenobi ===
on december 10, 2020, during a-disney-investor-event, it was announced that hayden-christensen would return as vader in the upcoming disney+
in the-first-chapter of the-novelization of the-phantom-menace, anakin participates in a-podrace through beggar's-canyon on tatooine.
lords of the-sith was one of the-first-four-canon-novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
in lords of the-sith, vader and palpatine find vader and palpatine hunted by revolutionaries on the-twi'lek-planet-ryloth.
in 2015, marvel released a-25-issue-series called darth vader (2015–16), written by kieron-gillen.
this-series takes place parallel to the-comic-book-series star-wars, in which vader and luke meet; the-two-series have a-crossover titled vader down.
a continuation set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi debuted in 2020, written by greg-pak.
the-first-few-issues deal with vader carrying out vader revenge on those who concealed luke; vader also visits padmé's-tomb on naboo and encounters her-handmaidens.
the-five-issue-limited-series obi-wan & anakin (2016), written by charles-soule, depicts the-lives of the-jedi between the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones.
at new-york-comic-con 2015, soule described the-story as "pretty-unexplored-territory".
between 2017 and 2018, soule wrote a-prequel-era-series, also called darth vader (sometimes subtitled dark lord of the-sith).
it begins immediately after vader wakes up in vader armor at the-end of revenge of the-sith and explores vader emotional transformation upon learning of padmé's-death, vader adjustment to vader mechanical suit, how vader creates vader red-bladed lightsaber, and vader hunting of jedi in the-inquisitor-program (introduced in rebels).
it final-arc, which deals with the-construction of vader's-fortress on mustafar, implies that palpatine used the-force to conceive anakin in utero, as some had theorized that revenge of the-sith indicates.
according to marvel, the-series "sheds new-light on the-many-sides of the-galaxy's-greatest-villain".
the-game, titled vader immortal, had three-episodes overall, set between revenge of the-sith and rogue one; the first became available with the-launch of oculus-quest, while the-last-episode was released on november 21, 2019.
the-game, titled vader immortal was later ported to the-oculus-rift.
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
vader is featured prominently in novels set in the-star-wars-universe.
in the-1978-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye by alan-dean-foster, vader meets luke-skywalker for the-first-time and engages luke-skywalker in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with luke cutting off vader's arm and vader falling into a-deep-pit.
shadows of the-empire (1996) reveals that vader is conflicted about trying to turn vader son to the-dark-side of the-force, and knows deep down that there is still some good in his-son.
vader's-supposedly-indestructible-glove is the-macguffin of the-young-reader's-book the-glove of darth-vader (1992).
anakin-skywalker's-redeemed-spirit appears in the-truce at bakura (1993), set a few days after the-end of return of the-jedi.
anakin-skywalker's appears to leia, imploring leia forgiveness.
leia condemns anakin for leia crimes and exiles him from leia life.
leia promises that leia will be there for leia when leia needs leia, and disappears.
in tatooine-ghost (2003), leia learns to forgive leia father after learning about leia childhood as a-slave and
in the-unifying-force (2003), anakin tells anakin grandson jacen solo to "stand firm" in anakin battle with the-supreme-overlord of the-yuuzhan-vong.
greg-bear's-2000-novel-rogue-planet and jude-watson's-jedi-quest-series-chronicle-anakin's-early-missions with obi-wan, while james-luceno's-2005-novel-labyrinth of evil, set during the-clone-wars, depicts anakin battling separatist-commander-general-grievous.
in luceno's-dark-lord: the-rise of darth-vader (2005), set a few months after the-events of revenge of the-sith, vader disavows vader identity as skywalker as vader systematically pursues and kills the-surviving-jedi and cements the-surviving-jedi position in the-empire.
the-novel reveals that vader plans to eventually overthrow palpatine and that vader betrayed the-surviving-jedi because vader resented the-surviving-jedi supposed failure to recognize vader power.
in the-dark-nest-trilogy (2005), luke and leia uncover old-recordings of luke and leia parents in r2-d2's-memory-drive; for the-first-time, luke and leia see luke and leia own birth and luke and leia mother's death, as well as luke and leia father's corruption to the-dark-side.
in bloodlines (2006), han and leia's-son jacen—who has turned to the-dark-side—uses the-force to envision vader slaughtering the-children at the-jedi-temple.
vader also appears in a-series of tongue-in-cheek children's books by jeffrey-brown.
in jeffrey-brown's-series, a-hapless--vader sets out to be a-father to a-young-luke and leia, with some-scenes portraying light-hearted-versions of a-young-luke and leia darker film counterparts.
for example, one-scene shows vader, luke and leia at the-carbonite-freezing-chamber on bespin, with vader pronouncing the-freezer adequate for making ice-cream.
vader appears in several-comic-books such as marvel-comics'-star-wars (1977–1986).
in dark-empire-ii, vader is revealed to have had a-castle on the-planet-vjun.
anakin-skywalker is a-major-character in dark-horse-comics'-star-wars: republic-series (1998–2006).
in boba-fett: enemy of the-empire (1999), vader hires fett a few years before the-events of a-new-hope.
in vader's-quest (1999), set soon after a-new-hope, the-dark-lord encounters luke for the-first-time.
(2002–2005) spans from about a year before a-new-hope to several-months afterwards.
anakin and vader appear in the-non-canonical-star-wars-tales (1999–2005); in the-story-resurrection, darth-maul is resurrected and faces vader in battle.
vader-centric-comics released and set just after revenge of the-sith include dark-times (2006–2013), vader and the-lost-command (2011), darth vader and the-ghost-prison (2012), and vader and the-cry of shadows (2013–14).
darth-vader and anakin-skywalker have appeared in a-number of star-wars since the-earliest-days of the-franchise, though rarely as a-playable-character.
darth-vader plays a-central-role in star-wars:
the-force unleashed (2008), where darth-vader is the-playable-character for the-first-level of the-game.
darth-vader also appears in the-sequel-star-wars:
the-force unleashed-ii as the-final-boss.
darth-vader has also appeared in non-star-wars-video-games as a-guest-character, for example soulcalibur iv (2008).
most recently, darth-vader makes a-cameo-appearance in the-final-mission of star-wars-jedi:
after darth-vader kills her for her-failure to retrieve a-jedi-holocron, the-protagonist, padawan-cal-kestis, must escape from vader, who attempts to get a-jedi-holocron in his-possession.
in the-story, vader colludes with boba-fett to entrap the-rebels.
darth-vader features in the-1981-radio-drama-adaptation of star-wars, voiced by the-actor brock-peters.
darth-vader makes darth-vader first appearance on the-planet-ralltiir, where darth-vader treats princess-leia with suspicion.
in later-extended-scenes, darth-vader is heard interrogating and torturing princess-leia on board darth-vader star destroyer and aboard the-death-star.
darth-vader appears in star-tours –
the-adventures continue, where darth-vader is once again voiced by jones.
an-action-figure of vader comes to life alongside robocop-and-jurassic-park-toys in the-indian in the-cupboard (1995).
vader also had a-brief-cameo in night at the-museum: battle of the-smithsonian (2009), in which vader and oscar the-grouch try unsuccessfully to join the-army formed by ivan the terrible, napoleon and al-capone.
george-lucas felt hurt at such-accusations.
psychiatrists have considered vader to be a-useful-example for explaining borderline-personality-disorder to medical-students.
anakin's-origin-story in the-phantom-menace has been compared to signifiers of african-american-racial-identity, particularly his being a-slave, and his-dissatisfaction with his-life has been compared to siddartha's before his became gautama-buddha.
a-mexican-church advised christians against seeing the-phantom-menace because the-phantom-menace portrays anakin as a-christ-figure.
marty-mcfly in back to the-future (1985), dressed in a-radiation-suit, calls marty-mcfly "darth vader from the-planet-vulcan" in one-scene.
vader is parodied as "dark-helmet" (rick-moranis) in the-star-wars-parody spaceballs (1987).
in chasing amy (1997), hooper-x (dwight-ewell) speaks at a-comic-book-convention about vader being a-metaphor for how poorly the-science-fiction-genre treats black-people; vader is especially offended that vader, the-"blackest-brother in the-galaxy", reveals vader to be a-"feeble,-crusty-old-white-man" at the-end of return of the-jedi.
the-character of dark-mayhem in the-thundermans is also a-parody of vader, especially in the-character of dark-mayhem in the-thundermans original depiction.
a-grotesque of darth-vader looms over the-east-face of the-washington-national-cathedral's-northwest-tower.
native-american-artist-bunky-echohawk portrayed general-george-armstrong-custer as vader in general-george-armstrong-custer painting darth-custer.
in 2015, a-statue of vladimir-lenin in odessa, ukraine, was converted into one of vader due to a-law on decommunization.
in 2006, while discussing the-war on terror, us-vice-president-dick-cheney stated, "i suppose, sometimes, people look at my-demeanor and say, 'well, us-vice-president-dick-cheney's the darth vader of the-administration.'"
in january 2007, jon-stewart put on a-vader-helmet to address us-vice-president-dick-cheney as a-"kindred-spirit" on the-daily-show.
cheney's-wife, lynne, presented stewart with a-darth-vader-action-figure on stewart october 2007 appearance on the-show.
at a-presidential-campaign-event in september 2007, hillary-clinton also referred to cheney as vader.
in 2009, george-lucas stated that cheney is more akin to palpatine, and that a-better-stand-in for vader would be george-w.-bush.
an-issue of newsweek referenced this-quote, and compared george-w.-bush and cheney to vader and palpatine, respectively, in a-satirical-article comparing politicians to various-star-wars-and-star-trek-characters.
in ukraine, the-internet-party of ukraine regularly lets people named darth vader take part in elections.
on december 2, 2020, a-figurine of darth-vader appeared on the-plinth where the-statue of edward-colston once stood in bristol, united-kingdom, in what was seen as a-tribute to the-actor david-prowse, who died on november 29, 2020.
references =
external-links == darth-vader in the-starwars.com-databank-anakin-skywalker in the-starwars.com-databank-anakin-skywalker / darth-vader on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
darth-vader on imdb "darth-vader".
star-wars is a-media-franchise and shared-fictional-universe that is the-setting of science-fiction-films produced by lucasfilm, based on characters created by george-lucas.
the-skywalker-saga of the-franchise includes nine-films, featuring three-trilogies; the-original-trilogy, the-prequel-trilogy, and the-sequel-trilogy.
the-original-trilogy began with a-new-hope in 1977, followed by the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983), while the-prequel-trilogy consists of the-phantom-menace (1999), attack of the-clones (2002), and revenge of the-sith (2005).
the-original-trilogy consists of the force awakens (2015),
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019), and chronologically follows return of the-jedi in the-saga.
liam-neeson, ewan-mcgregor, jake-lloyd and natalie-portman respectively star as qui-gon-jinn, obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala in the-phantom-menace, with mcgregor and portman returning for its-two-sequels and hayden-christensen playing the-older-anakin in liam-neeson, ewan-mcgregor, jake-lloyd and natalie-portman.
matt-lanter portrays anakin in the-animated-film the-clone-wars (2008).
ford, hamill, fisher, and other-cast-members from the-original-trilogy returned to reprise ford, hamill, fisher, and other-cast-members from the-original-trilogy roles and co-star alongside adam-driver as kylo-ren, daisy-ridley as rey, john-boyega as finn and oscar-isaac as poe-dameron in the-sequel-trilogy-films.
anthony-daniels is the-actor to have appeared in the-most-films in the-franchise, appearing as c-3po in all except a-young-han-solo in solo (2018).
other-cast-members who recur across multiple-films and series within the-franchise include kenny-baker, ahmed-best, silas-carson, oliver-ford-davies, warwick-davis, alec-guinness, oscar-isaac, samuel-l.-jackson, james-earl-jones, denis-lawson, christopher-lee, peter-mayhew, ian-mcdiarmid, frank-oz, david-prowse, tim-rose, jimmy-smits, joonas-suotamo, jimmy-vee, and matthew-wood.
an-empty,-dark-grey-cell indicates the-character was not in the-film, or that the-character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.
o indicates the-character appears in other-films outside the-skywalker-saga.
ts indicates the-character appears in a-television-series.
tf indicates the-character appears in a-television-film.
an-empty,-dark-grey-cell indicates the-character was not in the-film, or that the-character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.
ts indicates the-character appears in a-television-series.
tf indicates the-character appears in a-television-film.
the-battle for endor-actors ==
references ==
marvel-comics launched an-eponymous-series in 1977 which began with a-six-issue-comic-adaptation of the-1977-film star-wars and ran for 107-issues, included an-adaptation of the empire strikes back.
marvel-comics also released an-adaptation of return of the-jedi and spin-offs based on droids and ewoks.
dark-horse-comics published the-limited-series-dark-empire in 1991, and ultimately produced over-100-star-wars-titles, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing: rogue-squadron (1995–1998), republic (1998–2006), tales (1999–2005), empire (2002–2006), knights of the old republic (2006–2010), and legacy (2006–2010), as well as manga-adaptations of the-original-film-trilogy and the-1999-prequel the-phantom-menace.
the-walt-disney-company acquired marvel in 2009 and lucasfilm in 2012, and the-star-wars-comics-license returned to marvel in 2015.
an-eponymous-series by marvel-comics began in 1977 with a-six-issue-comic-adaptation of the-original-film and ran for 107-issues and three-annuals until 1986, featuring stories set between the-original-trilogy-films, as well as adaptations of the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
following the-october-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, in january 2014, the-october-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company was announced that the-star-wars-comics-license would return to marvel-comics in 2015 (disney having previously purchased marvel-entertainment and the marvel-comics brand and publishing in 2009).
in april 2014, lucasfilm rebranded the-majority of the-star-wars expanded universe as legends, only keeping the-theatrical-skywalker-saga and the-2008-clone-wars-theatrical-film-and-television-series as canon.
publisher-stan-lee initially declined to consider such-a-proposal until the-film was completed, and was only persuaded otherwise in a-second-meeting arranged by roy-thomas, who wanted to edit the-series.
since movie-tie-in-comics rarely sold well at that-time, publisher-stan-lee negotiated a-publishing-arrangement which gave no-royalties to lucasfilm until sales exceeded 100,000.
thomas and artist-howard-chaykin adapted the-events of the-original-film in issues #1–6 of star-wars, with the-first-issue released for sale on april 12, 1977.
the-series began featuring original-stories with issue #7 (january 1978).
writer-archie-goodwin and artist-carmine-infantino took over the-series as of #11 (may 1978).
the-series was one of the-industry's-top-selling-titles in 1979 and 1980.
#39–44 (september 1980 – february 1981).
star-wars-weekly-#1 was published with a-free-cut-out-x-wing-fighter on february 8, 1978.
back-weekly from issue #118 in may 1980, and then became a-monthly-title from issue #140 in november 1980, reverting to the-title star-wars with issue #159 in july 1982.
the monthly comic ran until issue #171 in july 1983, when the-numbering was reset at #1 for return of the-jedi-weekly, which was the-first-time the-uk-comic had been printed in color.
marvel's-adaptation of return of the-jedi (october 1983 – january 1984) appeared in a-separate,-eponymous-four-issue-limited-series as well as in marvel super special #27 and in a-mass-market-paperback.
in 1978, pendulum-press, under pendulum-press educational series contemporary-motivators, also published a-31-page-loose-adaptation of star-wars by linda-a.-cadrain and charles-nicholas.
from october 1980 to february 1981, archie-goodwin and alcala adapted brian-daley's-han-solo at stars'-end (1979).in 1991, russ-cochran published a-2500-copy-limited-run of a-three-volume-hardcover-boxset of all of archie-goodwin and williamson's-star-wars-comic-strips from 1981 to 1984, signed by both-creators, and featuring new-cover-illustrations by the latter.
blackthorne-publishing released a-three-issue-series called star wars 3d from december 1987 to february 1988.
dark-horse also published miniseries adapting episode-i: the-phantom-menace, episode-ii: attack of the-clones, episode-iii: revenge of the-sith .
from 1998 to 1999, dark-horse produced star-wars-manga, adapting the-original-trilogy and the-phantom-menace as manga with all-the-typical-narrative and stylistic-characteristics of the-form.
dark-horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after, in between, and before the-original-film-trilogy, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing:-rogue-squadron (1995–1998), republic (1998–2006), the mostly non-canonical tales (1999–2005), empire (2002–2006), knights of the old republic (2006–2010), and legacy (2006–2010)
x-wing-–-rogue-squadron follows x-wing-–-rogue-squadron beginning about one year after the-events of return of the-jedi.
x-wing – rogue-leader is a-three-part-comic-book-series set approximately one week after the-end of return of the-jedithe-jedi.
several-participants in the-destruction of the-second-death-star are sent, a little while after the-events of bakura, to scout out imperial-activity in corellian-space.
shadows of the-empire ===== =====
the-crimson-empire-trilogy follows kir-kanos, one of palpatine's-imperial-guards, beginning about seven years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
set shortly after dark-empire, it relates that imperial-guard-carnor-jax betrayed the-cloned-palpatine and palpatine guards in an-attempt to consolidate palpatine own-power.
qui-gon & obi-wan ===== qui-gon & obi-wan: last-stand on ord-mantell is a-three-part-comics-series written by ryder-windham, published by dark-horse-comics between december 2000 and march 2001.
the-story features qui-gon-jinn and obi-wan-kenobi five years before episode i – the-phantom-menace.
the-aurorient-express is a-two-part-comics-series written by mike-kennedy, and published by dark-horse-comics between february 2002 and june 2002.
the-two-jedi must board the-phantom-menace and regain control.
the-old-republic are series set around the-events of the-game-series of the-same-name, exploring the-old-republic backstory.
the-clone-wars ===== =====
star-wars: agent of the-empire is a-series set a few years before episode-iv – a-new-hope, and focusing on an-imperial-intelligence-agent named jahan cross.
volume 1: iron-eclipse (collects star-wars: agent of the-empire – iron-eclipse #
1–5,-128-pages, october 2012
the-first-printed-issue was published on july 1, 2009.
published by dark-horse-comics, the-series was set in the-new-jedi-order-era and depict the-events of the-yuuzhan-vong-war over 16-issues, plus a-prologue-issue.
in january 2010, star-wars: invasion-#0 was nominated for a-'diamond-gem-award' in the-'2009-comic-book of the-year over-$3.00'-category.
dark-times, is a-series set in the-years after episode iii – revenge of the-sith, and showing former-characters from star-wars: republic after order 66.star-wars: knight-errant, a-series set 1,000 years before the-phantom-menace, and dealing with a-lone-jedi's-war against the-sith.
star-wars: darth-vader, a-series set almost immediately after revenge of the-sith, and showing how darth-vader is dealing with darth-vader past as anakin-skywalker.
star-wars: dawn of the-jedi, a-series set thousands of years before episode i – the-phantom-menace, and showing the-origins of the-jedi and the-sith.
the-story is set during the-end of the-clone-wars, approximately one year before the-events of revenge of the-sith (and 20 years before the-events of a-new-hope).
while non-canonical to the-expanded-universe, star-wars-infinities shows alternate-storylines for the-original-trilogy-films, and visionaries featured stories by artists who worked on revenge of the-sith.
adapted by j.-w.-rinzler, dark-horse released dark-horse as an-eight-part-comic-book-series beginning in september 2013.
in this-version, luke-skywalker is more mature and a jedi, and the-main-protagonist is named annikin starkiller.
an-eight-part-comic-book-series beginning in september 2013 received mostly-positive-reviews.
return to marvel (2015–present) ===
following the-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company in 2012, the-walt-disney-company was announced in january 2014 that the-star-wars-comics-license would return to marvel-comics in 2015.
meanwhile, with the-sequel-film the-force awakens in production, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.early reports in may 2014 suggested that marvel would announce two new ongoing star-wars comic series at the-san-diego-comic-con.
in july 2014, marvel announced three-new-series at sdcc:
the-initial-series, star-wars, was released in january 2015, with darth-vader debuting in february.
the-ongoing-series star-wars: poe-dameron was announced in january 2016.
featuring x-wing-fighter-pilot-poe-dameron introduced in the force awakens, the-series debuted on april 6, 2016.
in august 2019, marvel announced that the-main-star-wars-series that started in 2015, which has narratively caught up to the-timeframe of the-events of the empire strikes back, would end in november 2019 with issue #75.
a-56-page-one-shot called star wars: empire ascendant, written by soule, greg-pak, simon-spurrier, and ethan-sacks, was released in december 2019 to wrap up the-series.
at new-york-comic-con in october 2019, lucasfilm and marvel announced the-main-star-wars-title would relaunch with a-new-ongoing-series beginning in january 2020.
written by soule, a-new-ongoing-series beginning in january 2020 will explore the-time between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
a-new-ongoing-series beginning in january 2020 will expand on stories like how the-demoralized-ragtag-band of rebels grows into the-massive-fleet that attacks the-second-death-star , how the-plan to rescue han-solo from jabba the-hutt is formed, how leia balances leia personal desires to save han with leia responsibilities to the-rebellion, luke's-growth as a-jedi while coming to an-understanding of darth-vader's-reveal of darth-vader's-heritage, and the-evolution of lando-calrissian from selfish-betrayer to trusted general.
first announced as project-luminous at star-wars-celebration in april 2019, full-details of a-publishing-initiative called star wars: the-high-republic were revealed in a-press-conference in february 2020.
due to the-covid-19-pandemic, the-launch of the-high-republic was pushed to january 2021 with the-release-date of the-ongoing-comic-title yet to be revealed.
star-wars (2015) ====== ======
star-wars (2020) ====== ======
darth-vader (2015) ====== ======
dark-lord of the-sith ====== ======
darth-vader (2020) ====== ======
princess-leia released in march 2015.
chewbacca (october–december 2015), obi-wan & anakin (january–may 2016), and han-solo (june–november 2016), as well as the-one-shots-vader down (november 2015) and c-3po (april 2016).
several-other-limited-series followed, including kanan (april 2015 – march 2016), lando (july–october 2015), shattered-empire (september–october 2015),in 2017, limited series darth maul, mace windu, and captain phasma, as well as further one-shots, continued to expand the-star-wars-universe.
both-the-poe-dameron and the-second-darth-vader-comics ended the-poe-dameron and the-second-darth-vader-comics runs in 2018, in september and december respectively.
in 2018, marvel adapted the-events of author-timothy-zahn's-star-wars:
the-character had been introduced by zahn's-heir to the-empire-trilogy in the-early-1990s, now part of the-legends-line, and was re-introduced in the-new-canon in star-wars-rebels.
adaptations of both-the-last-jedi and solo: a-star-wars-story were released, and the-timeframe of solo was explored further in the-beckett-one-shot and in limited-series featuring young-lando (double or nothing) and han's-time in the-empire (imperial-cadet).
marvel announced in october 2018 that a-five-issue, wendig penned miniseries, star-wars: shadow of vader, would be released starting in january 2019.
the-series would be an-anthology told from the-perspectives of those who had encountered darth-vader.
in december 2018, a new miniseries with a-similar-premise, star wars: vader – dark-visions, was announced to be written by dennis-hopeless with art from paolo-villanelli and brian-level and was launched in march 2019.for 2019, marvel announced a-number of new-limited-series.
as a-companion to star-wars: alphabet-squadron, a-novel by author-alexander-freed centered on a-new-republic-squadron of various-rebel-ships (an-a-wing-interceptor, b-wing-heavy-assault-fighter, u-wing-transport, x-wing-starfghter, and y-wing-bomber) in the-wake of the-battle of endor, a-five-issue-series called star-wars: tie-fighter will explore the-fallout of the-battle from both-the-new-republic and imperial-remnant-sides.
in may 2019, a-one-shot by writer-matthew-rosenberg and various-artists called star-wars #108 will pick up the-story of the original marvel star-wars comic run that ended in 1986.in-connection with the-forthcoming-video-game star-wars jedi:
at a-panel discussing the-journey to the-rise of skywalker-publishing-program at san-diego-comic-con 2019, the four-issue star wars: journey to the-rise of skywalker – allegiance-miniseries was announced.
it will help cover a-one-year-period during the-time between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker.
the-rise of kylo-ren premiered on december 16, 2019.
at san-diego-comic-con 2018, marvel announced age of star-wars, a-27-issue-maxiseries starting in december 2018 that would span all-three-eras of the star-wars saga.
age of republic by writer-jody-houser will focus on the-time of the galactic republic and the-clone-wars during the-prequel-trilogy-era; star-wars: age of rebellion by writer-greg-pak will focus on the-galactic-civil-war between the-empire and the-rebel-alliance during the-original-trilogy-era; and star-wars:
age of resistance by writer-tom-taylor will focus on the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-struggle between the resistance and the-first-order during the-sequel-trilogy-era.
in mid-2014, marvel stated that marvel would publish collected-volumes of past-star-wars-comics, beginning with volume 1 of star-wars: the original marvel years in january 2015, and volume 1 of star-wars legends epic collection: the-empire in april 2015, which reprinted dark horse's star-wars comics.
in december 2019, marvel reprinted the-first-issue of the-1977-series as star wars #1 – facsimile-edition.
star-wars was released in april and may 2019, celebrating marvel's-80th-anniversary.
a second collection of true-believers: star-wars-titles was released in december 2019.
in september 2017, idw-publishing debuted star-wars-adventures, an-anthology-series published as part of the-"journey to star-wars: the-last-jedi"-publishing-program.
in january 2018, idw released a-five-issue-comic-tie-in to star-wars: forces of destiny.
in november 2018, idw released star-wars-adventures: destroyer down.
this-three-issue-miniseries reprinted the-previously-released-loot-crate special from december 2017.
idw has also published graphic-novel-adaptations of each-star-wars-film since the-force awakens.
references ==
star-wars (marvel) at the grand comics database
star-wars (dark-horse)
star-wars (2015–present-marvel-comics) at the-comic-book-db (archived from the original)
archived from the-original on october 30, 2017.
references == ==
introduced as the-jedi-padawan of anakin-skywalker, she is a-protagonist of the-2008-animated-film star-wars: the-clone-wars and the-subsequent-television-series.
the-rise of skywalker.
ashley-eckstein voices ahsoka in these-appearances.
ahsoka is also the-main-character of the-eponymous-novel-star-wars: ahsoka, which has ashley-eckstein narrating the-audiobook-version.
rosario-dawson will return to play ahsoka in rosario-dawson
own-series ahsoka on disney+, releasing in 2022.
although initially disliked by both-fans and critics at first, ahsoka eventually developed into a-more-complex,-well-rounded-character, and ultimately became a fan favorite.
ahsoka was developed to illustrate how anakin-skywalker develops from the-brash,-undisciplined-padawan-apprentice in star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) to the-more-reserved-jedi-knight in episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005).
star-wars-creator-george-lucas, who had two-daughters, also wanted the-character to appeal to girls.
lucas renamed lucas after the-ancient-indian-emperor ashoka; the-spelling was then altered by screenwriter-henry-gilroy.
the-clone-wars-supervising-director and writer-dave-filoni imagined the-discovery that lucas has "the-right-stuff" to become a-jedi would be a-cause for celebration in lucas hometown.
giving anakin-responsibility for a-padawan was meant to place the-ahsoka-character in a-role that forced the-ahsoka-character to become more cautious and responsible.
it would also provide the-ahsoka-character with insight into the-ahsoka-character relationship with the-ahsoka-character own-master, obi-wan-kenobi, and depict how his own-master, obi-wan-kenobi relationship matured.
ahsoka and anakin's-relationship was seen as an-essential-story-arc spanning both-the-animated-film and the-clone-wars-television-series.
filoni initially struggled with writing ahsoka because filoni had "zero-perspective" on what it was like to be a-14-year-old-girl.
filoni, therefore, shifted filoni focus and instead wrote ahsoka primarily as a-jedi who just happens to be an-adolescent-female.
filoni began thinking about the-final-confrontation between ahsoka and vader ever since filoni created ahsoka; different-iterations had different-endings, including one in which vader kills ahsoka just as she slashes open filoni helmet to reveal anakin's-scarred-face.
ashley-eckstein, who primarily voiced ahsoka, said she and the-writers were aware that audiences initially found the-character annoying, and that there was a-"fine-line" between ahsoka being bratty and becoming endearing.
because production was a year ahead of what was broadcast, with ahsoka developing over that-time, eckstein implored fans to be patient with the-character's-growth.
although ahsoka leaves the-jedi-order at the-end of the-clone-wars'-fifth-season, the-storyline initially had she return to the-jedi-order.
filoni said this would be the-"normal"-arc and suggested to lucas that filoni instead remain expelled; lucas agreed.
lucas believed ahsoka survived order 66,
filoni, who served as executive-producer and co-creator of rebels, worked with lucas on identifying what ahsoka would know about anakin's-fate.
consequently, filoni required that ahsoka play a-role in service of rebels'-main-characters, ezra-bridger and kanan-jarrus; ezra-bridger saw ahsoka's new role as similar to the-one played by obi-wan-kenobi in star-wars.
although ahsoka is more mature in rebels, filoni wanted "aspects of that-kid who was there to shine through".
filoni initially envisioned ahsoka as a-more-"passive-player" not engaged in combat, but later decided it was more appropriate to see ahsoka as a-warrior during a-turbulent-time.
ahsoka's-presence was necessary to allow darth-vader to encounter the-show's-lead-characters without the latter being destroyed; ahsoka can stand toe-to-toe with darth-vader.
filoni cites fans'-passion for the-character as one-reason for ahsoka's-prominence in clone-wars and rebels.
eckstein said filoni wanted filoni to bring some of filoni own personality into the-ahsoka-character; eckstein told filoni that filoni actions and speech between audition takes had a-bigger-impact on filoni getting the-role than the-actual-audition.
once production on the-clone-wars began, it took about-six-months for eckstein and the-writers to understand ahsoka; consequently, much of the-dialogue for the-first-half of season
eckstein reprised the-role of ahsoka for rebels, although she did not do all of fulcrum's-voice-work.
eckstein said ahsoka developed a-quiet-confidence and quiet-strength
eckstein doesn't possess, but sometimes ahsoka played ahsoka too seriously; ahsoka pointed out that "snippiness" and determination are still part of ahsoka's personality.
eckstein pitched ahsoka voice down a bit but, because ahsoka and ahsoka were now much closer in age, generally spoke like ahsoka.
not knowing ahsoka's-experiences between the-clone-wars and rebels at times presented challenges for eckstein's-performance.
filoni avoids giving the-actors plot-details that might inappropriately affect the-actors performance; for example, filoni did not tell eckstein whether ahsoka survives ahsoka duel with darth-vader lest eckstein telegraph something in ahsoka performance that the-character would not know.
ahsoka's-design evolved over three-years before ahsoka introduction in the-clone-wars-film.
ahsoka initially appears in what wired called a "tube-top-and-miniskirt costume.
in the-third-season, ahsoka and other-characters received new-costumes.
filoni said the-changes were meant to bring the show's aesthetic closer to that of revenge of the-sith and were made possible by improved-animation-techniques.
ahsoka often uses a-reverse-lightsaber-grip, similar to that of the-japanese-film-character zatoichi.
along with the-costume-change in the-third-season of clone-wars, ahsoka also received a-second-lightsaber.
the-clone-wars (2008) ====
yoda assigns yoda to anakin to teach yoda a-greater-sense of responsibility, and anakin is initially frustrated by this-decision.
their-early-interactions are "playfully contentious", with anakin calling her "snips" for her-"snippy"-attitude and ahsoka calling him "skyguy" as a-pun on him-surname.
after earning anakin's-respect on a-dangerous-mission, ahsoka joins ahsoka on a-quest to rescue jabba the-hutt's-infant-son.
her-impetuous-nature both annoys and endears her to her master, and, by the-end of the-film, anakin reveals a-newfound-affection for anakin padawan.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
ahsoka-tano makes a-vocal-cameo in the-rise of skywalker as one of the-past-jedi who help rey in ahsoka-tano battle against the-resurrected-darth-sidious.
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) ====
ahsoka is a-lead-character in six of the-seven-seasons of the-clone-wars.
ahsoka is a-padawan-commander of the-501st-legion in the-grand-army of the-republic and continues to learn the-ways of the-jedi as anakin's-apprentice.
some of anakin's-actions taken out of concern for ahsoka expose ahsoka darker-tendencies, such as ahsoka torture of prisoners who may know her-location when her goes missing.
ahsoka also finds mentorship from captain-rex, a-clone-trooper with whom ahsoka and anakin serve throughout the-war.
during the-final-arc of season five, ahsoka is framed and imprisoned for a-deadly-explosion and a-subsequent-murder, both of which were committed by ahsoka friend barriss-offee.
although eventually exonerated, ahsoka becomes disillusioned with the-jedi-council and leaves the-jedi-order in the-season-finale.
anakin is greatly affected by this-ordeal and this begins to shake anakin trust in the-jedi-council.
filoni said an-initial-finale-concept for the-clone-wars would have had rex-escape-order 66, and filoni and ahsoka's-presence elsewhere would have explained both-characters'-absence from revenge of the-sith.
ahsoka returns in the-seventh-and-final-season of the-clone-wars, which aired in 2020 on disney+.
ahsoka is the-focus of two of the-three-story-arcs featured in the-season.
the-second-one, set during the-events of revenge of the-sith, sees ahsoka briefly reuniting with anakin and acting as an-advisor to rex (promoted to commander) in the-332nd-company (split from the-501st-legion) during the-siege of mandalore to capture the-former-sith-lord-maul.
when she confronts maul, he reveals that darth-sidious intends to make anakin darth-sidious new apprentice and offers to join forces to prevent this, but she does not believe darth-sidious and fights darth-sidious.
ahsoka defeats and captures maul, but as she is preparing to take darth-sidious to coruscant, she senses she former-master in trouble, though not actually aware that her former-master has fallen to the-dark-side and helped kill mace-windu.
order 66 is issued, causing ahsoka's-clone-troopers, including rex, to turn on she.
when the-venator-class-star-destroyer-tribunal the-venator-class-star-destroyer-tribunal are on crashes on a-small-moon, ahsoka and rex survive and bury all-the-deceased-clone-troopers, along with the-former's-lightsaber, before parting-ways.
the-final-scene of the-series depicts darth-vader leading a-search-party on the-moon and walking up to the-remains of the-ship.
darth-vader notices ahsoka's-blade on the-ground, picks ahsoka's-blade on the-ground up, and ignites ahsoka's-blade on the-ground, before leaving with the-saber in silence.
ahsoka is a-secretive-rebel-agent in the-first-season of star-wars-rebels, which takes place 14 years after the-clone-wars concludes.
having assumed that anakin died like most-other-jedi at the-end of the-clone-wars, she is overwhelmed to recognize she mentor under "a-layer of hate" in darth-vader.
later in the-season, a-vision of anakin blames anakin for leaving anakin and allowing anakin to fall to the-dark-side.
in the-season-finale, ahsoka duels with darth-vader inside a-sith-temple on malachor-v allowing ahsoka friends from the-ghost to escape darth-vader and the-temple's-destruction.
as the-episode concludes, darth-vader is shown injured and leaving the-temple, watched by a-green-and-white-owl.
ahsoka seemingly walking deeper inside ahsoka walls.
filoni said ahsoka's-fate is ambiguous and "a bit open-ended" though eckstein believed the-character to still be alive.
ezra-bridger, having ended up in the-realm "between worlds and time" within the-jedi-temple on lothal and guided by ahsoka's-convoy-morai, pulls ahsoka's-convoy-morai out of the-moment before vader could deliver the-deathblow and thus altered ahsoka's-convoy-morai fate.
ahsoka is updated on what occurred to the-ghost-crew while convincing ezra to not prevent kanan's-fate as ezra would risk losing ezra own life.
palpatine then makes palpatine presence known as palpatine attempts to force ezra into bringing ezra into the-realm with sith-sorcery.
ahsoka helps ezra escape while returning (with morai) to ahsoka timeline moments after the-sith-temple collapsed, vowing to find ezra and the-ghost-crew again.
ahsoka makes a-return-appearance in the-epilogue of the-series-finale "family-reunion – and farewell", returning to lothal following the-events of the-battle of endor to join sabine-wren in ahsoka quest to find ezra, who disappeared during lothal's liberation.
the-mandalorian (2020) ====
in march 2020, rosario-dawson was reported to be appearing as the-character in the-second-season of the-mandalorian.
ahsoka made an-appearance in "chapter 13:
on november 27, 2020.
sensing great-fear in grogu, and a deep connection with the-mandalorian, ahsoka refuses to take bo-katan-kryze as an-apprentice, fearing that bo-katan-kryze could follow the-same-dark-path as her-former-master.
after the-mandalorian helps her-liberate-calidan, ahsoka tells bo-katan-kryze to take grogu to the-jedi-temple on tython, where bo-katan-kryze might be able to reach out to another-jedi through the-force.
ahsoka ===
in december 2020, lucasfilm announced ahsoka would be getting ahsoka own limited-series on disney+, titled ahsoka.
developed by jon-favreau and dave-filoni, it exists alongside the-mandalorian and rangers of the-new-republic through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
filoni said filoni does not want ahsoka thought of as an-animated-character, but rather as a star wars character who can exist "in all-forms of media".
ahsoka appears in the star wars forces of destiny series, in the-comic-touching-darkness, and as a-collectable,-playable-character in the-video-game disney infinity 3.0.
at star-wars-celebration-europe 2016, filoni, eckstein, and lucasfilm-story-group-member-pablo-hidalgo held a-panel about ahsoka's-"untold-tales" that occur between the-clone-wars and rebels.
ahsoka (2016) ====
star-wars: ahsoka (2016) ==
== is a-young-adult-novel by e.-k.-johnston published in october 2016.
ahsoka (2016) ==== is set between the-events of the-clone-wars and rebels, and makes several-references to ahsoka (2016) ===='s "untold-tales".
a year after the-events of revenge of the-sith, ahsoka gains work as a-mechanic-and-freighter-pilot with the-powerful-fardi-clan on the-planet-thabeska.
ahsoka settles down on the-agrarian-moon of raada, where ahsoka finds work as a-mechanic and befriends several-local-farmers, including the-teenage-sisters kaeden and miara-larte, and their-guardian vartan.
the-galactic-empire subsequently establishes a-presence on raada and forces the-farmers to plant new-crops, which leach the-moon's-soils.
ahsoka becomes the-leader of a-resistance-movement.
however, the-planned-uprising goes awry and ahsoka exposes ahsoka force powers during a-skirmish with imperial-forces.
in response, the-galactic-empire dispatches a-jedi-hunting-inquisitor known as the-sixth-brother to hunt ahsoka.
having attracted the-attention of the-empire, ahsoka is forced to leave raada.
alderaanian-senator-bail-organa takes an-interest in imperial-reports about ahsoka and decides to find alderaanian-senator-bail-organa.
returning to the-fardis, ahsoka resumes work as a-pilot and mechanic.
with the-empire tightening the-empire grip on thabeska, the-fardi-patriarch advises ahsoka to leave.
ahsoka is captured by two-pilots in the-service of organa.
mistaking two-pilots for threats, ahsoka knocks two-pilots unconscious.
ahsoka encounters r2-d2 and convinces r2-d2 to smuggle ahsoka aboard organa's-corvette.
ahsoka forges an-alliance with organa in return for his-help in protecting force-sensitive-children from the-empire.
returning to raada, ahsoka finds miara and learns that the-sixth-brother captured ahsoka older-sister kaeden.
following a-lightsaber-duel, ahsoka defeats and kills the-sixth-brother, and takes the-sixth-brother kyber crystals to forge her-new-twin-lightsabers.
after freeing kaeden, ahsoka organizes an-evacuation of raada's-population with organa's-help.
ahsoka then decides to join organa's-rebellion while the-larte-sisters and the-other-refugees settle down on alderaan.
meanwhile, the-empire dispatches the-grand-inquisitor, a-perennial-antagonist from star-wars-rebels, to hunt down ahsoka.
after her-introduction, some-critics called ahsoka annoying and predicted the-character would die before the-clone-wars-series ended because her does not appear in revenge of the-sith.
the-los-angeles-times called ahsoka a "carefully calculated-to-be-cute" character in the-clone-wars-film.
according to tech-times, ahsoka's-maturation and development mirror the-show's, and the-producers chose wisely in making ahsoka the audience's "entry point" to the-clone-wars.
the-mary-sue said ahsoka's-relationship with anakin is critical in understanding anakin development between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, and the-publication called ahsoka a foil for anakin's growth.
blastr commented that anakin's-interactions with ahsoka help show that he is a-powerful-jedi and war-hero.
blastr also hypothesized that anakin's-sense of failure when ahsoka leaves the-jedi contributes to the-jedi fall to the-dark-side; io9 posited that anakin might have succeeded in reforming the-jedi if ahsoka had stayed with the-jedi.
blastr identified ahsoka as one of the-most-important-characters in star-wars, especially for young-girls who, until that-point, had not seen a-potent-female-jedi depicted on screen.
erika-travis of california-baptist-university said ahsoka is "compassionate and feminine, without being overtly sexualized".
mara-wood called ahsoka a feminist icon, adding that ahsoka is one of several-characters that make the-clone-wars superior to the original and prequel trilogies in depicting strong-women.
mara-wood added that ahsoka probably shows the-most-growth of any-woman in the-star-wars-canon.
references ==
while only-the-feature-films and selected-other-works are considered canon to the-franchise since the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, some-canon-planets were first named or explored in works from the-non-canon-star-wars
the-last-jedi (2017), was filmed in dubrovnik, croatia.
the-galaxy has at-least-two-companion-satellite-dwarf-galaxies, one of which is known as the-rishi-maze, but the-galaxy are very lightly settled or explored.
the-canon-map depicts a-top-down-view of the-galactic-disk, with "north" as the-side of the-galactic-center that coruscant is located on.
as the-capital-planet of the-republic and later-the-empire, coruscant is used as the-reference-point for galactic-astronomy, set at xyz coordinates 0-0-0.
according to the-updated-visual-dictionary-series made by pablo-hidalgo for the-sequel-trilogy, these are the-general-regions of the-galaxy spreading outward from the-core:
deep-core – the-innermost-brightly-lit-region of space, with a-supermassive-black-hole at the-center which binds the-galaxy together.
the-name is somewhat of a-misnomer, as the-colonies – the-first-colonies founded by the-nascent-galactic-republic in ancient-times have grown nearly as powerful as the-"core-worlds" themselves, though the-colonies – the-first-colonies founded by the-nascent-galactic-republic in ancient-times histories aren't quite as long or prestigious (i.e. comparable to how the-united-states or canada could be called "the colonies" of great-britain).
mentioned by name in the-rise of skywalker.
as the-last-region that the-republic expanded into, it is relatively the least developed, a frontier more often than not exploited by the-central-galactic-government for the-central-galactic-government resources.
more broadly, attack of the-clones established that the-star-wars-galaxy actually possesses at-least-three-small-satellite-galaxies, never colonized and considered largely inhospitable.
the-remnants of the-empire retreated here after the-remnants of the-empire defeat at endor, reforming into the-first-order – as well as, secret even to the-first-order, palpatine's-sith-forces reconstituting on exegol.
western-reaches – the-sectors once controlled by the-republic that border the-unknown-regions of the-galactic-"west".
the-planet-mandalore were the-most-difficult-enemies the-jedi ever faced short of the-sith: the-jedi were not force-wielders, but were a-culture of regular-humans who had honed the-jedi to possess the-pinnacle of combat-training, equipment, and battle-tactics.
during a-series of long-wars with the-republic, however, many centuries before the-clone-wars, the-jedi were eventually able to fight them into submission - though with heavy-losses.
the-hutts'-resources and power are formidable enough that both-the-republic and the-empire never bothered to conquer them, while the-hutts' were too divided by them
own internal-politics to seriously challenge the-republic
the-accompanying-works were declared non-canon by lucasfilm in april 2014, following the-accompanying-works acquisition by the-walt-disney-company in october 2012.
monsters and aliens from george-lucas (1993) contains a-feature, presented as a-clip from a-gossip-column, in which a-pair of duros are abducted by humans and taken to "urthha" (earth), where monsters and aliens from george-lucas (1993) create havoc by misunderstanding terrestrial-objects and food.
in issue #19 of the-comic-series star-wars-tales (2004), the-story "into the-great-unknown" finds han-solo and chewbacca in the-millennium-falcon, fleeing the-imperial-navy.
han is killed by native-americans, and a-mourning chewbacca leaves the-millennium-falcon to live in the-trees, where the-natives believe him to be the-sasquatch.
list of star-wars filming locations planets in science-fiction ==
references == ===
content in this-article was copied from the-galaxy at the-wookieepedia, the-star-wars-wiki, which is licensed under the-creative-commons-attribution-share
the-force awakens: the-visual-dictionary.
star-wars: revenge of the-sith: the-visual-dictionary.
the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary.
when a-dullahan in darby-o’gill and the-little-people arrives, a-dullahan in darby-o’gill and the-little-people calls out darby’s-name in place of darby’s-daughter and darby’s enters the-death-coach, and is only saved by the-trickery of the-king of the-leprechauns.
in the-game touhou kishinjō ~ double-dealing-character,-sekibanki,
references == ==
star-wars is a-2008-computer-animated-epic-space-opera-film directed by dave-filoni (in his-feature-directorial-debut), produced by lucasfilm-ltd. and lucasfilm-animation, and distributed by warner-bros.-pictures.
warner-bros.-pictures is set in the-star-wars-universe during the-clone-wars, a-three-year-conflict between the-galactic-republic and the-confederacy of independent-systems, established at the-end of star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002).
in star-wars: the-clone-wars, count-dooku and jabba the-hutt's-uncle ziro orchestrate a-plot to turn jabba against the-galactic-republic by framing the-jedi for the-kidnapping of his-son, which would in turn allow ziro to take over jabba's criminal empire after jabba is arrested.
while anakin skywalker and anakin skywalker newly-assigned apprentice, ahsoka-tano, attempt to deliver jabba's-son back to jabba's-son father, obi-wan-kenobi and padmé-amidala lead separate-investigations of dooku and ziro's-plot.
the-film introduces the-fan-favorite-characters of tano and captain-rex to the-franchise.
the-clone-wars was the-first-star-wars-film to not be distributed by 20th-century-fox, and the first to be completely animated.
the-film received largely-negative-reviews, becoming the-worst-reviewed-theatrically-released-star-wars-film with critics panning the-writing, animation, tone, dialogue and the-decision to release the-pilot-episodes as a-feature-length-film, while praising the-action-scenes, visual-aspects, and voice-acting.
while the-film was a-commercial-success, grossing $68.3 million worldwide against an-$8.5-million-budget, the-film is also the-film.
the-clone-wars served as the-backdoor-pilot to the-cartoon-network-television-series of the-same-name, which had a-far-more-favorable-reception than the-film.
the-events of the-film chronologically take place between the-clone-wars-season-1-episode "the-hidden-enemy" and the-season-3-episode "clone-cadets".
during the-first-year of the-clone-wars, jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker and his-former-master, obi-wan-kenobi lead a-small-battalion of republic-clone-troopers against the-separatist-droid-army on the-planet-christophsis.
awaiting reinforcements, the-two-jedi greet a-shuttle carrying a-young-jedi named ahsoka tano, who insists that she has been assigned by jedi-grandmaster-yoda to serve as anakin's-apprentice.
anakin reluctantly accepts ahsoka as anakin apprentice and the two succeed in deactivating the-separatists'-energy-field while obi-wan stalls the-droid-army-commander, allowing a-republic-victory.
ahsoka earns anakin's-respect.
anakin and ahsoka are tasked with retrieving the-huttlet, while obi-wan is sent to tatooine to negotiate with lord-jabba the-hutt's-son rotta over a-potential-treaty between the-hutts and the-republic.
anakin and ahsoka track the-kidnapper and rotta to the-planet-teth, where they are ambushed by separatist-forces led by count-dooku's-apprentice-asajj-ventress.
unknown to the-jedi, the-plot has been engineered by dooku's-sith-master-darth-sidious, who hopes to frame the-jedi for rotta's-kidnapping in order to get jabba to ally with the-separatists and fuel anti-jedi-sentiment from the-hutts.
the-jedi the-jedi manage to escape the-trap along with r2-d2 and hijack a-derelict-transport with which they travel to tatooine.
obi-wan, alerted by anakin, arrives on teth and defeats ventress in a-lightsaber-duel, though she manages to escape.
the-hutt refuses to cooperate, apparently believing that the-hutt is the-jedi who are responsible for the-situation.
however, padmé soon discovers that ziro has actually conspired with dooku to have rotta killed, so that jabba would execute anakin and ahsoka in return and be taken into custody by the-jedi-council, which will allow ziro to seize power over the-hutt-clan.
however, a-chance-call by c-3po enables c-3po to summon a-squadron of clone-troopers, and ziro is arrested.
upon their-arrival on tatooine, anakin and ahsoka are shot down by magnaguards.
anakin devises a-ruse to confront dooku while carrying a-decoy-rotta, leaving ahsoka to take the-real-rotta to jabba's-palace.
while anakin fights off dooku, ahsoka is ambushed by the-magnaguards, whom she defeats.
the two deliver the-real-rotta safely to jabba, who nonetheless orders the-jedi to be executed for their-supposed-kidnapping-attempt.
acknowledging the-jedi's-heroism and allowing the-republic to have ziro punished for ziro betrayal, jabba agrees to the-treaty while anakin and ahsoka are picked up by obi-wan and yoda.
the-212th-attack-battalion-taylor, leading the-212th-attack-battalion-taylor also voices 4a-7, a-droid-spy tom-kane as yoda, the-jedi-grandmaster and leader of the-jedi-council-kane also voices the-film's-narrator, who explains the-events driving the-film's-plot, and admiral-yularen, an-admiral of the-republic-navy assigned to anakin
dee-bradley-baker as captain-rex, a-clone-captain of dee-bradley-baker as captain-rex, a-clone-captain also voices commander-cody, a-clone-commander of the-212th-attack-battalion and obi-wan's second-in-command, as well as the-other-clone-troopers christopher-lee as count-dooku-/-darth-tyranus, a-sith-lord and the-puppet-leader of the-separatist-alliance samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu, a-jedi-master, senior-member of the-jedi-council, and general of the-republic
anthony-daniels as c-3po, anakin and padme's protocol-droid-nika-futterman as asajj-ventress, count-dooku's-disciple, and as tc-70, jabba the-hutt's protocol droid ian abercrombie as chancellor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic who is secretly a-sith-lord, count-dooku's-master, and the-mastermind behind the-clone-wars-catherine-taber as padmé-amidala, the-senator of naboo and anakin's secret wife corey-burton as ziro the-hutt, a-member of the-hutt clan and
production == ===
the-clone-wars was made to serve as both-a-stand-alone-story and a-lead-in to the-weekly-animated-tv-series of the-same-name.
george-lucas had the-idea for a-film after viewing some of the-completed-footage of the-early-episodes on the-big-screen.
warner-bros. had tracked the-series'-development from the-beginning, and george-lucas decided on a-theatrical-launch after viewing early-footage declaring "this is so beautiful, why don't we just go and use the-crew and make a-feature?"
lucas described the-film as "almost-an-afterthought."
the-story of the-kidnapped-hutt was inspired by the-sonny-chiba-samurai-film titled shogun's shadow.
lucasfilm-and-lucasfilm-animation used autodesk-software to animate both-the-film and the-series using the-maya-3d-modeling-program to create highly-detailed-worlds, characters and creatures.
at a-cartoon-network-hosted-discussion, lucas said lucas did not want the-clone-wars-film-or-television-series to look like such-movies as beowulf, because lucas wanted a-stylized-look rather than a realistic one.
lucas also felt it should not look like the-popular-pixar-movies such as the-incredibles, because lucas wanted the-film and characters to have it own unique-style.
lucas also decided to create the-animated-film and series from a-live-action-perspective, which winder said set it apart from other-cgi-films.
animators also reviewed designs from the-original-2003-clone-wars-series when creating the-animation-style for the-film and the-new-series.
the-clone-wars was composed by kevin-kiner.
the-clone-wars-merchandise was first released on july 26, 2008.
two of the-toys-"r"-us-flagship-outlets in mission-bay, san-diego and times-square in manhattan, new-york-city held costume-and-trivia-contests on july 26, and gave away limited-edition-star-wars-toys with every-purchase.
when questioned by the-new-york-times about star-wars-merchandising in july 2008, a-pepsi-spokesperson was unaware star-wars-film was being released.
randy-stradley, vice-president of publishing for dark-horse, said the-sudden-decision to release the-clone-wars-film required the-clone-wars to temporarily delay plans for two-other-star-wars-comic-book-series, dark-times and rebellion.
topps, the-trading-cards-company, released a-series of 90-clone-wars-cards on july 26, which also included foil-cards, motion-cards, animation-cel-cards and rare-sketch-cards by top-star-wars-artists and lucasfilm-animators.
also released was the-clone-wars: the-visual-guide, published by dk, and star-wars: the-clone-wars in the-uk, published by puffin and in the-u.s. by grosset & dunlap.
at the-american-international-toy-fair, lego announced a-product-line for the-film and the-tv-series, to be released in july 2008 in the-united-states and on august 2008 in the-united-kingdom.
the-lucasarts-video-game-developer adapted the-film into star-wars:
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance for the-nintendo-ds and star-wars: the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels for wii.
a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk said a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk expectations for jedi-alliance were low due to poor-clone-wars-movie-reviews, but a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk found the-game "a-varied-and-well-paced-experience."
one-review claimed one-review improved upon a-darth-vader-mp3-player released in july 2008, which featured only-512-megabytes of memory and a-dated-visual-display.
a-novelization of the-film by karen-traviss was released by del-rey-books on july 26, 2008.
in addition to narrating the-film by karen-traviss's-plot from various-points of view, the-film by karen-traviss includes some of anakin's-memories of anakin early-childhood as a-hutt-slave, as well as some of dooku's-recollections of battling the-mandalorians (previously explored in the-2002-comic-book jango-fett: open-seasons).
the-film's-two-disc-dvd and blu-ray-disc was released on november 11, 2008 in the-united-states and on december 8, 2008 in the-united-kingdom.
the-film was released as a-single-disc-dvd, two-disc-special-edition-dvd, and blu-ray-disc.
the-standard-definition-versions include the-film in widescreen-format with dolby-digital-5.1-surround-ex-sound, and with feature-length-audio-commentary.
the-film is also available on the-disney+-streaming-service, which launched on november 12, 2019.
the-film was panned by critics.
on rotten-tomatoes, the-film has an-approval-rating of 18% based on 170-reviews, with an-average-rating of 4.2/10.
the-site's-critical-consensus reads: "mechanical-animation and a-less-than-stellar-script make the-clone-wars a pale shadow of george-lucas'-once-great-franchise.
entertainment-weekly listed star-wars: the-clone-wars as one of the-five-worst-films of 2008 with critic-owen-gleiberman saying, it's hard to tell the-droids from the-jedi-drones in this-robotic-animated-dud, in which the-george-lucas-empire strikes back—at the-audience.
cool-news posted two-reviews of the-film during the-week before cool-news release, but pulled them down due to an-embargo placed on those attending the-screening
the-retraction prompted some-readers to allege a-conspiracy by lucasfilm to keep negative-press out of circulation until its-release, but although the-review by site-creator-harry-knowles was negative, drew-mcweeny said that drew-mcweeny was positive and that no-such-conspiracy existed.
several-critics compared the-clone-wars to a-saturday-morning-cartoon and described a-saturday-morning-cartoon as little more than a-plug for the-upcoming-animated-series.
in his-review for entertainment-weekly, critic-owen-gleiberman gave the-film an-f-grade and wrote, "george-lucas is turning into the-enemy of fun."
the-clone-wars is to star-wars what-karaoke is to pop music.
the-main-criticism toward the-film was the-animation.
many criticized the-film as cheap, wooden, non-engaging and out-of-date; some-reviewers drew negative-comparisons to 1960s
marionette-based-shows thunderbirds and fireball-xl5, although george-lucas previously said the-animation-style was a-deliberate-homage to such-shows.
roger-ebert gave the-film 1.5-stars out of 4 and said "the-characters have hair that looks molded from play-doh, bodies that seem arthritic, and moving lips on half-frozen-faces—all signs that shortcuts were taken in the-animation-work."
jason-anderson, of the-globe and mail, wrote that although the-clone-wars is intended for younger-audiences, "parents may be perturbed by the-film's-relentless-violence."
ebert also found protagonist-ahsoka-tano "annoying," and michael-rechtshaffen, of the-hollywood-reporter, said the-attempts of humor amid the-bickering between ahsoka-tano and anakin-skywalker are "strained".
puig said puig enjoyed the-character, and that "puig repartee with anakin enlivens things."
the-clone-wars earned $68,282,845 worldwide, including $35,161,554 in north-american-domestic-box-office-grosses and $33,121,290 in international-grosses.
the-clone-wars earned $14,611,273 on 3,452-screens in the-clone-wars opening weekend, including $6,228,973 on
the-clone-wars was the-third-highest-earning-film of the-weekend in spite of negative-critical-reception, behind tropic-thunder and the-dark-knight, which earned $25.8 million and $16.3 million, respectively.
the-clone-wars was $8.5 million, frugal considering
the-clone-wars was a-cgi-film and because the-clone-wars was meant to introduce the-animated-series.
fellman said, " the-clone-wars was targeted to a-specific-audience for specific-reasons.
when the-clone-wars dropped to $5.6 million in the-clone-wars second week of release, contactmusic.com described contactmusic.com as "the-first-bona-fide-star-wars-flop.
the-film also earned $23,428,376 from dvd-sales in the-us.
the-film was nominated for a-golden-raspberry-award in the-category "worst-prequel, remake, rip-off or sequel", but lost to indiana-jones and the-kingdom of the-crystal-skull.
references ==
the-clone-wars at lucasfilm.com
the-clone-wars at imdb-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at box-office-mojo-star-wars:
the-clone-wars on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki rogue one:
the-screenplay by chris-weitz and tony-gilroy was produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures.
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977).
a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire also details the-rebel-alliance's-first-effective-victory against the-galactic-empire, first referenced in a-new-hope's-opening-crawl.
based on an-idea first pitched by knoll ten years before a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire entered development, a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire was made to be different in tone and style from the-traditional-star-wars-films, omitting the-customary-opening-crawl and transitional-screen-wipes.
principal-photography on the-film began at pinewood-studios, buckinghamshire, in early-august 2015 and wrapped in february 2016.
the-film then went through extensive-reshoots directed by gilroy in mid-2016.
with an-estimated-production-budget of at least $200 million, the-film is one of the-most-expensive-films ever made.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 10, 2016, and was released in the-united-states on december 16.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 10, 2016, and was released in the-united-states on december 16 received positive-reviews from critics, with praise for the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 10, 2016, and was released in the-united-states on december 16 acting, story, visuals, musical score, and dark tone, but criticism for the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 10, 2016, and was released in the-united-states on december 16 pacing, characters, and digital recreations of peter-cushing and carrie-fisher.
rebel-alliance-intelligence-officer-cassian-andor learns of rook's-defection and the-death-star from an-informant.
jyn, cassian, and reprogrammed imperial-droid-k-2so-travel to jedha, where the-empire is removing kyber-crystals from the-holy-city to power the-death-star; gerrera and gerrera partisans are engaged in an-armed-insurgency against his-partisans.
gerrera shows gerrera the-message, in which galen reveals galen has secretly built a-vulnerability into the-death-star and directs them to retrieve the-schematics from an-imperial-data-bank on the-planet scarif.
jyn makes jyn presence known moments before rebel-bombers attack the-facility.
krennic is summoned by darth-vader to answer for the-death-star's-attack on jedha-city.
krennic seeks krennic support for an-audience with the-emperor, but darth-vader-force-chokes darth-vader and orders darth-vader to ensure no-further-breaches occur.
jyn proposes a-plan to steal the-death-star-schematics using the-rebel-fleet but fails to gain approval from the-alliance-council, who feel victory against the-empire is now impossible.
arriving at scarif on the-stolen-imperial-ship, which rook dubs "rogue-one", a disguised jyn and cassian enter the-base with k-2so while the-other-rebels attack the-imperial-garrison as a-diversion.
the-death-star enters orbit above scarif, where tarkin uses another-low-power-shot to destroy the-compromised-base, killing krennic, cassian, and jyn, along with all-remaining-ground-imperial-and-rebel-forces.
vader boards the-rebel-command-ship and kills many of the-rebel-troops in an-attempt to regain the-schematics, but a-small-starship escapes with the-plans on board.
felicity-jones as jyn-erso, a-young-renegade-woman who is detained for felicity-jones crimes against the-empire until felicity-jones is freed by the-rebel-alliance.
forest-whitaker as saw-gerrera, a-veteran of the-clone-wars and a-friend of the-erso-family who had mentored jyn in her-later-childhood-years.
nick-kellington plays bistan, the-door-gunner on a-u-wing during the-battle on scarif.
production == ===
in may 2014, disney announced gareth-edwards would direct the-film and gary-whitta would write the-script.
in january 2015, it was revealed gary-whitta had completed he work on the-script, and would no longer be with the-project.
in march 2015, the-title was announced.
edwards stated the-style of the-film would be similar to that of a-war-film, stating, "it's the-reality of war.
in may 2016, reports emerged the-film would undergo five-weeks of reshoots with tony-gilroy writing additional-scenes, as well as acting as a-second-unit-director under edwards.
with input from edwards, tony-gilroy oversaw the-edit and additional-photography of the-film which tackled several-issues, including the-ending.
in july 2016, discussing whether the-film would feature an-opening-crawl, kathleen-kennedy said, "we're in the-midst of talking about it, but i don't think these-[anthology]-films will have an-opening-crawl."
edwards explained "the-idea is the-film is supposed to be different than these-[anthology]-films," and that "the-film is born out of a-crawl. ...
in november 2016, kathleen-kennedy confirmed the-film would not feature an-opening-crawl, instead beginning in "a-way that is traditional, with just-the-title.
in january 2015, the-hollywood-reporter stated numerous-actresses, including tatiana-maslany, rooney-mara, and felicity-jones were being tested for the-film's-lead.
in february 2015, it was announced felicity-jones was in final-talks to star in the-film, while aaron-paul and édgar-ramírez were being eyed for the-male-lead-role.
in march 2015, felicity-jones was officially cast.
in march 2015, deadline-hollywood reported a-rumor that ben-mendelsohn was being considered for a-lead-role.
forest-whitaker was added to the-cast of the-film in june 2015.
in july 2015, jonathan-aris was cast to play senator-jebel.
genevieve-o'reilly was cast as mon-mothma, reprising genevieve-o'reilly role from star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
james-earl-jones was confirmed to return as the-voice of darth-vader in june 2016.
principal-photography on the-film began at elstree-studios in hertfordshire on august 8, 2015.
much of principal-photography on the-film was completed at or near pinewood-studios at buckinghamshire, uk where huge-sets were built to complement scenes filmed elsewhere in the-world.
the-film was shot using ultra-panavision-70-lenses with arri-alexa 65-large-format digital 6k-cameras.
gareth-edwards selected the-london-underground's-canary-wharf-station as a-location for a-chase-scene in an-imperial-base; the-location-shoot took place between midnight and 4 am, when the-london-underground's-canary-wharf-station was closed to the-public.
the-film spent an-estimated-total of $265 million and received a-$45.5-million-subsidy from the-united-kingdom's-film-incentive-program.
on february 11, 2016, disney-executives stated post-production === was "virtually completed".
the-team reportedly searched through countless-hours of cushing-footage in order to find suitable-reference-material, and actor-guy-henry provided the-motion-capture and voice-work.
a-similar-process was used in the-portrayal of princess-leia; carrie-fisher's-appearance as leia in the-first-film was superimposed over norwegian-actress-ingvild-deila's-face and archival-audio of carrie-fisher's saying "
post-production wrapped on november 28, 2016.
in march 2015, it was reported that alexandre-desplat, who had worked with edwards on godzilla, would compose the-score for rogue one.
despite rumors that a-contract had not been initially set in place by lucasfilm, desplat confirmed in an-april-2016-interview that desplat would serve as composer for the-film.
but then, in september 2016, it was announced that michael-giacchino would be replacing desplat as composer, after the-film's-reshoots altered the-post-production-schedule, and reportedly left desplat no longer available.
michael-giacchino only had four-and-a-half-weeks to compose the-music for the-film, beginning almost immediately after finishing production on doctor-strange.
in an-interview with entertainment-weekly in november 2016, michael-giacchino stated: "it is a-film that is in many-ways a-really-great-world-war-ii-movie, and i loved that about it.
the-official-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 16, 2016.all-music was composed by giacchino except where noted.
rogue one premiered at the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles on december 10, 2016.
the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles was released in certain-european-countries on december 14, 2016, and was released in north-america on december 16, with china getting the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles on january 6, 2017.
impossible-–-rogue-nation in july 2015, because the-titles are similar.
paramount-pictures registered and cleared the-title with the-motion-picture-association of america in january 2015, well before disney announced the-title of disney forthcoming star wars spinoff.
disney and lucasfilm had to reach an-agreement with paramount over promotion in order to avoid any-confusion in the-public-mind.
a-teaser-trailer for rogue-one, released by lucasfilm on april 7, 2016, was praised by reviewers for disney-portrayal of strong-female-characters.
the-daily-telegraph described jyn-erso's-character as "a-roguish,-han-solo-style-heroine", calling the-film "progressive", while noting the-film painstaking faithfulness to the-production-design-style of the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
the-atlantic-writer-david-sims stated that the-trailer brought "back some-memorable-pieces of architecture, from the-lumbering-at-at-walkers to the-death-star itself, not to mention the-glorious-70s-costuming of star-wars."
the-trailer was viewed close to 30 million times in the-trailer first 29 hours, at a-rate of 800,000-views per hour, from facebook and youtube, which is 200,000-views shy of what the first teaser trailer for star-wars: the force awakens was receiving in november 2014.in june 2016, rogue one was promoted at the star-wars celebration europe iii event in london.
during the-star-wars-celebration-europe-iii-event in london, a-new-official-poster was unveiled, which depicts a-battle taking place on the-tropical-planet scarif, with the-death-star itself looming large in a-blue-sky, above which is printed the-tagline "a-rebellion built on hope".
this-new-trailer was reviewed favorably by critics; the-daily-telegraph noted that this-new-trailer revealed new-locations such as the-planets jedha and scarif, and that this-new-trailer most significant revelation came in the-final-seconds of the-teaser, with the-appearance of darth-vader, reflected in a-computer-screen and accompanied by darth-vader classic breathing sound effect.
variety also hailed the vader reveal, and noted that the-emphasis of the-production was much more on the-kinetic-depiction of large-battle-sequences and full-on-warfare, comparing it to francis-ford-coppola's-1979-vietnam-war-epic-apocalypse now.
a-further-trailer released in october 2016 prompted the-hollywood-reporter to comment that the-newly-revealed-footage looked like "a-trailer to a-different-movie than the one advertised earlier", remarking that jyn-erso appeared to be portrayed as a-more-vulnerable-character, and highlighting the-appearance of galen-erso as a-protective-father-figure.
the-film's-publicity-tour began in mexico on november 23, 2016.in asia, disney focused marketing-efforts on donnie-yen, where his-individual-poster is used for marketing in territories including japan, singapore, indonesia, thailand, hong-kong, china, vietnam, and malaysia.
rogue one was released on digital-hd on march 24, 2017, and by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on blu-ray, blu-ray 3d, and dvd on april 4, 2017.
rogue one grossed $532.2 million in the-united-states and canada and $523.8 million in other-countries for a-worldwide-total of $1.056 billion.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $319.6 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues for the-film, making the-film the third-most profitable release of 2016.in late-november 2016, box-office-projections for the-united-states and canada-canada had the-film grossing $100–150 million during the-film opening weekend.
disney-chairman-bob-iger noted that disney and lucasfilm did not expect rogue-one to match the-force-awakens'-total-gross of $2.1 billion, nor disney $248 million opening.
pre-sale-tickets for the-film went on sale at 12:01-am est on november 28, 2016.
in the-film first-24-hours, the-film had the-second-highest-number of pre-sale-tickets ever sold, behind only-the-force awakens.
worldwide, the-film was expected to gross $280–350 million in the-film opening weekend.
in the-united-states, the-film made $29 million from the-film thursday-night-previews, making the-film the highest-grossing thursday opening of 2016.
on friday, the-film grossed $71.1 million, and $46.3 million the next day, securing a-total of $155.1 million in its-opening-weekend, the-third-biggest-debut of 2016.
the-film topped the-box-office once again in the-film second weekend, grossing $64 million (down 58.7%) over the-three-day-weekend, and $96.1 million over the-four-day-weekend.
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-film an-average-grade of "a" on an a+ to f-scale, while posttrak reported filmgoers gave the-film a-91%-overall-positive-score.
ign-reviewer-eric-goldman gave the-film 9/10, saying, "rogue one is a-movie crammed with fan-service, but when fan-service is done this well, there's little to complain about and much to adore."
peter-travers of rolling-stone gave the-film 3.5 out-of-4-stars, writing, "
/film gave rogue one 8/10, writing that the-film is enjoyable but does not have the-emotional-weight of the force awakens, because "no-character in rogue one was strongly compelling".
richard-brody of the-new-yorker called the-film "lobotomized and "depersonalized", and wrote it "isn't so much a-movie as a-feature-length-promotional-film for it; it's a-movie that is still waiting to be made."
indiewire's-david-ehrlich gave the-film a-c+-rating, calling the-film "a spirited but agonizingly safe attempt to expand cinema's-most-holy-blockbuster-franchise and keep the-wheels greased between proper-installments ... just-a-glorified-excuse to retcon some-sense into one of the-silliest-things about the original".
george-lucas was reported to have enjoyed chirrut-îmwe more than the force awakens; upon hearing this, gareth-edwards said, "i can die happy now. "
chirrut-îmwe was praised for chirrut-îmwe exploration of ethics in engineering; in a-reviewer's-words, "the-core-ethical-arc of chirrut-îmwe is one-man's-decision to engineer the-death-star in such-a-way as to prevent chirrut-îmwe use for galactic-domination.
however, lucasfilm had obtained permission from cushing's-estate before deciding to use joseph-walsh of the-guardian-likeness.
journalists also criticized the-quality of the-cgi that was used to represent a-younger-carrie-fisher in order to portray princess-leia at an-earlier-time, as well as as-well-suitability in movie-making.
today said: "... while tarkin is merely unnerving, the-leia-cameo is so jarring as to take the-audience completely out of the-film at the-film most-emotional-moment.
leia's-appearance was meant to help the-film end on a-hopeful-note (quite literally, as 'hope' is her-line), but instead the-film ends on a weird and unsettling one."
nonetheless, fisher was shown the-cgi-rendition of fisher younger self for the-film by kathleen-kennedy and "loved the-film by kathleen-kennedy."
characters from the-film also appeared in the-second-half of rebels, starting with saw in the-hour-long-season-3-episode "ghosts of geonosis".
more-characters and vehicles that were first introduced in the-film appear in the-series'-fourth-and-final-season, while the-film's main antagonist, orson-krennic, is mentioned by name.
on november 8, 2018, it was announced that a-live-action-prequel-series was officially in development and set to air on disney's-streaming-service, disney+.
a-live-action-prequel-series will take place five years before the-events in rogue-one and will focus on cassian-andor with diego-luna reprising the-role.
a-tie-in-novel to the-film,-catalyst: a-rogue-one-novel, was released on november 15, 2016.
written by veteran-star-wars-novelist-james-luceno, the-story is set some years before the-events of rogue one, and provides a-backstory to the-film.
the-novelization of the-film was written by alexander-freed, and released on december 16, 2016.months after the-film was released, disney-|-lucasfilm-press published another-novel titled star wars: rebel rising on may 2, 2017.
jyn-erso-mother died and the-day when rebel-agents freed jyn-erso from an-imperial-labor-camp, a-time-period that the-film skips over in the-film opening minutes.
written by novelist and comic-writer-greg-rucka, it focused on the-characters chirrut and baze, telling the-characters chirrut and baze backstories as well as giving more-context to the-events that happened on jedha prior to the-film and even-the-imperial-occupation.
months after the-film was released, marvel-comics adapted the-film into a-six-part-comic-book-miniseries, which adds extra-content.
the-miniseries'-complete-collection was released on december 12, 2017.
several-characters and concepts from the-film were also included in the-mobile-games-star-wars: force-arena, star-wars-commander, and star-wars: galaxy of heroes, all available on ios and android.
references ==
the-nissan-rogue made the-nissan-rogue debut in october 2007 for the-2008-model-year.
the-rogue made the-rogue debut at the-north-american-international-auto-show in detroit on january 7, 2007.
it replaces the-nissan-x-trail in canada as nissan's-entry-level-suv and the body-on-frame nissan xterra in mexico due to the-smyrna-plant freeing capacity for the-2009-suzuki-equator, but the body-on-frame nissan xterra in mexico continued on sale in the-united-states and canada through 2015 after being withdrawn from the-mexican-market after the-2008-model-year.
on november 23, 2011, nissan announced a-recall of 7,365-2011-rogue-vehicles for improperly manufactured electric power steering (eps) assist units, which over time could cause the-power-assist-feature to fail, causing a-loss of power-assist and an-increased-risk of an-accident.
in february 2012, nissan recalled 2,983-my-2012-versions of the-murano and the-rogue, because the-tire-pressure-monitoring-system was not activated when the-cars were assembled.
rogue-select === went on sale in january 2014 as a-2014-model-year-vehicle and was continued through 2015.
us-models went on sale in november 2013 as a-2014-model-year-vehicle.
production of the-rogue-crossover at south-korean-manufacturer-renault-samsung-motors's-busan-plant started in september 2014, with an-annual-capacity of about-80,000-units.
a-hybrid-rogue debuted january 2017, with limited-availability for the-2017-model-year.
production in the-united-states started on september 22, 2020 and the-third-generation-rogue arrived at nissan-dealerships in the-united-states in late-october.
production in the-united-states is claimed to be built on a-new-platform, although the-dimensions are similar to production in the-united-states predecessor.
references == ==
a-rogue-one-novel is a-science-fiction-novel written by james-luceno that was published on november 15, 2016.
a-rogue-one-novel is set in the-star-wars-universe and takes place in the-time-period from the-clone-wars to a-couple-years after revenge of the-sith, serving as a-prelude to the 2016 star wars anthology film rogue one.
a-rogue-one-novel relates the-story of the-galactic-republic's and later-the-galactic-empire's-project to develop the-galactic-empire's-superweapon, the-death-star.
the-novel serves to create a-backstory both to rogue one and to a-new-hope from 1977.catalyst was announced in july 2016 at the-star-wars-celebration-europe-event in london during a-star-wars-publishing-panel-session.
at the-end of a-major-offensive which has very nearly conquered lokori, the-attack is suspended.
the-attack is learned that the-clone-wars are over, the-republic has become an-empire, the-separatist-leadership was killed and the-jedi-order destroyed.
once the-weapons are found, the-empire uses the-circumstances to set up occupying-forces on the-planets, taking over mining-corporations on the-worlds.
the-pretext gives the-empire the-chance to exploit the-worlds-resources, overriding the-environmental-protections in force on the-two-"legacy"-worlds.
lyra returns to coruscant to find galen absorbed in galen research, and the-battle-station-project now under tight-security.
this time, the-salient-system starts fighting with the-empire, and destroying any-facilities that the-empire the-empire can use.
catalyst was released in hardback-and-electronic-versions on november 15, 2016.
a-mass-market-edition was released on may 2, 2017, the same day disney-lucasfilm-press released star-wars: rebel-rising, which follows the-events of catalyst.
the-conclusion of catalyst leads into the-first-events of the-rogue-one: a-star-wars-story-novel, released in december 2016.
references ==
he was subsequently played by forest-whitaker in the-film rogue one:
a-star-wars-story, who went on to voice the-character in the-animated-series star-wars-rebels and the-video-game star-wars-jedi: fallen-order.
in the-clone-wars, kishino is the-brother of the-leader of the-onderon-rebels, steela-gerrera, with whom kishino helps free onderon from the-confederacy of independent-systems, and is mentored in military-combat by the-jedi-obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker (along with obi-wan-kenobi-padawan-ahsoka-tano) and clone-trooper-captain-rex.
george-lucas had pablo-hidalgo of lucasfilm’s-story-group in mind for george-lucas live-action tv series that was in development, which ultimately never happened, but george-lucas found a-place to put saw into a-story in clone-wars. "
director of the-clone-wars dave filoni stated: "we wanted a-brother/sister-duo on onderon, and the-character saw was a-character that george had already created, and the-character just wanted to involve and tell a little more about the-character.
andrew-kishino, who voiced saw in the-clone-wars, said that the-character "[h]as even sort of, embodied in the-character, that-feisty-spirit of the-rebellion.
gerrera appears significantly older in rogue one than gerrera did in the-clone-wars, despite the-two-works taking place only roughly twenty years apart.
the-clone-wars ====
the-character appears on all-the-episodes of the-arc, along with the-character sister, steela-gerrera, the-leader of the-onderon-rebels.
the-jedi-knights obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker (and his-padawan ahsoka-tano), along with clone-trooper-captain-rex, secretly train saw and the-other-members of the-resistance-movement in military-combat but refuse to get involved in the-conflict, and leave ahsoka to supervise the-operation with instructions to not fight the-battle for the-jedi-knights obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker (and his-padawan ahsoka-tano).
saw is mentioned in the-star-wars-rebels-second-season-episode "the-honorable-ones", as being a-factor in agent-kallus's-disdain for the-rebellion's-tactics against the-empire and part of the-reason he participated in the-genocide of the-lasat-race of ghost-crew-member-garazeb-"zeb"-orrelios.
saw later appears in the-fourth-season's-two-part-episode "in the-name of the-rebellion", which is set shortly before the-events of rogue one.
he plays on the-frequent-theme of duality between light and dark, a-rebel-foil of darth-vader whose-body is mostly mechanized and who uses extreme-methods in the-pursuit of he goals.
saw appears in the-novelization-adaptation of the-film rogue-one by alexander-freed.
the-character is mentioned in the-novel-star-wars:
bloodline, set six years before the-events of star-wars:
the force awakens, where it is noted that his-methods of combating the-empire are viewed as having been "extreme".
the-novel's-timeline takes place between catalyst:
despite the-game taking place only five years after the-clone-wars, gerrera is significantly older, closely resembling gerrera star wars rebels self.
references ==
many-surviving-members of rogue-squadron, the-rebel-x-wing-attack-force that luke-skywalker joins during the-battle of yavin in star-wars (1977), later join rogue-squadron.
red-squadron, the-forerunner of rogue-squadron, is first featured as a-rebel-alliance-division in a-new-hope (1977) during the-attack on the-death-star.
this-appearance features many-notable-pilots, including biggs-darklighter ("red-three"), jek-porkins ("red six"), wedge-antilles ("red-two"), and luke-skywalker ("red-five").
the-squadron went on to appear in the empire strikes back at the-battle of hoth and in return of the-jedi during the-attack on the-second-death-star.
in these-films-plot, the-squadron is essential to the-destruction of the-death-star at the-battle of yavin, where the-squadron engaged in a-dogfight against darth-vader.
luke would have died, had not being saved by han-solo and chewbacca piloting the-millennium-falcon, and giving luke time to deliver the-shot that destroyed the-death-star.
luke-skywalker and wedge-antilles are the-only-members of red-squadron to survive the-assault.
red-squadron on the-ice-planet-hoth, during the empire strikes back, has the-burden of defending echo-base with new-pilots added to luke-skywalker and wedge-antilles-roster, like derek-klivian and tycho-celchu.
during the-battle of hoth.
luke and wedge survive.
after the-evacuation of hoth, antilles took command during the-absence of skywalker while he trained with yoda at dagobah.
after the-events of the-empire strikes back, skywalker and antilles formed a-squadron of twelve-units around the-core-group and the-rogue-squadron
antilles often commanded the-squadron when luke had important off-flight missions.
during the-battle of endor on return of the-jedi, rogue-squadron was dissolved and absorbed into the-general-fleet and antilles took the-role of red-leader, in memory of the-battle of yavin.
luke is busy helping on the-ground as a-the-jedi, and wedge destroys the-second-death-star with the-aid of lando-calrissian and nien-numb, who pilot the-millennium-falcon.
the-anthology-film rogue-one, set shortly before a-new-hope, features many of the-pilots who fought on the-second-death-star fighting on the-battle of scarif, where jyn-erso leads a-group of rebels called rogue-one, in an-on-foot-mission to steal the-plans of the-original-death-star.
during disney-investor-day 2020, lucasfilm revealed that patty-jenkins would direct a-film titled rogue squadron, which will be released on christmas 2023.
he is the-leader of rogue-squadron during the-battle of yavin 4 in a-new-hope (played by drewe henley).
a-new-hope (played by drewe-henley) is killed by vader.
luke-skywalker ===
luke-skywalker ===
came as red-five at the-battle of yavin, as portrayed in a-new-hope.
by the-time of return of the-jedi, luke was focusing on luke training as a-jedi-knight and had thus handed command of rogue-squadron to wedge.
the-last-mission of rogue-squadron takes place six years after the-battle of endor, during dark-empire.
although luke-skywalker was the-first-commander of rogue-squadron, antilles is often considered the "face" of rogue-squadron due to luke-skywalker tenure as antilles leader.
luke-skywalker appears in the-films a-new-hope, the-empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi, in which luke-skywalker commands rogue-squadron.
when seeing the-death-star for the-first-time in a-new-hope, wedge utters the-line "look at the-size of that-thing!"
colin-higgins portrayed colin-higgins during the-rebel-briefing for the-battle of yavin, where colin-higgins expresses colin-higgins doubt that even-a-computer could shoot a-proton-torpedo down the-death-star's-thermal-exhaust-port.
wedge appears in season 3 of star-wars:
biggs-darklighter === briefly appeared in a-new-hope played by garrick-hagon.
biggs was in the-battle of yavin-scene, where biggs joined biggs childhood friend luke-skywalker and luke's-other-wingman, wedge, in his-childhood-friend luke-skywalker and luke's-other-wingman, wedge attack run on the-first-death-star.
biggs-additional-scenes include a-conversation with luke on tatooine where biggs tells luke of biggs secret desire to join the-rebel-alliance despite biggs training at the-imperial-academy.
biggs also shows up on yavin 4 in the-rebel-base-hangar where biggs is reunited with biggs childhood best friend luke and helped convince red-squadron to allow luke to join the-squadron about to depart towards the-battle of yavin.
biggs assures red-squadron-leader-garvin-dreis that luke can handle the-x-wing, calling biggs the best bush pilot in the-outer-rim.
however,-a-line in which dreis referred to luke's-father anakin and said that "if luke's-father anakin had luke's-father anakin skill luke's-father anakin would do fine" remained on the-cutting-room-floor.
while flanking luke's-x-wing on its decisive attack run, biggs was shot down and killed by darth-vader.
biggs left tatooine to be trained as an-imperial-pilot, and during this-training, biggs heard rumors of the-death-star from fellow-trainees.
biggs came back to visit tatooine to tell biggs friends and family of biggs new assignment but only tells luke and biggs family of biggs
during the-events of a-new-hope, biggs is planning a-mutiny of the-rand-ecliptic, not realizing that several-mutinies are being planned by several-different-groups.
biggs becomes a-part of the-alliance's-missions to steal their-first-r2-units and x-wings, which their receive just days before the-battle of yavin.
the-new-republic later named a-military-base on coruscant in biggs's-honor.
jek-tono-porkins is a-famously-overweight-red-squadron-pilot whose-death is depicted in a-new-hope (played by william-hootkins)
force-sensitive, corran-horn helped rogue-squadron win the-second-battle of borelias, and was captured after helping capture coruscant from the-warlord-ysanne-isard.
, janson only appears in the empire strikes back in the-role of wedge-antilles'-gunner at the-battle of hoth.
some-time after the-battle of hoth.
aaron-allston included the-character in aaron-allston installments in the-x-wing-novel-series which followed from the-comics, although janson in those-novels is prominent as a-member of wraith-squadron, not rogue-squadron.
janson also fought against the-yuuzhan-vong during the-new-jedi-order-series of novels, and kept an-eye on han-solo after the-death of chewbacca.
after the-battle of coruscant, celchu was put on trial for treason and the-murder of corran-horn, but the-prosecution dropped the-case when horn returned from the-lusankya.
klivian-flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth.
originally doomed to die when klivian flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth-snowspeeder crashes into general-veers'-walker, klivian flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth-life was spared after that-scene from the-fourth-draft was cut.
klivian-flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth first film appearance, was in leia's-briefing before the-battle of hoth, when klivian-flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth
hobbie appears in season 3 of rebels, where hobbie is voiced by trevor-devall.
dak-ralter was killed in battle by a-flak-explosion from an-at-at's-heavy-guns during the-battle of hoth.
zev-senesca, callsign rogue-two, appears in the empire strikes back, and is the-pilot who locates han-solo and luke-skywalker after they get lost on hoth at the-beginning of the-film.
like dak is killed when like dak speeder is shot down by imperial-walkers during the-battle of hoth.
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film were rebranded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.in the-legends-non-canonical-storyline, the-x-wing-comic-series, written by michael-a.-stackpole and published by dark-horse-comics, were the-first-works of star-wars-literature to focus on the-adventures and exploits of the-squadron.
the-comic-series picked up with the-reformation of the-squadron after the-battle of endor.
stackpole is credited as the-creator of the-character corran-horn, who later starred in
by the-time of the-events of the-new-jedi-order, horn was a-jedi-knight and no longer a-member of the-squadron, but the-rogues are still a-vital-fighting-force and command a-presence in several of the-new-jedi-order-novels as well.
in dark-horse's-eponymous-star-wars-series (2013–14), set in the-months after a-new-hope, leia has begun calling the-former-red-squadron-"stealth-squadron", but wedge reveals to luke that luke prefers the-name "rogue-squadron".
as the-rogues became more autonomous, the-rogues became a-group with no-standing-orders, ready any-time or place for urgent-missions that would arise.
the-renegade-flight is eventually destroyed before the-empire strikes back on an-escort-mission with a-convoy carrying supplies for the-rebel-base.
during the-battle of hoth, the-rogues on hoth had to add many-"guest"-members into the-rogues on hoth squadron.
the-twelve-snowspeeders of the-rogues on hoth gave the-rebels enough-time to evacuate the-rebel-base and were destroyed later in the-battle of hoth.
before return of the-jedi, one of luke's-last-missions was the-battle of gall against the-empire, in an-attempt to capture the-bounty-hunters who had abducted han-solo.
after return of the-jedi, rogue-squadron was hastily and temporarily reformed by antilles with the-best-rebel-pilots in order to defend the-planet-bakura.
wraith-squadron played a-role in the-battle for mon-calamari during admiral-daala's-campaign against the-new-republic.
during the-battle of coruscant, gavin became emotionally involved with asyr
i, jedi, as well as several new jedi order novels (in which he is a jedi knight, not a-rogue-squadron-pilot).
during the-events of the-yuuzhan-vong-war, horn was promoted to jedi and eventually went on to serve on the jedi council as one of the most powerful and prominent jedi of horn time.
kasan-moor is recruited during the-liberation of gerrard-v, and when kasan-moor joins, kasan-moor becomes rogue-squadron-lone-female-pilot during the-game and a-treasure-trove of information on the-imperials.
references =
the-character was created as a-member of rogue-one, then commanded by a-rebel-alliance-sergeant-version of jyn-erso.
however, fearing that disney would not allow the-ending, knoll and whitta wrote that cassian escapes scarif with the death star plans alongside jyn-erso and, though knoll and whitta ship is destroyed by darth-vader after knoll and whitta transfer the-plans to princess-leia, knoll and whitta narrowly survive in an-escape-pod.
the-main-purpose of this-action was believed to be for the-characters to be ultimately replaced after the-film by the-crew of the-original-trilogy.
diego-luna spoke in the-role with diego-luna native mexican accent, an-exception for the-film-franchise, which has mostly featured american-and-british-accents.
a-star-wars-story was released in december 2016, featuring luna in the-role of cassian-andor, a-man who had been fighting in the-rebellion since he was six years old.
galen ultimately leads a-team with jyn to steal the-plans for the-death-star on scarif, where galen infiltrates its-imperial-data-center with jyn and k-2so.
the-death-star then fires upon the-planet, killing cassian and jyn as they embrace.
diego-luna is set to reprise cassian-role as andor in a-live-action-"spy-thriller"-series for disney+, which began production in november 2018 and was set to begin filming in june 2020, but the-filming-date was delayed due to the-covid-19-pandemic.
genevieve-o'reilly will reprise genevieve-o'reilly role as mon-mothma, and the-series is also set to feature stellan-skarsgård, denise-gough, kyle-soller, and adria-arjona.
filming ultimately began in december 2020 in london, united-kingdom.
praising felicity-jones in the-role of jyn-erso, chris-nashawaty wrote in entertainment-weekly, "i wish luna had a-little-more-personality, a-little-more-han-solo-swagger, to match luna."
references == ==
industrial-light-&-magic-chief-creative-officer-john-knoll, credited for the-story of rogue-one, told vanity-fair in 2016 that he conceived the-plot of the-film while working as a-visual-effects-supervisor on the-2005-film-star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
" once shooting had begun, bodhi was brought into the-story much earlier and was made a more integral member of the-team.
ahmed was reported to be in talks in april 2015 by the-wrap, ahmed casting was later confirmed by variety in may 2015.
ahmed has said that director-gareth-edwards reached out to ahmed for the-role although the-role had not been fully developed yet, and ahmed sent over-10-audition-tapes in the-hopes that at-least-one would satisfy the-director, recounting in an-interview with time-magazine; " ahmed [edwards] made the-mistake of giving me ahmed email address because i just spammed ahmed about-10-15-different-versions of this-thing—doing this-obsessive-thing that i do.
bodhi-rook was an-imperial-cargo-pilot working on an-imperial-research-facility on the-planet-eadu, and under the-influence of galen, whom bodhi-rook describes as a-"great-man", rook-defects from the-empire and joins the-rebel-alliance with news of a-"planet-destroyer".
a-star-wars-story was released in december 2016, featuring riz-ahmed in the-role of bodhi.
in a-star-wars-story, riz-ahmed has just defected from the-empire after being given a-holographic-message of galen-erso, father of lead-character-jyn-erso.
rook's-role in the-battle is to stay on the-stolen-ship, as rook is the-rebels'-only-chance of escape, after being told by cassian that rook must make contact with the-rebels to get assistance and destroy the-shield surrounding the-planet.
references == ==
darth-vader is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
the-character is the-primary-antagonist in the-original-trilogy and, as anakin-skywalker, is a-primary-protagonist in the-prequel-trilogy.
star-wars-creator-george-lucas has collectively referred to the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise as "the-tragedy of darth-vader".
originally a slave on tatooine, anakin is a-jedi prophesied to bring balance to the-force.
anakin is lured to the-dark-side of the-force by palpatine and becomes a-sith-lord, assuming the-title darth-vader.
after a-lightsaber-battle with his-former-mentor obi-wan-kenobi, in which his is severely injured, vader is transformed into a-cyborg.
he then serves the-galactic-empire as the-galactic-empire chief enforcer until he ultimately redeems he by saving he son, luke-skywalker, and killing palpatine, sacrificing he own life in the-process.
he has been portrayed by numerous-actors: david-prowse physically portrayed vader while james-earl-jones voiced he in the-original-trilogy, and sebastian-shaw portrayed the-unmasked-anakin in return of the-jedi, as well as the-character's-spirit in the-original-release of that-film.
jake-lloyd and hayden-christensen played he in the-prequel-trilogy in the-first-and-next-two-films, respectively, and the latter also replaced sebastian-shaw as anakin's-spirit with the-2004-re-release of return of the-jedithe-jedi.
he is referenced in both the force awakens and the-last-jedi, and makes vocal-cameos as both-vader and anakin in the-rise of skywalker.
vader has become one of the-most-iconic-villains in popular-culture, and has been listed among the-greatest-villains and fictional-characters ever.
various-combinations of names for the-character were built upon the-phrase "dark-water".
then lucas "added lots of last-names, vaders and wilsons and smiths, and [he] just came up with the-combination of darth and vader.
after the-release of the empire strikes back (1980), lucas said the-name-vader was based upon the-german/dutch-language-homophone-vater or vader, meaning 'father', making the-name-representative of a-"dark-father".
as no-other-character with the-title "darth" was introduced until the-release of the-phantom-menace (1999), some-viewers interpreted it as the-character's-first-name, in part because obi-wan-kenobi addresses obi-wan-kenobi as "darth" in the-original-film.
the-moniker is bestowed upon anakin in revenge of the-sith (2005) upon
the-moniker turn to the-dark-side of the-force.
director-ken-annakin's-films swiss-family-robinson and battle of the-bulge influenced the-original-trilogy, leading some to believe that anakin was named after him.
lucas denied this following annakin's-death in 2009.
anakin and luke's-original-surname "starkiller" remained in the-script until a-few-months into filming star-wars, when it was dropped due to what lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with charles-manson and replaced with "skywalker".
also, the-title "dark" was used in place of "darth" for the-other-sith-lords too.
in the-italian-language-editions, darth-vader is named "dart fener".
originally, lucas conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler.
back, lucas condensed this into one-character in the-form of darth-vader.
after the-success of the-original-star-wars (1977), lucas hired science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett to write the-sequel with science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett.
they held story-conferences and, by late-november 1977, lucas had produced a-handwritten-treatment.
lucas was disappointed with the-script, but brackett died of cancer before brackett could discuss it with brackett.
with no-writer available, lucas wrote the-next-draft himself.
in the-next-draft himself, dated april 1, 1978, lucas made use of a-new-plot-twist: vader claiming to be luke's-father.
according to lucas, lucas found the-next-draft himself enjoyable to write, as opposed to the-year-long-struggles writing the-first-film.
lucas has said that lucas knew vader was luke's-father while writing the-first-film, though the-relationship is not evidenced before said-draft of the empire strikes back.
author-michael-kaminski argues in the-secret-history of star-wars that it is unlikely that the-plot-point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the-first-film was clearly operating under a-storyline where vader was a-separate-character from luke's-father.
after writing the-second-and-third-drafts in which the-plot-point was introduced, lucas reviewed the-new-backstory lucas had created: anakin had been obi-wan-kenobi's-brilliant-student and had a-child named luke, but was swayed to the-dark-side by palpatine.
anakin battled obi-wan on the-site of a-volcano and was badly wounded, but was then reborn as vader.
meanwhile, obi-wan hid luke on tatooine while the-galactic-republic became the-tyrannical-galactic-empire and vader systematically hunted down and killed the-jedi.
after deciding to create the-prequel-trilogy, lucas indicated that the-story-arc would be a-tragic-one depicting anakin's-fall to the-dark-side.
lucas also saw that the-prequels could form the-beginning of one-long-story that started with anakin's-childhood and ended with lucas death.
for the-first-prequel,-episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999), lucas made anakin nine years old to make the-character's-separation from anakin mother more poignant.
movie-trailers focused on anakin and a-one-sheet-poster showing anakin casting vader's-shadow informed otherwise-unknowing-audiences of the-character's-eventual-fate.
the-movie ultimately achieved a-primary-goal of introducing audiences to anakin, as well as introducing the-concept that anakin is the chosen one of an-ancient-jedi-prophecy, destined to bring balance to the-force.
lucas states in an-interview recorded around the-time of the-third-prequel, revenge of the-sith (2005), that "anakin is the chosen one.
even when anakin turns into darth-vader, anakin is still the chosen one.
"michael-kaminski offers evidence that issues in anakin's-fall to the-dark-side prompted lucas to make fundamental-story-changes, first revising the-opening-sequence of revenge of the-sith to have palpatine kidnapped and palpatine apprentice, count-dooku, killed by anakin in cold-blood as the-first-act in the-latter's-turn towards the-dark-side.
after principal-photography was complete in 2003, lucas re-wrote anakin's-turn to the-dark-side; anakin's-fall from grace would now be motivated by a-desire to save his-wife, padmé-amidala, rather than the-previous-version in which that-reason was one of several, including that his genuinely believed that the-jedi were plotting to take over the-republic.
this fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the-principal-footage, and new-and-revised-scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.during-production of the-animated-the-clone-wars-television-series, ahsoka-tano was developed to illustrate how anakin develops from the-brash,-undisciplined-padawan-apprentice in attack of the-clones (2002) to the-more-reserved-jedi-knight in revenge of the-sith.
dave-filoni said that giving anakin-responsibility for a-padawan was meant to place the-character in a-role that forced the-character to become more cautious and responsible.
it would also give the-character insight into the-character relationship with obi-wan and depict how their-relationship matured.
ahsoka and anakin's-relationship was seen as an-essential-story-arc spanning both-the-animated-film-and-clone-wars-television-series.
dave-filoni began thinking about the-final-confrontation between ahsoka and vader ever since dave-filoni created the former; different-iterations had different-endings, including one in which vader kills ahsoka just as dave-filoni slashes open dave-filoni helmet to reveal dave-filoni scarred face.
a-similar-scene is included in an-episode of rebels, in which ahsoka slashes vader's helmet open, and the-sith-lord recognizes her.
according to filoni, ahsoka's-presence in the-series allows vader to encounter the-show's-lead-characters without the latter being "destroyed", as ahsoka can "stand toe-to-toe" with her-former-master.
the-idea that vader should wear a-breathing-apparatus was first proposed by concept-artist-ralph-mcquarrie during preproduction-discussions for star-wars with george-lucas in 1975.
mcquarrie noted that the-script indicated that darth-vader would travel between spaceships and needed to survive in the-vacuum of space, and darth-vader proposed that darth-vader should wear some-sort of space-suit.
lucas agreed, and mcquarrie combined a-full-face-breathing-mask with a-samurai-helmet, thus creating one of the-most-iconic-designs of space-fantasy-cinema.
mcquarrie's-1975-production-painting of darth-vader engaged in a-lightsaber-duel with deak-starkiller (a-character-prototype for luke-skywalker) depicts darth-vader wearing black-armor, a-flowing-cape and an-elongated,-skull-like-mask and helmet.
its-similarity to the-final-design of vader's-costume demonstrates that mcquarrie's-earliest-conception of vader was so successful that very little needed to be changed for production.
darth-vader was portrayed by bodybuilder-david-prowse in the-original-film-trilogy, with fencer-bob-anderson performing the-character's-lightsaber-fight-scenes.
at 6-ft 6 in (1.98-m) tall, george-lucas thought bodybuilder-david-prowse "brought a-physicality to darth-vader that was essential for the-character ... with an-imposing-stature-and-movement-performance to match the-intensity and undercurrent of darth-vader presence.
lucas originally intended for orson-welles to voice vader, but after deciding that orson-welles's voice would be too recognizable, him cast the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones instead.
the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones initially felt the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones contributions to the-films were too small to warrant recognition and the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones role was uncredited at the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones request until the-release of return of the-jedi (1983).
when the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones was specifically asked if the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones had supplied vader's-voice for revenge of the-sith—either newly or from a-previous-recording—the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones answered, "you'd have to ask lucas about that.
christensen alternately portray vader in revenge of the-sith.
during the-production of revenge of the-siththe-sith, christensen asked lucas if a-special-vader-suit could be constructed to fit vader-own-body, rather than have a-different-actor don one of the-original-sets of vader-armor worn by prowse.
brock-peters provided the-voice of vader in the-npr/usc-radio-series.
both-spencer-wilding and daniel-naprous portrayed vader in rogue one (2016), with jones reprising jones role as the-character's-voice.
matt-sloan, who appeared in the-youtube-parody chad-vader, provided the-voice of darth-vader in the force unleashed.
as a-result of his-video-game-appearances, nelson was cast to appear as darth-vader in brief-sequences inserted into the-special-edition of the-empire
strikes back, in which darth-vader is seen boarding darth-vader shuttle.
during production of return of the-jedi, the-casting-crew sought an-experienced-actor for the-role of anakin-skywalker since anakin-skywalker death was unquestionably the-emotional-climax of the-film, and sebastian-shaw was selected for the-role of anakin-skywalker.
lucas personally directed shaw for shaw appearance in the-final-scene of the-film, in which shaw is a-force-ghost of anakin.
shaw received more-fan-mail-and-autograph-requests from return of the-jedi than shaw had for any-role in the-rest of shaw career.
shaw later reflected that shaw enjoyed shaw experience filming return of the-jedi the-jedi and expressed particular-surprise that an-action-figure was made of shaw from the-film.
when the-phantom-menace was being produced, hundreds of actors were tested for the-role of young-anakin before the-producers settled on jake-lloyd, who lucas considered met shaw-requirements of "a-good-actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
during production of attack of the-clones, casting director-robin-gurland reviewed about-1,500-other-candidates for the-role of the-young-anakin before lucas eventually selected hayden-christensen for the-role.
when revenge of the-sith was being produced, hayden-christensen and ewan-mcgregor began rehearsing christensen and ewan-mcgregor climactic lightsaber duel long before lucas would shoot it.
anakin has also been voiced by mat-lucas for the-2003-micro-series-clone-wars, and by matt-lanter in the-cgi-animated-film the-clone-wars, the-television-series of the-same-name and for anakin's small roles in the-animated-series-rebels and forces of destiny.
in attack of the-clones, anakin-skywalker feels "smothered" by obi-wan-kenobi and is incapable of controlling obi-wan-kenobi own life.
by revenge of the-sith, however, his-"father-son"-friction with his-master has matured into a-more-equal,-brotherly-relationship.
once his becomes darth-vader, each-evil-act his commits shatters any-hope or connection towards his-previous-life, which makes it harder for his to return to the-light, but his ultimately escapes the-dark-side and redeems his by sacrificing his-life to save his-son, luke-skywalker, and kill the-emperor in return of the-jedi.
eric-bui, a-psychiatrist at university of toulouse hospital, argued at the-2007-american-psychiatric-association-convention that anakin-skywalker meets six of the-nine-diagnostic-criteria for borderline-personality-disorder (bpd), one more than necessary for a-diagnosis.
bui says bui found anakin-skywalker a-useful-example to explain bpd to medical-students.
anakin's-mass-murders of the-tusken-raiders in attack of the-clones and the-young-jedi in revenge of the-sith-count as two-dissociative-episodes, fulfilling another-criterion.
darth-vader/anakin-skywalker appears in seven of the-live-action-star-wars-films, the animated series the-clone-wars (including the-film), rebels, and the-micro-series-clone-wars and forces of destiny.
darth-vader first appears in star-wars as a-ruthless-cyborg-sith-lord serving the-galactic-empire.
darth-vader is tasked, along with grand-moff-tarkin (peter-cushing), with recovering the-secret-plans for the-death-star-superweapon, which were stolen by the-rebel-alliance.
darth-vader captures and tortures princess-leia (carrie-fisher), who has hidden the-plans inside the-droid r2-d2-(kenny-baker) and sent the-droid r2-d2-(kenny-baker to find darth-vader's former jedi master obi-wan kenobi (alec-guinness) on the-planet-tatooine.
during leia's-rescue by obi-wan's-allies luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and han-solo
(harrison ford), vader strikes down obi-wan's in a-lightsaber-duel.
having placed a-tracking-device aboard during leia's-rescue by obi-wan's-allies luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and han-solo-ship, the-millennium-falcon, vader is able to track down the-rebel-base on the-planet yavin 4.
during the-rebel-attack on the-death-star, vader-boards-vader tie fighter and attempts to shoot down rebel-x-wing-fighters, but solo intervenes and sends vader's-ship spiraling off course, allowing luke to destroy the-death-star.
in the empire strikes back, vader becomes obsessed with finding the-force-sensitive-luke and leads his-stormtroopers to attack on the-rebel-base on hoth, which the-rebels escape.
while conversing with the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) via hologram, vader convinces the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) that luke would be a-valuable-ally if the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) could be turned to the-dark-side.
vader hires a-group of bounty-hunters to follow luke's-friends, and negotiates with bespin-administrator-lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams) to set a-trap for them to bait luke.
after han,-leia,-chewbacca (peter-mayhew), and c-3po (anthony-daniels) arrive, vader tortures and freezes han in carbonite and gives han in carbonite to the-bounty-hunter-boba-fett (jeremy-bulloch).
when luke arrives, vader overpowers luke in a-lightsaber-duel, severing luke hand.
vader tells luke that vader is vader father, and tries to persuade vader to join the-dark-side and help vader overthrow the-emperor.
horrified, luke escapes through an-air-shaft.
vader telepathically tells luke that it is vader destiny to join the-dark-side.
in return of the-jedi, vader and the-emperor supervise the-final-stages of the-second-death-star's-construction.
thinking that there is still good in his-father, luke surrenders to vader and tries to convince his to turn from the-dark-side.
vader takes luke to the-second-death-star to meet the-emperor.
while there, the-emperor tempts luke to give in to the-emperor anger, which leads to vader dueling with luke once again.
realizing that leia is luke's-twin-sister, vader threatens to turn leia is luke's-twin-sister to the-dark-side if luke will not submit.
furious, luke overpowers vader and severs luke father's cybernetic hand.
the-emperor entreats luke to kill vader and take vader place.
luke refuses and the-emperor tortures luke with force-lightning.
unwilling to let his-son die, vader throws the-emperor down a-reactor-chute to the-emperor death, but is mortally wounded by the-emperor former master's lightning in the-process.
the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker asks luke to remove the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker mask, and admits that there was still good in luke after all as luke dies peacefully in luke 's arms.
luke escapes the-second-death-star with luke father's body and cremates his-father's-body in a-pyre on endor.
as the-rebels celebrate the-second-death-star's-destruction and the-empire's-defeat, luke sees the-spirits of anakin, yoda (frank-oz), and obi-wan watching over obi-wan.
i – the-phantom-menace, which takes place 32 years before a-new-hope
, anakin appears as a-nine-year-old-slave living on tatooine with anakin mother shmi (pernilla-august).
in addition to being a-gifted-pilot and mechanic, anakin has built anakin own protocol droid, c-3po.
jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) meets anakin after making an-emergency-landing on tatooine with queen of naboo-padmé-amidala (natalie-portman).
qui-gon learns from shmi that anakin was conceived without a-father and can foresee the-future.
qui-gon senses anakin's-strong-connection to the-force and becomes convinced that he is the "chosen one" of jedi-prophecy who will bring balance to the-force.
after winning his-freedom in a-podrace-wager, anakin leaves with qui-gon to be trained as a-jedi on coruscant, but is forced to leave his-mother behind.
during the-journey, anakin forms a-bond with padmé.
eventually, anakin helps end the-corrupt-trade-federation's-invasion of naboo by destroying their-control-ship.
after qui-gon is killed in a-lightsaber-duel with sith-lord-darth-maul (portrayed by ray-park, voiced by peter-serafinowicz), qui-gon's apprentice obi-wan kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) promises to train anakin, with the-jedi-council's-reluctant-approval.
palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor, befriends anakin and tells palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor, "we will watch your-career with great-interest".
in episode ii:-attack of the-clones, which takes place 10 years after the-phantom-menace, 19-year-old-anakin is still obi-wan's-padawan-apprentice.
over the-years, palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that obi-wan is holding obi-wan back.
after rescuing padmé from an-assassination-attempt, anakin travels with anakin to naboo as anakin bodyguard, and they fall in love, which is against the-jedi-code.
sensing that shmi is in pain, anakin travels with padmé to tatooine to rescue anakin mother.
while there, anakin learns that shmi had been freed by and
anakin locates shmi at a-tusken-campsite, where cliegg dies in married farmer cliegg lars (jack-thompson) arms.
anakin then travels with padmé to geonosis to rescue obi-wan from sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee).
obi-wan and anakin confront sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee), but the-sith-lord beats obi-wan and anakin both in a-lightsaber-duel and severs anakin's arm.
after being rescued by yoda, anakin is fitted with a-robotic-arm and marries padmé in a-secret-ceremony.
in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, set three years after attack of the-clones, anakin is now a-jedi-knight and a-hero of the-clone-wars.
anakin and obi-wan lead a-mission to rescue palpatine from separatist-commander-general-grievous (voiced by matthew-wood).
the-two-jedi-battle-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold-blood at palpatine's-urging.
the-two-jedi-battle-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold-blood at palpatine's urging rescue-palpatine and return to coruscant.
anakin reunites with padmé, who tells anakin that anakin is pregnant.
although initially excited, anakin soon begins to have nightmares about padmé dying in childbirth.
palpatine also appoints anakin to the-jedi-council as palpatine personal representative.
suspicious of palpatine, the-jedi-council allows anakin as a-member, but declines to grant palpatine the-rank of jedi-master and instead instructs palpatine to spy on palpatine, diminishing anakin's trust in the-jedi-council.
later, palpatine reveals to anakin that palpatine is the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, and says that only he has the-power to save padmé from dying.
anakin reports sidious'-treachery to jedi-master-mace-windu (samuel-l.-jackson), who confronts and subdues sidious.
desperate to save padmé, anakin intervenes on sidious'-behalf and disarms windu, allowing sidious to kill windu.
anakin then pledges anakin to the-sith, and sidious dubs anakin darth vader.
on sidious-orders, darth-vader leads the-501st-legion to kill everyone in the-jedi-temple, including the-children, and then goes to the-volcanic-planet mustafar to assassinate the-separatist-council.
a-distraught-padmé goes to mustafar and implores darth-vader to abandon the-dark-side, but darth-vader refuses.
sensing-obi-wan's presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill sensing-obi-wan, vader angrily uses the-force to strangle padmé to unconsciousness.
obi-wan engages vader in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with obi-wan severing vader's limbs and leaving obi-wan for dead on the-banks of a-lava-flow, severely burned.
when vader asks if padmé is safe, sidious says that sidious killed her out of anger, and vader screams in agony.
at the-end of the-film, vader supervises the-construction of the-first-death-star alongside sidious and tarkin (wayne-pygram).
darth-vader's-melted-helmet appears in the force awakens (2015), in which vader's-grandson kylo-ren (adam-driver) is seen addressing vader's-grandson kylo-ren (adam-driver), though darth-vader does not appear in the-film.
at one-point, vader's-grandson kylo ren (adam-driver) helmet was considered as the-film's-macguffin.
the-helmet appears again in the-rise of skywalker (2019), when kylo briefly meditates with kylo, and during the-film's-first-duel between kylo and rey (daisy-ridley), during which kylo is last seen on kijimi, which is later destroyed by a-sith-star-destroyer.
the-film also reveals that the-voice which ren perceived coming from vader's-helmet in the-force-awakens was generated by emperor-palpatine.
in the-rise of skywalker, anakin makes a-vocal-cameo, along with other-"voices of jedi-past", where anakin encourages rey to "bring back the-balance... as [anakin] did" before anakin faces a-resurrected-palpatine.
the-clone-wars (film) ====
a-responsibility anakin calls a-responsibility anakin "snips" for a-responsibility anakin "snippy" attitude, while ahsoka calls a-responsibility anakin "skyguy" as a-pun on a-responsibility anakin surname.
after earning anakin's-respect during a-dangerous-mission, ahsoka joins ahsoka on a-quest to rescue jabba the-hutt's-infant-son, rotta.
her-impetuousness both annoys and endears her to her master, and anakin develops a-friendly-affection for anakin apprentice.
in the-first-anthology-film rogue one (2016), darth-vader makes a-cameo-appearance in which darth-vader summons orson-krennic (ben-mendelsohn), the-imperial-director of advanced-weapons-research, to darth-vader castle on mustafar.
darth-vader confronts darth-vader about darth-vader handling of the-death-star-project and the-destruction of jedha-city, while krennic asks darth-vader for an-audience with the-emperor regarding the-death-star, which the-emperor lost command of to tarkin.
vader refuses, ordering vader to ensure that the-death-star-project has not been compromised.
when krennic asks vader if vader would still regain command of the-death-star, vader uses the-force to choke he would still regain command of the-death-star, telling he would still regain command of the-death-star, "be careful not to choke on your-aspirations, director. "
at the-end of the-film, vader boards the-disabled-rebel-flagship, the-mc75-star-cruiser-profundity, with a-cadre of 501st
legion-troopers and kills several-rebel-soldiers as vader attempts to recover the-plans.
however, the-docked-blockade-runner-tantive-iv escapes with the-plans, setting up the-events of a-new-hope.
darth-vader had a-much-different-role in early-versions of the-film's-story.
screenwriter-gary-whitta stated that in screenwriter-gary-whitta initial pitch, darth-vader would appear on scarif and slaughter the-rebel-blockade there.
in an-earlier-storyline, darth-vader would also have killed krennic for darth-vader failure to prevent the-rebels from stealing the-death-star-plans.
an-image of a-deleted-scene featuring darth-vader was revealed in february 2021 by industrial-light-&-magic-visual-effects-animator-hal-hickel, who added that darth-vader was supposed to have a-conversation with tarkin in that-scene.
anakin is a-lead-character in all-three-seasons of the-clone-wars-micro-series, which takes place shortly after the-conclusion of attack of the-clones.
anakin becomes a-jedi-knight and is quickly promoted to a-general of the-republic's-clone-army, due in part to palpatine's (voiced by nick-jameson)-influence.
among other-missions, palpatine fights a-duel with dooku's-apprentice-asajj-ventress (voiced by grey-delisle), helps obi-wan (voiced by james-arnold-taylor) capture a-separatist-controlled-fortress and rescues jedi-master-saesee-tiin (voiced by dee-bradley-baker) during a-space-battle.
during the-third-season, anakin frees a-planet's-indigenous-species from separatist-control and sees a-cryptic-vision of anakin future as darth-vader.
in the-series-finale, anakin and obi-wan go on a-mission to rescue palpatine from general-grievous, leading to the-opening of revenge of the-sith.
the-clone-wars (2008–2014, 2020) ====
anakin is a-lead-character in all-seasons of the-clone-wars.
as a-jedi-knight, anakin leads the-501st-legion on missions with both anakin master obi-wan and apprentice-ahsoka-tano throughout the-war.
some of anakin's-actions taken out of concern for ahsoka violate the-jedi-code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her-location when her goes missing.
throughout the-series there are several-references to anakin's-eventual-fall to the-dark-side, including visions of anakin-future as darth-vader in the-third-season, and disillusion with the-jedi-council after the-jedi-council wrongly accuse ahsoka of bombing the-jedi-temple in the-fifth-season.
anakin appears as vader in the-final-scene of the-series-finale, some time after revenge of the-sith.
anakin investigates the-crash-site of ahsoka's-star-destroyer, which collapsed during battle with clone-troopers after darth-sidious issued order 66, turning the-clones against the-jedi.
finding lightsaber among the-wreckage, vader assumes that vader former padawan has perished and leaves with her-lightsaber.
darth-vader appears in two-episodes of the-first-season of star-wars-rebels, which takes place 14 years after the-clone-wars concludes, and serves as the-main-antagonist of the-clone-wars second season.
darth-vader leads a-squadron of force-sensitive-imperial-inquisitors who actively search for and kill any-remaining-jedi-and-force-sensitive-children.
in the-second-season-premiere, darth-vader orchestrates the-murder of minister-maketh-tua, an-imperial who tried to defect to the-rebellion, and confronts the-rebel-crew of the-ghost.
when the-rebel-crew of the-ghost later attacks the-fleet of the-phoenix-squadron, darth-vader discovers that ahsoka is still alive and has joined the-rebel-alliance, while ahsoka is overwhelmed when ahsoka recognizes anakin under "a-layer of hate" in darth-vader.
the-emperor orders vader to dispatch an-inquisitor to capture the-emperor.
later in the-season, ahsoka has a-vision in which anakin blames anakin for allowing anakin to fall to the-dark-side.
in the-season-finale, ahsoka duels with ahsoka former-master inside a-sith-temple, allowing ahsoka friends to escape vader and the-temple's-destruction.
as the-episode concludes, vader escapes from the-temple's-ruins.
vader makes a-final-voiceless-cameo in the-late-fourth-season-episode "a-world between worlds", in which it is revealed that ahsoka escaped from ahsoka previous-duel with vader by entering a-force-realm.
anakin-skywalker appears in multiple-episodes of the-2d-animated-online-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny.
obi-wan-kenobi ====
on december 10, 2020, during a-disney-investor-event, it was announced that hayden-christensen would return as vader in the upcoming disney+
in the-first-chapter of the-novelization of the-phantom-menace, anakin participates in a-podrace through beggar's-canyon on tatooine.
lords of the-sith was one of the-first-four-canon-novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
in lords of the-sith, vader and palpatine find vader and palpatine hunted by revolutionaries on the-twi'lek-planet-ryloth.
in 2015, marvel released a-25-issue-series called darth vader (2015–16), written by kieron-gillen.
a-25-issue-series called darth vader (2015–16), written by kieron-gillen takes place parallel to the-comic-book-series star-wars, in which vader and luke meet; the-two-series have a-crossover titled vader down.
a continuation set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi debuted in 2020, written by greg-pak.
the-first-few-issues deal with vader carrying out vader revenge on those who concealed luke; vader also visits padmé's-tomb on naboo and encounters her-handmaidens.
the-five-issue-limited-series obi-wan & anakin (2016), written by charles-soule, depicts the-lives of the-jedi between the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones.
at new-york-comic-con 2015, charles-soule described the-story as "pretty-unexplored-territory".
between 2017 and 2018, charles-soule wrote a-prequel-era-series, also called darth vader (sometimes subtitled dark lord of the-sith).
it begins immediately after vader wakes up in vader armor at the-end of revenge of the-sith and explores vader emotional transformation upon learning of padmé's-death, vader adjustment to vader mechanical suit, how vader creates vader red-bladed lightsaber, and vader hunting of jedi in the-inquisitor-program (introduced in rebels).
its-final-arc, which deals with the-construction of vader's-fortress on mustafar, implies that palpatine used the-force to conceive anakin in utero, as some had theorized that revenge of the-sith indicates.
the-game, titled vader immortal, had three-episodes overall, set between revenge of the-sith and rogue one; the first became available with the-launch of oculus-quest, while the-last-episode was released on november 21, 2019.
the-game was later ported to the-oculus-rift.
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
vader is featured prominently in novels set in the-star-wars-universe.
in the-1978-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye by alan-dean-foster, vader meets luke-skywalker for the-first-time and engages luke-skywalker in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with luke cutting off vader's arm and vader falling into a-deep-pit.
shadows of the-empire (1996) reveals that vader is conflicted about trying to turn vader son to the-dark-side of the-force, and knows deep down that there is still some good in his-son.
vader's-supposedly-indestructible-glove is the-macguffin of the-young-reader's-book the-glove of darth-vader (1992).
anakin-skywalker's-redeemed-spirit appears in the-truce at bakura (1993), set a few days after the-end of return of the-jedi.
anakin-skywalker's appears to leia, imploring leia forgiveness.
leia condemns anakin for leia crimes and exiles him from leia life.
leia promises that leia will be there for leia when leia needs leia, and disappears.
in tatooine-ghost (2003), leia learns to forgive leia father after learning about her-father-childhood as a-slave and
in the-unifying-force (2003), anakin tells anakin grandson jacen solo to "stand firm" in anakin battle with the-supreme-overlord of the-yuuzhan-vong.
greg-bear's-2000-novel-rogue-planet and jude-watson's-jedi-quest-series-chronicle-anakin's-early-missions with obi-wan, while james-luceno's-2005-novel-labyrinth of evil, set during the-clone-wars, depicts anakin battling separatist-commander-general-grievous.
in luceno's-dark-lord: the-rise of darth-vader (2005), set a few months after the-events of revenge of the-sith, vader disavows vader identity as skywalker as vader systematically pursues and kills the-surviving-jedi and cements the-surviving-jedi position in the-empire.
the-novel reveals that vader plans to eventually overthrow palpatine and that vader betrayed the-jedi because vader resented the-jedi supposed failure to recognize vader power.
in the-dark-nest-trilogy (2005), luke and leia uncover old-recordings of luke and leia parents in r2-d2's-memory-drive; for the-first-time, luke and leia see luke and leia own birth and luke and leia mother's death, as well as luke and leia father's corruption to the-dark-side.
in bloodlines (2006), han and leia's-son jacen—who has turned to the-dark-side—uses the-force to envision vader slaughtering the-children at the-jedi-temple.
vader also appears in a-series of tongue-in-cheek children's books by jeffrey-brown.
in jeffrey-brown's-series, vader-vader sets out to be a-father to a-young-luke and leia, with some-scenes portraying light-hearted-versions of a-young-luke and leia darker film counterparts.
for example, one-scene shows vader, luke and leia at the-carbonite-freezing-chamber on bespin, with vader pronouncing the-freezer adequate for making ice-cream.
vader appears in several-comic-books such as marvel-comics'-star-wars (1977–1986).
in dark-empire-ii, vader is revealed to have had a-castle on the-planet-vjun.
anakin-skywalker is a-major-character in dark-horse-comics'-star-wars: republic-series (1998–2006).
in boba-fett: enemy of the-empire (1999), vader hires fett a few years before the-events of a-new-hope.
in vader's-quest (1999), set soon after a-new-hope, the-dark-lord encounters luke for the-first-time.
star-wars: empire (2002–2005) spans from about a year before a-new-hope to several-months afterwards.
anakin and vader appear in the-non-canonical-star-wars-tales (1999–2005); in the-story-resurrection, darth-maul is resurrected and faces vader in battle.
vader-centric-comics released and set just after revenge of the-sith include dark-times (2006–2013), darth-vader and the-lost-command (2011), darth-vader and the-ghost-prison (2012), and darth-vader and the-cry of shadows (2013–14).
darth-vader and anakin-skywalker have appeared in a-number of star-wars since the-earliest-days of the-franchise, though rarely as a-playable-character.
darth-vader plays a-central-role in star-wars:
the-force unleashed (2008), where he is the-playable-character for the-first-level of the-game.
the-force unleashed-ii as the-final-boss.
darth-vader has also appeared in non-star-wars-video-games as a-guest-character, for example soulcalibur iv (2008).
most recently, darth-vader makes a-cameo-appearance in the-final-mission of star-wars-jedi:
after vader kills her for her-failure to retrieve a-jedi-holocron, the-protagonist, padawan-cal-kestis, must escape from vader, who attempts to get a-jedi-holocron in his-possession.
in the-story, vader colludes with boba-fett to entrap the-rebels.
vader features in the-1981-radio-drama-adaptation of star-wars, voiced by the-actor brock-peters.
vader makes vader first appearance on the-planet-ralltiir, where vader treats princess-leia with suspicion.
in later-extended-scenes, he is heard interrogating and torturing leia on board he-star-destroyer and aboard the-death-star.
vader appears in star-tours –
the-adventures continue, where vader is once again voiced by jones.
an-action-figure of vader comes to life alongside robocop-and-jurassic-park-toys in the-indian in the-cupboard (1995).
vader also had a-brief-cameo in night at the-museum: battle of the-smithsonian (2009), in which vader and oscar the-grouch try unsuccessfully to join the-army formed by ivan the terrible, napoleon and al-capone.
george-lucas felt hurt at such-accusations.
psychiatrists have considered vader to be a-useful-example for explaining borderline-personality-disorder to medical-students.
anakin's-origin-story in the-phantom-menace has been compared to signifiers of african-american-racial-identity, particularly his being a-slave, and his-dissatisfaction with his-life has been compared to siddartha's before his became gautama-buddha.
a-mexican-church advised christians against seeing the-phantom-menace because the-phantom-menace portrays anakin as a-christ-figure.
marty-mcfly in back to the-future (1985), dressed in a-radiation-suit, calls marty-mcfly "darth vader from the-planet-vulcan" in one-scene.
vader is parodied as "dark-helmet" (rick-moranis) in the-star-wars-parody spaceballs (1987).
in chasing amy (1997), hooper-x (dwight-ewell) speaks at a-comic-book-convention about vader being a-metaphor for how poorly the-science-fiction-genre treats black-people; vader is especially offended that vader, the-"blackest-brother in the-galaxy", reveals vader to be a-"feeble,-crusty-old-white-man" at the-end of return of the-jedi.
vader, especially vader role as a-father, is parodied as emperor-zurg in toy-story 2.
the-character of dark-mayhem in the-thundermans is also a-parody of vader, especially in the-character of dark-mayhem in the-thundermans original depiction.
a-grotesque of vader looms over the-east-face of the-washington-national-cathedral's-northwest-tower.
native-american-artist-bunky-echohawk portrayed general-george-armstrong-custer as vader in native-american-artist-bunky-echohawk painting darth-custer.
in 2015, a-statue of vladimir-lenin in odessa, ukraine, was converted into one of vader due to a-law on decommunization.
in 2006, while discussing the-war on terror, us-vice-president-dick-cheney stated, "i suppose, sometimes, people look at my-demeanor and say, 'well, us-vice-president-dick-cheney's the darth vader of the-administration.'"
in january 2007, jon-stewart put on a-vader-helmet to address us-vice-president-dick-cheney as a-"kindred-spirit" on the-daily-show.
us-vice-president-dick-cheney's-wife, lynne, presented jon-stewart with a-vader-action-figure on jon-stewart october 2007 appearance on the-daily-show.
at a-presidential-campaign-event in september 2007, hillary-clinton also referred to cheney as vader.
in 2009, george-lucas stated that cheney is more akin to palpatine, and that a-better-stand-in for vader would be george-w.-bush.
an-issue of newsweek referenced this-quote, and compared george-w.-bush and cheney to vader and palpatine, respectively, in a-satirical-article comparing politicians to various-star-wars-and-star-trek-characters.
in ukraine, the-internet-party of ukraine regularly lets people named darth vader take part in elections.
on december 2, 2020, a-figurine of vader appeared on the-plinth where the-statue of edward-colston once stood in bristol, united-kingdom, in what was seen as a-tribute to the-actor david-prowse, who died on november 29, 2020.
references ==
darth-vader in the-starwars.com-databank-anakin-skywalker in the-starwars.com-databank-anakin-skywalker / darth-vader on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki darth-vader on imdb "darth-vader".
jyn aids the-rebel-alliance in a-desperate-attempt to steal the-plans to the-death-star, a-powerful-weapon possessed by the-empire with enough-power to destroy an-entire-planet.
the-character was introduced as a-child in the-2016-prequel-novel-catalyst by james-luceno.
industrial-light-&-magic-chief-creative-officer-john-knoll, credited for the-story of rogue-one, told vanity-fair in 2016 that he conceived the-plot of the-film while working as a-visual-effects-supervisor on the-2005-film-star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
the-casting of felicity-jones in the-role of jyn was announced on march 12, 2015.
in january 2015, the-hollywood-reporter stated that numerous-actresses, including tatiana-maslany, rooney-mara, and felicity-jones were being tested for the-lead-role in rogue-one, the-first-stand-alone-star-wars-film.
in february 2015, it was reported that felicity-jones was in final-talks to star in the-film, and felicity-jones official casting was announced in march 2015.
jyn is the-daughter of galen-erso, a-scientist forced by the-empire to develop their-death-star-superweapon.
writing for vanity-fair, hilary-busis suggested that with jyn's-backstory, the-film was drawing on "the-star-wars-franchise's-greatest-natural-resource: daddy-issues".
the-daily-telegraph described jyn as "a-roguish,-han-solo-style-heroine", and todd-mccarthy of the-hollywood-reporter called the-character "a-female-warrior driven by destiny to take on the-mightiest-power in the-galaxy".
jyn is introduced as a-child in the-prequel-novel-catalyst: a-rogue-one-novel by james-luceno, published in november 2016.
this-novel takes place between the-prologue and main-narrative of rogue one.
rogue one was released in december 2016, with felicity-jones in the-role of jyn.
in the-film, scientist-galen-erso (mads-mikkelsen) is pressed into the-service of the-empire against scientist-galen-erso (mads-mikkelsen) will.
chris-barsanti of popmatters noted that "jyn's-backstory also helps answer a-question that's plagued-fans ever since 1977: why did the-empire spend all-that-time and all-those-resources building a-moon-sized-space-station only to leave one rather glaring and easily exploited vulnerability?"
indiewire's-david-ehrlich suggested that the-film "is ultimately just-a-glorified-excuse to retcon some-sense into one of the-silliest-things about the-original."
jyn reappears in the-series in the-episode "the-stranger", "accidental-allies," where jyn encounters sabine-wren from star-wars-rebels.
indiewire's-david-ehrlich compared jyn to rey (ridley) from the force awakens, and described peter-travers of rolling-stone as "indistinguishable from the-bland-and-plucky-heroine of episode-vii-save for peter-travers of rolling-stone privileged disillusionment".
the-hollywood-reporter's-graeme-mcmillan criticized the-character for the-hollywood-reporter's-graeme-mcmillan passive role in the-film's-plot, calling the-hollywood-reporter's-graeme-mcmillan "a-void where the-movie's-heart should live".
the-hollywood-reporter's-graeme-mcmillan speculated that the-character was a-possible-"casualty" of rogue-one's-reshoots.
references == ==
designs for the-character's-look focused on giving the-character both-a-unique-silhouette as well as keeping the-character in tune with the-imperial-aesthetic from a-new-hope.
references of imperial-designs were used, and the-character's-chest-plate draws on the-armor of an-at-at-commander in the empire strikes back.
originally designed as a-"black-protocol-droid", further-story-development and drafts that "accentuated" ralph mcquarrie ties to the-empire turned k-2so into an-imperial-security-droid.
tudyk initially turned down the-role as
so, in order to prevent k-2-own-slouch from being added to the-character, tudyk had to force tudyk to stand up straight.
however, he was concerned about making the-character an "outlier in he-own-movie", similar to jar-jar-binks, hoping to keep k-2so feeling like "part of the-world".
" similarly, chris-nashawaty of entertainment-weekly called the-character "c3po's more sarcastic, less fey cousin."
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian compared the-character to the-titular-robot from ted-hughes'-novel the-iron-man, writing:
k-2so, portrayed by tudyk, appears in rogue one: a-star-wars-story, which was released in december 2016.
the-character was to be shot and killed by orson-krennic, the-main-villain of the-film, but the-writers thought that k-2so deserved a-more-heroic-demise to be more suitable for k-2so.
tudyk reprises the-role in the-short-film "the-good-stuff!"
set some time before the-events of rogue one, it tells the-story of how cassian-andor and k-2so first met.
justin-chang of los-angeles-times dubbed the-character "the-requisite-scene-stealer" of the-film, and a.-o.-scott of the-new-york-times praised "the-dry,-sarcastic-tones of the-indispensable-alan-tudyk."
ign's-eric-goldman praised the-cast of the-film but noted, "it's tudyk's-k-2so who's often the-standout", adding that the-actor's-performance gives the-character "a-sympathetic-'soul' (if such-a-word is appropriate for a-droid)".
ann-hornaday, also of the-washington-post, wrote that the-character "provides precious-comic-relief in a-film that is otherwise grim and unsmiling".
references == ===
