"Journey to Star Wars" is a Disney/Lucasfilm publishing initiative that connects the Star Wars sequel films with previous film installments in the franchise.
It currently includes the initiatives "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens" and "Journey to Star Wars: The Last Jedi", and "Journey to Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker".
All titles under the program are canonical to the
Star Wars universe.

A group of "at least" 20 novels and comic books related to the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens was announced in March 2015.
The first novels, including Star Wars: Aftermath and Star Wars: Lost Stars,
were published in September 2015, prior to the release of
The Force Awakens in December 2015.

Three novels and a comic miniseries related to the 2017 film Star Wars: The Last Jedi were announced in April 2017.
Two novels, a comic miniseries, and a number of children's books related to the 2019 film Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker were announced in May 2019.

==
History ==
A large number of licensed novels and comics were produced between the originating 1977 film Star Wars and the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, set in what was dubbed the expanded universe.
In April 2014, with The Force Awakens in production, Disney rebranded this body of work as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canon to the franchise.
"Journey to Star Wars
: The Force Awakens", consisting of "at least" 20 novels and comic books from multiple publishers, was announced in March 2015.
All titles under the program are canonical to the Star Wars universe, and connect the previous films with The Force Awakens and its forthcoming sequels.
The first novels, including Aftermath by Chuck Wendig and Lost Stars by Claudia Gray, were published in September 2015, prior to the release of The Force Awakens in December 2015.
At the October 2015 New York Comic Con panel for the Journey to Star Wars: The Force Awakens, more works were announced that would be released from November 2015 through Summer 2017.Three novels and a comic book miniseries related to the second sequel film, The Last Jedi, were announced at the Star Wars Celebration in April 2017.
Multiple other publications were announced under Journey to Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at the San Diego Comic-Con in July 2017.On Star Wars Day, May 4, 2019, Lucasfilm released the roadmap of their "Journey to Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker" campaign leading up to the final film of the sequel trilogy and the nine-film Skywalker Saga.
The publishing program is said to detail events occurring over a one-year period in the time taking place between The Last Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker.

==
The Force Awakens ==


===
Novels ===


====
Aftermath trilogy ====
Star Wars:
Aftermath (September 2015) by Chuck Wendig
Star Wars:
Aftermath:
Life Debt (July 2016) by Chuck Wendig
Star Wars:
Aftermath:
Empire's End (February 2017) by Chuck WendigAftermath is set shortly after the 1983 film Return of the Jedi and deals with the consequences of the deaths of Palpatine and Darth Vader, as well as the power vacuum formed in the Empire's rule over the galaxy and the actions of the Rebellion during the following months.
The trilogy begins to bridge the Star Wars timeline between Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens.

====
Young adult ====
Star Wars:
Lost Stars (September 2015) by Claudia Gray, set during the original film trilogy.

Smuggler's Run: A Han Solo & Chewbacca Adventure (September 2015) by Greg Rucka, set between the films Star Wars (1977) and
The Empire Strikes Back (1980).

The Weapon of a Jedi: A Luke Skywalker Adventure (September 2015) by Jason Fry, set between Star Wars and
The Empire Strikes Back.
In the novel, C-3PO tells Resistance pilot Jessica Pava the story of Luke Skywalker's adventure after the destruction of the first Death Star as well as one of his first trials with the Force.

Moving Target: A Princess Leia Adventure (September 2015) by Cecil Castellucci and Jason Fry, set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
In the novel, an older Leia Organa recounts a past mission for her memoirs.
The book also features the character Nien Nunb and introduces the droid PZ-4CO.

Star Wars: Before the Awakening (December 2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers about the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.

====
Other ====
Star Wars: Bloodline (May 2016) by Claudia Gray, set several years before The Force Awakens with Leia Organa as the protagonist.
===
Short stories ===
"Star Wars: The Perfect Weapon" (November 2015) by Delilah S. Dawson, centered on the bounty hunter and First Order spy Bazine Netal.
====
Tales from a Galaxy
Far, Far Away: Aliens ====
"All Creatures Great and Small" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker
"High Noon on Jakku" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker
"The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Count Dooku" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker
"The Face of Evil" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker
"A Recipe for Death" (April 2016) by Landry Q. Walker
"True Love" (April 2016) by
Landry Q. Walker


===
Comics ===
Star Wars:
Shattered Empire (
Marvel Comics, 2015), written by Greg Rucka and illustrated by Marco Checchetto.
The four-part limited series Shattered Empire was published by Marvel Comics between September 9 and October 21, 2015, and is set immediately after Return of the Jedi.
It features the parents of Poe Dameron from The Force Awakens, who are members of the Rebel Alliance: his mother is Shara Bey, an A-wing pilot who adventures with Leia Organa, and his father is Kes Dameron, part of a special ground force known as the Pathfinders who are led by Han Solo.
The story involves their adventures alongside Leia, Han, Luke Skywalker, Lando Calrissian and others in the aftermath of the Battle of Endor as the Empire attempts to avoid total defeat.

Star Wars: Poe Dameron (Marvel, April 2016), written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Phil Noto.
Set immediately before The Force Awakens, Marvel's Poe Dameron centers on the Resistance X-wing fighter pilot portrayed in the film by Oscar Isaac.
It explores Poe's adventures before the start of the film, and includes appearances by Poe's astromech droid BB-8, new X-wing pilots and a new villain from the First Order positioned as Poe's nemesis and whom Soule describes as "fresh and cool".
Noto patterned the character's look on Isaac.

===
Reference books ===
Star Wars:
Ships of the Galaxy (September 2015) by Benjamin Harper
Star Wars:
Absolutely Everything You Need To Know (September 2015) by Adam Bray, Cole Horton, Michael Kogge and Kerrie Dougherty
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens Incredible Cross-Sections (December 2015) by Jason Fry
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens Visual Dictionary (December 2015) by Pablo Hidalgo
The Art of Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (December 2015) by Phil Szostak


==
The Last Jedi ==


===
Novels ===
Star Wars:
Leia, Princess of Alderaan (September 2017) by Claudia Gray, exploring the early years of Princess Leia.

Star Wars: Phasma (September 2017) by Delilah S. Dawson, chronicling the backstory of Captain Phasma.

The Legends of Luke Skywalker (October 2017) by Ken Liu
Star Wars:
A Leader Named Leia (September 2017) by Jennifer Heddle
Star Wars:
The Power of the Force (September 2017) by Brian Rood
Big Golden Books:
Tales of the Force (September 2017)


===
Short stories ===
Canto Bight (December 2017), a short story collection including works by John Jackson Miller, Saladin Ahmed, Rae Carson, and Mira Grant.
===
Comics ===
Star Wars: Captain Phasma (Marvel, September 2017), written by Kelly Thompson and illustrated by Marco Checchetto.
The four-issue miniseries follows the character between the events of The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi.

Star Wars Adventures (IDW Publishing, September 2017), an ongoing anthology series aimed at young readers.
===
Reference books ===
Star Wars:
Absolutely Everything You Need To Know, Updated and Expanded (October 2017) by Adam Bray and Cole Horton, Michael Kogge and Kerrie Dougherty
Stormtroopers:
Beyond the Armor (October 2017) by Ryder Windham and Adam Bray
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi Incredible Cross-Sections by Jason Fry
Star Wars: The Last Jedi Visual Dictionary by Pablo Hidalgo
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi by Phil Szostak


==
The Rise of Skywalker ==


===
Novels ===


====
Adult ====
Star Wars:
Resistance Reborn (November 2019) by Rebecca Roanhorse, covers the difficulties General Leia Organa, Poe Dameron, Finn, and Rey have in rebuilding the Resistance following the defeat to the First Order escaping D'Qar and the Battle of Crait.

====
Young adult ====
Star Wars: Force Collector (November 2019) by Kevin Shinick, follows a teenager prior to the events of The Force Awakens as he scavenges for relics to make sense of his Force abilities and his possible connection to the Jedi.

====
Kids ====
Little Golden Book - Star Wars
: We are the Resistance (October 2019), written by Elizabeth Schaefer and illustrated by Alan Baston.
Highlights iconic scenes from all three films of the sequel trilogy:
The Force Awakens, The Last Jedi, and The Rise of Skywalker.

World of Reading
- Star Wars: Resistance Heroes (October 2019), written by Michael Siglain and illustrated by Diogo Saito & Luigi Aimé.

World of Reading - Star Wars:
First Order Villains (October 2019), written by Michael Siglain and illustrated by Diogo Saito & Luigi Aimé.

Choose Your Destiny:
A Finn & Poe Adventure (October 2019), written by Cavan Scott and illustrated by Elsa Charretier.
Kids can aid Poe, Finn, and BB-8 on a vital mission for the Resistance.

Star Wars:
Spark of the Resistance (October 2019), written by Justina Ireland and illustrated by Phil Noto.
Rey, Poe, and Rose Tico respond to a distress call on the planet Minfar and have to face a First Order battalion, flying creatures, and a weapon that could change the course of the war.

===
Picture books ===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker -
The Galaxy Needs You (December 2019), written by Caitlin Kennedy and illustrated by Eda Kaban.
Follow Rey on her hero's journey.

===
Comics ===
Star Wars: Allegiance (Marvel, October 2019), written by Ethan Sacks and illustrated by Luke Ross.
While on the run from the First Order, General Leia Organa reaches out to her old allies the Mon Calamari for assistance in being able to fight back in this four-issue miniseries.

Star Wars Adventures #27-29 (IDW Publishing, October–December 2019), an ongoing anthology series aimed at young readers.
Wookiees defend Kashyyyk against the First Order, and the droids C-3PO, R2-D2, and BB-8 engage in a spy mission for the Resistance.

Star Wars:
The Rise of Kylo Ren (Marvel, November 2019–March 2020), written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney.
The story explores the backstory of Kylo Ren and the Knights of Ren, and the era of the New Republic.
===
Reference books ===
Ultimate Star Wars:
New Edition (DK Publishing, October 2019) by Adam Bray, Cole Horton, Tricia Barr, and Ryder Windham; with a foreword by Anthony Daniels
The Moviemaking Magic of Star Wars: Ships & Battles (December 2019) by Landry Walker
Star Wars:
The Ultimate Pop-Up Galaxy (October 2019) by Matthew Reinhart and illustrated by Kevin M. Wilson
The Art of Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (December 2019) by Phil Szostak
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker Visual Dictionary (December 2019) by Pablo Hidalgo
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker Official Guide (DK Publishing, December 2019) by Matt Jones


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Journey to Star Wars: The Force Awakens on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Journey to Star Wars:
The Last Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Journey to Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: The Last Jedi (also known as Star Wars: Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi) is a 2017 American epic space opera film written and directed by Rian Johnson.
Produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the second installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015), and the eighth episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Gwendoline Christie, Kelly Marie Tran, Laura Dern, and Benicio del Toro.
The Last Jedi follows Rey as she seeks the aid of Luke Skywalker, in hopes of turning the tide for the Resistance in the fight against Kylo Ren and the First Order, while General Leia Organa, Finn, and Poe Dameron attempt to escape a First Order attack on the dwindling Resistance fleet.
The film features the first posthumous film performance by Fisher, who died in December 2016, and the film is dedicated to her.
The Last Jedi is part of a new trilogy of films announced after Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012.
It was produced by Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy and Ram Bergman and executive produced by The Force Awakens director J. J. Abrams.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score.
A number of scenes were filmed at Skellig Michael in Ireland during pre-production in September 2015, but principal photography began at Pinewood Studios in England in February 2016 and wrapped that July.

The Last Jedi premiered in Los Angeles on December 9, 2017, and was released in the United States on December 15.
It grossed over $1.3 billion worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing film of 2017 and the ninth-highest-grossing film of all time during its theatrical run.
It is also the second-highest-grossing Star Wars film and turned a net profit of over $417 million.
The film received positive reviews, with praise for its ensemble cast, musical score, visual effects, action sequences, and emotional weight.
The film received four nominations at the 90th Academy Awards, including Best Original Score and Best Visual Effects, as well as two nominations at the 71st British Academy Film Awards.
The sequel, The Rise of Skywalker, was released in December 2019.

==
Plot ==
Shortly after the battle of Starkiller Base, General Leia Organa is leading the Resistance forces in evacuating their base when the First Order fleet arrives.
Against Leia's orders, Poe Dameron leads a costly counterattack that destroys a First Order dreadnought.
The remaining Resistance escapes into hyperspace, but the First Order uses a device to track them, and attacks again.
Kylo Ren hesitates to fire on the lead Resistance ship after sensing his mother Leia's presence on board, but his wingmen destroy the bridge, killing most of the Resistance's leaders.
Leia is dragged into space but survives by using the Force.
While Leia recovers, Vice-Admiral Holdo assumes command of the Resistance.
Running low on fuel, the remaining fleet is pursued by the First Order.

On Ahch-To, Rey attempts to recruit Luke Skywalker to the Resistance.
Under self-imposed exile, Luke refuses to help and says that the Jedi should end.
After encouragement from R2-D2, he agrees to give Rey three lessons in the ways of the Force.
Rey and Kylo begin communicating through the Force, which puzzles them both.
Kylo tells Rey that Luke feared his power; Luke confesses that he momentarily contemplated killing Kylo upon sensing that Snoke was corrupting him, which prompted Kylo to destroy Luke's new Jedi Order.
Convinced that Kylo can be redeemed, Rey leaves Ahch-To.
Luke prepares to burn the Jedi library but hesitates.
The spirit of Luke's master Yoda appears and destroys the library by summoning a bolt of lightning.
He encourages Luke to learn from his failure.

Meanwhile, Poe entrusts Finn, mechanic Rose, and BB-8 with a secret mission to disable the First Order's tracking device.
Maz Kanata directs them to the casino town of Canto Bight, where they meet the hacker DJ.
Pursued by the local security, they escape Canto Bight with the help of stablehand children and racing animals they set free.
Finn, Rose, and DJ infiltrate Snoke's flagship but are captured by Captain Phasma.
Kylo brings Rey to Snoke, who reveals that he connected their minds to discover Luke's whereabouts.

Holdo plans to evacuate the remaining members of the Resistance using small transport vessels.
Believing her plan cowardly and futile, Poe leads a mutiny.
A recovered Leia stuns Poe with a blaster and proceeds with the evacuation.
Holdo remains aboard the ship as a decoy to mislead Snoke's fleet as the others flee to an abandoned base on Crait.
DJ buys his freedom by revealing the Resistance's plan to General Hux, and the First Order fleet begins firing on the evacuation transports, destroying many.

Ordered to kill Rey, Kylo instead kills Snoke and defeats his Praetorian Guard with her help.
Rey hopes that Kylo has abandoned the dark side, but he instead asks her to rule the galaxy with him.
Refusing, she battles him for control of Luke's lightsaber, bisecting the weapon.
Holdo sacrifices herself by slicing through Snoke's flagship at lightspeed, crippling the First Order fleet.
Rey escapes the destruction while Kylo declares himself Supreme Leader.
BB-8 frees Finn and Rose; they defeat Phasma and join the survivors on Crait.
When the First Order arrives, Poe, Finn, and Rose attack with obsolete speeders.
Rey and Chewbacca draw TIE fighters away in the Millennium Falcon, while Rose stops Finn from sacrificing himself.
The First Order penetrates the Resistance fortress using a siege cannon.

Luke appears and confronts the First Order, allowing the surviving Resistance to escape.
Kylo orders the First Order's forces to fire on Luke, but they fail to harm him.
He then engages Luke in a lightsaber duel; upon striking Luke, Kylo realizes that Luke is not physically present, but projecting his image through the Force.
Rey helps the remaining Resistance escape on the Falcon.
Exhausted, Luke dies peacefully on Ahch-To, becoming one with the Force.
Rey and Leia sense his death, and Leia tells Rey that the Resistance can rise again.

At Canto Bight, the stablehands recount the story of Luke Skywalker; afterward, one of them moves a broom with the Force and gazes into space.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, a powerful Jedi Master who has been in self-imposed exile on the planet Ahch-To.
Hamill voices Dobbu Scay, named after the film's editor, Bob Ducsay.
On Canto Bight, the character mistakes BB-8 for a slot machine.

Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa, twin sister to Luke, former princess of Alderaan, and a leading general in the Resistance.

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren, Supreme Leader Snoke's disciple, who is strong with the Force.
He is the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa, and Luke's nephew.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a highly Force-sensitive scavenger from the desert planet Jakku who joined the Resistance and goes to find Luke.

John Boyega as Finn, a former stormtrooper of the First Order who defected to the Resistance.

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot in the Resistance.

Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke, the leader of the First Order and Kylo Ren's master.

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a pirate and ally of the Resistance.

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the former head of the First Order's Starkiller Base.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of Leia Organa.

Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma, the commander of the First Order's stormtroopers.

Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a member of the Resistance who works in maintenance.

Laura Dern as Vice-Admiral Amilyn Holdo, an officer in the Resistance.

Benicio del Toro as DJ, an underworld codebreaker.
Frank Oz returns as Yoda, the deceased former Jedi Master and Luke's wise mentor, who appears as a Force spirit.
Joonas Suotamo appears as Chewbacca, taking over the role from Peter Mayhew after previously serving as his body double in The Force Awakens.
Mayhew, who suffered from chronic knee and back pain, and was credited as "Chewbacca consultant".
Billie Lourd, Mike Quinn, and Timothy D. Rose reprise their roles as Lieutenant Connix, Nien Nunb, and
Admiral Ackbar, respectively; with Tom Kane voicing Ackbar.
Amanda Lawrence appears as Commander D'Acy, and Mark Lewis Jones and Adrian Edmondson play Captains Canady and Peavey, respectively.
BB-8 is controlled by puppeteers Dave Chapman and Brian Herring, with initial voice work by Ben Schwartz and final sound effects voiced by Bill Hader modulated through a synthesizer.
Jimmy Vee portrays R2-D2, taking over the role from Kenny Baker, who died in August 2016.
Veronica Ngo portrays Rose's sister Paige Tico, a Resistance gunner who sacrifices her life to destroy a First Order dreadnought.
Justin Theroux plays the master codebreaker, while Lily Cole plays his companion.
Joseph Gordon-Levitt has a voice cameo as Slowen Lo, and Warwick Davis plays Wodibin.
Rogue One (2016)
director Gareth Edwards has a cameo appearance as a Resistance Soldier, with Edgar Wright and Joe Cornish also cameo in the film.
Hermione Corfield appears as Tallissan "Tallie" Lintra, a Resistance A-Wing pilot and squadron leader, and Noah Segan and Jamie Christopher appear as Resistance pilots Starck and Tubbs.
Hugh Skinner cameos as a Resistance Officer; while Hamill's children, Griffin, Nathan, and Chelsea, cameo as Resistance soldiers.
Prince William, Duke of Cambridge; Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex; and Gary Barlow have cameo appearances as stormtroopers, and Tom Hardy also has an appearance as a stormtrooper, but his cameo was dropped from the final cut.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney announced a new trilogy of Star Wars films.
J. J. Abrams was named director of the first episode in the trilogy, The Force Awakens, in January 2013.
In June 2014, director Rian Johnson was reported to be in talks to write and direct its sequel, Episode VIII, and to write a treatment for the third film, Episode IX, with Ram Bergman producing both films.
Johnson confirmed in August that he would direct Episode VIII.In January 2015, Disney CEO Bob Iger stated that Episode VIII would be released in 2017.
In December, Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said that the film had not been mapped out and that Abrams was collaborating with Johnson, who would in turn work with (then)
Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition.
Additionally, Abrams served as an executive producer along with Tom Karnowski and Jason McGatlin.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm announced the title for Episode VIII as Star Wars: The Last Jedi.

===
Writing ===
The Last Jedi story begins immediately after The Force Awakens.
Johnson had his story group watch films such as Twelve O'Clock High (1949),
The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957), Gunga Din (1939), Three Outlaw Samurai (1964), Sahara (1943), and Letter Never Sent (1960) for inspiration while developing ideas.
He felt it was difficult to work on the film while The Force Awakens was being finished.
Johnson wrote the scene with the mirrored versions of Rey to symbolise her search for identity; when she asks for a vision of her parents, she sees only herself.
Rey learns that her parents were "nobodies" as it would be "the hardest thing" she and the audience could hear; Johnson likened the scene to Luke Skywalker learning that Darth Vader is his father in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980).
During production, Hamill expressed disagreement with the direction of his character, Luke, feeling his character's disillusioned state was at odds with his character.
Hamill later said he regretted making his initial misgivings public and compared his disagreements to his clashes with George Lucas during the filming of Return of the Jedi (1983).

===
Casting ===
In September 2015, Disney shortlisted the female cast members to Gina Rodriguez, Tatiana Maslany, and Olivia Cooke.
That same month, Benicio del Toro confirmed his involvement in the film, but denied that he was playing a villain, and Mark Hamill was also confirmed.
Joaquin Phoenix was also courted to portray the role of DJ, but would end up passing on the offer.
In October 2015, Gugu Mbatha-Raw was rumored to have been cast in the film.
In November, Kennedy announced at the London premiere of The Force Awakens that the entire cast would return for Episode VIII, along with "a handful" of new cast members.
In February 2016, at the start of filming, it was confirmed that Laura Dern and Kelly Marie Tran had been cast in undisclosed roles.
In April 2017, at the Star Wars Celebration Orlando, Lucasfilm announced that Tran would play Resistance maintenance worker Rose Tico, which Johnson described as the film's largest new role.
To keep Frank Oz's return as Yoda a secret, producers excluded Oz's name in the billing for the film's pre-release marketing and ensured that Oz stayed on set during filming.

===
Filming ===
Second unit photography began during pre-production at Skellig Michael in Ireland on September 14, 2015, due to the difficulties of filming at that location during other seasons.
It would have lasted five days, but filming was canceled for the first day due to poor weather and rough conditions.
In September 2015, del Toro revealed that principal photography would begin in March 2016.
The production began work on the 007 Stage at Pinewood Studios on November 15, 2015.
Rick Heinrichs served as production designer.
In January 2016, production of Episode VIII was delayed until February due to script rewrites.
Filming was in danger of being delayed further due to an upcoming strike between the Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television and the Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union.
On February 10, 2016, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed that principal photography had begun under the working title Space Bear.
Additional filming took place in Dubrovnik, Croatia from March 9 to 16, as well as in Ireland in
May. Malin Head in County Donegal and a mountain headland, Ceann Sibeal in County Kerry, served as additional filming locations.
To increase the scenes' intimacy Driver and Ridley were both present when filming Kylo and Rey's Force visions.
Location filming for the battle scenes on the planet
Crait took place at the Salar de Uyuni salt flats in Bolivia.
Additional filming took place in Mexico.
Principal photography wrapped on July 22, 2016, though as of early September, Nyong'o had not filmed her scenes.
In February 2017, it was announced that sequences from the film were shot in IMAX.
Production designer Rick Heinrichs said the original script called for 160 sets, double what might be expected, but that Johnson did some "trimming and cutting".
Ultimately, 125 sets were created on 14 sound stages at Pinewood Studios.
According to creature designer Neal Scanlan, The Last Jedi has more practical effects than any Star Wars film, with 180 to 200 creatures created with practical effects, some cut from the final edit.
For Yoda's appearance in the film as a Force ghost, the character was created using puppetry, as was done in the original Star Wars trilogy (as opposed to computer-generated imagery, which was used to create Yoda in most of the prequel trilogy).

===
Music ===
In July 2013, Kennedy confirmed at the Star Wars Celebration Europe that John Williams would return to score the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
Williams confirmed his assignment for The Last Jedi at a Tanglewood concert in August 2016, stating he would begin recording the score "off and on" in December 2016 until March or April 2017.
On February 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both Williams and William Ross conducting the sessions.
In lieu of a traditional spotting session with Johnson, Williams was provided a temp track of music from his previous film scores as a reference for scoring The Last Jedi.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 15, 2017.

==
Marketing ==
On September 19, 2017, Australia Post released a set of stamp packs.
On October 12, Royal Mail released a set of eight promotional postage stamps designed by Malcolm Tween.
Several tie-in books were released on the same day as the film's release, including The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary, and various children's reading and activity books.
Related novelizations included the prequel book Cobalt Squadron, and the Canto Bight, a collection of novellas about the Canto Bight Casino.
As with The Force Awakens, there is no official tie-in game for The Last Jedi, in favor of integrating content from the film into other Star Wars video games, including Star Wars Battlefront II, which introduced various content from the film, during the game's first "season".

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film had its world premiere at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles on December 9, 2017, and was released in the United States on December 15.
The film was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on May 26; however, it was pushed back to December to avoid competition with Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017).
===
Home media ===
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars:
The Last Jedi digitally in HD and 4K via digital download and Movies
Anywhere on March 13, 2018, with an Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD physical release on March 27.
The 4K version of the film was later re-released in "The Skywalker Saga" 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi  grossed $620.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $712.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.333 billion.
It had a worldwide opening of $450.8 million, the eighth-biggest of all time, including $40.6 million that was attributed to IMAX screenings, the second biggest for IMAX.
It was estimated that the film would need to gross $800 million worldwide to break even; Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $417.5 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues, making it the most profitable release of 2017.

====
United States and Canada ====
Pre-sale tickets went on sale in the United States on October 9, 2017, and as with The Force Awakens and Rogue One, ticket service sites such as Fandango had their servers crash due to heavy traffic and demand.
In the United States and Canada, industry tracking had The Last Jedi grossing around $200 million from 4,232 theaters in its opening weekend.
The film made $45 million from Thursday night previews, the second-highest amount ever (behind The Force Awakens' $57 million).
It went on to make $104.8 million on its first day (including previews), and $220 million over the weekend, both the second-highest amounts of all time.
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend of $25 million, the biggest IMAX opening of the year, and the second biggest ever behind The Force Awakens.
After dropping by 76% on its second Friday, the worst Friday-to-Friday drop in the series, the film fell by a total of 67% in its second weekend, grossing $71.7 million.
It was the largest second-weekend drop of the series, although it remained atop the box office.
It made $52.4 million in its third weekend, again topping the box office.
It also brought its domestic total to $517.1 million, overtaking the Disney film Beauty and the Beast (2017) as the highest of 2017.
It grossed $23.6 million and was surpassed the following weekend by Jumanji:
Welcome to the Jungle (2017) (which was in its third week) and Insidious:
The Last Key (2018).
====
Other countries ====
In its first two days of release the film made $60.8 million from 48 markets.
The top countries were the United Kingdom ($10.2 million), Germany ($6.1 million), France ($6 million), Australia ($5.6 million), and Brazil ($2.5 million).
By the end of the weekend, the film made $230 million outside the United States and Canada.
All-time opening weekend records were set in various countries, including France, Germany, Spain, United Kingdom, and Finland.
On its second weekend, it grossed $76.1 million outside the United States and Canada and became the fourth-highest-grossing film of the year in Europe.
As of January 21, the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($109.3 million), Germany ($79.8 million), France ($63.5 million), Japan ($60.8 million), and Australia ($43.5 million).The film had a $28.7 million opening weekend in China.
A week after its debut, China's movie exhibitors dropped the film's showtimes by 90%.
The film grossed $910,000 in its third weekend, dropping to ninth place at the Chinese box office, overshadowed by new releases including Bollywood film Secret Superstar (2017), Hollywood films
Ferdinand (2017)
and Wonder (2017), and
Chinese film
A Better Tomorrow 2018.
The Last Jedi grossed $42.5 million in China.

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 90% of 476 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.1/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi honors the saga's rich legacy while adding some surprising twists — and delivering all the emotion-rich action fans could hope for."
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 56 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 84 out of 100, The Last Jedi received "universal acclaim".
Metacritic analysis found the film was the 25th-most mentioned film on "best of the year" film rankings and the 22nd-most mentioned on "best of the decade" film rankings.
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film four stars out of four, praising the surprises and risks that it took, writing that "The movie works equally well as an earnest adventure full of passionate heroes and villains and a meditation on sequels and franchise properties", in which the film "includes multiple debates over whether one should replicate or reject the stories and symbols of the past.
"
Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the cast and the direction, and the film "ranks with the very best Star Wars epics (even the pinnacle that is The Empire Strikes Back) by pointing the way ahead to a next generation of skywalkers".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the action sequences and humor, said that the film "doesn't pack quite the same emotional punch [as The Force Awakens] and it lags a bit in the second half,
[but] this is still a worthy chapter in the Star Wars franchise", and containing a few callbacks of "previous characters and iconic moments.
"Will Gompertz, arts editor of BBC News, gave the film four stars out of five, writing "Rian Johnson [...] has not ruined your Christmas with a turkey.
His gift to you is a cracker, a blockbuster movie packed with invention, wit, and action galore.
"
The unpredictability of the plot was appreciated by reviewers such as Alex Leadbeater of Screen Rant, who commented specifically that the death of Snoke was "the best movie twist in years".
Creator of the franchise George Lucas, who was not involved with the film's production, described The Last Jedi as "beautifully made" shortly after its release.
His reaction to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens was generally more negative.
Conversely, Richard Brody of The New Yorker wrote that the film "comes off as a work that's ironed out, flattened down, appallingly purified."
Kate Taylor of The Globe and Mail gave the film two stars out of four, saying the film suffered from too many new additions, and writing the film that "seeks to uphold a giant cultural legacy, this unfolding trilogy struggles to maintain a balance that often seems just out of reach."
Owen Gleiberman of Variety criticized the film for being too derivative of the past movies by saying that "it's now repeating things that have already been repeated", with such attempts by having a "mood and darkening design of The Empire Strikes Back", making the sequel trilogy becoming "an official monument to nostalgia."
===
Audience reception ===
Audience reception measured by scientific polling methods was highly positive.
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, and those at PostTrak gave the film an 89% overall positive score, a 79% "definite recommend", and a rare five-star rating.
User-generated scores at Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic were more negative.
At Rotten Tomatoes, 42% of users rated the film 3.5 stars or higher out of 5, while at Metacritic, the average user score is 4.2 out of 10.
Audience scores on such sites require only registration and do not ensure that contributing voters have seen the film.
Several reviewers speculated that coordinated vote brigading from internet groups and bots contributed to the low scores.
Quartz noted that some new accounts gave negative ratings to both The Last Jedi and Thor: Ragnarok (2017), while Bleeding Cool stated that reviews for Thor: Ragnarok had tapered off but then "skyrocketed".
In response to tampering claims shortly after the film's release, a Fandango executive stated that Rotten Tomatoes detected no unusual activity on The Last Jedi aside from a noticeable "uptick in the number of written user reviews".
In 2019, a Rotten Tomatoes spokesperson said the film had been "seriously targeted" by a review-bombing campaign.
Reviewers characterized The Last Jedi as divisive among audiences.
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox found that dissatisfied fans saw the film as too progressive, disliked its humor, plot, or character arcs, or felt betrayed that it ignored fan theories.
Other reviewers made similar observations.
Particularly divisive was the reveal that Rey's parents are insignificant; many fans had expected her to be Luke's daughter or to share a lineage with another character from the original trilogy.
There was also sentiment that Snoke's character was underdeveloped and that Luke's actions contradicted his previous heroic portrayal.
Reviewers stated that fan theories were held so strongly among some viewers that it was difficult for them to accept different stories, but that other viewers appreciated the film's action, tone, and deviation from Star Wars tradition.

===
Accolades ===


==
Sequel ==
The Rise of Skywalker, the final installment of the sequel trilogy, was released on December 20, 2019.
Colin Trevorrow was expected to direct the film, but on September 5, 2017, Lucasfilm announced that he had stepped down.
A week later, Lucasfilm announced that J. J. Abrams would return to direct the film and co-write it with Chris Terrio.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars: The Last Jedi at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: The Last Jedi at Disney A to Z
Star Wars:
DroidWorks is a 1998 edutainment computer game and the premiere title from LucasArts subsidiary Lucas Learning.
It uses the same engine as LucasArts' previous title Star Wars: Jedi Knight.
The creators aimed to create a game that would be both appealing and nonviolent.
The game's original release date was moved up by months, which resulted in the development team cutting some planned game features.

The game's plot involves the player saving the galaxy by manufacturing droids with specific abilities, such as the ability to see in the dark or jump, to complete missions.
The educational portions of these missions teach players about concepts such as energy, force, motion, simple machines, light, and magnetism.

Star Wars:
DroidWorks received high praise from critics, sold well, and won numerous awards and accolades.

==
Plot and gameplay ==
C-3PO, R2-D2, and the player are sent by the Rebellion to Tatooine to shut down production at an Imperial droid factory.
In the tutorial, the player must complete eight training missions and four secret missions, each requiring droids with specific abilities, before proceeding to the droid factory.
In the Jawa Droid Workshop, players can paint and name their creations and get a full 360-degree view of other works in progress.
Overall, the player can choose from 87 droid parts, which can be combined in 25 million different combinations.
Through experiential learning, players learn about the scientific principles of energy, force, motion, simple machines, light, and magnetism.
Players are also encouraged to utilize mathematics, logic, and critical thinking.

An in-game 'InDex' provides explanations on various scientific concepts through internet links.

==
Development and release ==


===
Conception ===
The game was developed by Lucas Learning, which was originally created to produce consumer products but was re-imagined as a developer of direct-to-school products in the fall of 1998.
Star Wars:
DroidWorks was the first title from Lucas Learning and eventually became one of a series of Star Wars games to be released as edutainment titles.
This game marked George Lucas' first foray into the edutainment market.
Lucas' directive to the company was to design a game that would allow players to explore and create in a manner similar to playing with Erector Sets and Lego.
DroidWorks was only one out of a total of 175 titles created by third-party software developers for the newly launched iMac.
Susan Schilling, the general manager of Lucas Learning, and Clent Richardson, the senior director of worldwide developer relations at Apple Computer, agreed that the Apple Mac was the best platform for the game.
The game was initially conceived by project leader, Collette Michaud, who pitched a game where players could design their own Star Wars droid and watch them move.
Susan Schilling said that DroidWorks did not require the player to use bombs or guns, noting that the only weapon required is the player's mind.
The team made a concerted effort to make the game equally appealing to all children; recent research had shown that children liked interactive software and to "make their own story," so the team wanted the program to encourage learning about math, science, and computers.
It would be the player's decisions and curiosity that would ultimately lead to his or her success.
In a press release, Lucas Learning described DroidWorks as a "unique combination of construction set and strategy game."

The development team consulted with both a kid advisory group and subject matter experts to make the game appealing to young players and scientifically accurate.
===
Design ===
The game uses audio tracks similar to those from the film series and includes clips from the original Star Wars trilogy.
It uses the same first-person shooter engine as many other contemporary LucasArts' titles.
The game was built using a modified version of the Jedi game engine which was developed for LucasArts' Star Wars: Jedi Knight, with changes to ensure that the physics engine would be realistic.
While the Star Wars universe was known for its combative atmosphere, the design team tried to incorporate minimal violence.
This approach is visible in the ways players progress—rather than pitting the player's droid against enemies, the landscape itself becomes an obstacle passable to only certain droid types.
This effectively prevents those who have not yet acquired the parts necessary to complete a level from doing so.
One of the removed features would have allowed players to place droid parts in locations other than where they were intended, for instance, an arm could be attached to a droid's head.

===
Release ===
While the developers planned a "luxurious" development schedule which would have culminated in the game's release in Christmas 1998, the marketing department thought the game should be released on Labor Day instead.
This new deadline meant that various cuts had to be made to the design.
A demo of the game premiered at the 1998 Macworld Expo.
In June 1998, The Washington Times reported that the game was scheduled for release (for both Macintosh and PC) in September of that year.
Ultimately, the game missed the Labor Day deadline and was released on 21 October 1998.
The game was directly made available to schools, along with other edutainment titles from Lucas Learning.
The game was marketed and packaged as an entertainment title, and was advertised in gaming magazines and Family PC.The developers' original claim that the game blurred the line between entertainment and education presented difficulties for marketers as they had to decide whether to place the game on
"game" or "education" shelves.
In March 1999, the game was "currently available wherever software is sold."
By June, however, the game was noted as being sold at two-store specialty groups.
Fortunately, Lucas Arts' previous successes and association with the Star Wars title enabled DroidWorks to be distributed at retail stores, such as Walmart and Costco.

== Reception ==
Sandra Vogel of The Scotsman noted that, while part of the game's success was due to its association with George Lucas, it had a "pedigree all its own", including a series of gaming awards.
Multimedia Schools praised its user-friendliness, tutorials, replayability, and the ease of installation, giving the title 5 stars.
Computer Shopper noted that while the game was an exploitation of the Star Wars brand, it used the association to ensure the "productive" game received an audience.
Similarly, Daily Record wrote that the title was "yet another spin off from the incredible marketing hype" of the upcoming movie, but praised the game for its imagination, magic, and 3D environments.
The Washington Times thought the game would appeal to all fans of the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
Daily Herald said the game had a broader appeal than the computer-programming video game The Robot Club.
Knight Ridder said the game offered an opportunity for parents and children to work together to build robots and solve missions, in a method similar to the tradition of building Soap Box Derby racers, and praised its slick graphics.
The Washington Post thought the game was a worthy piece of kidware.
Birmingham Evening Mail praised the game's blend of fun and education.
The Boston Globe thought it was a standout educational title.
Rocky Mountain News complimented the game's ease of use, sense of humor, and surreptitious educational content.
KidsWorld said the game was "slow and jerky" on a 133 Pentium, and recommended at least a 166 Pentium, or above.
Computer Gaming World gave the game 4/5 stars, writing as a minor criticism that, while the game features millions of possible robots, only a select few are useful in the game.
Boys' Life praised the educational content, but thought that some of the environments were creepy.
ICR and Literacy included a transcript of three children playing the game, which demonstrated how one child was learning how to interpret the game's symbols and articulate herself.
PC Magazine praised the game for its ability to make learning fun.
Complete Sourcebook on Children's Software (1999, Vol.
7) gave it a rating of 4.5/5 stars.
Lisa Karen Savignano of AllGame wrote that the game successfully combined puzzle solving, education and action into an enjoyable title.
SuperKids offered a rave review, deeming the program both "intellectually stimulating" and "viscerally captivating", noting that their playtests had brought out a rare "curiosity-driven patience and tenacity" in the young gamers.
PC Accelerator thought the game proved that "educational game" was an oxymoron and suggested that people would have been more interested in prequel games.
The game was included in National Association for Gifted Children magazine's Parenting for High Potential 1999 list of favorite holiday educational toys, and commented that the game sufficiently challenges young players.
In January 1999, Software Industry Report noted that the game was a popular title on the Mac.
Playthings, in June 1999, noted that the PC game was selling "robustly" at $30.

===
Awards and accolades ===
From October 1998 to March 1999, the game received seven awards, including the BAFTA Interactive Entertainment award and two New Media Invision awards, and was "singled out by several prominent educational software newsletters, magazines and Web sites".
By May 1999, the game had received two more awards.
The game was the highest-rated science software title from 1999 to 2000.
While noting that they had previously never considered including educational software in their list, the game was featured in Parenting for High Potential.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Droidworks homepage
Postmortem of the game
The Skywalker family is a fictional legendary family in the Star Wars franchise.
Within the series' fictional universe, the Skywalkers are presented as a bloodline with strong inherent capabilities related to the Force.
Luke Skywalker, his twin sister Princess Leia, and their father Darth Vader are central characters in the original Star Wars film trilogy.
Darth Vader, in his previous identity as Anakin Skywalker, is the lead character in the prequel film trilogy; his mother Shmi is a minor character in the first and second film respectively.
Leia and Han Solo's son (and hence Luke's nephew and Anakin and Padmé's grandson)
Ben Solo, renamed Kylo Ren, is the antagonist of the sequel trilogy.
Shmi, Han, and Padmé are the only members who are not Force-sensitive.

==
History ==
In terms of the series' internal chronology, the Skywalkers first appeared in the 1999 film Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
In this film, Jedi Knight Qui-Gon Jinn discovers Shmi Skywalker and her son Anakin as slaves on the planet Tatooine.
Shmi informs Qui-Gon that Anakin has no father, leading Qui-Gon to suggest that Anakin is a product of midi-chlorians (Force-imparting microorganisms).
As the film progresses, Anakin leaves Tatooine to begin his Jedi training.
Later, in a comic, Anakin's father is implied to be Palpatine.

Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) reveals that, in Anakin's absence, Shmi has married Cliegg Lars, becoming the stepmother of Owen.
Shmi later dies.
Owen tells Anakin they are stepbrothers and later marries Beru Whitesun.
Anakin secretly marries Naboo Senator Padmé Amidala at the end of the film.
In Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), Padme dies giving birth to twins, Luke and Leia.
Luke is raised by Beru and Owen Lars on Tatooine.
Leia is raised by Senator Bail Organa and Queen Breha Organa on Alderaan.
Anakin, who has since become the Sith Lord Darth Vader, is unaware of his children's birth.
Neither of the twins know of their relation until the events of Star Wars: Episode VI –
Return of the Jedi
(1983).The Solo family is part of the Skywalker family.
In the 2018 spin-off film Solo:
A Star Wars Story (set between Episode III and 1977's Episode IV – A New Hope)
, orphan Han Solo steals to survive on the planet Corellia.
The last-name "Solo" is given to him by an Imperial Officer in his application to join the Imperial Flight Academy.
Since the last-name of Han's father is unknown, Han would be the first Solo.
In the 2015 film Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens, it is revealed that Han had a son named Ben with Leia.
The family breaks apart following Ben's descent into the dark side as Kylo Ren, with Leia and Han separating.
Luke is not revealed to have any children.
At the end of Star Wars: Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019), all blood-related members of the Skywalker bloodline have died out, as Leia dies to bring her son back to the light side and Ben Solo dies to save Rey.
Later, Rey adopts "Skywalker" as her surname to honor the Skywalker family and continue their legacy while cutting ties with her Palpatine lineage.

==
Family tree ==


==
Members ==


===
Shmi Skywalker-Lars ===
Shmi Skywalker (portrayed by Pernilla August) is the mother of Anakin Skywalker, the mother-in-law of Padmé Amidala, the paternal grandmother of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa, the grandmother-in-law of Han Solo, and the maternal great-grandmother of Ben Solo.
She appears in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones.

Shmi was captured by pirates as a child alongside her parents, and was sold to the Hutts.
In a bet, Gardulla the Hutt lost Shmi to Watto.

In The Phantom Menace, she and her son are introduced as slaves of junk merchant Watto on the desert world Tatooine.
She welcomes Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) into their home, and tells him that Anakin (Jake Lloyd) has no father; she simply became pregnant with him.
In spite of her poverty, Shmi tries to give Anakin a good home in the slave quarter of Mos Espa.
Qui-Gon helps Anakin win his freedom, but cannot get Shmi out of slavery.
She allows Anakin to leave with Qui-Gon, assuring her heartbroken son that they will meet again.

In Attack of the Clones, Anakin (Hayden Christensen), now a young adult Jedi apprentice, senses through the Force that she is in pain.
He travels to Tatooine to find her, and, upon arriving, learns that she had been freed by and married to moisture farmer Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson), but had recently been abducted by Tusken Raiders.
He finds her inside one of their encampments, but it's too late—beaten and tortured beyond help, she dies in his arms.
Heartbroken and enraged by the loss of his mother, Anakin slaughters every single Tusken in the camp, including the women and children.
Shmi's death ignites a strong anger in Anakin, and sets him on the path to becoming Darth Vader.
Anakin later brings Shmi's body back to the Lars' homestead where she is given a burial.

===
Anakin Skywalker ===
Anakin Skywalker is the son of Shmi Skywalker, born without a father through the Force.
He is the secret husband of Padmé Amidala, the father of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa, the father-in-law of Han Solo, and the maternal grandfather of Ben Solo.
Anakin is discovered on Tatooine by Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn who is sure that the boy is the "Chosen One" of Jedi Prophecy, who will bring balance to the Force.
After the death of Qui-Gon, he becomes the Padawan of Obi-Wan Kenobi.
He also forms a close bond with Padmé Amidala, the young senator of Naboo.
The newly elected Chancellor of the Galactic Republic, Palpatine, also befriends Anakin, promising to watch the boy's progress "with great interest" and advise him.
Torn between his loyalty to the Jedi and his drive for power, Anakin succumbs to temptation and becomes Darth Vader.
As Vader, Anakin spends the following decades serving under Palpatine's Galactic Empire until reuniting with his son, Luke, redeeming himself by defeating his master to protect him (therefore, forfilling his role as the Chosen One) while sacrificing himself in the process and becoming one with the Force.

Anakin is portrayed by Jake Lloyd in The Phantom Menace (1999) and Hayden Christensen in Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005).

===
Padmé Amidala ===
Padmé Amidala (portrayed by Natalie Portman) is the secret wife of Anakin Skywalker, the mother of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa, the daughter-in-law of Shmi Skywalker, the mother-in-law of Han Solo, and the maternal grandmother of Ben Solo.
She served as Queen of Naboo, and later as a Senator for her planet.
Her closest friend in the Senate was Senator Bail Organa.
She reconnected and fell in love with Anakin Skywalker after he was assigned to protect her from an assassination attempt, and secretly married him shortly after the Battle of Geonosis.
Three years later, she reveals to Anakin that she is pregnant and plans to raise their child on Naboo.
She realizes that Anakin has started to have nightmares of her dying in childbirth and assures him that it was just a dream and that it won't happen.
After Anakin turned to the dark side and massacred the Jedi at the Jedi Temple, she was told by Anakin that the Jedi had taken over the Republic.
Obi-Wan arrives and asks Padmé about her husband's whereabouts and informs her that he has turned to the dark side.
Padmé accuses Obi-Wan of lying and doesn't believe that Anakin would kill younglings.
Obi-Wan states that Anakin is the father of Padmé's child and sets off to find him.
Padmé tracks Anakin, now Darth Vader, to Mustafar and tries to persuade him to abandon the dark side, but Vader refuses and force chokes her unconscious when Obi-Wan arrives.
Padmé gives birth to her children shortly after the first Empire Day, whom she calls Luke and Leia.
Padmé tells Obi-Wan that she believes there is still good left in Vader, before passing away.
During her funeral, her body was altered to make her appear still pregnant.
Obi-Wan and Yoda decided to separate the children in order to keep them hidden from Darth Vader.

===
Luke Skywalker ===
Luke Skywalker (portrayed by Mark Hamill) is the brother of Leia Organa, the brother-in-law of Han Solo, the uncle of Ben Solo, the son of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and the grandson of Shmi Skywalker.
He is taken in by his uncle and aunt, Owen and Beru Lars, after the death of Padmé and Anakin's fall to the dark side.
He is Force-sensitive and skilled with a lightsaber.
In Return of the Jedi, a dying Yoda confirms to Luke, that Darth Vader (previously Anakin Skywalker) is actually his father, despite Luke's belief that Vader's claim to fatherhood in The Empire Strikes Back was a ruse to pull Luke to the dark side.
He also finds out from Obi-Wan's Force Ghost that Princess Leia Organa is his sister.
In The Force Awakens, as the last known Jedi, Luke is in hiding after failing to prevent his nephew and apprentice Ben Solo (now Kylo Ren) from turning to the dark side to join Supreme Leader Snoke and has cut himself off from the Force.
In The Last Jedi, a young scavenger named Rey has located Luke and tries to convince him to show her the ways of the Force, but he refuses.
After knowing the death of Han Solo, he trains Rey about how to use the Force and to become a Jedi.
Luke reveals to Rey that he sensed the dark side in Ben and was scared for him, but Ben retaliated by using the Force to collapse the hut, burying him underneath.
When he refuses to help Rey turn Ben back to the light, Luke plans to burn the Jedi Library tree and is greeted by Yoda, who convinces him to help Rey and not to mourn his failure of losing Ben to Snoke.
On the planet Crait, Luke appears with his old lightsaber and duels Ben, who tries to attack Luke, but he dodges them.
Luke tries to reason with Ben and then disappears, revealing that he was still on the island and that Ben was dueling a Force projection of him.
Luke falls to the ground and gets up, and afterwards dies after disappearing, becoming one with the Force


===
Leia Organa-Skywalker ===
Leia Amidala Skywalker (portrayed by Carrie Fisher) is the wife of Han Solo, the mother of Ben Solo, the sister of Luke Skywalker, the daughter of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and the granddaughter of Shmi Skywalker, raised by Bail and Breha Organa of Alderaan.
At age 19, she is the Princess of Alderaan, and is captured by Darth Vader while in the Tantive IV blockade runner on a so-called "diplomatic mission".
Leia is shown to be Force-sensitive.
In The Empire Strikes Back, Leia professes her love for Han Solo when he is put into carbonite stasis, although it is originally Han and Luke who compete for her affections.
In Return of the Jedi, planning to feed Luke, Han, and Chewbacca to the flesh eating Sarlacc, Jabba the Hutt is instead strangled to death by Leia by a chain he has on her.
She later becomes involved in the Battle of Endor.
In the years that follow, she becomes General Organa, the leader of the Resistance, a military organization unofficially backed by the New Republic to counter the First Order.
She married Han Solo and had a son named Ben Solo, later Kylo Ren, whose turning to the dark side separated the couple before the events of The Force Awakens.
Leia has been on a search to find her missing brother Luke and find a way to save her son from the dark side.
She dies spending her energy trying to reach Ben, which helps him come back to the light side.
Her body later disappears and she becomes one with the Force.

===
Han Solo ===
Han Solo (portrayed by Harrison Ford) is the husband of Leia Organa, the brother-in-law of Luke Skywalker, the father of Ben Solo, the son-in-law of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and the grandson-in-law of Shmi Skywalker.
The anthology film Solo:
A Star Wars Story reveals that Han Solo's father constructed ships on the planet Corellia, where Han was born.
The name of Han's dad is not known.
Han's surname, Solo, was not his birth name, with Han being given his Solo surname by an imperial officer right before Han joined the imperial flight academy, which he would leave three years after.
Han Solo's first film appearance however was in 1977's Star Wars:
A New Hope where he is played by Harrison Ford.
He and his Wookiee co-pilot and best friend, Chewbacca, are initially hired to transport Luke Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Han and Chewbacca later become involved in the Rebel Alliance and are committed to its cause.
Over the course of the franchise, Han becomes a military leader for the Alliance, falling in love with and marrying Leia Organa, with whom he has a son named Ben.
He is killed by Ben, who has become Kylo Ren, after failing to convince his son to turn from the dark side.
===
Ben Solo ===
Ben Solo (portrayed by Adam Driver) is the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, the nephew of Luke Skywalker, the grandson of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and the great-grandson of Shmi Skywalker.
He initially trains to be a Jedi under his uncle, Luke.
Soon, Luke suspects Ben has been influenced by Snoke, and ignites his lightsaber because of instinct in an attempt to kill Ben in his sleep to prevent him from causing the destruction.
But when he thinks about killing Ben, Ben wakes up and this causes Ben to fall to the dark side.
Ben becomes Kylo Ren, working for the First Order and working under the influence of Snoke.
He also forms an uneasy alliance with General Hux.
Ren is obsessed with the legacy of his grandfather, the Sith Lord Darth Vader, and aspires to finish what Vader started: the elimination of the Jedi.
He stabs Han Solo, his father, in the heart but spares his mother when ordered to destroy her ship.
Ben becoming Kylo Ren also caused Han and Leia to break up, with neither of them able to stop loving their son.
Luke confronts him and also disappears trying to stop Ben's actions.
After his mother's death, Rey saves his life and admits to him she did want to join him as Ben Solo, he then sees a vision of his father and he decides to come back to the light side becoming Ben Solo again.
Later, he sacrifices himself to bring Rey back to life, and forms a brief relationship with her before vanishing into the Force as the last of the Skywalker bloodline.

===
Rey ===
Rey (portrayed by Daisy Ridley) is the paternal granddaughter of Emperor Palpatine.
As a child, Rey was hidden by her parents on the planet Jakku to save her from Palpatine.
Years later, Rey meets Kylo Ren, with whom she has a connection in the Force.
The two are referred to as a 'Force dyad'.
She also becomes the last Jedi apprentice of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa.
At the end of The Rise of Skywalker, Rey adopts "Skywalker" as her surname (having considered the Skywalkers her true family) despite not being part of the Skywalker bloodline; until then, she had been mononymous.
She is currently the last living member of the Skywalker family.

===
Extended family of the Skywalkers ===


====
Padmé Amidala's family ====


====
Lars family (Anakin’s step-father, step-brother, and Luke's adoptive family) ====


====
Organa family (Leia's adoptive family) ====


====
Possible Palpatine connection ====
Since the 2000s prequel trilogy, and according to the 2018 comic book Darth Vader: Dark Lord of the Sith written by Charles Soule and Giuseppe Camuncoli, it has been implied that Shmi Skywalker's impregnation was the result of Palpatine influencing the Force to do so, making Palpatine the father of Anakin Skywalker.
In an early draft of the script for Revenge of the Sith, Palpatine states that he is Anakin's father via this method.
In December 2019, after the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Matt Martin of the Lucasfilm Star Wars story group stated that Palpatine's involvement in Anakin's birth is not confirmed.

== Legends ==
The following characters are exclusive to what is now retroactively known as the Legends brand since April 2014, and non-canonical to any and all Star Wars material produced under the ownership of the Walt Disney Company.
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.Following the events of the original film trilogy, Leia and Han marry and have children, and Luke does likewise several years after they do.
The Skywalker bloodline branches from Luke and Leia's descendants, but only Luke's side continues to carry the Skywalker name.

Leia and Han marry in The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994) by Dave Wolverton.

Leia is pregnant with twins in  Timothy Zahn's Heir to the Empire (1991) and they are born in Zahn's The Last Command (1993).
Han and Leia have another child by the time of the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, by which time Leia has become the Chief of State of the New Republic.
All three of the Solo children become Jedi Knights under the tutelage of their maternal uncle Luke Skywalker.
The Solo children were ranked as the 16th top Star Wars heroes, according to IGN in 2008.Having refounded the Jedi Order and trained several new Jedi including Leia, Luke eventually marries an enemy-turned-ally Mara Jade, and they have a son named Ben, who was voted the 40th top Star Wars character by IGN and
the 6th top Star Wars Expanded Universe character by UGO Networks.
===
Mara Jade ===
Mara Jade was created by Timothy Zahn as an antagonist for Heir to the Empire (1991), and she and Luke marry several years later in the comic miniseries Union (1999-2000).
She joins his restored Jedi Order, and they have a son, Ben Skywalker, in the middle of the New Jedi Order series (1999-2003).

===
Jaina Solo ===
Jaina Solo and
her twin brother Jacen were created by Timothy Zahn in the Star Wars
expanded universe novel The Last Command (1993).
She is the eldest child of Han Solo and Leia Organa Solo, and has appeared in various novels and the Champions of the Force set for the Star Wars Miniatures game.
Jaina, named after Han's mother, is born five minutes before her brother Jacen in the Thrawn trilogy (1991–93), set about five years after Return of the Jedi.
The twins, and eventually their younger brother, live at various safe havens for their first few years under the protection of Leia's handmaiden Winter.
The twins play a small role in Kevin J. Anderson's Jedi Academy trilogy (1994).
In Champions of the Force (1994), Jaina helps her brother defend their unconscious uncle from the spirit of Sith Lord Exar Kun.
In Vonda McIntyre's The Crystal Star (1994), Jaina is kidnapped and used in a plot, along with her siblings, to take advantage of their Force powers.
In the Corellian trilogy (1994), Jaina is again kidnapped but escapes.
Jaina becomes a major character in Young Jedi Knights (1995) as Jaina and Jacen begin their Jedi training.
Throughout the New Jedi Order series (1999–2003), Jaina pursues a life separate from her twin brother and becomes Mara Jade Skywalker's apprentice.
Jaina progresses quickly as a Jedi and a pilot, eventually joining Rogue Squadron.
She also develops a romantic relationship with Jagged Fel.
She briefly becomes the apprentice of fallen Jedi Kyp Durron.
Jaina's understanding and manipulation of Yuuzhan Vong technology causes them to associate her with their trickster goddess.
She is present at the conclusion of the war with the Yuuzhan Vong.
Walter Jon Williams, author of Destiny's Way (2002), noted that the plot concerning Jaina's love life caused some frantic rewrites.
Elaine Cunningham, author of the Dark Journey, commented that the story of the 2002 novel is a personal one focusing on a difficult time in Jaina's life.
In The Joiner King (2005), Jaina and the Jedi Zekk are joined in the Killik hive.
Jacen tricks them into attacking a Chiss base to provoke a war between the Chiss and the Killiks; Jaina, furious, vows that she will never fly with Jacen again.
In the Legacy of the Force series (2006–08), Jacen throws Jaina out of the Galactic Alliance when she refuses to follow his order to destroy a crippled ship.
She senses at this time a growing darkness in her twin.
In Betrayal (2006), Jacen falls to the dark side of the Force, and Jaina realizes her duty as the "Sword of the Jedi" requires her to stop him.
She turns to Boba Fett to train her.
In Invincible (2008), Jaina duels and kills Jacen.

In the Fate of the Jedi series (2009–12), Jaina is promoted to Jedi Master by Luke Skywalker, and marries Jagged Fel.
Her and Jagged's descendants include Emperor Roan Fel and his daughter Marasiah Fel in the Legacy series (2006–14), set nearly 140 years after Return of the Jedi.

In 2017, Hasbro released a 6" Jaina figure as a part of its Black Series line.

===
Jacen Solo ===
Jacen Solo is the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa, introduced in utero in the 1994 Star Wars expanded universe novel Heir to the Empire, and born and named in  The Last Command.
He is a major character in several Star Wars novels, particularly as the protagonist of The New Jedi Order series and later as the antagonist of the Legacy of the Force series, in which he becomes known as Darth Caedus.
IGN listed Jacen as #17 on their list of the top 100 Star Wars heroes, saying that he had a more "profound effect" than any other Solo children on the Star Wars setting.
Jesse Schedeen, writing for IGN, also listed him as #5 in a reader-inspired list of top Star Wars villains, and named the character's murder of Mara Jade as his "defining moment of villainy".
UGO.com listed Jacen as their top Star Wars expanded universe character, calling him "one of the most fearsome—and most tragic—villains in the Star Wars universe".
===
Anakin Solo ===
Anakin Solo is the youngest child born to Han Solo and Princess Leia, and the younger brother of Jacen and Jaina Solo.
Anakin is named after his maternal grandfather, Anakin Skywalker, and, like his namesake, is a talented pilot who is prodigiously gifted both in the Force and mechanical engineering.

Anakin appears as an infant and toddler in many Star Wars novels such as the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994).
Anakin and his siblings play central roles in other novels such as The Crystal Star (1994), the Corellian trilogy (1995) and The New Rebellion (1996).
Anakin's birth is featured in Tom Veitch's Dark Empire II comic book miniseries (May 1995).
He is first referred to as Han Solo, Jr. by his father, but Leia corrects him, having named the baby after her biological father, Anakin Skywalker, as a reminder of hope.
However, Anakin still fears the name and his grandfather's legacy.
On October 1, 1995, Nancy Richardson started the Junior Jedi Knights series with The Golden Globe starring Anakin and his best friend Tahiri Veila.
Anakin is now an eleven-year-old child starting his training at the Jedi Academy on Yavin 4.
Richardson continued Anakin's adventures in the following two novels, Lyric's World and Promises, before Rebecca Moesta finished the series with Anakin's Quest, Vader's Fortress, and Kenobi's Blade, starting in 1996.

Anakin appears in the Young Jedi Knights series by Kevin J. Anderson and Rebecca Moesta, which follows the adventures of Anakin's siblings, Jacen and Jaina.

In 1999, the first novel of the New Jedi Order series was published, entitled Vector Prime by R.A. Salvatore.
Anakin is now a teenager, who often spends time alone thinking about the role of the Force, and would get into arguments with his brother Jacen on the ways of a Jedi and the Force.
Anakin studies as a Jedi under his uncle, Luke Skywalker, who still sees his nephew as being too young and reckless.
In the novel's climax, his father's copilot and best friend, Chewbacca, dies saving Anakin's life.

Anakin plays major roles in Dark Tide:
Onslaught and Dark Tide
: Ruin by Michael A. Stackpole published 1 February 2000 and 1 June 2000, respectively, and is the main focus of the books Edge of Victory: Conquest and Edge of Victory:
Rebirth by Greg Keyes published April 1, 2001 and August 1, 2001, respectively.

In the 2001 novel Star by Star by Troy Denning, Anakin leads a team of Jedi to take out a dangerous enemy, resulting in his death.
Writers of the New Jedi Order storyline revealed in a question-and-answer section of the paperback edition of The Unifying Force published on August 3, 2004 that Anakin was supposed to be the hero of the story and lead the Jedi Order, but this was changed due to the release of the Star Wars prequel films, in which the hero was also named Anakin.
Instead, he dies in battle at the conclusion of the novel.

Even after his death, Anakin Solo has been mentioned several times in most following novels, including a possible appearance in Traitor by Matthew Stover, as a droid in Betrayal by Aaron Allston as Anakin Sal-Solo, and in Backlash, where he appeared to his maternal uncle Luke Skywalker and to Luke's son, Ben Skywalker by Aaron Allston.

Anakin is portrayed in the earlier books as being a genius and a loner, but is haunted by his name.

In Lyric's World, it is revealed that he loves to take computers apart and put them back together and sees it as a puzzle.
He would also have dreams of Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader trying to persuade him to fall to the dark side of the Force; Anakin overcomes this fear in Anakin's Quest, in which he confronts himself.

===
Ben Skywalker ===
Luke Skywalker and Mara Jade Skywalker's son.
Named after Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi, Jedi Knight.
Former student of Jacen Solo, his cousin.
He inherits his mother's red hair and his father's blue eyes.
He is born during the New Jedi Order series (1999-2003).
In Fate of the Jedi: Outcast, he voluntarily accompanies his father into exile.
He proves himself as both a fighter and as an investigator to carry on his father's name.
His love interest is Vestara Khai, formerly a Sith apprentice, then a Jedi apprentice.
The character was voted the 40th top Star Wars character by IGN and the 6th top Star Wars Expanded Universe character by UGO Networks.

===
Allana Djo Solo ===
Allana Djo Solo is the daughter of Jacen Solo and Tenel Ka Djo, Jacen's fellow trainee at Luke's Jedi Academy.
She is born during the Dark Nest trilogy of novels.
In the Legacy of the Force series, Jacen becomes Darth Caedus partly to protect Allana from a dark fate which he foresees.
Her death is faked and she is adopted by her grandparents under the false identity of "Amelia", a supposed war orphan.
She lives and travels with them during the following series Fate of the Jedi.
By the end of that series, her Jedi training is about to begin.

===
Roan and Marasiah Fel ===
In the Star Wars: Legacy comic series, set over 120 years after the original trilogy, some of Leia's descendants have since become the ruling dynasty of a reformed, more benevolent Empire.
The first volume (2006-2010) recounts their struggles against a new Sith Order.
Emperor Roan Fel is Leia's great-grandson, Jaina Solo's grandson and the head of the Imperial Knights (who split from the Jedi refounded by Luke, but are still opposed to the dark side).
Marasiah Fel is his daughter and an imperial Knight herself.
They oppose the new Sith Order who have taken over most of the galaxy, and ally with Cade Skywalker and the surviving Jedi and Republic forces in order to fight them.

===
Lon Skywalker ===
The son of Ben Skywalker and Vestara Khai.
He was named after Ben's close friend and mentor, Lon Shevu.
He was the father of Nat and Kol Skywalker.
As a Jedi master, he had only one pupil in his lifetime - his younger son Kol.

===
Nat Skywalker ===
Nat Skywalker is a former Jedi Master in Star Wars: Legacy, the older son of Lon Skywalker, the grandson of Ben Skywalker, older brother of Kol Skywalker and the uncle of Cade Skywalker.
He took the name Bantha Rawk upon leaving the Jedi and works as a mechanic.

===
Kol Skywalker ===
Kol Skywalker is a character in Star Wars: Legacy.
A Jedi Master, he is the younger son of Lon Skywalker, younger brother of Nat Skywalker and the grandson of Ben Skywalker (they share the same red hair color, and has green eyes like Ben's mother Mara Jade), he is the father of Cade Skywalker.

===
Ania Solo ===
The second volume of Star Wars: Legacy (2013-2014) follows Ania Solo, the great-granddaughter of Leia and granddaughter of Jacen Solo.
She is a junkyard trader who is embroiled in the continuing conflict between the new Sith and the Republic-Imperial alliance.

===
Cade Skywalker ===
Cade Skywalker is the descendant of Anakin Skywalker, Luke Skywalker, Mara Jade Skywalker and Ben Skywalker, the son of Kol Skywalker and the nephew of Nat Skywalker.
He is a protagonist of the Star Wars:
Legacy comic book series from Dark Horse, which takes place 125 years after Return of the Jedi.
Cade has completely abandoned the Jedi way after an attack by the New Sith Order on the Jedi Academy on Ossus.
Despite this, he still encounters other Jedi, as well as the ghost of his ancestor Luke Skywalker, and ultimately reclaims his heritage to fight the Sith.
The character was voted the 84th top Star Wars character by IGN.

== See also ==
Clan McDuck


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Skywalker family on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
A listing for "Union" at the Comic Book DataBase.

Star Wars: Union on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D animated science fiction television series produced by Lucasfilm Animation and set in the Star Wars galaxy five years before A New Hope.
It takes place during the Dark Times, when the Galactic Empire is hunting down the last of the Jedi while a fledgling rebellion against the Empire is emerging.
The visual style of the series is inspired by the original Star Wars trilogy concept art by Ralph McQuarrie.
The series features new characters, along with some from the original trilogy and from the previous animated series, The Clone Wars.

The series premiered as a one-hour television film, Spark of Rebellion, on October 3, 2014, on Disney Channel prior to the premiere of the series on October 13 on Disney XD.
The second season premiered on June 20, 2015, with a one-hour television film, The Siege of Lothal.
The third season premiered on September 24, 2016, with the television film, Steps Into Shadow.
The fourth and final season premiered on October 16, 2017, with another one-hour television film, Heroes of Mandalore.
Its final episode aired on March 5, 2018.Dave Filoni, Simon Kinberg and Greg Weisman served as executive producers of season one.
Weisman left the show after season one.
Filoni was also the supervising director for the first two seasons, a role he relinquished after accepting a promotion that expanded his creative role into overseeing all Lucasfilm Animation projects; he chose Justin Ridge to succeed him for season three.
Filoni assumed the role back for the fourth season.

The series has been generally well-received with several award wins and nominations.
Rebels garnered praise for its writing, characters, voice acting, score, and expansion of the franchise's mythology, although it received some criticism for its animation and perceived lack of depth.
The show was nominated for the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Animated Series and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Children's Program.
Rebels became the first recipient of the Saturn Award for Best Animated Series on Television, winning for its final two seasons.

A number of tie-in media have been released to expand upon the series' lore such as the comic book series Kanan, the novel A New Dawn, and the novel series Thrawn.

==
Premise ==
Fourteen years after the fall of the Galactic Republic and the Jedi Order and the rise of the Galactic Empire depicted in Revenge of the Sith, a motley group of rebels unite aboard a freighter starship called the Ghost and begin to conduct covert operations against the Imperial garrison on and around the planet Lothal and other planets that are menaced by the Empire.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Taylor Gray as Ezra Bridger, a teenage con artist who is taken in by Kanan to be trained as a Jedi.

Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, formerly known as Jedi Padawan, Caleb Dume, who survived the events of Order 66.
He is Ezra's mentor and leader of the Ghost Crew.

Vanessa Marshall as Hera Syndulla, a Twi’lek pilot turned Rebel Commander and the daughter of Ryloth freedom fighter Cham Syndulla.

Tiya Sircar as Sabine Wren, a young Mandalorian warrior who's fixated on art.

Steven Blum as Garazeb "Zeb" Orrelios, a former Lasat honor guard member who wants the Empire to pay for enslaving his people.

Dave Filoni as Chopper (
credited as "Himself" prior to the series finale), Hera's astromech droid who can be a bit reckless.

David Oyelowo as Agent Kallus, a member of the Imperial ground team tasked with overviewing Imperial activities.

Dee Bradley Baker as Captain Rex (seasons 2–4), a former high ranking Clone trooper, who served under Anakin Skywalker in the Clone Wars.

Sam Witwer as Maul (seasons 2–3), a former Sith Lord and apprentice to Palpatine who is attempting to hunt down Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Lars Mikkelsen as Grand Admiral Thrawn (seasons 3–4), a powerful high-ranking officer within the Galactic Empire.
===
Recurring ===
Jason Isaacs as Grand Inquisitor, a former Jedi Temple Guard who turned to the dark side and was tasked with hunting down surviving Jedi.

James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, an evil Sith Lord and apprentice to Palpatine who was once Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker.

Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, a former Jedi Knight who became Darth Vader.

Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, the former Padawan of Anakin Skywalker, who aids the rebellion with pivotal assets.

Stephen Stanton as Grand Moff Tarkin, an Imperial officer who oversees many of the Empire's activities.

Sam Witwer and Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the ruler of the galaxy and also known as Darth Sidious, Sith master of Darth Vader.

Mary Elizabeth McGlynn as Governor Arihnda Pryce, a high-ranking officer of the Galactic Empire and Governor of the Lothal sector.

Forest Whitaker as Saw Gerrera, a Rebel extremist and a former freedom fighter.

Genevieve O'Reilly as Mon Mothma, the leader of the Rebel Alliance.
===
Guest appearances ===
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a protocol droid who assists allies in the rebellion.

James Arnold Taylor and Stephen Stanton as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Knight in exile on Tatooine.

Frank Oz as Yoda, the wise and powerful Grand Master of the Jedi who is exiled on the planet Dagobah.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian, a smuggler in the underworld.

Nathan Kress as Wedge Antilles, a former Imperial TIE fighter pilot, who defects to the rebellion.

==
Episodes ==


==
Release ==


=== Broadcast ===
The first two episodes, titled Spark of Rebellion, premiered on October 3, 2014, on Disney Channels worldwide and on Family Channel in Canada.
In Australia, the series premiered on October 17 on Disney XD.
The Siege of Lothal premiered on June 28, 2015, and the second season debuted on October 18.
In Canada, the series premiered on October 19 on the DHX-owned Disney XD.
However, due to DHX Media losing the rights to Disney content, the show was later moved to Disney Channel.
The second season premiered on November 7, and it was moved to the Corus-owned Disney XD channel on December 1.In
the Middle East and Africa, Spark of Rebellion premiered on October 11 and the series debuted on October 18 on Disney XD.
Siege of Lothal premiered on October 10, followed the official season premiere on October 17.
In Southeast Asia, Spark of Rebellion premiered on Disney XD on October 4 and the series officially started on November 29.
Siege of Lothal premiered on October 3 on Disney XD and Disney Channel, and the second season was released on October 24.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the series debuted on October 16 on Disney XD.
Siege of Lothal premiered on July 18, 2015, followed by the second-season debut on October 17.
===
Home media ===
Star Wars Rebels:
Spark of Rebellion was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD in the US at all retailers on October 14, 2014.
DVD bonus features include character shorts, a 3D model kit of the Ghost ship, and a preview of season 1.The
Complete Season
One of Star Wars Rebels was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on September 1, 2015, in America, and in Germany on September 10, 2015.
The Season 1 collection contains the expanded version of Spark of Rebellion with the Darth Vader/Grand Inquisitor prologue shown on ABC-TV.
The Complete Season Two of Star Wars Rebels was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on August 30, 2016, in North America.
The Complete Season Three of Star Wars Rebels was released on DVD and Blu-Ray on August 29, 2017.
The Complete Season Four is announced to be released on DVD and Blu-ray on November 15, 2018, in Germany, and July 31, 2018, in the United States.
The series is also available on the Disney+ streaming service, which launched on November 12, 2019.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings ===
In the United States, the one-hour special garnered 2.74 million viewers on Disney Channel and 2.40 million viewers on ABC.
Worldwide, it delivered a total of 6.5 million viewers.
On Disney Channel, the first and second episodes delivered 2.33 million and 1.92 million viewers, respectively.
The third and fourth episodes garnered 2.32 million and 1.84 million, respectively.
The fifth, sixth, and seventh episodes were watched by 1.43 million, 1.30 million, and 1.60 million viewers, respectively.
The eighth and ninth episodes got 1.92 and 1.44 million viewers, respectively.
In Canada, the second episode was watched by 274,500 viewers, making it the most-watched broadcast ever on the network.
In the United Kingdom, the film was the highest-rated broadcast that week, with 81,000 viewers.

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has received a 92% positive score, based on 12 reviews, and seasons 2, 3 and 4 have received a 100% score based on 6 reviews for season 2, 6 reviews for season 3, and 10 reviews for season 4, with an average rating of 8.17/10 for season 1, 7.38/10 for season 2, 9/10 for season 3, and 9.22/10 for season 4.
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average score of 78 out of 100 based on 4 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
IGN and Variety in particular had strong praise for the pilot film, Spark of Rebellion, with their only criticism being the appearance of the Wookiees in the film, being cited as not all that impressive compared to the rest of the animation.

===
Accolades ===


==
Other media ==


===
Films ===
Chopper and the Ghost appear in the 2016 film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.
Hera's surname is called on a loudspeaker at the Rebel base on Yavin IV, where Chopper can briefly be seen.
In addition, the Ghost takes part in the climactic battle over Scarif.
The Ghost also appears in the 2019 film Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker during the final battle over Exegol.
The voice of Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus can also heard in the film as one of the voices of Jedi past who provide Rey with encouragement to defeat Emperor Palpatine.

===
Novels ===
On September 2, 2014, Del Rey Books published Star Wars: A New Dawn, a prequel novel by John Jackson Miller telling the story of how Kanan and Hera met (set about six years before the series).
One of the first canon Star Wars novels to be released by Disney, it also introduces Imperial captain Rae Sloane, who is later a grand admiral in the Aftermath trilogy (2015–2017).
It includes a foreword by Dave Filoni.

In 2017, a new novel, entitled Thrawn, was released.
The book marked the entrance of Grand Admiral Thrawn into the current canon.
It was written by the character's original creator, Timothy Zahn.

A sequel to Thrawn, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was released on July 24, 2018.

It explored Thrawn's partnerships with Darth Vader and Anakin Skywalker.
Another Thrawn novel, Thrawn: Treason was released on July 23, 2019.
It takes place during the events of Rebels' fourth season.
Hera Syndulla would go on to appear in Alexander Freed's Star Wars:
Alphabet Squadron  novel trilogy, as a general of the recently christened New Republic's eponymous starfighter squadron in the final days of the Galactic Civil War, hunting down the weakened Imperial forces after the battle of Endor and the death of Emperor Palpatine.
===
Comics ===
From April 1, 2015, through March 16, 2016, Marvel Comics published a 12-issue comic series, titled Kanan, and set during the events of the first season.
Written by former executive producer of the series Greg Weisman and illustrated by Pepe Larraz, Jacopo Camagni and Andrea Broccardo, the story is centered on Kanan having flashbacks to his days as a Padawan in the Jedi Temple and the Clone Wars.
The other members of the Ghost crew also appear.
In the summer of 2017, Marvel announced that a comic book miniseries adaptation of Zahn's Thrawn novel was being planned, scheduled to be released in early 2018.

The first issue was released on February 14, 2018, with new issues being released over the following five months.

A few days after the series finale was aired, IDW Publishing released the seventh issue of the long-running Star Wars Adventures multi-era comic book series, which contained the first of a two-part comic arc, set between the second and third season, in which the Spectres embark on a mission to save a rare endangered bird from Imperial custody.

The second part appeared in the next issue, which was released on March 28, 2018.

===
Video games ===
A side-scrolling run-and-gun game based on the show's first season, titled Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions, was released by Disney Mobile on iOS, Android, and Windows Store in early 2015, before being discontinued on July 28, 2016, due to the limitations of the support team.
Ezra Bridger is the only playable character, with other characters available via in-app purchases, which also grant early access to most of the game's levels in the mobile versions and are required to play the full campaign in the Windows Store version.

Additionally, several of the characters from the series are playable in other games such as Disney Infinity 3.0, Angry Birds Star Wars II, Roblox (as virtual accessories and gears), Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (as downloadable content only),
Star Wars:
Galactic Defense, Star Wars:
Force Arena and Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes.

Vanessa Marshall reprises her role as Hera Syndulla for the 2020 video game Star Wars:
Squadrons, providing voice work and motion capture for the character.

==
Themes ==


===
Historical influences ===
Characters in Star Wars Rebels have taken influence from Biblical, Hebrew, and Greco-Roman mythological names.
Star Wars writers have often used biblical names for Jedi while giving galactic Imperial characters Roman names.
In 2015 an interview was conducted with Dave Filoni and Simon Kinberg where Kinsberg stated that they wanted to connect to the original films by using the biblical naming scheme seen in the films.

Both Caleb and Ezra are historically Hebrew names with Ezra translating to "Helper".
Characters with Roman names include Clone Captain Rex which translates to "King" in Latin along with Sabine Wren, Admiral Brom Titus and Admiral Kassius Konstantine.

==
References ==


==
See also ==
2015 in science fiction


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Rebels at StarWars.com
Star Wars Rebels at IMDb
Star Wars Rebels at TV.com
DK Publishing for Star Wars Rebels
Star Wars Rebels on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Multiple global locations were used for filming locations during the production of the Star Wars films to provide the setting for alien planets in the Star Wars Universe.

Most locations were used to shoot principal photography with actors; more recently as digital filmmaking has become more common, some prequel trilogy locations were shot with no actors present and digitally composited into the films to provide a backdrop of a story setting.

In addition to filming locations, a list of film studios is also included for reference.

== Locations ==
Listed below are locations used for filming of the following Star Wars films:
Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977)
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983)
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005)
Star Wars:
Episode VII –
The Force Awakens (2015)
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016)
Star Wars:
Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi (2017)
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018)
Star Wars:
Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker (2019)


===
Map ===


===
Location filming ===
==
Studios ==


==
See also ==
Behind-the-scenes documentaries:
The Making of Star Wars
SP FX:
The Empire Strikes Back
Classic Creatures:
Return of the Jedi
From Star Wars to Jedi:
The Making of a Saga
Empire of Dreams
Star Wars:
The Legacy Revealed


==
References ==
Notes
Sources
Howard, Marcus Hearn ; foreword by Ron (2005).
The Cinema of George Lucas.
New York: Abrams.
ISBN 0810949687.

==
External links ==
Star Wars Locations and their GPS coordinates - Article featuring every filming location, Lat/Long coordinates and scene comparisons
Star Wars Locations - fan site devoted to Star Wars filming locations
Star Wars filming locations category on Wookieepedia
Star Wars filming locations category on 501st
Legion Spanish Garrison
Filming locations on the Internet Movie Database:
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
Episode IV:
A New Hope
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi
Episode VII:
The Force Awakens
George Lucas's filming locations on Movie-Locations.com
"Hostage Crisis" is the twenty-second episode and first season finale of Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
It first aired on March 20, 2009 on Cartoon Network.

==
Plot ==
Cad Bane and his crew of bounty hunters and droid enforcers arrive at the Senate landing zone, where they meet a host of Senate Commandos, who are not happy with their unauthorized arrival.
Aurra Sing snipes three of them from long-range and the rest of the bounty hunters overwhelm the rest of the squad.
One of the commando droids fools security into thinking that the guards had taken down a group of protesters before taking their uniforms.

A few levels above, in Senator Padmé Amidala's office, Anakin Skywalker offers to take her to somewhere in the galaxy for a few weeks where no one will recognize them, but Padmé is too focused on her work.
He gives her his lightsaber to show his devotion.
However, he has to hide, as C-3PO and Bail Organa are about to enter.
Organa informs Padmé that they must meet in the lobby to discuss the Enhanced Privacy Invasion Bill.
Suddenly, once everyone is gathered, the bounty hunters surround and take them hostage.
Senator Philo attempts to leave only to be shot by Bane.
He then communicates with Chancellor Palpatine, demanding Ziro the Hutt's release from captivity.
Palpatine refuses to do so.
Unfortunately, Bane proves his point by locking down the entire building, severing all communication with the outside.
He takes everyone's comlinks, but before he can search Padmé, who is holding Anakin's lightsaber in her sleeve, Bane notices Anakin in the upper levels and orders an IG-86 sentinel droid and Shahan Alama to get him.

Anakin eludes his pursuers and hot-wires a terminal to communicate with Palpatine.
The Chancellor advises Anakin to get to the central power core to contact for help.
Anakin manages to disconnect and hide before the bounty hunters find him, and then uses a mind trick to convince Alama to check the other two floors.
As the hunters split up, Anakin follows the IG-86 sentinel droid and manages to bash it into submission.
Alama comes back down to check and finds the droid's mangled remains.
Noticing no lightsaber slashes, he quickly figures out that Anakin isn't armed.
He reports this to Bane, who sends Sing to assist him.

Anakin locates the power core, but a panicked Robonino shuts the door behind him.
Alama and Sing then attack Anakin, and Robonino shocks him into unconsciousness.

Bane then gives Palpatine instructions to give a pardon chip to Orn Free Taa to be transported to the prison where Ziro is being held.
3D then comes in to take the Senator.
They arrive at the prison and ship Ziro away.

An unconscious Anakin is dragged into the lobby, where the bounty hunters start to plant bombs that can go off if their laser detectors are triggered.
This enables the hunters to leave the Senate unhindered, despite an attempt by Orn Free Taa to have them arrested.
Anakin wakes up and Padmé gives him back his lightsaber.
He then manages to save everyone by cutting a hole in the floor and dropping everyone one floor down, just before Bane triggers the bombs anyway for the clone troopers' interference.

Cad Bane liberates Ziro from prison, and they escape.

== Reception ==
Hostage Crisis received attention for it being the episode that contained the debut of Cad Bane.
The episode was generally well received for its willingness to portray violence, but drew criticism for its inclusion of Ziro the Hutt, due to that character being seen as uninteresting and as an offensive LGBT stereotype.
The effectiveness of the episode's portrayal of Anakin Skywalker was disputed among critics.

==
References ==
A banshee ( BAN-shee; Modern Irish bean sí, from Old Irish: ben síde, pronounced [bʲen ˈʃiːðʲe], "woman of the fairy mound" or "fairy woman") is a female spirit in Irish folklore who heralds the death of a family member, usually by wailing, shrieking, or keening.
Her name is connected to the mythologically important tumuli or "mounds" that dot the Irish countryside, which are known as síde (singular síd) in Old Irish.

== Description ==
Sometimes she has long streaming hair and wears a gray cloak over a green dress, and her eyes are red from continual weeping.
She may be dressed in white with red hair and a ghastly complexion, according to a firsthand account by Ann, Lady Fanshawe in her Memoirs.
Lady Wilde in Ancient Legends of Ireland provides another:
The size of the banshee is another physical feature that differs between regional accounts.
Though some accounts of her standing unnaturally tall are recorded, the majority of tales that describe her height state the banshee's stature as short, anywhere between one foot and four feet.
Her exceptional shortness often goes alongside the description of her as an old woman, though it may also be intended to emphasize her state as a fairy creature.

In O'Brien's Irish- English Dictionary the entry for Síth-Bhróg states:"hence bean-síghe, plural mná-síghe, she-fairies or women-fairies, credulously supposed by the common people to be so affected to certain families that they are hears to sing mournful lamentations about their houses by night, whenever any of the family labours under a sickness which is to end by death, but no families which are not of an ancient & noble Stock, are believed to be honoured with this fairy privilege".
Sometimes the banshee assumes the form of some sweet singing virgin of the family who died young, and has been given the mission by the invisible powers to become the harbinger of coming doom to her mortal kindred.
Or she may be seen at night as a shrouded woman, crouched beneath the trees, lamenting with veiled face, or flying past in the moonlight, crying bitterly.
The cry of this spirit is mournful beyond all other sounds on earth, and betokens certain death to some member of the family whenever it is heard in the silence of the night.

==
Keening ==
In Ireland and parts of Scotland, a traditional part of mourning is the keening woman (bean chaointe), who wails a lament—in Irish: Caoineadh, Irish pronunciation: ['kɰiːnʲi] (Munster dialect), [ˈkɰiːnʲə] (Connaught dialect) or [ˈkiːnʲuː] (Ulster dialect), caoin meaning "to weep, to wail".
This keening woman may in some cases be a professional, and the best keeners would be in high demand.

Irish legend speaks of a lament being sung by a fairy woman, or banshee.
She would sing it when a family member died or was about to die, even if the person had died far away and news of their death had not yet come.
In those cases, her wailing would be the first warning the household had of the death.
The banshee also is a predictor of death.
If someone is about to enter a situation where it is unlikely they will come out alive she will warn people by screaming or wailing, giving rise to a banshee also being known as a wailing woman.

It is often stated that the banshee laments only the descendants of the pure Milesian stock of Ireland, sometimes clarified as surnames prefixed with O' and Mac, and some accounts even state that each family has its own banshee.
One account, however, also included the Geraldines, as they had apparently become "more Irish than the Irish themselves," countering the lore ascribing banshees exclusively to those of Milesian stock.
Another exception was  the Rossmore banshee which supposedly heralded  the death of a member of the family of Baron Rossmore, whose ancestry was predominantly Scottish and Dutch.

When several banshees appear at once, it indicates the death of someone great or holy.
The tales sometimes recounted that the woman, though called a fairy, was a ghost, often of a specific murdered woman, or a mother who died in childbirth.

==
Origin ==
Most, though not all, surnames associated with banshees have the Ó or Mc/Mac prefix - that is, surnames of Goidelic origin, indicating a family native to the Insular Celtic lands rather than those of the Norse, English, or Norman.
Accounts reach as far back as 1380 to the publication of the Cathreim Thoirdhealbhaigh (Triumphs of Torlough) by Sean mac Craith.
Mentions of banshees can also be found in Norman literature of that time.
The Ua Briain banshee is thought to be named Aibell and the ruler of 25 other banshees who would always be at her attendance.
It is possible that this particular story is the source of the idea that the wailing of numerous banshees signifies the death of a great person.
In some parts of Leinster, she is referred to as the bean chaointe (keening woman) whose wail can be so piercing that it shatters glass.
In Scottish folklore, a similar creature is known as the bean nighe or ban nigheachain (little washerwoman) or nigheag na h-àth (little washer at the ford) and is seen washing the bloodstained clothes or armour of those who are about to die.
In Welsh folklore, a similar creature is known as the cyhyraeth.

==
In popular culture ==
Banshees, or creatures based upon them, have appeared in many forms in popular culture.

== See also ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Sorlin, Evelyne (1991).
Cris de vie, cris de mort: Les fées du destin dans les pays celtiques (in French).
Academia Scientiarum Fennica.
ISBN 978-951-41-0650-7.

Lysaght, Patricia (1986).
The banshee: The Irish death-messenger.
Roberts Rinehart.
ISBN 978-1-57098-138-8.

Evans-Wentz, Walter Yeeling (1977).
The Fairy-Faith in celtic countries, its psychological origin and nature.
C. Smythe.
OCLC 257400792.

==
External links ==
Chisholm, Hugh, ed.
(
1911).
"
Banshee" .
Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.).
Cambridge University Press.
Clone troopers are fictional characters in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
They have been featured in a number of Star Wars media, including Episode II:
Attack of the Clones (2002), Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005),
The Clone Wars animated film (2008), the related television series of the same name (2008–2020), and the Rebels television series (2014–2018), as well as comics, novels, and video games of the Star Wars Legends expanded universe.

In-universe, the clone troopers serve as the military of the Galactic Republic, created in the wake of the Confederacy of Independent Systems' formation, which threatened the galactic peace established by the Republic.
The three-year conflict between the clones and the Separatists' battle droid armies is known as the "Clone Wars", in reference to the former, and was secretly orchestrated by the Republic's Chancellor Palpatine to seize power and transform the Republic into the Galactic Empire.
All clone troopers are humans, bred from the DNA of their genetic template, the bounty hunter Jango Fett, at the cloning facilities on Kamino, run by the native Kaminoans, who genetically modified the clones to display unquestioned obedience to the higher chain of command, and age at twice the rate of a normal human.
During the Clone Wars, they served under the command of the Jedi Order, but ultimately turned on them and killed them, as a result of Palpatine issuing Order 66, which branded the Jedi as traitors and ordered their deaths.
The nature of Order 66 is explored in more detail in The Clone Wars animated series, which reveals that Palpatine had secretly arranged for the Clone Army's creation almost a decade before the Clone Wars, and ordered that all clones be outfitted with inhibitor chips, which would alter their mentality and force them to carry out Order 66 unquestionably.
Following the formation of the Empire, clone troopers became more and more uncommon as they were slowly replaced by stormtroopers.
At the time of the original Star Wars trilogy, the 501st Legion, aka "Vader's Fist", was the only known branch of the Imperial Army to consist mostly of former clone troopers.

During development of The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas initially conceived a planet of clones, which is why the Clone Wars was mentioned for the first time in the original Star Wars (1977) film.
The clone trooper armor was designed to suggest an evolution into the stormtroopers of the original trilogy, and it incorporated features from both the armor of stormtroopers and Boba Fett, revealed in Attack of the Clones to be an unaltered clone of Jango.
The armored troopers in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith are computer-generated images voiced by Temuera Morrison, who played Jango.
Younger clones were played by Bodie Taylor and Daniel Logan, who played the younger Boba.
Unhelmeted clones were played by both Morrison and Taylor, who wore bodysuits to isolate their heads, and some clone troopers featured a blend of the actors' features.
In the animated The Clone Wars film and television series, adult clone troopers are voiced by Dee Bradley Baker and child clone troopers are voiced by Logan.

While the prequel trilogy depicted clone troopers as soldiers lacking any personality, The Clone Wars animated film and television series introduced numerous clones with distinctive traits, who quickly became fan favorites.
Clone troopers were humanized especially by the television series, which explored their motivations and feelings about the Clone Wars.
Since then, numerous Star Wars works set during the Clone Wars era have featured clone troopers as main characters.
Clone troopers have become cultural icons, and a widely recognized element of the Star Wars franchise.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Development and design ===
In writing The Empire Strikes Back, Leigh Brackett's first draft of the film initially developed Lando Calrissian as a clone from a planet of clones involved in the Clone Wars mentioned in A New Hope and were nearly made extinct by the war, but this concept was not featured in the final film.
George Lucas later came up with the alternate concept of an army of clone shock troops from a remote planet used by the Republic in the war that followed.
Lucas intended for the prequel trilogy to depict the evolution of the galaxy's fighting forces, and the clone troopers were the step after flawed battle droids.
Clone troopers were designed to strongly suggest the army's evolution into the Empire's stormtrooper army.
Concept artist Jay Shuster said of the armor design, "It follows the formula for a lot of the prequel trilogy.
Take something pre-conceived in the existing trilogy and de-generate it."
Design Director Doug Chiang incorporated both features of the Boba Fett and stormtrooper armor into the design, acknowledging the "vague assertion in Star Wars lore" that Fett's armor was connected to those of the stormtroopers.
Initial concept models implied that the first generation armor was thicker and bulkier than stormtrooper armor, and this characteristic was retained by the art department for Revenge of the Sith.
Lucas expressed a desire for individualized trooper armor from the beginning of art development for Revenge of the Sith.
Several variations were largely dictated by environmental needs, but others were influenced of the 2003 Clone Wars animated series and the desert stormtroopers of A New Hope.
The clone trooper designs "progressed" closer toward the stormtrooper designs, and the film included variant designs similar to the sandtrooper, scout trooper, and snowtrooper armor of the original trilogy.
The designs of clone trooper in snow and cold weather gear, seen in season one of The Clone Wars, are heavily inspired by early concept and costume by Ralph McQuarrie, Joe Johnston, and John Mollo for The Empire Strikes Back.
===
Portrayal ===
In Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, all clone troopers are computer-generated images and are voiced by Temuera Morrison, who played the clone template Jango Fett.
The child clone troopers were played by Daniel Logan, who also played Jango's clone son Boba Fett, and the clone troopers as young men were played by Bodie Taylor, who was cast for his resemblance to a younger Morrison.
Taylor was filmed multiple times and composited to fill out crowded shots set in Tipoca City, and in some cases, such as for distant shots, he was entirely digital.
Commander Cody, seen in armor without his helmet in Revenge of the Sith, was played by Morrison.
He wore a blue bodysuit and only footage of his head was used for Cody; he held a stormtrooper helmet to approximate the digital clone trooper helmet Cody carries.
Like Morrison, Taylor also played armored and unhelmeted clones in Revenge of the Sith, wearing a blue bodysuit that isolated his head.
Some clone troopers were entirely digital and featured a digital blend of Morrison's and Taylor's facial features.
The armor was match-animated to the actors' bodies.
The clone troopers are voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in the 2008 animated film The Clone Wars and its related animated television series of the same name.
Baker attempted to give each clone trooper a unique voice, taking into account personality, age, and position within the unit, sometimes describing the clone in a single adjective and focusing on that descriptor for the voice work.
Each clone was voiced individually, with all the clone's lines for the episode recorded at one time before moving to another character, and the dialogue was edited together.
Logan voiced the young clone troopers in seasons two and three of the 2008 television series.
Baker reprises his role in the 2014 Rebels animated series.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===
In Attack of the Clones (2002), Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi discovers the clone army on Kamino.
He is told by the Kaminoans that Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas ordered the army on the Republic's behalf ten years prior; however, Sifo-Dyas' apparent death shortly before that timeframe leads the Jedi Order to doubt this.
The clone troopers are cloned from Jango Fett, a bounty hunter hired by a man named Tyranus, later revealed to be Sith lord Count Dooku.
The clone troopers' genetics are altered so that they age at twice the normal rate and are more loyal and easier to command.
The clone army is deployed to Geonosis under the command of the Jedi to rescue Obi-Wan, Anakin Skywalker, and Padmé Amidala from execution by the Separatists.
The ensuing battle becomes the first one in the Clone Wars.
Although the clone army emerges victorious, Dooku and many other Separtists leaders escape, meaning that the war has only just begun.
In Revenge of the Sith (2005), set three years later, the clone army continues to fight in the Clone Wars against the Separatist battle droid army.
However, just as it appears that the Republic will win the war, Chancellor Palpatine, secretly the Sith lord Darth Sidious, orders the clone army to execute Order 66, turning them against the Jedi.
The clone troopers kill their Jedi commanders, although a few manage to escape, while the 501st Legion, led by the newly christened Darth Vader, storms the Jedi Temple, burning it and killing the Jedi inside, which effectively ends the Jedi Order.
Following Vader's assassination of the remaining Separatist leaders, Palpatine transforms the Republic into the Galactic Empire and the clone army becomes the basis of the Imperial Army.
Clone troopers are referenced in The Force Awakens (2015) when Kylo Ren chides General Hux for the betrayal of rogue stormtrooper FN-2187 and suggests that Supreme Leader Snoke should consider a clone army.

===
Animation ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Clone troopers are heavily featured in the 2008 animated film The Clone Wars, which spawned an animated series of the same name that lasted until 2014, with a final season released in 2020.
Many named clone troopers are introduced and given individual personalities, serving as the focus of several story arcs.
In the 6th season, more of the nature of "Order 66" is revealed when a clone trooper named Fives discovers that he and his brothers have chips implanted into their brains that would compel them to kill Jedi when "Order 66" is uttered.
Ultimately, the Jedi remained unaware of this as Fives was executed by a shock trooper clone ordered by Palpatine to conceal the existence of the contingency order.

====
Rebels ====
The 2014 animated TV show
Star Wars Rebels features a group of former clone troopers who had removed their chips and, therefore, were not forced to carry out Order 66.
These clones help the crew of the Ghost in their fight against the Empire, and eventually join the Rebel Alliance.
It is also revealed that in the years after the end of the Clone Wars, the Empire gradually replaced the aging clones with the less-effective but more numerous stormtroopers.

===
In other media ===
In the novels Lords of the Sith by Paul S. Kemp, and Tarkin by James Luceno, several clone troopers are still in active service during the early years of the Empire's reign, such as among stormtroopers serving Darth Vader, and even among the Emperor's elite Imperial Guard.

In the Legends game Star Wars Battlefront II, the surviving clone troopers were fitted with new armour and weapons, and became the Imperial Stormtrooper corps of the Empire.
Later, a combination of natural-born humans as well as clones from different donor templates would be incorporated into the Stormtrooper corps.

==
Individual clone troopers
==
===
Coruscant Guard ===
The Coruscant Guard is a division of the Grand Army of the Republic tasked with internal security and peacekeeping operations on Coruscant, protecting "soft target" public spaces and important "hard target" buildings, and serving as escorts and guards on diplomatic missions.
They first appear in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, where they search for Yoda's body in the Senate building after his duel with Darth Sidious and later help Sidious recover Darth Vader's body on Mustafar.
The Coruscant Guard appears in The Clone Wars film and television series, led by Commander Fox.
They hunt Jedi fugitive Ahsoka Tano when she is framed for the bombing of the Jedi Temple and for murder in season five, and they search for ARC trooper Fives when he is framed for an assassination attempt on Supreme Chancellor Palpatine in season six.
In season seven, a skirmish broke out onboard former Jedi Padawan Ahsoka Tano's Venator-class Star Destroyer during the final days of the Clone Wars when clone troopers of the 332nd Company and Coruscant Guard received Order 66 from Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine.
Members of the Coruscant Guard wear armor with red markings.

====
Commander Fox ====
Commander Fox, CC-1010, led the Coruscant Guard, an elite clone trooper unit assigned to serve as peace-keepers on the Galactic Republic capital.
Following the Battle on Teth, Fox's squad rescued Senator Padmé Amidala from Ziro the Hutt.
Fox stormed Ziro's Palace, took out his battle droids, and freed Amidala.
Ziro was taken to the Republic Judiciary Central Detention Center.
When Cad Bane entered the Senate building and held a number of Senators and the Supreme Chancellor hostage, Fox led a company of the Coruscant Guard to cut off his escape.
Unfortunately, Bane had rigged the chamber and the hostages with explosives.
Seeing this, Fox ordered his men to stand down and allowed the bounty hunter and his team to leave the Senate building
Like every other clone trooper in the Guard, Fox was bound by honor and duty to protect and serve the Supreme Chancellor and the members of the Galactic Senate.
Utterly fearless, he was always the first to lead the charge into battle, even in the most perilous combat situations.
His unquestionable loyalty meant he would carry out his orders without question, even if it meant killing a Jedi or another "brother".
His exemplary performance has made him one of the most highly decorated soldiers in the Republic army.
Additional sources state that Fox continued his duty on Coruscant, until an error on his part led Darth Vader to execute him by force snapping his neck.

====
Commander Thire ====
Commander Thire, CC-4477, is a Coruscant Guard clone shock trooper who served as a lieutenant in the Coruscant Guard of the Grand Army of the Republic.
During the Clone Wars, he accompanied Grand Master Yoda of the Jedi Order on an diplomatic assignment to meet with King Katuunko of Toydaria.
In the course of their mission Yoda inspired his clone troopers to take strength from their individual traits, such as Thire's patience.

Following the initiation of Order 66 and the subsequent confrontation between Yoda and Emperor Palpatine in 19 BBY, Thire and his troopers were ordered to hunt the Jedi Master.
The failure to locate his body convinced Mas Amedda that Yoda was still alive, leading the Emperor to order Thire to resume the search.
However, Yoda succeeded in escaping from Coruscant with the aid of Senator Bail Organa.
Thire later accompanied Palpatine to Mustafar to recover the critically wounded Darth Vader.

=== 501st
Legion ===
The 501st Legion is a division of the Grand Army of the Republic—in both canon and Legends—under the command of Jedi General Anakin Skywalker and Padawan Commander Ahsoka Tano.
The 501st fought against the droid forces of CIS (the Confederacy of Independent Systems) throughout the Clone Wars.

The 501st first appears unnamed in Revenge of the Sith under the leadership of Commander Appo, and they assault the Jedi Temple on Coruscant under Order 66.
The 501st Legion also appears extensively throughout Star Wars Battlefront video game franchise and The Clone Wars television series, under the leadership of Captain Rex of Torrent Company.
In the Star Wars Legends expanded universe, after the conversion of the Republic into the Galactic Empire,
the 501st Legion (nicknamed "Vader's Fist") is placed under the command of General Maximilian Veers that serves as Darth Vader's personal battalion.
In current Canon media, the 501st still remain under the command of Vader, however a new group named the First Legion is established as his personal task force, which recruits only from 501st ranks.
Members of the 501st
Legion wear armor with blue markings.
The unit is named after the 501st Legion costuming group.

Notable sub-divisions within the 501st
Legion include:

332nd Company, which was active during the Clone Wars after former Jedi Padawan Ahsoka Tano left the Jedi Order.
When she returned to help Republic forces stage an invasion of Mandalore, the company—alongside Clone Commander CT-7567 "Rex" and Clone Captain CT-0292 "Vaughn"— was assigned to aid her.
After Order 66 is issued, the 332nd's Star Destroyer crash lands on the surface of an unnamed moon, killing all except Ahsoka, Rex, and Maul, who manage to escape; The troopers under the command of Ahsoka Tano have orange marks on their helmets.
Ahsoka and Rex have dug graves for the fallen soldiers as a memorial to them.

Torrent Company was an elite military unit led by Clone Captain CT-7567 "Rex", who served as first-in-command to Jedi General Anakin Skywalker.
The company is distinguished for their engagements against the Confederacy of Independent Systems throughout the war, including the Battle of Christophsis, Battle of Teth, and the Battle of Horain.
Torrent Company died along with the 332nd soon after Order 66.During Star Wars Celebration 2016, Dave Filoni stated that in a planned story arc for The Clone Wars, Ahsoka, who has left the Jedi Order, is given command of part of the 501st Legion, including Captain Rex; those under her command repaint their helmets orange and adorn them with Ahsoka's togruta markings.
She leads them at the siege of Mandalore, which takes place at the same time as the beginning of Revenge of the Sith.
It would later be a part of the new Season 7 episodes on Disney+.
====
Commander Appo ====
Commander Appo, CC-1119, served in the 501st Legion under the command of Jedi General Anakin Skywalker.
He first appears in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, in which he and other members of the 501st carry out Order 66 and follow Anakin, now Darth Vader, in attacking the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.
He stops Senator Bail Organa from entering the Temple.
Appo later appears in season four of The Clone Wars television series as a sergeant in the 501st serving under clone Captain Rex.
His armor bears blue markings.
In The Clone Wars television series, his helmet is adorned with a white arrow in reference to Appa of the Avatar: The Last Airbender television series, on which The Clone Wars supervising director Dave Filoni worked.
====
Captain Rex ====
Captain Rex, CT-7567, leads Torrent Company of the 501st Legion, often under the command of Jedi General Anakin Skywalker and Jedi Commander Ahsoka Tano.
He first appears in The Clone Wars film and its related television series, and he is the primary clone trooper character of the series.
In the seventh season of the series (which overlaps with Revenge of the Sith), Rex is promoted to Commander and leads part of the 501st Legion, called the 332nd legion (Ahsoka Troopers) in the Siege of Mandalore alongside Ahsoka.
When Order 66 is issued, he attempts to execute Ahsoka, but she removes his chip and restores his free will, before the pair fake their deaths and part ways.
Rex later appears in the Rebels television series, set fourteen years after Revenge of the Sith.
Now a much older man because of his accelerated aging, he lives on the wasteland planet Seelos and hunted worm-like joopa with fellow clones Wolffe and Gregor before they are offered a place in the Rebel Alliance, which leads to Rex reuniting with Ahsoka.
In the series' epilogue, it is mentioned that Rex fought in several battles throughout the Galactic Civil War.

====
ARC Trooper Fives ====
ARC trooper Fives, CT-27-5555, serves alongside fellow ARC trooper Echo.
He first appears in The Clone Wars season one episode "Rookies" as a regular trooper.
He and his unit are assigned to a remote listening outpost that is invaded by Separatist droids.
Though the invasion is successfully repelled, only Fives and Echo survive, and they are reassigned to the 501st Legion.
The season three episode "Clone Cadets" depicts Fives and his unit as cadets in training on Kamino.
The unit, called Domino squad, is initially unable to work together to pass their final test.
Fives and Echo feel weighed down by the others in the squad and ask to be reassigned, but the request is denied.
Under the advice of Jedi General Shaak Ti, Fives and Echo recommit themselves to Domino, and the squad is able to pass.
Fives and Echo are eventually promoted to ARC troopers together for their actions while defending Kamino and continue serving with the 501st.
When assigned to the command of Jedi General Pong Krell during the campaign on Umbara, Fives finds Krell's disregard for clone trooper lives appalling and openly disagrees with Krell and with Captain Rex, who is insistent on following orders.
After discovering how to pilot Umbaran fighters, Fives, along with fellow clones Jesse and Hardcase disobey direct orders and destroy Umbaran supply ships delivering arms to the Umbaran Capital using the starfighters, with Hardcase sacrificing himself in the process.
Though their actions allow a Republic victory, Krell, without process of a court-martial, finds Fives and Jesse guilty of treason and sentences them to execution by firing squad.
However, Fives urges his fellow troopers to see this as an injustice, and the firing squad refuses to execute him.
After Krell is ousted as a Republic Traitor, Fives is freed from custody and aids Rex and the 501st in arresting Krell, with clone trooper Dogma eventually using Fives’ blaster to execute Krell.

In season six, during a battle over Ringo Vinda, Fives and the 501st are winning the battle until fellow clone Tup mysteriously executes Jedi General Tiplar, forcing the 501st to retreat.
After rescuing Tup from Separatists and delivering him to Kamino for a medical investigation, Fives discovers a mysterious tumour in Tup’s head before the latter dies.
After realising the Kaminoans intend to wipe his mind, Fives launches his own investigation and realises the “tumour” in Tup’s head is an inhibitor chip implanted in every clone from a young stage.
Jedi Master Shaak Ti brings him to inform Palpatine about the chips, where Palpatine, being the true mastermind behind the conspiracy, reveals the chips’ true purpose to Fives.
He frames Fives for an assassination attempt, initiating a manhunt for Fives.
With the help of 501st medic Kix, Fives is able to contact Rex and Anakin Skywalker, and he attempts to warn them of the conspiracy and of Palpatine's involvement.
He is ultimately killed by Commander Fox of the Coruscant Guard and dies in Rex's arms.

Fives' name is derived from his designation number (CT-27-5555), which features fives in sequence.
He is distinguished by a goatee and a stylized numeral five tattoo on his right temple.
His armor bears blue markings, and a stylized worm creature adorns his helmets; after his promotion to ARC trooper, he also wears light gray pauldrons on his shoulders and
kilt-like kama painted with blue stripes.
He regards duty and honor above orders and protocol, feeling that there is no honor in following foolish orders and marching to his death.
He insists that clone troopers be referred to by name, not number, and that they are soldiers, not units, and should be treated as such.
He is a close friend of Rex and, after the apparent death of Echo, considers his best friend to be fellow trooper Tup, who aids Fives against Krell and is one of the first to refuse executing Fives when given the order by Krell.
When Tup begins behaving abnormally due to his inhibitor chip malfunctioning, Fives goes to great lengths and disregards order to attempt to save Tup's life and, later, discover the true cause of Tup's death.
With his dying words, he describes attempting to expose the conspiracy to have been his duty.

====
ARC
Trooper Echo ====
ARC trooper Echo, CT-21-0408, sometimes CT-1409, serves alongside fellow ARC trooper Fives.
He first appears in The Clone Wars season one episode "Rookies" as a regular trooper.
He and his unit are assigned to a remote listening outpost that is invaded by Separatist droids.
Though the invasion is successfully repelled, only Echo and Fives survive, and they are reassigned to the 501st Legion.
The season three episode "Clone Cadets" depicts Echo and his unit as cadets in training on Kamino.
The unit, called Domino squad, is initially unable to work together to pass their final test.
Echo and Fives feel weighed down by the others in the squad and ask to be reassigned, but the request is denied.
Under the advice of Jedi General Shaak Ti, Echo and Fives recommit themselves to Domino, and the squad is able to pass.
Echo and Fives are eventually promoted to ARC troopers together for their actions while defending Kamino and continue serving with the 501st.
Echo is apparently killed in an explosion during a rescue operation in the season three episode "Counter Attack".

Story reels for a previously-unfinished four episode arc called "Bad Batch" (initially part of The Clone Wars Legacy project, the episodes were later released on Disney+
in their completed state) revealed that Echo survived and was captured by the Separatists.
He was modified into a cyborg able to communicate directly to computers and tasked with decoding the Republic strategy algorithm.
Echo is rescued by Captain Rex, and with his ability to understand Separatist transmissions, he plays a key role in the Battle of Anaxes, earning a victory against the Separatists.
After the mission, Echo decided to join Clone Force 99.

Echo's armor bears blue markings, and a blue handprint adorns his chest-plate, created when Rex touched it while covered in eel blood during Echo's first mission.
After his promotion to ARC trooper, Echo also wears light gray pauldrons on his shoulders and a kilt-like kama painted in an asymmetrical white and blue design.
Later, after his rescue from Separatist capture, he is visibly a cyborg, with various apparatus protruding from his head and a droid plug in place of his right hand; post-rescue, he takes to wearing what appears to be a stripped-down variant on Standard Phase II Armor.
Throughout his appearances, he is characterized as one who strictly follows orders, regulations, and protocol.
Echo's name is given to him by Domino squad on Kamino as a sarcastic reference to his tendency to immediately repeat orders, even if his squad already heard.

====
ARC
Lieutenant Jesse ====
ARC Lieutenant Jesse, CT-5597, is a member in the 501st Legion.
In season four' Battle of Umbara, Jesse, like Fives comes to consider General Pong Krell to be ruthless and reckless (mainly over the casualty numbers).
He later helps Fives and Hardcase on a rogue mission to destroy a Separatist supply ship, which succeeds at the cost of Hardcase's life.
In season seven, he takes part in the Siege of Mandalore, during which he is captured and interrogated by Maul, and later attempts to execute Ahsoka Tano when Order 66 is issued.
After Commander Rex has his chip removed and sides with Ahsoka, Jesse accuses him of treason and tries to kill him as well, but dies along with all the troopers aboard when the Venator-class Star Destroyer they are on crashes on a small moon, and is buried by Ahsoka and Rex.

Jesse is distinguished by his shaved hair with the Republic symbol tattooed on most of his head.
His armor bears blue markings with the Republic symbol on the center.

====
Trooper Kix ====
Kix, CT-6116, is a medic serving in the 501st Legion.
In season six, Kix aids Fives, a fugitive because he discovered the inhibitor chip conspiracy.
The short story "The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Count Dooku" reveals that this action prompted Count Dooku to capture Kix, who discovered the conspiracy himself by the time of his capture.
With droids failing to secure a confession, Kix was frozen in stasis for delivery to Dooku.
The ship crashed into a planet during a randomized hyperspace jump to escape a Republic attack and protect "Dooku's prize".
Fifty years later, Kix is released from stasis by pirates searching for "the lost treasure of Count Dooku".
Kix is taken aboard the Corsair's ship and welcomed to their endeavor of raiding forgotten Separatist bases.
Kix is distinguished by his shaved hair and a phrase translating to "a good droid is a dead one" tattooed across his head.
His armor bears blue markings, and his Phase II armor bears a red insignia marking him as a medic.
He is "dedicated to preserving the life of his brothers", and he even tells an injured Captain Rex, "As the team medic, when it comes to the health of the men, including you, I outrank everyone."
However, he still has "no qualms about fighting the enemy".
====
Trooper Tup ====
Tup, CT-5385, was part of the 501st legion under Captain Rex.
He served in the Umbara campaign and was key to the capture of treasonous Jedi General Pong Krell, supporting and siding with his friend Fives even after Fives had been condemned to death by Krell and stunning the Jedi after a fierce battle with mutinous 501st clones led by Rex.
In the sixth season, Tup suffered a malfunction in a biotechnical chip implanted in his brain shortly after his creation by the Kaminoans.
Intended to ensure that the clones obeyed Order 66, the chip caused Tup to shoot and kill Jedi General Tiplar despite not having been ordered to.
As Tup was being shipped back to Kamino for evaluation, he was kidnapped by the Separatists (who wanted to know why his chip had malfunctioned), only to be recovered shortly afterwards.
Tup's actions led to the discovery of the chips by both the Jedi and the clones themselves, but Tup died of medical complications soon afterwards.
Though Fives attempted to avenge Tup's death by finding the truth behind the chips, he was killed before he could reveal what he had learned, with Tup's actions and death officially declared to be the result of a locally acquired virus.

Tup's armor featured the blue markings common in the 501st, as well as an image of a single blue teardrop underneath the right eye of his helmet; this matched a tattoo on his face.

===
212th Attack Battalion ===
The 212th Attack Battalion is a division of the Grand Army of the Republic under the command of Jedi General Obi-Wan Kenobi and his subordinate, Commander Cody.
The 212th fought against the droid forces of the Confederacy of Independent Systems throughout the Clone Wars.
A component of the 7th Sky Corps of the Third Systems Army, it consisted of both standard clone infantry and clone paratroopers.
The battalion fought on a multitude of worlds throughout the Clone Wars, including early campaigns on Christophsis, Teth, Ryloth, Saleucami and Geonosis, to latter battles on Kiros, Sarrish, Moorjhone and Umbara.
The 212th was also involved in numerous special operations missions; which included an infiltration mission on Lola Sayu.

By the third and last year of the conflict, the 212th led an invasion of the Separatist-controlled worlds, including Anaxes and Utapau.
During the latter battle, Kenobi killed General Grievous, marking a major loss for the Separatists and bringing the Republic one step closer to winning the war.
However, Kenobi was ultimately betrayed by his soldiers upon the activation of Order 66, a protocol that called for the extermination of all Jedi.
The clones failed to execute their former leader, however.
Following the proclamation of the New Order, the 212th was folded into the armed forces of the Galactic Empire.
During their days in service to the new government, with General Kahdah as the commanding officer, the battalion was dispatched to the Wookiee homeworld of Kashyyyk where they suppressed an indigenous uprising.

Notable sub-divisions within the 212th Attack Battalion include:

Ghost Company - participated in several battles and campaigns.
Most Ghost Company clone troopers bore orange markings on their standard clone trooper armor.
Many also had customized helmet coloration designs.

Foxtrot Group - an elite commando unit, led by Clone Captain Gregor, within the Special Operations Brigade of the Grand Army of the Republic.
It was attached in direct support to the 212th Attack Battalion and was deployed during the Battle of Sarrish, though many of its troopers perished in that battle.

====
Commander Cody ====

Commander Cody, CC-2224, leads the 212th Attack Battalion under the command of Jedi General Obi-Wan Kenobi.
He first appears in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith during the Battle of Utapau, aiding Obi-Wan against General Grievous on the planet Utapau.
He is the first clone trooper to receive Order 66 on-screen, and he obediently commands his troopers to shoot down Obi-Wan and to locate his body to confirm the kill.
Cody later appears in The Clone Wars film and its related television series.
Cody is distinguished by a scar on the left side of his face.
His armor bears orange markings, and he wears visors on his helmets.
He is characterized as a cautious but "natural and practical leader" whose "keen ability to strategize, combined with his fierce combat style in the heat of battle, earned him the respect of the Jedi, and of his fellow clones".
He is also noted to adhere to standard procedures and protocol.
Cody is particularly loyal to Obi-Wan, whom he complemented well, and their relationship is characterized by a mutual camaraderie and trust, though this did not prevent Cody from attempting to kill Kenobi as part of Order 66.
Cody is also friends with Captain Rex, having completed many missions together.

====
Captain Gregor ====
Captain Gregor, Ct-5576-39, is the former leader of Foxtrot Group, an elite commando unit within the Special Operations Brigade of the Grand Army of the Republic, attached in direct support to the 212th Attack Battalion.
He is introduced in the season five episode "Missing in Action"—suffering amnesia and living on the distant planet Abafar, where a stranded D-Squad—a Republic covert-ops unit consisting of droids looking for a Separatist decoding chip—discovers him working as a dishwasher in a diner.
It is revealed that he lost his memories and sense of identity after a shuttle crash during the devastating Battle of Sarrish.
He was rescued by his employer, who keeps Gregor's true identity from him to prevent him from leaving, but Gregor is able to regain his sense of duty and his armor to help the Republic.
Gregor holds off Separatist droids to allow the Republic mission to escape, and despite his promise to make his way home, he is seemingly killed in an explosion of rhydonium.
He later appears in the Rebels television series, set fourteen years after Revenge of the Sith.
He is revealed to have removed his inhibitor chip, preventing him from carrying out Order 66.
Now a much older man because of his accelerated aging, he lives on the wasteland planet Seelos and hunts worm-like joopa with Captain Rex (CT-7567) and Commander Wolffe (CT-3636).
Sometime after the Clone Wars, he suffered a brain injury, causing him to suffer brief periods of apparent insanity.

When the Spectres, a team of rebels from the planet Lothal, arrive on Seelos to ask for help, Gregor initially declines, but eventually assists them in fending off an Imperial attack after Wolffe inadvertently exposes them to the Empire.
He later took part in a final battle to free Lothal from Imperial control, where he was fatally wounded by an Imperial technician.

Gregor's commando armor bears yellow markings and an off-white camouflage pattern, and his helmet is adorned with hash-marks modeled after those on Gerry Cheevers' hockey mask.
===
Special Operations Brigade ===
Special Operations Brigade (SOBDE)—a.k.a.
GAR Special Forces—was a brigade of elite clone troopers in the Grand Army of the Republic under the command of Jedi General Arligan Zey and Jedi General Iri Camas.
Within the film series and in the Star Wars expanded universe media, the brigade contained highly-specialized elite Republic special forces soldiers enhanced with genetic experimentation, including Clone Commandos, Advanced Reconnaissance Commandos (ARC Troopers), Alpha-class ARCs, Null-class ARCs, clone assassins, clone shadow troopers, covert operations clone troopers, and special operation clone troopers who usually work alone.
All clone commandos and ARCs were trained by Mandalorian mercenaries.

The style and color of a clone troopers armor often varies depending on their rank, specialization, unit, or environment, for example, the clone troopers on Kashyyyk wear camouflage green scout-style armour whereas the 501st legion wears standard white armor with blue accents.
Another example is the aquatic SCUBA troopers, who appear in the animated series Star Wars: Clone Wars.
SCUBA troopers are equipped with high-tech breathing apparatuses and long range blaster rifles.

====
Clone Force 99 ====
Clone Force 99—informally known as "The Bad Batch"—was a clone commando squad consisting of four clone troopers with personality quirks that only slightly resemble normal clones—the result of specially designed genetic experimentation.
Their names were "Crosshair," a scout sniper specialist with brilliant eyesight abilities; "Wrecker," a reckless heavy ordnance specialist with enhanced muscular form; "Tech," a security specialist with enhanced mental capacity and intelligence; and squad leader Clone Sergeant "Hunter," a CQC specialist with enhanced sensory abilities.
The squad had maintained an impressive 100% mission completion ratio, but were notorious for their insubordination and considered themselves superior to other special operations units.
The squad was introduced in their self-titled story arc of the seventh season of The Clone Wars animated series, where they came to Anaxes to assist Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Rex on their mission to investigate a source of Separatist' victories, as well as trying to rescue Echo, the ARC Trooper who was presumed dead on Lola Sayu, now revealed to have been captured by the Techno Union and held on Skako Minor.
Following the successful mission, Echo decided to join Clone Force 99.

In July 2020, it was announced that Clone Force 99 would be receiving their own spin-off series in 2021 on Disney+
titled "The Bad Batch" and will follow their actions in the early days of the Empire.
==== 05
Commando Battalion ====
05 Commando Battalion was one of 10 units of commando groups within the Grand Army of the Republic's Special Operations Brigade.
The unit held five companies, with each consisting of 100 commandos per company, which accounted for 25 squads.
Within the battalion, Arca Company was housed, who also held Delta Squad and Omega Squad.
Veshok Squad was also housed in a separate company.
During the Clone Wars, Jedi General Bardan Jusik was placed in charge of the unit, until he stepped down from the Jedi Order and as a military General.
When Jusik stepped down, Jedi General Etain Tur-Mukan was placed in charge.
Notable sub-divisions within the 05 Commando Battalion include:

Delta Squad is a unit of four Republic commandos, a type of specialized clone trooper.
The squad is introduced in the video game
Star Wars:
Republic Commando and featured thorough the Republic Commando novels by Karen Traviss, and its troopers make a brief appearance in The Clone Wars television series.
Delta is led by Sergeant Boss, RC-1138 and often referred to as simply 38; he is distinguished by orange markings on his armor, and he is voiced by Temuera Morrison.
Scorch, RC-1262 and
often referred to as simply 62, is the squad's demolitions expert and has a jocular sense of humor; he is distinguished by yellow markings on his armor, and he is voiced by Raphael Sbarge.
Sev, RC-1207 and often referred to as simply 07, is the group's sniper and is characterized as grim.
During a mission on Kashyyyk at the end of the Clone Wars, depicted at the end of Republic Commando, Sev's transmission signal is lost, and he is declared missing in action; his ultimate fate is uncertain.
Sev is distinguished by red markings on his armor, and he is voiced by Jonathan David Cook.
Fixer, RC-1140 and often referred to as simply 40, is the hacker and technical expert and is characterized as distant and stern; he is distinguished by green markings on his armor, and he is voiced by Andrew Chaikin.

Omega Squad is a unit of four Republic commandos featured in the "Republic Commando" novels.
The members wear black armor, and each man is the sole survivor of his previous unit.
Omega is led by Sergeant Niner, RC-1309, who is characterized as serious and protective of the other men.
Darman, RC-1136, is a demolitions expert; he falls in love with Jedi Etain Tur-Mukan, and they have a child.
Fi, RC-8015, is the squad's sniper and medic, and he is described as seemingly easy-going but troubled by the denial of a normal life.
Fi suffers a brain injury in True Colors and is declared legally dead when he falls into a coma; medical procedure requires he be euthanized, but he is taken to Mandalore where he eventually makes a full recovery.
Atin, RC-3222, is the squad's technical expert, and he is described as quiet but deeply stubborn.
Atin was trained by Walon Vau, unlike the others, and he initially harbors deep resentments for Vau.
Corr, CT-5108/8843 later RC-5108/8843, joins the squad upon Fi's injury.
Corr is a regular trooper who served as a bomb disposal expert; because of an injury, both arms from the elbows are prosthetic.

===
Notable Commanders ===


====
Commander Gree ====
Commander Gree, CC-1004, leads the 41st Elite Corps under the command of Jedi General Luminara Unduli.
He first appears in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith aiding Jedi General Yoda on Kashyyyk.
He attempts to carry out Order 66, but he and another Kashyyyk Scout trooper are decapitated by Yoda.
He later appears in the first and second seasons of The Clone Wars television series serving under Luminara.
Gree is distinguished by his dyed red hair shaved into two parallel stripes and eyebrows dyed to match his hair.
His armor bears green markings, and he appears in green camouflage armor in Revenge of the Sith.

====
Commander Bly ====
Commander Bly, CC-5052, leads the 327th Star Corps under the command of Jedi General Aayla Secura.
He first appears in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, in which he and his men carry out Order 66 and shoot Aayla in the back, killing her.
He later appears in season one of The Clone Wars television series alongside Aayla.
Bly is distinguished by his close-shaved hair and yellow rectangular tattoos on his cheeks.
His armor bears yellow markings, and he wears a brown pauldron on his left shoulder, a kilt-like kama, and binocular attachments on his helmets.
He is known as a dependable soldier who greatly values the success of the mission, and he has a "close working relationship" with Aayla and respects her dedication to achieving her objectives.

====
Commander Neyo ====
Marshal Commander Neyo, CC-8826, leads the 91st Mobile Reconnaissance Corps, with initial-command given to Jedi General Mace Windu in the Battle of Ryloth and Battle of Anaxes; command was later transferred to Jedi Generals Adi Gallia and Stass Allie.
Aside from BARC speeders, the corps utilized AT-AP walkers, and AT-RT walkers.
The elite cavalry unit Lightning Squadron was part of the 91st Reconnaissance Corps.
As the war with the Confederacy of Independent Systems progressed, in 20 BBY, the Republic Military formed a special covert-ops team of droids known as D-Squad;
consisted of four astromech droids, R2-D2, QT-KT, U9-C4, and M5-BZ, Neyo's DUM-series pit droid, designated WAC-47, and was placed under the command of Colonel Meebur Gascon.
D-Squad's primary objective was to infiltrate a Separatist Providence-class carrier/destroyer and steal an encryption module that was housed aboard, which was successful.
Later, the commander attended a Republic strategy conference at the Valor space station located in the Carida system.
During the conference, a Separatist attack on the station was thwarted by the members of D-Squad.
Neyo and his troops were stationed on the Outer Rim world of Saleucami, under the command of Jedi General Stass Allie, in the waning days of the Clone Wars.
While patrolling the planet's surface, he received a message from Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine instructing him to execute Order 66.
Neyo fired his BARC speeder's laser cannons on the general, adding Allie to the list of Jedi who perished.
After the transformation of the Galactic Republic into the Galactic Empire, 91st Recon Corps was folded into the Imperial Army.
Neyo had a specialized helmet similar to that of Commander Wolffe, and sported a sash on his armor, and a small, grey, shoulder pauldron over his right shoulder as well.

====
Commander Wolffe ====
Commander Wolffe, CC-3636, leads the 104th Battalion under the command of Jedi General Plo Koon.
He is introduced in The Clone Wars season one episode "Rising Malevolence".
He is the first officer aboard Plo's flagship Triumphant when it is destroyed by General Grievous and is one of three clones to survive.
Afterward, he appears with a redesigned character model, including a cybernetic eye implant, and leads a tight-knit unit nicknamed Wolfpack on the battlefield.
He later appears in the Rebels television series, set fourteen years after Revenge of the Sith.
Wolffe is revealed to have removed his inhibitor chip, preventing him from carrying out Order 66.
Now a much older man because of his accelerated aging, he lives on the wasteland planet Seelos and hunts worm-like joopa with Rex and Gregor.
When they are sought by the rebel protagonists, Wolffe is suspicious of their motives and contacts the Empire to protect himself, Rex, and Gregor.
Rex convinces him that the rebels can be trusted, and Wolffe regrets his actions.

He then thwarts an incoming attack from the Empire to save the rebels, and
later on helps them free their planet from Imperial occupation once and for all.

Wolffe is distinguished by a scar running through his eye and a silver cybernetic eye implant.
His armor is adorned with a gray stylized likeness of a wolf, and he wears a kilt-like kama.
He is characterized as detail-oriented and as having "a sense of strategy superior to that of most clone officers, making him a highly effective complement to Plo.
"
He is impatient with missions that send him away from the battlefield and becomes quickly exasperated with garrulous protocol droid C-3PO.
==
Reception ==
Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter felt the decision to make an army of clones is a "softening of the Star Wars' own mythology", though the article later corrected that not all troopers in the franchise were clones.
Noting that the films never specify that the clone troopers are replaced by regular soldiers by the original trilogy, he believed that the idea of soldiers who are created solely for war and are little more than machines "sanitizes the war of the franchise's title".
He praised the decision of The Force Awakens to explicitly move away from clone troopers as bringing "much-needed moral complexity" to the film's conflict.
The story arcs and character development of various clone trooper characters in the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars was met with praise from both fans and critics alike, with many clones such as Captain Rex becoming fan favorite characters.

== See also ==
Stormtrooper (Star Wars)
501st
Legion
Captain Rex
Galactic Republic
Galactic Empire
Mandalorians
Spartiate


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Clone Troopers in the StarWars.com Databank
Clone trooper on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed is an unfinished multimedia project developed by LucasArts along with Dark Horse Comics, Lego, Hasbro, and Del Rey Books.
It consists of two video games:
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, released in September 2008, and its sequel, Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II, released in October 2010, as well as two corresponding tie-in novels, action figures, a comic book, a reference book, a role-playing game supplement, and a book on the making of the game.

After The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm in 2012 and began production of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, the Unleashed project, along with all other Star Wars expanded universe works, was discarded from the current Star Wars canon and reassigned as part of the Legends non-canonical stories on April 25, 2014, preventing the video game series representing it from continuing further past Unleashed II.

== Story ==
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed tells the story of Darth Vader's secret apprentice, code-named "Starkiller" but born Galen Marek, as he hunts down the remaining Jedi after Emperor Palpatine orders them killed.
Set between Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and Star Wars: Episode IV – A New Hope, the story explores the aftermath of the Great Jedi Purge as well as the rise of Darth Vader.

The events of The Force Unleashed are "pivotal" in Darth Vader's history and development as a character and offer illumination into other characters from A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi.
The game explores themes of redemption and self-sacrifice; aside from hunting Jedi, Starkiller helps build the Rebel Alliance on Vader's orders, who plots to overthrow the Emperor, but eventually comes to truly believe in the Rebel cause and sacrifices himself to save the Alliance's leaders from the Empire, who honor him by adopting his family's crest as their symbol.
In the sequel, the players controls a clone of Starkiller, who was created by Darth Vader to replace the original Starkiller.
However, the clone has the original Starkiller's memories and begins to rebel against his master, eventually escaping to search for his identity.
Along the way, he too comes to believe in the Rebel cause and helps capture Vader.
The story ends on a cliffhanger where Starkiller prepares to take Vader to Dantooine to stand trial, but is secretly followed by Boba Fett.
Due to the cancellation of the third game, as well as the previous two games being assigned into the discarded Legends brand of non-canonical stories, the cliffhanger may never be resolved.

==
Releases ==


===
Video games ===


====
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed ====
The Force Unleashed game was released in North America on September 16, 2008, and in Australia and Southeast Asia on September 17, 2008, and was released in Europe on September 19, 2008.
The game follows the story of Darth Vader's secret apprentice Starkiller, who is tasked with hunting down Jedi while killing rebels and Imperials alike in order to hide his existence from the Emperor, but soon starts to slowly redeem himself to the light side of the Force.
Starkiller was licensed to Namco Bandai Games to be a playable character in both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of Soulcalibur IV.

====
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II ====
A sequel was released on October 26, 2010.
This time, the player assumes the role of a clone of Starkiller that, upon escaping from Darth Vader's clutches, embarks on a quest to find his identity and the original Starkiller's love interest, Juno Eclipse, but is soon forced to join the Rebel Alliance and help them bring down the Empire and Vader, who has captured Juno to lure the clone back to him.

===
Print works ===


====
Novel ====
Sean Williams' novelization was released in the United States on August 19, 2008.
It spent one week as #1 on both Publishers Weekly's and The New York Times' hardcover fiction bestsellers lists, slipping to #7 and #9, respectively, the following week.
It also reached #15 on USA Today's bestsellers list.
Williams took on the writing project in part because of the "catchy description" of The Force Unleashed being "Episode 3.5" of the Star Wars saga.
The novel focuses on the dark side of the Force and its practitioners; Williams found it "interesting" to portray the Jedi as "bad guys."
The author most enjoyed developing the character of Juno Eclipse, exploring the "feminine" side of The Force Unleashed in a way the video game does not.
Williams also said that while the game allows the player to "do" Starkiller's actions, the novel allows readers to experience Starkiller's thoughts about those actions, adding another dimension to the story.

====
Graphic novel ====
Dark Horse's The Force Unleashed graphic novel was published August 18, 2008.
Newsarama called the graphic novel a "solid story" that matches the video game source material in both structure and plot.
IGN gave the graphic novel a score of 6.9/10 (6.4/10 for art,
7.5/10 for the writing), praising the overall story but faulting inconsistency in the art and questioning whether the comic medium was the best way to convey the story.

===
Merchandise ===
At Toy Fair 2007, Hasbro showed seven figures from their action figure line based on the game.
Lego released a model of the main character's ship, the Rogue Shadow.
==
Legacy and third game cancellation ==
After the Unleashed franchise was discontinued following Disney's decision to reboot the Star Wars canon in favor of producing a sequel trilogy, Sam Witwer, Marek's voice actor, revealed that Dave Filoni, the creator of the Star Wars Rebels animated series, considered bringing Marek back into the new canon and having him appear in that series, but ultimately decided against it because he could not find a way to do so without compromising either the new canon's quality or the character's unique distinctions.
Witwer remained involved with the Star Wars franchise, voicing Darth Maul in the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels and the film Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
He also has voiced Palpatine and other minor characters.

== See also ==
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The static induction thyristor (SIT, SITh) is a thyristor with a buried gate structure in which the gate electrodes are placed in n-base region.
Since they are normally on-state, gate electrodes must be negatively or anode biased to hold off-state.
It has low noise, low distortion, high audio frequency power capability.
The turn-on and turn-off times are very short, typically 0.25 microseconds.

==
History ==
The first static induction thyristor was invented by Japanese engineer Jun-ichi Nishizawa in 1975.
It was capable of conducting large currents with a low forward bias and had a small turn-off time.
It had a self controlled gate turn-off thyristor that was commercially available through Tokyo Electric Co. (now Toyo Engineering Corporation) in 1988.
The initial device consisted of a p+nn+ diode and a buried p+ grid.
In 1999, an analytical model of the SITh was developed for the PSPICE circuit simulator.
In 2010, a newer version of SITh was developed by Zhang Caizhen, Wang Yongshun, Liu Chunjuan and Wang Zaixing, the new feature of which was its high forward blocking voltage.

== See also ==
Static induction transistor
MOS composite static induction thyristor


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Static induction thyristor
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith is a 2005 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas.
It stars Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Hayden Christensen, Ian McDiarmid, Samuel L. Jackson, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker and Frank Oz.
It is the final installment in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, the third chapter in the Skywalker saga and the sixth Star Wars film to be released overall.

Revenge of the Sith is set three years after the onset of the Clone Wars, established in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002).
The Jedi are spread across the galaxy, leading a large-scale war against the Separatists.
The Jedi Council dispatches Obi-Wan Kenobi to eliminate General Grievous, the leader of the Separatist army, to put an end to the war.
Meanwhile, after having premonitions of his wife Padmé Amidala dying in childbirth, Anakin Skywalker is tasked by the Council to spy on Palpatine, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic and, secretly, a Sith lord known as Darth Sidious.
Palpatine manipulates Anakin into turning to the dark side of the Force and becoming his apprentice, Darth Vader, at the same time Anakin's love, Padme gives birth to twins, Luke and Leia; however, due to her discontent of Anakin becoming Vader, she passes away due to a broken heart.
Lucas began writing the script before production of Attack of the Clones ended, citing that he wanted to end the trilogy to have similar aspects of a romantic tragedy, thus building into Darth Vader's state at the beginning of the next film.
Production of Revenge of the Sith started in September 2003, and filming took place in Australia with additional locations in Thailand, Switzerland, China, Italy and the United Kingdom.

Revenge of the Sith premiered on May 15, 2005, at the Cannes Film Festival, then released worldwide on May 19, 2005.
The film received positive reviews and was deemed an improvement over the first two prequel films, with praise for its action sequences, mature themes, score, visual effects, darker tone, and the performances of McGregor, McDiarmid, Oz, and Jimmy Smits; criticism largely focused on the film's dialogue and aspects of Christensen's performance.
It broke several box office records during its opening week and went on to earn over $868 million worldwide, making it the second-highest-grossing film in the Star Wars franchise at the time.
It was the highest-grossing film in the U.S. and the second-highest-grossing film worldwide in 2005.
The film also holds the record for the highest opening-day gross on a Thursday, making $50 million.

==
Plot ==
Above Coruscant, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker lead a mission to rescue the kidnapped Supreme Chancellor Palpatine from the cyborg Separatist commander General Grievous.
After infiltrating Grievous' flagship, the Jedi battle Sith Lord Count Dooku, whom Anakin overpowers and decapitates at Palpatine's urging.
Grievous escapes the battle-torn ship, which the Jedi crash-land on Coruscant.

There, Anakin reunites with his wife, Padmé Amidala, who reveals that she is pregnant.
While initially excited, Anakin soon begins to have nightmares about Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine appoints Anakin to the Jedi Council as his personal representative.
The Council, suspicious of Palpatine, approve the appointment, but decline to grant Anakin the rank of Jedi Master and instead instruct him to spy on Palpatine, diminishing Anakin's trust in the Jedi.

Grievous is ordered by Darth Sidious to relocate the Separatist Council to the lava planet of Mustafar.
Obi-Wan travels to Utapau, where he kills Grievous, and Yoda travels to the Wookiee homeworld of Kashyyyk to defend it from a Separatist invasion.
Meanwhile, Palpatine tempts Anakin with his knowledge of the Force, including the power to prevent death, which he offers to teach him to save Padmé's life.
Anakin deduces that he is the Sith Lord behind the war and reports Palpatine's treachery to Mace Windu, who confronts and subdues him.
Desperate to save Padmé's life, Anakin disarms Windu before he can kill Palpatine, who sends Windu falling to his death.
Anakin pledges himself to the Sith, and Sidious knights him Darth Vader.

Palpatine then issues Order 66, which commands the clone troopers to kill their commanding Jedi officers, thus sending the Jedi Order into near-extinction.
Meanwhile, Vader and a battalion of clone troopers kill the remaining Jedi in the Jedi Temple, after which Vader travels to the volcanic planet Mustafar to assassinate the Separatist leaders.
Palpatine declares himself Emperor before the Galactic Senate, transforming the Republic into the Galactic Empire, and denounces the Jedi as traitors.
Having survived the chaos, Obi-Wan and Yoda return to Coruscant and learn of Anakin's turn to the dark side.
Yoda orders Obi-Wan to confront Vader while he faces Darth Sidious.

When Padmé learns of Anakin's treachery, she travels to Mustafar – with Obi-Wan stowing away on her ship – and implores Vader to abandon the dark side, but he refuses.
Sensing Obi-Wan's presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill him, Vader angrily uses the Force to strangle Padmé to unconsciousness.
Obi-Wan then engages Vader in a lightsaber duel that ends with Obi-Wan severing Vader's legs and left arm.
Obi-Wan retrieves Vader's lightsaber and leaves him for dead at the bank of a lava flow.

On Coruscant, Yoda battles Sidious until their duel reaches a stalemate.
Yoda then flees with Senator Bail Organa and regroups with Obi-Wan and Padmé on the planetoid Polis Massa.
There, Padmé gives birth to twins, whom she names Luke and Leia, and dies soon after, having lost her will to live.
On Mustafar, Sidious retrieves a barely alive Vader and takes him to Coruscant, where his mutilated body is treated and covered in a black armored suit.
Palpatine tells him that he killed Padmé in a blind rage, devastating Vader.

Obi-Wan and Yoda plan to conceal the twins from the Sith and go into exile until the time is right to challenge the Empire.
As Padmé's funeral takes place on her homeworld of Naboo, Sidious and Vader supervise the construction of the Death Star.
Bail takes Leia to his homeworld of Alderaan, where he and his wife adopt her, while Obi-Wan delivers Luke to his step-uncle and aunt, Owen and Beru Lars, on Tatooine before going into exile to watch over the boy.

== Cast ==
Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Master, general of the Galactic Republic and Anakin's mentor.

Natalie Portman as Padmé Amidala, a senator of Naboo who is secretly Anakin's wife and pregnant with their children.

Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, a Jedi Knight, hero of the Clone Wars and former Padawan of Obi-Wan, who turns to the dark side of the Force and becomes the Sith lord Darth Vader.
Christensen also plays Vader in his suit.

Ian McDiarmid as Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic who is secretly a Sith Lord, and later the founder and leader of the Galactic Empire.
He takes advantage of Anakin's distrust of the Jedi and fear of Padmé dying to turn him towards the dark side, becoming Vader's master.

Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, a Jedi Master and senior member of the Jedi Council.

Jimmy Smits as Bail Organa, a senator of Alderaan.

Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, Darth Sidious' Sith apprentice and leader of the Separatists.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, Anakin and Padmé's personal protocol droid that Anakin created as a child.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2, Anakin's astromech droid.

Frank Oz as the voice of Yoda, a Jedi Grandmaster and the leader of the Jedi Council.
Peter Mayhew, Oliver Ford Davies, Ahmed Best, and Silas Carson reprise their roles as Chewbacca, Sio Bibble, Jar Jar Binks, and Nute Gunray and Ki-Adi-Mundi, respectively, from the previous films.
Joel Edgerton and Bonnie Piesse also make cameo appearances, reprising their roles as Owen and Beru Lars respectively from Attack of the Clones.
Sound engineer Matthew Wood provides the voice of General Grievous, the fearsome cyborg commander of the Separatists' droid army; Temuera Morrison portrays Commander Cody and the rest of the clone troopers; Bruce Spence portrays Tion Medon, local administrator of Utapau; Jeremy Bulloch (who played Boba Fett in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi) appears as Captain Colton, the pilot of the Rebel Blockade Runner Tantive IV; Genevieve O'Reilly portrays senator Mon Mothma, though her scene was ultimately cut.
Rohan Nichol portrays Captain Raymus Antilles.
Wayne Pygram appears as a young Wilhuff Tarkin, and stunt coordinator Nick Gillard appears as a Jedi named Cin Drallig (his name spelled backward, without the 'k').
Editor Roger Barton's son Aidan Barton portrays Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa as infants.
James Earl Jones makes an uncredited cameo appearance, reprising his role from previous films as the voice of Darth Vader.
Director and Star Wars creator George Lucas has a cameo as Baron Papanoida, a blue-faced alien in attendance at the Coruscant opera house.
Lucas' son Jett portrays Zett Jukassa, a young Jedi-in-training.
One of Lucas' daughters, Amanda, appears as Terr Taneel, seen in a security hologram, while his other daughter Katie plays a blue-skinned Pantoran named Chi Eekway, visible when Palpatine arrives at the Senate after being saved by the Jedi and talking to Baron Papanoida at the opera house.
Christian Simpson appeared as a stunt double for Hayden Christensen.

==
Production
==
===
Writing ===
Lucas stated that he conceived the Star Wars saga's story in the form of a plot outline in 1973.
However, he later clarified that, at the time of the saga's conception, he had not fully realized the details
—only major plot points.
The film's climactic duel has its basis in the Return of the Jedi novelization, in which Obi-Wan recounts his battle with Anakin that ended with the latter falling "into a molten pit".
Lucas began working on the screenplay for Episode III before the previous film, Attack of the Clones, was released, proposing to concept artists that the film would open with a montage of seven battles on seven planets.
In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski surmises that Lucas found flaws with Anakin's fall to the dark side and radically reorganized the plot.
For example, instead of opening the film with a montage of Clone War battles, Lucas decided to focus on Anakin, ending the first act with him killing Count Dooku, an action that signals his turn to the dark side.
A significant number of fans speculated online about the episode title for the film with rumored titles including Rise of the Empire,
The Creeping Fear (which was also named as the film's title on the official website on April Fool's 2004), and Birth of the Empire.
Eventually, Revenge of the Sith also became a title guessed by fans that George Lucas would indirectly confirm.
The title is a reference to Revenge of the Jedi, the original title of Return of the Jedi; Lucas changed the title scant weeks before the premiere of Return of the Jedi, declaring that Jedi do not seek revenge.
Since Lucas refocused the film on Anakin, he had to sacrifice certain extraneous plot points relating to Attack of the Clones.
Lucas had previously promised fans that he would explain the mystery behind the erasure of the planet Kamino from the Jedi Archives.
However, Lucas abandoned this plot thread in order to devote more time to Anakin's story, leaving the matter unresolved on film.
Lucas had originally planned to include even more ties to the original trilogy, and wrote early drafts of the script in which a 10-year-old Han Solo appeared on Kashyyyk, but the role was not cast or shot.
He also wrote a scene in which Palpatine reveals to Anakin that he created him from midichlorians, and is thus his "father", a clear parallel to Vader's revelation to Luke in The Empire Strikes Back, but Lucas ejected this scene as well.
Another planned scene by Lucas that was written during the early development of the film was a conversation between Master Yoda and the ghostly Qui-Gon Jinn, with Liam Neeson reprising his role as Jinn (he also hinted his possible appearance in the film).
However, the scene was never filmed and Neeson was never recorded, although the scene was present in the film's novelization.
Neeson finally reprised the role in an episode of The Clone Wars in 2011.After principal photography was complete in 2003, Lucas made even more changes in Anakin's character, rewriting the entire "turn" sequence.
Lucas accomplished this "rewrite" through editing the principal footage and filming new scenes during pickups in London in 2004.
In the previous versions, Anakin had myriad reasons for turning to the dark side, one of which was his sincere belief that the Jedi were plotting to take over the Republic.
Although this is still intact in the finished film, by revising and refilming many scenes, Lucas emphasized Anakin's desire to save Padmé from death.
Thus, in the version that made it to theaters, Anakin falls to the dark side primarily to save Padmé.
===
Art design ===
For the Kashyyyk environment, the art department turned to the Star Wars Holiday Special for inspiration.
Over a period of months, Lucas would approve hundreds of designs that would eventually appear in the film.
He would later rewrite entire scenes and action sequences to correspond to certain designs he had chosen.
The designs were then shipped to the pre-visualization department to create moving CGI versions known as animatics.
Ben Burtt would edit these scenes with Lucas in order to pre-visualize what the film would look like before the scenes were filmed.
The pre-visualization footage featured a basic raw CGI environment with equally unprocessed character models performing a scene, typically for action sequences.
Steven Spielberg was brought in as a "guest director" to make suggestions to the art designers for the Mustafar duel, and oversee the pre-visualization of an unused version of the Utapau chase scene.
Later, the pre-visualization and art department designs were sent to the production department to begin "bringing the film out of the concept phase" by building sets, props and costumes.

===
Filming ===
Although the first scene filmed was the final scene to appear in the film (shot during the filming of Attack of the Clones in 2000), the first bulk of principal photography on the film occurred from June 30, 2003 to September 17, 2003, with additional photography occurring at Shepperton Studios in Surrey and Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire from August 2004 to January 31, 2005.
The initial filming took place on sound stages at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, although practical environments were shot as background footage later to be composited into the film.
These included the limestone mountains depicting Kashyyyk, which were filmed in Phuket, Thailand.
The production company was also fortunate enough to be shooting at the same time that Mount Etna erupted in Italy.
Camera crews were sent to the location to shoot several angles of the volcano that were later spliced into the background of the animatics and the final film version of the planet Mustafar.
While shooting key dramatic scenes, Lucas would often use an "A camera" and "B camera", or the "V technique", a process that involves shooting with two or more cameras at the same time in order to gain several angles of the same performance.
Using the HD technology developed for the film, the filmmakers were able to send footage to the editors the same day it was shot, a process that would require a full 24 hours had it been shot on film.
Footage featuring the planet Mustafar was given to editor Roger Barton, who was on location in Sydney cutting the climactic duel.

Hayden Christensen says Lucas asked him "to bulk up and physically show the maturity that had taken place between the two films.
"
The actor says he worked out with a trainer in Sydney for three months and ate "six meals a day and on every protein, weight gain supplement that man has created" to go from 160 lbs to 185 lbs.
Christensen and Ewan McGregor began rehearsing their climactic lightsaber duel long before Lucas would shoot it.
They trained extensively with stunt coordinator Nick Gillard to memorize and perform their duel together.
As in the previous prequel film, McGregor and Christensen performed their own lightsaber fighting scenes without the use of stunt doubles.
The speed at which Vader and Obi-Wan engage in their duel is mostly the speed at which it was filmed, although there are instances where single frames were removed to increase the velocity of particular strikes.
An example of this occurs as Obi-Wan strikes down on Vader after applying an armlock in the duel's first half.
Revenge of the Sith eventually became the first Star Wars film in which Anakin Skywalker and the suited Darth Vader were played by the same actor in the same film.
As Christensen recounted, it was originally intended to simply have a "tall guy" in the Darth Vader costume, but after "begging and pleading" Christensen persuaded Lucas to have the Vader costume used in the film created specifically to fit him.
The new costume featured shoe lifts and a muscle suit.
It also required Christensen (who is 6 feet or 1.8 metres tall) to look through the helmet's mouthpiece.
In 2004, Gary Oldman was originally approached to provide the voice of General Grievous; however, complications arose during contract negotiations after Oldman learned the film was to be made outside of the Screen Actors Guild, of which he is a member.
He backed out of the role rather than violate the union's rules.
Matthew Wood, who voiced Grievous, disputed this story at Celebration III, held in Indianapolis.
According to him, Oldman is a friend of producer Rick McCallum, and thus recorded an audition as a favor to him, but was not chosen.
Wood, who was also the supervising sound editor, was in charge of the auditions and submitted his audition anonymously in the midst of 30 others, under the initials "A.S." for Alan Smithee.
Days later, he received a phone call asking for the full name to the initials "A.S."


===
Visual effects ===
The post-production department (handeled by Industrial Light & Magic) began work during filming and continued until weeks before the film was released in 2005.
Special effects were created using almost all formats, including model work, CGI and practical effects.
The same department later composited all such work into the filmed scenes—both processes taking nearly two years to complete.
Revenge of the Sith has 2,151 shots that use special effects, a world record.
The DVD featurette Within a Minute illustrated the film required 910 artists and 70,441 man-hours to create 49 seconds of footage for the Mustafar duel alone.
Members of Hyperspace, the Official Star Wars Fan Club, received a special look into the production.
Benefits included not only special articles, but they also received access to a webcam that transmitted a new image every 20 seconds during the time it was operating in Fox Studios Australia.
Many times the stars, and Lucas himself, were spotted on the webcam.

=== Removed scenes ===
Lucas excised all the scenes of a group of Senators, including Padmé, Bail Organa, and Mon Mothma (Genevieve O'Reilly), organizing an alliance to prevent Palpatine from usurping any more emergency powers.
Though this is essentially the Rebel Alliance's birth, the scenes were discarded to achieve more focus on Anakin's story.

The scene where Yoda arrives on Dagobah to begin his self-imposed exile was also removed, but is featured as an extended scene in the DVD release, although McCallum stated he hopes Lucas may add it to the release if Lucas releases a six-episode DVD box set.
Bai Ling filmed minor scenes for the film playing a senator, but her role was cut during editing.
She claimed this was because she appeared in a nude pictorial for the June 2005 issue of Playboy, whose appearance on newsstands coincided with the film's May release.
Lucas denied this, stating that the cut had been made more than a year earlier, and that he had cut his own daughter's scenes as well.
The bonus features show an additional removed scene in which Jedi Master Shaak Ti is killed by General Grievous in front of Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker.
The bonus features also show Kenobi and Skywalker running through Grievous's ship, escaping droids through a fuel tunnel, and arguing over what the droid R2-D2 is saying.

===
Music ===
The music was composed and conducted by John Williams (who has composed and conducted the score for every episode in the Star Wars saga), and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra and London Voices.

The film's soundtrack was released by Sony Pictures Classical Records on May 3, 2005, more than two weeks before the film's release.
A music video titled A Hero Falls was created for the film's theme, "Battle of the Heroes", featuring footage from the film and was also available on the DVD.The soundtrack also came with a collectors' DVD
, Star Wars: A Musical Journey, at no additional cost.
The DVD, hosted by McDiarmid, features 16 music videos set to remastered selections of music from all six film scores, set chronologically through the saga.

==
Releases ==
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith charity premieres took place in Seattle, Los Angeles, Chicago, Washington D.C., Boston, Denver, Atlanta, San Francisco, and Miami on Thursday, May 12, 2005; and on May 13, 2005, there were two additional charity premiere screenings in George Lucas's hometown of Modesto, California.
The official premiere was at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival (out of competition) on May 16.
Its theatrical release in most other countries took place on May 19 to coincide with the 1999 release of The Phantom Menace
(the 1977 release of A New Hope and the 1983 release of Return of the Jedi were also released on the same day and month, six years apart).
The global outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas claimed one week before the premiere that it may have cost the U.S. economy approximately US$627 million in lost productivity because of employees who took a day off or reported in sick.
Grauman's Chinese Theatre, a traditional venue for the Star Wars films, did not show it.
However, a line of people stood there for more than a month hoping to convince someone to change this.
Most of them took advantage of an offer to see the film at a nearby cinema, ArcLight Cinemas (formerly the "Cinerama Dome").
On May 16, the Empire Cinema in London's Leicester Square hosted a day-long Star Wars marathon showing of all six films; an army of Imperial stormtroopers "guarded" the area, and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra gave a free concert of Star Wars music.
===
Leaked workprint ===
A copy of the film leaked onto peer-to-peer file sharing networks just hours after opening in theaters.
The film was a time-stamped workprint, suggesting it may have come from within the industry rather than from someone who videotaped an advance screening.
Eight people were later charged with copyright infringement and distributing material illegally.
Documents filed by the Los Angeles District Attorney allege that a copy of the film was taken from an unnamed Californian post-production office by an employee, who later pleaded guilty to his charges.
The illegal copy was passed among seven people until reaching an eighth party, who also pleaded guilty to uploading to an unnamed P2P network.
Shortly after the above-mentioned print was leaked, it was released in Shanghai as a bootleg DVD with Chinese subtitles.
The unknown producer of this DVD also chose to include English subtitles, which were in fact translated back into English from the Chinese translation, rather than using the original English script.
This resulted in the subtitles being heavily mis-translated, often causing unintentional humor.
For example, in the opening crawl the title is mis-translated as Star War:
The Third Gathers – The Backstroke of the West.
Darth Vader's cry of "Noooooooo!"
(
不要) is rendered as "Do not want".
This translation error would later be popularized as an Internet meme.
In 2016, YouTube user GratefulDeadpool uploaded a fan edit of Revenge of the Sith in which the cast's voices were dubbed by other actors to match the bootleg subtitles.

===
Rating ===
Revenge of the Sith is the first Star Wars film to receive a PG-13 rating from the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), officially for "thematic elements sci-fi violence and some intense images", namely for the scene in which Darth Vader is set aflame by lava and molten rock.
Lucas had stated months before the MPAA's decision that he felt the film should receive a PG-13 rating, because of Anakin's final moments and the film's content being the darkest and most intense of all six films.
Some critics, including Roger Ebert and Richard Roeper, later responded that children would be able to handle the film as long as they had parental guidance, hence a "PG rating".
All previously released films in the series were rated PG.

===
Home media ===
The film was released on DVD and VHS on October 31, 2005, in the UK and Ireland; on November 1, 2005, it was released in the United States and Canada on DVD; and on November 3, 2005, it was released in Australia.
It was also released in most major territories on or near the same day.
The DVD included a number of documentaries including a new full-length documentary as well as two featurettes, one which explores the prophecy of Anakin Skywalker as the Chosen One, the other looking at the film's stunts and a 15-part collection of web-documentaries from the official web site.
Like the other DVD releases, included is an audio commentary track featuring Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, animation director Rob Coleman, and ILM visual effects supervisors John Knoll and Roger Guyett.
Six deleted scenes were included with introductions from Lucas and McCallum.

This release is notable because, due to marketing issues, it was the first Star Wars film never to be released on VHS in the United States.
However, the film was released on VHS in Australia, the U.K. and other countries.
The DVD was re-released in a prequel trilogy box set on November 4, 2008.The Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray on December 16, 2010, in three different editions.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Revenge of the Sith was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued Revenge of the Sith on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on March 31, 2020.
===
3D re-release ===
On September 28, 2010, it was announced that all six films in the series were to be stereo-converted to 3D.
The films would be re-released in chronological order beginning with The Phantom Menace on February 10, 2012.
Revenge of the Sith was originally scheduled to be re-released in 3D on October 11, 2013.
However, on January 28, 2013, Lucasfilm announced that it was postponing the 3D release of episodes II and III in order to "focus 100 percent of our efforts on Star Wars:
The Force Awakens" and that further information about 3D release plans would be issued at a later date.
The premiere of the 3D version was shown on April 17, 2015, at Star Wars Celebration Anaheim.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 80% based on 302 reviews, with an average rating of 7.3/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "With Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
, George Lucas brings his second Star Wars trilogy to a suitably thrilling and often poignant – if still a bit uneven – conclusion."
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 68 out of 100, based on 40 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score as the previous two films.
Most critics have considered the film to be the best of the prequel trilogy.
A. O. Scott of The New York Times concluded that it was "the best of the four episodes Mr. Lucas has directed", and equal to The Empire Strikes Back as "the richest and most challenging movie in the cycle".
In a 2007 summary of the 100 Best Science-Fiction Films on Rotten Tomatoes, Revenge of the Sith was placed 51 out of 100, making it the only Star Wars prequel film to earn a rank on that list.
J.R. Jones, a Chicago Reader critic who disliked The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones, gave the film a positive review, saying that it had a "relatively thoughtful story".
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half out of four stars, writing "If [Lucas] got bogged down in solemnity and theory in Episode II:
Attack of the Clones, the Force is in a jollier mood this time, and Revenge of the Sith is a great entertainment", but he noted that "the dialogue throughout the movie is once again its weakest point".
Though many critics and fans viewed Revenge of the Sith as the strongest of the three prequels, some viewers thought it was more or less on par with the previous two episodes.
Much of the criticism was directed towards the dialogue, particularly the film's romantic scenes; critics claimed this demonstrated Lucas's weakness as a writer of dialogue, a subject with which Lucas openly agreed when receiving the Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Film Institute.
Some film critics and fans criticized Hayden Christensen's acting, calling it "wooden".

In 2012, Glittering Images art critic Camille Paglia praised the film, comparing some of its scenes to works by modern painters and calling it "the greatest work of art in recent memory".
Paglia explained that the film's finale ...has more inherent artistic value, emotional power, and global impact than anything by the artists you name.
It's because the art world has flat-lined and become an echo chamber of received opinion and toxic over-praise.
It's like the emperor's new clothes -- people are too intimidated to admit what they secretly think or what they might think with their blinders off.
Episode III epitomizes the modern digital art movement, more so than other piece from the last 30 years.
I had considered using Japanese anime for the digital art chapter of the book, but it lacked the overwhelming operatic power and yes, seriousness of Lucas's Revenge of the Sith.

During the late 2010s, the film amassed a cult following on social media among young fans who were children when the film was released, using the film's dialogue to create Internet memes out of nostalgia.
Some American conservatives criticized the film, claiming it had a liberal bias and was a commentary on the George W. Bush administration and Iraq War.
Some websites went so far as to propose a boycott of the film.
Lucas defended the film, stating that the film's storyline was written during the Vietnam War and was influenced by that conflict rather than the war in Iraq.
Lucas also said "The parallels between Vietnam and what we're doing in Iraq now are unbelievable".
===
Box office ===
The film was released in 115 countries.
Its worldwide gross eventually reached $849 million—making it the second most financially successful film of 2005, behind Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire.
The film earned an estimated $16.91 million from 2,900 midnight screenings in North America upon its release.
In total, it earned a record $50 million on its opening day.
It was surpassed the following year by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest, which earned $55.5 million on its opening day.
With only the May 19 earnings, the film broke four box office records: midnight screenings gross (previously held by The Lord of the Rings:
The Return of the King, $8 million), opening day gross (Spider-Man 2, with $40.4 million), single day gross (Shrek 2 with $44.8 million) and Thursday gross (
The Matrix Reloaded with $37.5 million).
Its single day and opening day gross records were later surpassed by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest on July 7, 2006, when that movie grossed $55.5 million on its opening day, and its midnight screening gross was broken by The Dark Knight on July 18, 2008 with $18.5 million.
According to box office analysis sites, the film set American records for highest gross in a given number of days for each of its first 12 days of release except for the seventh and eighth, where the record is narrowly held by Spider-Man 2.
On its fifth day, it became the highest-grossing film of 2005, surpassing Hitch ($177.6 million).
The film earned $158.5 million in its first four-day period, surpassing the previous four-day record held by The Matrix Reloaded ($134.3 million), and joining Spider-Man, The Matrix Reloaded and Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire as one the only films to make $100 million in three days.
In eight days, it reached the $200 million mark (a record tied with Spider-Man 2) and by its 17th day, the film had passed $300 million (surpassing the record of 18 days of Shrek 2).
It was eventually the third-fastest film (after Shrek 2 and Spider-Man) to reach $350 million.
The film ended its run in American theaters on October 20, 2005, finishing with a total gross of $380,270,577.
It ranks 29th in all-time domestic grosses and is the highest-grossing U.S. of 2005, out-grossing second-place
The Chronicles of Narnia:
The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe by nearly $90 million.
The film sold an estimated 59,324,600 tickets in the US.
It topped the domestic box office for two consecutive weekends before being overtaken by Madagascar and The Longest Yard (which were in their second weekends).International grosses that exceeded $460 million include those Australia ($27.2 million), France and Algeria ($56.9 million), Germany ($47.3 million), Italy ($11.3 million), Japan ($82.7 million), Mexico ($15.3 million), South Korea ($10.3 million), Spain ($23.8 million), and the United Kingdom and Ireland ($72.8 million).
===
Accolades ===
Following the release of Revenge of the Sith—the completion of the original and prequel Star Wars series—on June 9, 2005, George Lucas was presented with the 33rd American Film Institute Lifetime Achievement Award.
The institute honored his "astonishing contributions to the art and technology of filmmaking, as well as the impact of the epic Star Wars series".
Despite being the prequel trilogy's best reviewed and received film, it received fewer award nominations than the previous films.
It became the only Star Wars film not to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects; it was nominated for Best Makeup (Dave Elsey and Nikki Gooley), losing to The Chronicles of Narnia:
The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.
It also won "Favorite Motion Picture" and "Favorite Dramatic Motion Picture" awards at the People's Choice Awards, "Hollywood Movie of the Year" award at the Hollywood Film Festival, Empire Awards (Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film), and the Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie – Action.
As did every film of the original trilogy, the film won the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film.
Williams also won Best Music.
The film was nominated for ten Saturn Awards overall, including Best Director and Best Writing for Lucas, Best Actor for Christensen, Best Actress for Natalie Portman and Best Supporting Actor for Ian McDiarmid.
Of the three Star Wars prequels, the film received the fewest Golden Raspberry Awards nominations: only one, for Christensen as Worst Supporting Actor, which he won.
(
The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones received seven nominations each, with one and two wins, respectively.)
It is the only Star Wars prequel not to receive a Razzie nomination for "Worst Picture".
Christensen further won the "Best Villain" award at the MTV Movie Awards.
The film also received the fewest nominations (and no wins) at the 2005 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards: Worst Screenplay for a Film Grossing More Than $100M and Worst On-Screen Couple (Christensen and Portman).

==
Themes ==
Throughout Revenge of the Sith, Lucas refers to a wide range of films and other sources, drawing on political, military, and mythological motifs to enhance his story's impact.
Perhaps the most media coverage was given to a particular exchange between Anakin and Obi-Wan, which led to the aforementioned controversy: "If you're not with me, then you're my enemy", Anakin declares.
Despite Lucas' insistence to the contrary, The Seattle Times concluded, "Without naming Bush or the Patriot Act, it's all unmistakable no matter what your own politics may be.
"McDiarmid, Lucas, and others have also called Anakin's journey to the dark side Faustian in the sense of making a "pact with the devil" for short-term gain, with the fiery volcano planet Mustafar representing hell.
Midway through the film, Lucas intercuts between Anakin and Padmé by themselves, thinking about one another in the Jedi Temple and their apartment, respectively, during sunset.
The sequence is without dialogue and complemented by a moody, synthesized soundtrack.
Lucas' coverage of the exterior cityscapes, skylines and interior isolation in the so-called "Ruminations" sequence is similar to the cinematography and mise-en-scène of Rosemary's Baby, a film in which a husband makes a literal pact with the devil.

==
Other media ==


===
Novelization ===
The film's novelization was written by Matthew Stover.
It includes much more dialogue than the film, and certain story elements were fleshed out further in the novelization, such as Anakin and Palpatine's relationship and Palpatine's apprenticeship to Darth Plagueis.
===
Video game ===
A video game based on the film was released on May 5, 2005, two weeks before the film.
The game followed the film's storyline for the most part, integrating scenes from the film.
However, many sections of the game featured scenes cut from the film, or entirely new scenes for the game.
The style of the game was mostly lightsaber combat and fighting as Obi-Wan or Anakin.
It also has a form of multiplayer mode, which includes both "VS" and "Cooperative" mode.
In the first mode, two players fight with characters of their choice against each other in a lightsaber duel to the death.
In the latter mode, two players team up to combat increasingly difficult waves of enemies.

===
The Clone Wars and subsequent Star Wars media ===
The 2008 animated film and subsequent television series fill the three-year gap between the events of Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
Several plot threads planned but ultimately dropped from Revenge of the Sith were instead incorporated into The Clone Wars; these included Boba Fett's revenge plot against Mace Windu for his father Jango's death, as well as the mystery behind deceased Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas introduced in Attack of the Clones.
The final four episodes of the series take place concurrently with Revenge of the Sith.
Several scenes from the film were recreated and expanded for these episodes in order to showcase the whereabouts of Anakin Skywalker's former Padawan Ahsoka Tano during the events of the film.
While Ahsoka was a major character in The Clone Wars, she is not alluded to in Revenge of the Sith as the character had not yet been created when the film was in production.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at StarWars.com
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at IMDb
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at AllMovie
Star Trek:
Picard is an American television series created by Akiva Goldsman, Michael Chabon, Kirsten Beyer, and Alex Kurtzman for the streaming service CBS All Access (later rebranded as Paramount+).
It is the eighth Star Trek series and was launched in 2020 as part of Kurtzman's expanded Star Trek Universe.
The series features a retired Jean-Luc Picard who has been deeply affected by the death of Data in the film Star Trek: Nemesis (2002) and the destruction of the planet Romulus in the film Star Trek (2009).

Patrick Stewart executive produces the series and stars as Picard, reprising his role from the series Star Trek:
The Next Generation as well as other Star Trek media.
Alison Pill, Isa Briones, Evan Evagora, Michelle Hurd, Santiago Cabrera, Harry Treadaway, Jeri Ryan, Orla Brady, and Brent Spiner also star.
The series was first rumored in June 2018, and was officially announced that August.
Stewart had previously said he would not return to the franchise after Nemesis.
The series is produced by CBS Television Studios in association with Secret Hideout, Weed Road Pictures, Escapist Fare, and Roddenberry Entertainment, and was designed to be slower and more character-focused than previous series in the franchise.
Filming takes place in California, which granted the series large tax credits.
Chabon served as showrunner for the first season, with Goldsman and Terry Matalas taking over from him with the second.

Star Trek:
Picard premiered on CBS All Access on January 23, 2020, and its first season ran for 10 episodes until March 26.
The second is in production and is set to debut on Paramount+
in 2022.
The series was met with positive reviews from critics, who praised Stewart's performance and the focus on character over action, though some criticized the series' slow pace.
Several tie-in projects were created for the series, including an episode of the companion series Star Trek: Short Treks that serves as a prequel to Picard.

==
Premise ==
The series begins 20 years after Jean-Luc Picard's last appearance in Star Trek: Nemesis (2002), and finds the character deeply affected by the death of Data in that film as well as the destruction of the planet Romulus in the film Star Trek (2009).

==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2020) ===


===
Season 2 ===


== Cast and characters ==
Patrick Stewart as Jean-Luc Picard: A former Starfleet admiral who previously commanded the USS Enterprise.
Picard retired from Starfleet in protest when the Federation chose not to aid the Romulans when their planet was destroyed.
Co-creator Alex Kurtzman saw the series as a redemption story for Picard who is now at the end of his life and must face the consequences of his choice to abandon Starfleet and the Romulans, with the series depicting the suffering that has happened since he retired and Picard's attempts to make up for his past actions.

Alison Pill as Agnes Jurati:
A former Starfleet doctor and expert on synthetic life who joins Picard's mission.

Isa Briones as Dahj and Soji Asha:
Twin androids with organic bodies created as the daughters of Data.
Briones also portrays Sutra, an earlier android model.

Evan Evagora as Elnor: A Romulan refugee whom Picard abandoned as a boy and was raised by the Qowat Milat, a sect of all-female warrior nuns.

Michelle Hurd as Rafaella "Raffi" Musiker: Picard's former Starfleet first officer who struggles with substance abuse.

Santiago Cabrera as Cristobal "Chris" Rios:
A former Starfleet officer and the pilot of La Sirena.
Cabrera also portrays the emergency holograms aboard La Sirena.

Harry Treadaway as Narek:
A Romulan agent sent to seduce and spy on Soji Asha.

Jeri Ryan as Seven of Nine
Orla Brady as Laris
Brent Spiner as Altan Inigo Soong


==
Production ==


===
Development ===


====
Background ====
In June 2018, after becoming sole showrunner of the series Star Trek: Discovery, Alex Kurtzman signed a five-year overall deal with CBS Television Studios to expand the Star Trek franchise beyond Discovery to several new series, miniseries, and animated series.
One of these new series was reported to star Patrick Stewart, reprising his role of Jean-Luc Picard from the series Star Trek: The Next Generation.
Kurtzman and Akiva Goldsman (who worked on the first season of Discovery) were attached to the project.
When CBS had first approached him about making more Star Trek series, Kurtzman believed Picard was the greatest Star Trek captain and included a series featuring the character on his wish list, despite Stewart having said that he did not want to return to the franchise.
While developing ideas for the short form companion series Star Trek: Short Treks, Kurtzman and his team developed a story that would have featured Nichelle Nichols reprising her original Star Trek role of Uhura.
The short would have seen a young Picard visit Uhura in hospital and receive a mission related to the Borg.
The short did not move forward, but it led to discussions of a short starring Stewart as an older version of Picard.
After developing the older Picard story, the team decided that they had enough to pitch a full series focused on the character to Stewart; Kurtzman and Goldsman contacted the actor before January 2018 to discuss this idea, and met with him along with Discovery writer Kirsten Beyer at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel.
Stewart took the meeting with the intention of turning the project down, but after Beyer convinced him to reconsider he agreed to read a four-page document outlining their ideas.
At that time, Goldsman invited novelist Michael Chabon, a friend, to work on the project as well and the four ultimately produced a 35-page document that they sent to Stewart.
Stewart asked to meet with the group again in March 2018, where he expressed his approval of their pitch.
Stewart said the pitch felt like "something very unusual, and I was intrigued.
"
While deciding whether to join the project, Stewart asked Kurtzman that the series be "so different" from previous Star Trek stories, "both what people remember but also not what they're expecting at all, otherwise why do it?"
He was also concerned that the series would be "jokey", but received assurances from the project's creative team that it would not be.

==== Announcement and creative team ====
On August 4, 2018, Stewart made a surprise appearance at the annual Las Vegas Star Trek Convention to officially announce the series and confirm that he would star in it.
He explained that after last portraying the character in the 2002 film Star Trek: Nemesis, he felt his role in the franchise "had run its natural course", but in the years since he was humbled by stories of the impact the character had on the lives of fans and so was now happy "to research and experience
what comforting and reforming light he might shine on these often very dark times".
In addition to starring, Stewart was also set to executive produce the series alongside Kurtzman, Goldsman, Chabon, Discovery's James Duff, Heather Kadin of Kurtzman's production company Secret Hideout, and Rod Roddenberry (the son of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry) and Trevor Roth of Roddenberry Entertainment.
Beyer also remained part of the creative team, serving as supervising producer for the series.
The series was set to premiere in 2019.

Kadin revealed in October that the series was intended to be ongoing rather than a limited miniseries, and said that its release dates would not overlap with Discovery or any other new Star Trek series.
Kurtzman added that the Picard series would be "its own thing", later elaborating that where Discovery is "a bullet", the Picard series is "a very contemplative show" with its own "rhythm" and more of a "real-world" feeling.
CBS CCO David Nevins confirmed in December 2018 that the series was intended to debut on CBS
All Access at the end of 2019, after the full release of Discovery's second season and several Star Trek:
Short Treks shorts.
Stewart revealed a month later that the series would consist of 10 episodes, and reiterated that the intention was for it to continue for multiple seasons, adding in February that "we are set up for possibly three years of this show".
A production listing in March gave the series' title as Star Trek: Destiny, which CBS had trademarked in 2018.
However, the official title was announced to be Star Trek: Picard at CBS's upfront presentation that May.
At that time, Kurtzman said the series was being "shepherded" by a larger creative team rather than having a traditional showrunner.
In late June, Chabon was named sole showrunner of the series, to work closely on the day-to-day production with Kurtzman and Goldsman.
A month later, the series was scheduled to premiere in January 2020.
In October, Kurtzman said a second season of the series was "already in the works".
In early December, Chabon signed an overall deal with CBS Television Studios to create several new series for the studio, which meant he would be exiting as showrunner of Picard at some point in 2020, though he would remain creatively involved in a potential second season as an executive producer.
CBS officially renewed the series for a second season a month later and revealed that Terry Matalas had joined the series as an executive producer to fill the void that would be created by Chabon's planned departure.
Goldsman and Matalas took over as co-showrunners for the series once Chabon left.
Also at this time, the series was reported to have an informal green-light for a third season that would be developed at the same time as the second
so the two could be filmed back-to-back to save costs and simplify scheduling.
The series has a reported budget of $8–9 million per episode.
Goldsman said in May 2020 that the series' creative team had discussed a three-season plan and a five-season plan for the series, but ultimately they would just keep making it until Stewart wanted to stop.

===
Writing ===
The series is set 20 years after Stewart's last appearance as Picard in the film Star Trek: Nemesis (2002).
Kurtzman revealed that the series would find the character "radically altered" by the destruction of Romulus several years after the events of Nemesis, as depicted in the film Star Trek (2009), and explained that the mandate for the series was to make it "a more psychological show, a character study about this man in his emeritus years".
He noted that it was rare for a television series to star an older actor like Stewart.
In the series, the character must find his way back to Roddenberry's original optimistic vision for the franchise, which Kurtzman hoped would reinforce that original vision while allowing the character to "go through deep valleys".
In July 2019, Goldsman said the series would not be a direct sequel to The Next Generation and would be more character-focused than that series.
He described Picard as "slower, more gentle, more lyrical" than previous Star Trek series, and specifically compared the tone of Picard to that of Discovery by describing the latter as a sci-fi action-adventure series while Picard is a sci-fi drama series that tells dramatic stories within an otherworldly setting.
Stewart compared the series to when he reprised his X-Men role of Professor X in the film Logan (2017), where he was the same character but the franchise's world and tone was "blown apart".
===
Casting ===
With the series announcement in August 2018 came confirmation that Stewart would star as Picard.
At the start of March 2019, Santiago Cabrera and Michelle Hurd were both set to co-star in the series, with Cabrera being one of the most sought-after actors during the 2019 television pilot season and choosing this series over other offers.
Later that month, newcomer Evan Evagora was cast in another series regular role.
In April, Alison Pill, Harry Treadaway, and Isa Briones joined the cast.
Characters for the new cast members were announced in July, with Briones as Dahj, Pill as Agnes Jurati, Cabrera as Cristobal "Chris" Rios, Hurd as Raffi Musiker, Treadaway as Narek, and Evagora as Elnor.
The series reveals that Briones portrays several androids:
Dahj, who dies in the first episode; her twin sister Soji Asha; and Sutra, an older android model.
In June 2020, the entire main cast of the series was confirmed to be returning for the second season except for Treadaway.
While developing the series, the creative team discussed not bringing back any other characters from The Next Generation to allow Picard to stand alone and not become reliant on nostalgia.
Part of this was to allow newcomers who had not seen the previous series to enjoy Picard.
However, the writers wanted to be respectful to longtime fans of Star Trek and felt they were missing opportunities by not including certain characters, so they decided to add some returning guests who organically served the new story.
Several actors from previous Star Trek series were announced as guest stars for Picard in July 2019, including The Next Generation's Brent Spiner as Data, Jonathan Del Arco as Hugh, Jonathan Frakes as William Riker, and Marina Sirtis as Deanna Troi, as well as Star Trek:
Voyager's Jeri Ryan as Seven of Nine.
In January 2020, Stewart said it was his hope that all of the main cast of The Next Generation would appear on Picard before the end of the series, while Kurtzman said if Michael Dorn reprised his Klingon role Worf in Picard he would appear as he did in The Next Generation and not be changed to match the new Klingon designs in Discovery.
At that time, Whoopi Goldberg agreed to appear in the second season of the series as her The Next Generation character Guinan.
In April 2021, Ryan, Spiner, and first season guest star Orla Brady were revealed to be main cast members for the second season, with John de Lancie also appearing in the season as his Star Trek character
Q.


===
Design ===
Several members of the design team from Star Trek:
Discovery returned for Picard, including production designer Todd Cherniawsky and creature designer Neville Page of Alchemy Studios.
Christine Clark served as costume designer for the series.
Acknowledging that the series would be set further in the future than any previous Star Trek film or series, Kurtzman explained that the production was aiming for a "grounded" approach rather than having things like "crazy floating skyscrapers and all the cliches of science fiction".
The opening title sequence for the show was created by Prologue, the company that created the Discovery opening sequence.

===
Filming ===
The series is filmed at Santa Clarita Studios, California, under the working title Drawing Room.
It received large tax credits from the California Film Commission for the production to take place in California, rather than in Toronto, Canada, where Star Trek:
Discovery is filmed.
Location shooting for the first season also took place around California, including at Sunstone Winery in Santa Ynez Valley to depict Picard's French vineyard, at long-time Star Trek filming location Vasquez Rocks in the Sierra Pelona Mountains in Los Angeles County where Raffi's home is found in the series, and in the Malibu area for the planet Coppelius.

===
Visual effects ===
Visual effects for the series are provided by Pixomondo, DNEG, Crafty Apes, Ghost VFX, Gentle Giant Studios, Technicolor VFX, and Filmworks/FX.
with Jason Zimmerman returning from Discovery as visual effects supervisor.
Pixomondo worked with the series' production design department to help flesh out their designs into 3D assets, and then shared those assets with the other vendors.
For the first season, these digital models included the Borg Cube, La Sirena, and the Romulan ships.

===
Music ===
Star Trek:
Discovery composer Jeff Russo was revealed to be composing the score for Picard in July 2019.
Russo's relationship with Star Trek began as a fan of The Next Generation, and he asked Kurtzman if he could work on Picard after seeing Stewart's announcement of the series at the Las Vegas Star Trek Convention.
Kurtzman took time to consider this before officially asking Russo to score the new series.
Russo noted that his prior work on Discovery served as his audition for Picard.
Russo wanted his music to remain truthful to previous Star Trek scores without repeating them, and especially wanted to avoid his music for Discovery to differentiate the two series.
Russo felt that Picard was a more intimate story than Discovery and wanted to take a more personalized approach by featuring more solo instrument performances in his score for Picard.
Russo's music for Picard is recorded at the Eastwood Scoring Stage at
Warner Bros. Studios in California, where his score for Discovery was also recorded.
Russo had several ideas in his head when he began work on the main title for Picard, but the first melody that he played became the idea that he associated with Picard and the series.
He then had to fashion this into a theme that matched the tone of the show, and went through several different iterations: a "swashbuckling" version, a "'space' show" version, a darker and more contemplative version, and finally a more emotional and stirring version which became the actual theme.
It is bookended with a piccolo, which Russo felt sounded similar to the fictional Ressikan flute that Picard played in the Next Generation episode "The Inner Light", while the main melody is played on a cello which Russo often uses since it "fills that same harmonic space as the human voice".
Additionally, Russo uses Jerry Goldsmith's theme from Star Trek:
The Motion Picture (1979) to connect the story back to The Next Generation, as that series used Goldsmith's theme in its main title, while Russo also references Alexander Courage's original Star Trek theme to "evoke the idea of Star Trek in general".
He felt that using these previous themes was "not technically necessary" but appreciated how meaningful they are to fans.
A soundtrack album for the first half of the first season was released on February 7, 2020, followed by a complete soundtrack album covering the full season on April 3.
==
Release ==
The first season of Star Trek:
Picard was released on the streaming service CBS All Access in the United States.
Like Discovery before it, each episode of the series is broadcast in Canada by Bell Media on the same day as the All Access release, on the specialty channels CTV Sci-Fi Channel (English) and Z (French) before streaming on Crave.
Amazon Prime Video streams the episodes within 24 hours of their U.S. release in over 200 other countries and territories around the world; this is separate from Discovery, which is released internationally by Netflix.
The deals with Amazon and Bell for Picard were made by international distributor arm CBS Studios International.
In September 2020, ViacomCBS announced that CBS All Access would be expanded and rebranded as Paramount+
in March 2021.
Existing episodes of Picard season one will remain on Paramount+
along with future seasons of the series.

== Reception ==


===
Viewership ===
A week after the series premiere, CBS said that Picard had set a new record for the total streams of a CBS
All Access original series by its subscribers, with 115 percent more total streams than the previous record set by Star Trek: Discovery.
CBS also partly attributed the premiere of the series for the month of January 2020 breaking the service's record for the most new subscribers in a month, helped by the week of Picard's premiere being the second-most new subscribers in a single week for the service.

===
Critical response ===
For the first season, the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 87% approval rating with an average rating of 7.63/10 based on 67 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Anchored by the incomparable Patrick Stewart, Picard departs from standard Starfleet protocol with a slower, serialized story, but like all great Star Trek it tackles timely themes with grace and makes for an exciting push further into the final frontier.
"
The average rating for each of the first season's individual episodes is 85%.
Metacritic, which aggregates reviews using a weighted average, assigned a score of 76 out of 100 based on reviews from 27 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
===
Accolades ===


==
Tie-in media ==


===
Star Trek:
Short Treks ===
When the first season of the Discovery companion series Star Trek:
Short Treks was being released in December 2018, CBS CCO David Nevins stated that there would be more shorts released before the premiere of Picard.
In February 2019, Kurtzman said future shorts could tie directly into series other than Discovery.
At San Diego Comic-Con 2019, Kurtzman announced that the second season of Short Treks would include a "teaser" for Picard set 15 years before the start of the series.
The episode, titled "Children of Mars", was released on January 9, 2020, and depicts the synthetic attack on Mars from Picard's backstory but from the perspective of two school children.

===
Comics ===
In September 2019, CBS announced a new three issue comic book titled Star Trek: Picard – Countdown, to be released beginning that November by IDW Publishing.
Written by Mike Johnson and Picard supervising producer Kirsten Beyer, the comic is set in 2385, and depicts Admiral Picard's actions during the evacuation of Romulus.
===
Novels ===
In September 2019, CBS announced a new novel written by frequent Star Trek author Una McCormack to be published by Simon & Schuster in February 2020.
Titled
The Last Best Hope
, the novel leads directly into the events of the series and introduces several new characters that are featured in the first season.
A second novel, Dark Veil by James Swallow, will be published in January 2021.
Another prequel to the series, Dark Veil follows Riker and Troi aboard the USS Titan a year after Picard retired from Starfleet.

===
Aftershows ===


====
The Ready Room ====
In January 2020, CBS All Access announced that The Next Generation actor Wil Wheaton would host a new season of the Star Trek aftershow
The Ready Room, to stream after the release of each Picard episode.
Wheaton replaced Naomi Kyle, who hosted the series for its first run after episodes of Discovery's second season.

====
Official podcast ====
After the series premiere on January 23, 2020, Deadline Hollywood released the first episode of the Star Trek: Picard Podcast, a weekly podcast sponsored by CBS All Access and hosted by Deadline's senior editor Dominic Patten and genre editor Geoff Boucher.
Each episode of the podcast features interviews with the series' cast and creative team.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Trek: Picard at IMDb
Star Trek: Picard at TV.com
Star Trek: Picard at Memory Alpha (a Star Trek wiki)
This list of characters from the Star Wars franchise contains only those which are considered part of the official Star Wars canon, as of the changes made by Lucasfilm in April 2014.
Following its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the novels, comics, video games and other works produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars as Star Wars Legends and declared them non-canon to the rest of the franchise.
As such, the list contains only information from the Skywalker Saga films, the 2008 animated TV series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and works published after April 2014.

The list is organized in humans and various alien species.
No droid characters are included, so for those, see the list of Star Wars droid characters.
Some of the characters featured in this list have additional or alternate plotlines in the non-canonical Legends continuity.
To see those or characters who do not exist at all in the current Star Wars canon, see the list of Star Wars Legends characters and list of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters.

==
Humans ==
Humans are a sentient, sapient species in the fictional Star Wars universe.
They are the most numerous and dominant species, with apparently millions of major and minor colonies galaxy-wide.
Humans are native to many different worlds, and they are characterized by multidimensional complex personalities that are both individual and unique.
They are the only race accepted as pure by Emperor Palpatine.

By the time the hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a few scattered worlds throughout the galaxy; according to the New Essential Chronology, the humans of Coruscant managed to send out a number of 'sleeper ships' between the fall of the Rakatan Infinite Empire and the invention of the hyperdrive.
Star Wars humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life humans.
The presence of ordinary humans in the story is important dramatically and the first movie establishes their vulnerability and weakness.
Luke Skywalker's introduction early in the first movie was rewritten to establish this.
In the Star Wars mythology, the human homeworld, according to the New Essential Chronology, is generally believed to be Coruscant.
However, there is actually no real consensus on the issue; according to releases from the official Starwars.com site, the ancient human home world has simply been lost to history.

Star Wars humans live on many different worlds throughout the galaxy, with many populations living together with several other species—something which is most common either on the cosmopolitan worlds at the core, such as on Coruscant, or on the frontier at the Outer Rim of the galaxy, such as on Tatooine.

===
Skywalker and Solo families ===


====
Extended family ====
Naberrie family - Padmé Amidala's family
Lars family - Luke's adoptive familyOrgana
family - Leia's adoptive family


===
Force-wielders ===
Human Force-sensitive characters.
They are divided into Jedi and those affiliated with the light side of the Force; and Sith and those affiliated with the dark side (such as Dark Jedi, who are former Jedi who have fallen to the dark side, and Inquisitors, who are Jedi hunters trained by Darth Vader and serving the Empire).
===
Mandalorians ===
Mandalorians are a culture of humans from the planet Mandalore with strong warrior traditions.
Most of them wear armor and helmets, the strongest ones made from beskar, a blaster-resistant steel that is originally from Mandalore.
The Mandalorian culture was carried on by humans from Mandalore around the galaxy.
The name of their home planet, "Mandalore", is the same as the title given to their leader.
The Mandalorians are also associated with the Darksaber, a black-bladed lightsaber built by Tarre Vizsla, the first Mandalorian Jedi, which has since become a symbol of power for the Mandalorian people and is passed from a leader to the next.
===
Galactic Republic ===
The Galactic Republic is a democractic government, overseen by a Galactic Senate, that governed most of the known galaxy for thousands of years.
With the help of the Jedi Order, it maintained intergalactic peace, but during its last years, it became highly corrupt, causing numerous planets and systems to abandon the Republic and form the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
The ensuing conflict between the two factions became known as the Clone Wars, which Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious and the mastermind behind the war, took advantage of to manipulate the Republic's Senators and citizens into supporting his plans for the government's reorganization into the Galactic Empire for the purpose of intergalactic "peace".
The Republic serves as the protagonist faction of the prequel trilogy, which depicts its downfall and conversion into the Empire.

====
Clone troopers ====
Clone troopers were the soldiers of the Galactic Republic's army during the Clone Wars.
Created from Jango Fett's DNA, they were genetically modified to have accelerated growth and be predisposed toward unquestioning obedience to the chain of command, including being outfitted with mind-controlling biochips, which were put to use during Order 66, when the clone troopers turned on and tried to kill their Jedi Generals.

===
Confederacy of Independent Systems ===
The Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) is an organization of multiple planets and systems formerly part of the Galactic Republic, who decided to secess after becoming annoyed with the corruption and injustice within the Galactic Senate.
Formed by Count Dooku under the orders of his master, Darth Sidious, it is the main antagonistic faction of the prequel trilogy.
Most of the planets that made up the Confederacy attempted to earn their freedom by force, engaging in the three year-long Clone Wars with the Republic using an army of battle droids.
Once Sidious achieved his goal of scaring the people of the Republic into supporting his plans for the formation of a Galactic Empire, he ended the Clone Wars by having his new apprentice, Darth Vader, kill the Separatist Council leaders.
The remaining systems of the Confederacy were subsequently reabsorbed into the newly formed Empire.
===
Rebel Alliance ===
The Rebel Alliance is an organization of multiple planets and systems that oppose the rule of the Galactic Empire, with which it engages in the five year-long Galactic Civil War.
It serves as the protagonist faction of the original trilogy.
The Partisans are a faction or rebels led by Saw Gerrera known for their extreme methods, who have distanced themselves from the rest of the Alliance.
Rogue One is a squad of Rebel soldiers formed in the film of the same name that embarked on a suicide mission to steal the Death Star's schematics.

====
Erso and Gerrera families ====


===
Galactic Empire ===
The First Galactic Empire is an autocracy formed by Emperor Palpatine at the end of the Clone Wars, replacing the old Galactic Republic.
Palpatine's rise to power and manipulation of the Galactic Senate into supporting his plans for the formation of an empire and extermination of the Jedi Order with the purpose of intergalactic "peace" are depicted in the prequel trilogy.
In the original trilogy, the Empire serves as the main antagonistic faction.
At its peak, the Empire sprawled most of the known Star Wars galaxy.
The Empire was eventually defeated by the Rebel Alliance and collapsed, but some remnants continued to exist for 30 years and reunited to form the First Order.

The stormtroopers are the elite, faceless shock troops serving the Empire's military.
Originally the clone troopers of the Republic's army, over time they became mostly human recruits.

===
Resistance ===
The Resistance is a military organization founded and led by Leia Organa, and the successor of the Rebel Alliance.
It fought against the First Order to defend the New Republic and maintain peace in the galaxy, 30 years after the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War.
It is the protagonist faction of the sequel trilogy.

===
New Republic ===
The New Republic is a democractic government established in the aftermath of the Galactic Empire's defeat.
Formed from the Rebel Alliance and meant to be a restoration of the old Galactic Republic, it governed most of the known galaxy, until it fell after the First Order destroyed its capital, the Hosnian Prime system.
The New Republic is only briefly featured in the sequel trilogy, but has a more prominent presence in related works.
===
First Order ===
The First Order is an autocratic military dictatorship and the successor of the Galactic Empire, formed from its remnants.
Its main goal is to overthrow the New Republic and destroy the Resistance and Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi.
It is the central antagonistic faction of the sequel trilogy.
Ruled by Supreme Leader Snoke, a Force-sensitive being created by the resurrected Darth Sidious to act as his puppet ruler, the First Order succeeded in destroying the New Republic and conquering much of the known galaxy, especially during Kylo Ren's reign, who killed Snoke and became the next Supreme Leader.
Near the end of its one-year-long war with the Resistance, it allied itself with the Sith Eternal, a secret cult of Sith loyalists led by Sidious on Exegol, though both were ultimately defeated by the remains of the Resistance and the civilians of the galaxy, who finally gathered the courage to rise against their oppressors.

Much like the Empire before it, the First Order uses stormtroopers as its main military.
Most stormtroopers are children who had been abducted from their homes and brainwashed into serving the First Order.

===
Bounty hunters, mercenaries, and criminals ===


===
Naboo humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Naboo.

===
Tatooine humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Tatooine.
===
Sorgan humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Sorgan.
===
Versio family ===


===
Uncategorized humans ===


==
Other sentient species ==
A mix of non-human characters from the Star Wars galaxy, organized by species, in alphabetical order.

===
A–E ===


====
Abednedos ====
Abednedos are a humanoid, sentient species native to the planet Abednedo.
They have either brown or tan skin, mouth tendrils, long faces, and widely spaced fleshy nostrils.
Abednedos are known for their ingenuity, and generally peaceful nature, being acceptant of other species.

====
Abyssins ====
Abyssins are a humanoid, cycloptic, sentient species native to Byss.
They have green or blue skin, can regenerate missing limbs, and can live for up to 300 years.

====
Aleena ====
The Aleena are a short, humanoid, sentient species native to Aleen.
They have scaly skin, elongated skulls, and large mouths with tiny teeth.

====
Anacondans ====
Anacondans are a large, snake-like sentient species.

====
Anzellans ====
Anzellans are a diminutive sentient species native to Anzellan.
Their eyes have corneal micro-lenses that can see microscopic details.

====
Aqualish ====
The Aqualish are a species of tusked humanoids from the planet Ando.
They can have either two or four eyes, fur around their cheeks, and varying skin color and number of fingers.
The Aqualish have a reputation of being nasty, crude, and aggressive.

====
Ardennians ====
Ardennians are a species of short, four-armed, monkey-like humanoids from the planet Ardennia.

====
Artiodacs ====
Artiodacs are a hulking, humanoid, sentient species from Artiod Minor.
They are distinguished by their broad, flat noses, bulging arms, and deep, rumbling voices.

====
Askajians ====
Askajians are a near-human species from Askaji, whose bulky appearance is given by their internal water storages.
They are also distinguished by their wrinkled foreheads and six breasts (present at females).

====
Bardottans ====
Bardottans are a humanoid, reptilian-like sentient species from Bardotta.
They are distinguished by their long, curving necks, pointed snouts, and crested heads, and are a generally insular and secretive society.

====
Besalisks ====
Besalisks are a humanoid, four-armed, sentient species from Ojom.
Often thick-set, they are also distinguished by their bony, three-pronged headcrests, inflatable wattles, and wide mouths, with large, pudgy lips.
Besalisks are known to be industrious and hardworking.

====
Bith ====
The Bith are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Bith.
They are distinguished by their bald, domed heads, black, glassy eyes, and skin flaps on their faces, which are used to smell because they lack noses.
They are a generally intelligent and peaceful species, and are known to be good scientists, engineers, and musicians.

====
Blarina ====
The Blarina are a species of short, pudgy, sentient humanoids from the planet Rina Major.
They have snouts, tough skin, and small eyes.
The Blarina are famously accomplished liars, and are known to be highly sociable and fond of words, often talking very quickly and incomprehensibly.

====
Cereans ====
Cereans are a near-human species from the planet Cerea, distinguished by their coned skulls, which hold their binary brains.
They are known to be an intelligent species, although their homeworld lacks most of the advanced technology found on other planets.

====
Chagrians ====
Chagrians are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from the planet Champala.
They are distinguished by their long horns, head tentacles with additional horns, forked tongue, and varying skin color.
Chagrians are known for their skills as military commanders.

====
Chiss ====
The Chiss are a near-human species native to Csilla, distinguished by their blue skin, red eyes, and dark blue-black hair.
Prior to Thrawn's rise within the ranks of the Galactic Empire, the Chiss had relatively very little contact with the rest of the galaxy, and some even considered their existence a myth.

====
Clawdites ====
Clawdites are a species of sentient, shape-shifting, reptilian humanoids from the planet Zolan.
With their unique ability they can impersonate virtually any humanoid, although the shape-shifting requires great concentration and they return to their true, reptilian form if knocked unconscious or killed.

====
Cloddograns ====
Cloddograns are a humanoid species with four arms and nose tendrils.

====
Cosians ====
Cosians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species native to Cosia.
They are short in stature and have beaked mouths, four-fingered hands, and medium-length tails.
A genetically-engineered subspecies called Nu-Cosians also exists.

==== Crolutes ====
Crolutes are a species of hulking, amphibian, sentient humanoids from the planet Crule, distinguished by their blobfish-like faces.
They are all males, while their mates, called Gilliands, are exclusively female.
Crolutes rarely travel beyond their homeworld and its moons.

====
Delphidians ====
Delphidians are a near-human species from the planet Delphidian Cluster, with dark gray, leathery, and striated skin.

====
Devaronians ====
Devaronians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Devaronian.
They are distinguished by their two horns (present only at males), pointed ears, and sharp teeth.
The males are known for their spirit of travel and are among the first species in the galaxy to develop interstellar travel, while the females usually remain on their homeworld to look after the children and govern the place.

====
Dianoga ====
The Dianoga are large, highly adaptable cephalopods from the planet Vodran.
They live in semi-aquatic environments, like swamps and sewers, and are a sentient, but primitive species.

====
Dowutins ====
Dowutins are a species of large, sentient humanoids native to Dowut.
They have a bulky build, brown-orange skin, and two chin horns.
They are known for their strength, and can live for several centuries.

====
Dressellians ====
Dressellians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Dressel, distinguished by their round, hairless, wrinkled faces.

====
Dugs ====
Dugs are a sentient species from the planet Malastare, distinguished by their elongated faces, and the fact that they walk on their arms.
They are known to be very greedy.

====
Duros ====
Duros (or "Durosians") are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Duro, with large, ovular heads, red eyes and blue skin.
They are known for their superior astronavigational skills, and were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the development of hyperdrives and other related technological advancements.

====
Er'Kit ====
The Er'Kit are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Er'Kit.
They have white-blue skin, long skinny legs, and elongated skulls.

====
Ewoks ====
Ewoks are a small, furry, sentient species who live in trees on the forest moon of Endor.
While primitive, they have proven themselves to be loyal, skilled hunters, and ingenious in designing their traps.

===
F–J ===


====
Falleen ====
The Falleen are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species native to Falleen.
They have green skin, ridged skulls, and long, black hair, usually worn in ponytails.

====
Faust ====
The Faust are a species of tall, slender, gray or purple-skinned humanoids native to Adana.
They are recognized by their narrow faces and two sets of eyelids.

====
Gabdorins ====
Gabdorins are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species with large, round heads, ridged nostrils, and massive sweat glands.

====
Gamorreans ====
Gamorreans are a humanoid, pig-like, sentient species native to Gamorr.
They have green, thick, and hairless skin, large-nostriled snouts, and upturned tusks.
Gamorreans are known for their low intelligence, strength, and love of conflict and violence.

====
Gand ====
The Gand are a humanoid, insectoid, sentient species native to Gand.
They have three-fingered hands, two-toed feet, and large, silver-coloured eyes.
They wear respiratory masks in oxygen-rich environments, because it is toxic to them.

====
Geonosians ====
Geonosians are a humanoid, winged, insectoid sentient species native to Geonosis.
They live in large colonies like insects, and are generally regarded as a primitive species, but are skilled engineers and operated the Confederacy of Independent Systems' battle droid factories during the Clone Wars.

====
Gossams ====
Gossams are a humanoid, sentient species native to Castell.
They have wrinkled skin, squat bodies, and long, thin necks.
They are known to care about status, power, and wealth, and most wear expensive jewelry for this reason, such as neck rings.

====
Gran ====
The Gran are a humanoid, three-eyed, sentient species native to Kinyen and Malastare, and with major colonies on several other planets, such as Hok and Varkana.
They have brown-orange skin, goat-like snouts, bulky hands, and small antennae-like nubs.
The Gran of Kinyen are known for their peaceful nature, pursuing simple careers like farmers, while others have more dangerous pastimes.

====
Gungans ====
Gungans are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient and sapient species native to the swamps of Naboo.
They have a very flexible skeletal structure, long necks and head tails, and muscular tongues.
While usually regarded as clumsy and primitive, they have proven themselves to be very loyal and ingenious.

====
Harches ====
Harches are a humanoid, spider-like, sentient species native to Secundus Ando.
They have six arms, six red eyes, fangs, and brown or white hair that covers most of their body, and can supposedly live for centuries.

====
Hutts ====
Hutts are a portly, grotesque, slug-like sentient species native to Nal Hutta.
They are often depicted as being very greedy and very gluttonous.
Some famous Hutts, such as Jabba the Hutt, are crime lords, and speak in their native language, Huttese.

====
Iktotchi ====
The Iktotchi are a near-human species from the planet Iktotch, recognized their large cranian horns.

====
Ithorians ====
Ithorians are a species of humanoids from the planet Ithor, with curved necks and two mouths, located on the sides of the neck.
Their faces resemble those of hammerhead sharks, for which reason they were nicknamed "hammerheads".
===
K–O ===


====
Kaleesh ====
The Kaleesh are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from the planet Kalee.
They have red skin, elongated ears, and flat noses (which are rarely seen because they wear masks), and are known for being skilled and merciless warriors and hunters.

====
Kaminoans ====
Kaminoans are a species of tall, thin, amphibian, sentient humanoids from the ocean planet Kamino.
They have white skin, large eyes, and long necks and limbs.
Kaminoans are skilled scientists specialized in cloning technology, and were responsible for the creation of the Republic's Clone army during the Clone Wars.

====
Karkarodon ====
The Karkarodon are a humanoid, shark-like, amphibian sentient species from the planet Karkaris.
With their webbed feet and hands and sharp teeth, they are fast swimmers and skilled hunters.

====
Kel Dors ====
Kel Dors are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Dorin.
Their body is covered by a leathery hide, which allows them to survive the vacuum of space for a brief time, and they wear respiratory masks and protective eye goggles on planets with oxygen-rich atmospheres, because it is toxic to them.

====
Kiffar ====
The Kiffar are a near-human species from the planets Kiffu and Kiffex, distinguished by their ceremonial tattoos and scarlet blood.

====
Kitonak ====
The Kitonak are a species native to Kirdo III, distinguished by their white-pink and tough skin, large hands and feet, and tiny eyes, ears and mouths.
They are known to be slow and patient, but also skilled musicians.

====
Klatooinians ====
Klatooinians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Klatooine.
They are distinguished by their leathery skin, imposing brows, and toothy underbites.

==== Koorivar ====
The Koorivar are a near-human sentient species with reptilian-like skin and a large cranial horn that spirals upwards from their skull.

====
Kowakian monkey-lizards ====
Kowakian monkey-lizards are a small, semi-sentient species from Kowak.
They have beak-like mouths, long ears, medium-length tails, and a distinct laughter, which is used to scare predators on their homeworld.
Most are kept as pets by members of the underworld.

====
Kubaz ====
The Kubaz are a humanoid sentient species from Kubindi, distinguished by their long snouts, dark skin, protective eyewear, and unique manner of speech, consisting of a series of whirring syllables.

====
Kyuzo ====
The Kyuzo are a humanoid, sentient species from Phatrong.
They have green skin, wrinkled faces, and yellow eyes, and are known for their exceptional combat abilities and fast reflexes.
When not on their homeworld, Kyuzo always wear masks to filter the atmosphere, which conceal most of their faces.

====
Lanniks ====
Lanniks are a species of short humanoids from the planet Lannik, with long, droppy ears.
They are known for their honor and bravery.

====
Lasats ====
Lasats are a humanoid, sentient species native to Lira San, though they later settled on Lasan.
They are very tall, strong, and agile, and possess superior sight and hearing thanks to their large eyes and ears, respectively.
Lasats are distinguished by their prehensile feet, and varying fur patterns, which are unique for every individual.
The species was nearly driven to extinction by the Empire.

====
Latero ====
The Latero are a short, four-armed, humanoid sentient species from Lateron.
They have small, pointed ears, gray skin, and gray sideburns hair.

====
Lepi ====
The Lepi are species of bipedal, humanoid, sentient rabbits.

====
Lurmen ====
The Lurmen are a species of diminutive, lemur-like humanoids from Mygeeto.
They have brown and gray fur, large yellow eyes, and medium-length tails.
Pacifists by nature, they have often found themselves oppressed for this reason.

====
Melitto ====
The Mellito are a humanoid, insectoid, sentient species from Li-Torran.
They lack eyes and mouths, and are capable of sensing their environment using super-sensitive hairs called cilia.
They also wear masks and use breathing tubes to filter other planets' atmospheres, as most contain substances that are toxic to them.

====
Miraluka ====
The Miraluka are a species of near-humans, distinguished by their lack of eyes.
The only known member of this species, Prosset Dibs, could use the Force to make up for his lack of eyesight and become familiar with his surroundings


====
Mirialans ====
Mirialans are a near-human species from Mirial.
They are distinguished from humans by their skin color (yellow, green, pink, or purple), and geometric tattoos on their faces.
Mirialans are known for their spirituality and strong connection with the world around them.

==== Mon Calamari ====
Mon Calamari are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species native to Mon Cala.
They have salmon-coloured skin (though their skin may have other tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a high-domed head with large, sideways eyes, and webbed hands.
They are known for their swimming and engineering abilities.

====
Mortis Gods ====
The Mortis Gods are a family of three mythical, immortal, and god-like beings who are the sole inhabitants of the Force realm Mortis.
They are believed to be the embodiments of the Force itself: the light side, the dark side, and the balance between the two.

====
Muuns ====
Muuns are a tall, thin, humanoid sentient species with elongated skulls and flat noses.
Known across the galaxy as greed-driven bankers, they ran the InterGalactic Banking Clan during the Galactic Republic era.

====
Mythrol ====
The Mythrol are a humanoid, sentient species with blue skin and amphibious traits.

====
Nautolans ====
Nautolans are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Glee Anselm.
They are distinguished by their head tentacles, which allow them to detect chemicals, and large, black, pupil-less eyes.
Nautolans are a generally peaceful species, but can be strong warriors when needed to.

====
Neimoidians ====
Neimoidians are a humanoid large-eyed, amphibian, and reptilian-like sapient species native to Neimoidia.
They are known for their dishonesty, wealth, and cowardice, as well as for being in charge of the Trade Federation during the Galactic Republic era.

====
Nikto ====
The Nikto are a humanoid sentient species native to Kintan.
There are at least three known subspecies: the Red Nikto (Kajain'sa'Nikto), the Green Nikto (Kadas'sa'Nikto), and the Mountain Nikto (Esral'sa'Nikto); the former two have scaly, coarse skin and horns and spikes on their face, while the latter present no horns and have facial fins instead.

====
Noghri ====
The Noghri are a humanoid, short, sentient species native to Honoghr.
They have grey, leathery skin with a row of horns on their head, sharp teeth, and clawed fingers, and are known for their exceptional combat abilities and keen sense of smell.

====
Nosaurians ====
Nosaurians are a humanoid sentient species from the planet New Plympto.
They are distinguished by their six horns, red eyes, and orange, white, and yellow skin, and are considered to be ill-tempered.

====
Ongrees ====
Ongrees a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Skustell.
They are distinguished by sideways eyes, located underneath their mouths, four nostrils, and lipless mouths.
Most Ongrees are considered to be even-minded individuals and are skilled diplomats and negotiators.

====
Ortolans ====
Ortolan are a species of squat, blue-skinned, sentient humanoids from Orto.
They are distinguished by their large, floppy ears, trunk-like noses, and black eyes, and are known to consume large amounts of nutrients through their fingers.
Some Ortolans have no arms.

====
Ovissians ====
Ovissians are a humanoid, sentient species, distinguished by their four head horns (two sideways horns, and two extending from the chin).
They can have either green or orange skin, which matches the color of their blood.

===
P–T ===


====
Pa'lowicks ====
Pa'lowicks are a sentient species from Lowick.
They have bulbous bodies supported by long, reed-thin legs, small eyes located in stalks on the top of their heads, and long, thin, trunk-like mouths.

====
Palliduvans ====
Palliduvans are a near-human species, with chalky white skin, and long, bony fingers, with which they can draw blood.

====
Pantorans ====
Pantorans are a near-human species from the moon of Pantora, distinguished by their blue skin.

====
Pau'ans ====
Pau'ans are a species of gaunt, tall, and long-limbed humanoids from Utapau.
They have white or gray skin, sunken eyes, and sharp, jugged teeth.
Pau'ans are an intelligent and peaceful species, though they often seem afraid of outsiders.

====
Phindians ====
Phindians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Phindar.
They have green-yellow skin, long arms, and elongated skulls, and are known to be very cautious.

====
Pykes ====
Pykes are a humanoid, sentient species from Oba Diah.
They are distinguished by their elongated, tapered skulls with an undersized face.
The Pykes are best known for running the Pyke Syndicate, an illegal spice-dealing group.

====
Quarren ====
The Quarren are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Mon Cala.
They have four tentacles protruding from their jaws, for which reason they are nicknamed "squid heads" around the galaxy, as well as suction-cup tipped fingers, and the ability to spit ink in self-defense.
They are more introverted than the Mon Calamari, with whom they share their homeworld, and rarely invite strangers to their planet.

====
Quermians ====
Quermians are a species of gaunt, tall, long-necked and white-skinned humanoids from Quermia.

====
Rodians ====
Rodians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Rodia.
They have green skin, antennas, large pupil-less eyes, a row of spike on the back of their head, slender snouts, and fingers with suction cups at the end.

====
Shawda Ubb ====
The Shawda Ubb are a diminutive, amphibian, sentient species with green skin and small faces that sport heavy brow ridges.

====
Skakoans ====
Skakoans are a humanoid, sentient species native to Skakoa.
They have crown-shaped skulls and are required to wear special suits with breathing masks to survive off their homeworld.
Skakoans are best known for running the Techno Union during the Galacic Republic era.

====
Snivvians ====
Snivvians, also known as "snaggletooths", are a short, humanoid, sentient species native to Cadomai Prime.
They have a protruding lower jaw with two small tusks, and large nostrils.
Snivvians have great tracking skills, and are good scouts and trackers.

====
Sullustans ====
Sullustans are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sullust.
They are mouse-eyed and have two flaps of jowls around their cheeks.
Sullustans are a sophisticated species and experts at manufacturing, scientific and technological development, and economics.

====
Tarsunt ====
The Tarsunt are a humanoid, sentient species from Tarsunt.
They have long faces, widely spaced nostrils, and hair on various places of their body, including their faces, where it resembles a beard.

====
Teedos ====
Teedos are a short, humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Jakku.
They have three-fingered hands and feet, and are almost always wrapped completely in clothing.
All Teedos are identical, sharing the same name and a telepathic connection that allows one Teedo to recount events experienced by another.

====
Terrelian Jango Jumpers ====
Terrelian Jango Jumpers are a humanoid, sentient species from Terrelia.
They are tall, slender and very acrobatic, while having blue, gray, and white skin.

====
Thisspiasians ====
Thissipiasians are a humanoid, serpentine, sentient species from Thisspias.
While the lower part of their bodies is snake-like, they have arms and can grow facial hair.

====
Tholothians ====
Tholothians are a near-human species from Tholoth, distinguished by their scaled craniums and head tendrils.

====
Togruta ====
The Togruta are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Shili.
They are distinguished by their three, rarely four "head tails" called lekku (similar to those of Twi'leks), which are striped to help them blend in with their natural surroundings.
Togrutas are known for their solidarity and for possessing a form of passive echolocation by means of their hollow montrals, which allows them to sense space and the proximity and movement of physical objects around them.

====
Toong ====
The Toong are a humanoid, sentient species from Tund, with disproportionately large heads for their bodies.

====
Toydarians ====
Toydarians are a species of short, winged humanoids from Toydaria.
They have long snouts, tusks, and webbed feet, and have been shown to be strong-willed, resisting Force mind tricks.

====
Trandoshans ====
Trandoshans are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Trandosha, known for their hunting abilities and bad history with the Wookiees.
They are tall and muscular and have a pointed skull, sharp teeth, long claws, and four fingers on their hands and three on their feet.

====
Triffians ====
Triffians are a humanoid, sentient species recognized by their triangle-shaped appendages that extend from their shoulders to their heads.

====
Trodatome ====
The Trodatome are a slug-like sentient species that lack arms, but possess sensory antennas and flippers.

====
Troigs ====
Troigs are a two-headed and four-armed humanoid sentient species from Pollillus.

====
Tusken Raiders ====
Tusken Raiders, also known as Sand People or simply Tuskens, are a culture of nomadic, primitive sentients indigenous native to Tatooine.
They are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing their identity.
Tuskens are known for their aggressivity towards strangers, which they consider possible threats, and unique manner of speech, which combines vocal sounds (mostly screams) with sign language.

====
Twi'leks ====
Twi'leks are a humanoid, sentient species native to Ryloth.
They are distinguished by their "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the back of their head, and varying skin color.
Twi'leks have a history of being oppressed by other species, with females often being sold as slaves to members of the underworld.

===
U–Z ===


====
Ugnaughts ====
Ugnaughts are a short, humanoid, sentient species from the planet Gentes, with pig-like faces.
They are considered to be one of the hardest-working species in the galaxy.

====
Umbarans ====
Umbarans are a near-human species from Umbara, distinguished by their pale skin and colorless eyes, with which they can see in the ultraviolet spectrum.
They have developed technology much more advanced than that found in the rest of the galaxy.

====
Veknoids ====
Veknoids are a humanoid, sentient species from Moonus Mandel, distinguished by their large under-bites, sharp teeth, slender tails, and fleshy ears.

====
Vulptereens ====
Vulptereens are a species of stocky humanoids, recognizable by their shovel-like snouts which sport six tusks and a single long feeler.

====
Vurk ====
The Vurk are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sembla.
They are distinguished by their bony crests on the top of their heads (similar to those of the parasaurolophus), and three-fingered hands.
While regarded as a primitive species, the Vurk are highly empathetic and skilled mediators.

====
Weequays ====
Weequays are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sriluur.
They are distinguished by their though, leathery skin, which helped them survive the harsh life conditions of their homeworld.
Most of them are pirates, mercenaries, and bounty hunters, as a result of the Hutts' takeover of Sriluur.

====
Wookiees ====
Wookiees are a large, hairy, primate-like sentient species native to Kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the modern-day depictions of Sasquatch.
They are known for their strength, loyalty, unique manner of speech (depicted as a series of growls and purrs), and bad history with the Trandoshans.

====
Xexto ====
The Xexto are a species of short, four-armed humanoids from the planet Troiken.
They have white skin, glassy eyes, and long necks and fingers.

====
Yakora ====
The Yakura (also known as Yakorans) are a humanoid, sentient species, with yak-like faces.

====
Yoda's species ====
"Yoda's species" is the name given to a species of diminutive, green-skinned, sentient creatures, of which the popular character Yoda is a member.
The species is characterised by their pointy ears, strong connection to the Force, and slow aging, for which reason they can live for several centuries.
Much about the species, including its name and origins, has been deliberately left vague.

====
Yuzzums ====
Yuzzums are a humanoid, round-bodied, furred, sentient species from the forest moon of Endor.
They have long limbs compared to the rest of their body, medium-length antennae, big mouths, and no neck.
Yuzzums are considered a primitive and unintelligent species.

====
Zabraks ====
Zabraks are a near-human, sentient species, distinguished by their horns and tattoos.
Most originate from Iridonia (in which case they are also referred to as Iridonians), though some males also lived on Dathomir (in which case they are referred to as Dathomirians), as part of the warrior clan called the Nightbrothers, who served the witches known as the Nightsisters.

====
Zygerrians ====
Zygerrians are a humanoid, feline-like sentient species from Zygerria, who had built and run the biggest slave empire in the galaxy, until the Jedi overthrew them and outlawed slavery.
Attempts to rebuild the empire were made during the Clone Wars and the Imperial Era, but were thwarted.

===
Unknown species ===


==
See also ==
List of The Mandalorian characters
List of Star Wars creatures
List of Star Wars droid characters
List of Star Wars Legends characters
List of Star Wars Rebels characters
List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars cast members
List of Star Wars books
== Notes ==


==
References ==
Star Wars: Droids (also sold as Droids) is an action video game developed by Binary Design and published by Mastertronic in 1988.
The game was released for the Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, and ZX Spectrum.

==
Gameplay ==
The game is a mixture of platform, puzzle and action, and is loosely based on the Star Wars: Droids TV series.
The player mainly controls C-3PO through the use of six buttons at the bottom of the screen, four dedicated to movement, one as an "interact" button, and one for throwing Thermal Detonators.
The player will occasionally happen across items that can be picked up and used with the "interact" button.
Items are generally used to open doors, and Thermal Detonators can be used to attack other droids that become hazards.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Game at GameSpot
[1] at mobygames
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (also known as Star Wars: Episode IX –
The Rise of Skywalker) is a 2019 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the third installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015) and The Last Jedi (2017), and the final episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Carrie Fisher, Mark Hamill, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Anthony Daniels, Naomi Ackie, Domhnall Gleeson, Richard E. Grant, Lupita Nyong'o, Keri Russell, Joonas Suotamo, Kelly Marie Tran, Ian McDiarmid, and Billy Dee Williams.
The Rise of Skywalker follows Rey, Finn, and Poe Dameron as they lead the Resistance's final stand against Supreme Leader Kylo Ren and the First Order, who are aided by the return of the deceased Galactic Emperor, Palpatine.

Following initial reports that The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson would write the script for Episode IX, in August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a script with his collaborator Derek Connolly; both ultimately retain story credit with Abrams and Chris Terrio.
In September 2017, Trevorrow left the project following creative differences with producer Kathleen Kennedy, and Abrams returned as director.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score for the last time for the franchise.
Principal photography began in August 2018 at Pinewood Studios in England and wrapped in February 2019, with post-production completed in November 2019.
With an estimated budget of $275 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on December 16, 2019, and was released in the United States on December 20.
Unlike The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi which received positive reviews, The Rise of Skywalker received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the acting, action sequences, musical score, and visual effects, but criticized the story, pacing, and its perceived departures from the plot and themes of The Last Jedi.
The film grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2019; although the film was the lowest-grossing installment of the trilogy, it turned an estimated net profit of $300 million.
The film received three nominations at the 92nd Academy Awards (Best Original Score, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound Editing) as well as three at the 73rd British Academy Film Awards (also Best Special Visual Effects, Best Original Music, and Best Sound).
==
Plot ==
Following a threat of revenge by the revived Emperor Palpatine, Kylo Ren obtains a Sith Wayfinder, leading him to the uncharted planet Exegol.
There, he finds Palpatine, who reveals that he created Snoke as a puppet to control the First Order and lure Kylo to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order—a secret armada of Star Destroyers—and tells Kylo to find and kill Rey, who is continuing her Jedi training under Resistance leader Leia Organa.
Finn and Poe Dameron deliver intelligence from a spy that Palpatine is on Exegol; Rey has learned from Luke Skywalker's notes that a Sith Wayfinder can lead them there.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, BB-8, and C-3PO depart in the Millennium Falcon to Pasaana, where a clue to a Wayfinder is hidden.

Kylo initiates a Force bond with Rey to discover her location; he travels to Pasaana with his warrior subordinates, the Knights of Ren.
With the help of Lando Calrissian, Rey and her friends find the clue—a dagger inscribed with Sith text, which C-3PO's programming forbids him from interpreting—and the remains of a Jedi hunter named Ochi and his ship.
Rey senses Kylo nearby and faces him.
The First Order captures the Falcon, Chewbacca, and the dagger; attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys a First Order transport with Force lightning.
Believing Chewbacca to be dead, the group escapes on Ochi's ship.

The group travels to Kijimi, where a droidsmith extracts the Sith text from C-3PO's memory, revealing coordinates to a Wayfinder.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive, and the group mounts a rescue mission to Kylo's Star Destroyer.
Rey recovers the dagger and has visions of Ochi killing her parents with it.
Kylo informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter; the Sith Lord had ordered Ochi to recover Rey as a child, but her parents hid her on Jakku to protect her.
General Hux saves Poe, Finn, and Chewbacca from execution, revealing himself as the spy.
He permits the group to escape on the Falcon but is discovered and killed by Allegiant General Pryde.
The group flies the Falcon to the Wayfinder's coordinates on a moon in the Endor system.

Rey retrieves the Wayfinder from the remains of the second Death Star, but she is met by Kylo, who destroys the Wayfinder and duels her.
In a dying act, Leia calls to Kylo through the Force, distracting him as Rey impales him.
Sensing Leia's death, Rey heals Kylo and takes his ship to exile herself on Ahch-To.
There, Luke's Force spirit encourages Rey to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber.
Rey leaves for Exegol in Luke's X-wing fighter, using the Wayfinder from Kylo's ship.
Meanwhile, Kylo converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber and reclaims his identity as Ben Solo.
Sensing Leia's death and Ben's redemption
, Palpatine sends one of his superlaser-equipped Star Destroyers to destroy Kijimi as a show of force.

Rey transmits her coordinates to R2-D2, allowing the Resistance—now led by Poe and Finn—to follow her to Exegol.
There, she confronts Palpatine; he demands that she kill him for his spirit to pass into her.
Lando brings reinforcements from across the galaxy to join the battle.
Ben overpowers the Knights of Ren and joins Rey, but Palpatine drains their power to rejuvenate himself.
He incapacitates Ben and attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who lend her their strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing Palpatine before dying herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive her at the cost of his own life; Rey kisses Ben before he dies.
The Resistance defeats Palpatine's armada, while people across the galaxy rise up against the First Order.
The Resistance returns to their base to celebrate.

After the celebration, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries his and Leia's lightsabers.
A passerby asks her name; as the spirits of Luke and Leia watch, she replies, "Rey Skywalker."
== Cast ==
Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa, the Force-sensitive leading general of the Resistance, mother to Ben Solo, Luke Skywalker's twin sister, and Anakin Skywalker's daughter.
Fisher, who died in late 2016, appears through the use of repurposed unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi Master and maternal uncle of Kylo Ren.
He became one with the Force in The Last Jedi.

Adam Driver as Ben Solo / Kylo Ren, the Supreme Leader of the First Order.
He is the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, and the grandson of Anakin Skywalker.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a former scavenger from Jakku, member of the Resistance, and the next JediCailey Fleming and Josefine Irrera Jackson as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn, a member of the Resistance and a former stormtrooper (FN-2187) who defected from the First Order
Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot and commander of the Resistance who later inherits the rank of general from Leia
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of General Organa
Naomi Ackie as Jannah, a former stormtrooper of the First Order (TZ-1719) living on the planet Kef Bir, who aids the Resistance
Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the First Order's third in-command
Richard E. Grant as Allegiant General Pryde, a high-ranking general in the First Order, who previously served in the Galactic Empire
Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a former space pirate and ally of the Resistance
Keri Russell as Zorii Bliss, an old acquaintance of Poe's from Kijimi
Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca, a Wookiee and first mate of the Millennium Falcon
Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a mechanic in the Resistance and friend of Finn
Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the resurrected Dark Lord of the Sith and Rey's paternal grandfather
Billy Dee Williams
as Lando Calrissian, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance, a former owner of the Millennium Falcon, and an old friend of ChewbaccaBillie Lourd and Greg Grunberg reprise their roles as Lieutenant Kaydel Ko Connix and Temmin "Snap" Wexley respectively.
Additionally, Dominic Monaghan portrays Resistance trooper Beaumont Kin, Shirley Henderson voices Babu Frik, and Nick Kellington portrays Klaud via capture performance.
Hassan Taj and Lee Towersey perform the role of R2-D2, while Dave Chapman and Brian Herring return as the puppeteers of BB-8, and director J. J. Abrams also provides the voice for D-O. Martin Wilde, Anton Simpson-Tidy, Lukaz Leong, Tom Rodgers, Joe Kennard, and Ashley Beck appear as the Knights of Ren.
Amanda Lawrence reprises her role as Commander Larma D’Acy, while Vinette Robinson plays her wife, Pilot Wrobie Tyce.
Jodie Comer and Billy Howle briefly appear as Rey's parents, while Tom Wilton and screenwriter Chris Terrio briefly appear as the performer and voice for Aftab Ackbar, the son of Admiral Ackbar, respectively; and Mike Quinn and Kipsang Rotich return as the performer and voice of Nien Nunb, respectively.
Denis Lawson and Warwick Davis briefly reprise their roles as Wedge Antilles, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance; and Wicket W. Warrick, now the leader of the Ewoks, respectively.
Harrison Ford reprises his role as Han Solo in an uncredited cameo.
Composer John Williams cameos as Oma Tres, a Kijimi bartender, Kevin Smith cameos as a Kijimi inhabitant, and Abrams' frequent composer collaborator Michael Giacchino cameos as a Sith Trooper, while Lin-Manuel Miranda and Jeff Garlin both cameo as human and alien Resistance troopers, respectively.
Actors making reprisal vocal cameos include James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, Andy Serkis as Snoke, and the voices of several past Jedi, including Ewan McGregor and Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi (the latter via digitally altered archive audio), Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli, Frank Oz as Yoda, Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura, Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, and Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia.
Ed Sheeran, Karl Urban, Dhani Harrison, Nigel Godrich, J. D. Dillard, and Dave Hearn all cameo as stormtroopers.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney subsequently announced the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
In June 2014, it was announced that Rian Johnson, writer and director of The Last Jedi, would write a story treatment for Episode IX.
However, Johnson later stated that he was not involved in writing the film.
In August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was announced as the director of the film; he was to write the script with frequent collaborator Derek Connolly.

=== Pre-production ===

In February 2016, Disney chief executive officer Bob Iger confirmed that pre-production on Episode IX had begun.
Carrie Fisher died in December 2016.
Prior to the release of the film, Carrie Fisher's brother Todd Fisher, who planned her character
General Leia Organa to appear in the film before her death, revealed that “she was going to be the big payoff in the final film” and “she was going to be the last Jedi, so to speak.
”In
August 2017, it was announced that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.
In September 2017, Lucasfilm stated that Trevorrow had left the production following creative differences, resulting his working relationship with Kathleen Kennedy to become unmanageable after failing to deliver a satisfactory script, despite writing several drafts.
That same month, Johnson was rumored as the top choice to replace Trevorrow as director, but stated "it was never in the plan for me to direct Episode IX", and later, J. J. Abrams, the director of The Force Awakens, was announced to return as the director in Episode IX.The story team met with George Lucas before writing the new script to discuss the nature of the Force.
Abrams co-wrote the script with Chris Terrio, though Trevorrow and Connolly retain story credits.
The story was rewritten to some extent before filming was completed.
The film was produced by Abrams' company Bad Robot Productions, Kathleen Kennedy, and Michelle Rejwan.
According to Terrio, the film's script had to include certain narrative beats provided by Kennedy and Rejwan, including the redemption of the character Kylo Ren.
Before filming, Episode IX was initially given the working title Black Diamond, which was then changed to TrIXie in 2018, so that the roman numeral "IX" would be included in the working title.
The film's title, The Rise of Skywalker, was announced at April 2019's the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago.

===
Casting ===
Carrie Fisher, who played Leia Organa, died on December 27, 2016.
Variety and Reuters reported that she had been planned for a key role in Episode IX.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm stated that there were no plans to digitally generate Fisher's performance as they had for Rogue One (2016).
The following April, Fisher's brother Todd revealed that Fisher's daughter, Billie Lourd, had granted Disney the rights to use recent footage of Fisher.
However, a week later, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not appear in the film.
In July 2018, J. J. Abrams announced that unused footage of Fisher from The Force Awakens would be used to help complete the story.
In flashback scenes, digital de-aging was used for the appearance of Luke and Leia through the use of facial shots of both characters from the Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi respectively.

In July 2018, Keri Russell was in talks to play a part with some "action-heavy fight scenes", and it was confirmed that Billy Dee Williams would return as Lando Calrissian, onscreen for the first time since 1983's Return of the Jedi—marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.
At the end of July, Russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an announcement of returning and additional new cast members.
In late August, Deadline Hollywood announced that Dominic Monaghan and Matt Smith had been cast in unspecified roles, but Smith later denied his involvement.
Greg Grunberg reprises his role as Temmin "Snap" Wexley.
At the Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, it was revealed via the film's teaser trailer that Ian McDiarmid would return to portray Palpatine.
Since the event was held after principal photography wrapped, Abrams was thrilled that news of McDiarmid on the set never leaked.
Kathleen Kennedy said they decided to reveal Palpatine's return ahead of the film's release because of the characters playing a larger role in the story, having them differentiated from Baby Yoda, the character from The Mandalorian.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography began on August 1, 2018, at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.

Filming also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan.

Oscar Isaac stated that Abrams was allowing more improvised acting than in the previous two films.
Due to the tight schedule, some editing took place on set.
Principal photography wrapped on February 15, 2019.
Footage from the film was shown at The Walt Disney Company's annual shareholders meeting on March 7, 2019.
Two weeks of reshoots took place at Pinewood involving Hamill, Ridley, and Isaac in July 2019.
Another round of reshoots took place between late September and October.

===
Post-production ===
The visual effects were created by Industrial Light & Magic and supervised by Roger Guyett.
The film finished post-production on November 25, 2019.
After Boyega accidentally left a copy of the script in his hotel room, it was listed on eBay for around £65.
===
Music ===
In January 2018, it was confirmed that John Williams would return to compose and conduct The Rise of Skywalker.
The next month, Williams announced that it would be the last Star Wars film for which he would compose the score.
In August 2019, it was revealed that Williams had written about 35 of an expected 135 minutes of music for the film, which according to Williams' brother Don, would incorporate all of the major themes of the Skywalker saga.
Scoring began in July 2019 with Williams and William Ross conducting and orchestrating the sessions over the course of six months.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 20, 2019.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Despite staying silent about many details of the film, Abrams expressed his hopes that fans and general audiences would be "satisfied".
He headed a panel dedicated to the film on April 12, 2019, during the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago, where the film's title was revealed.
Additionally, the story events of the Disneyland themed area Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge precede the film, including the Millennium Falcon:
Smugglers Run motion simulator, which features Chewbacca.
On August 24, a new poster and "sizzle reel" was released at D23; the latter was released to the public two days later.
The footage includes a montage of the Skywalker saga so far, as well as several new shots from the film.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
A publishing campaign titled "Journey to Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker" was announced on May 4, 2019.
It includes the novel Resistance Reborn, set between The Last Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker, and various other titles.
From December 18, 2019, to March 11, 2020, a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren, telling the story of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren and elaborating upon the character's backstory, was published by Marvel Comics, written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney.
The official novelization of The Rise of Skywalker is by Rae Carson:
hardcover and audiobook versions were released on March 19, 2020.
The novel details Palpatine's return in more depth
: he transferred his consciousness into a clone body following his death in Return of the Jedi, and his "son", Rey's father, was a failed clone of Palpatine.
The junior novel and corresponding audiobook are by Michael Kogge and were released on April 21, 2020.
Additionally, a five-issue Marvel Comics adaptation written by Jody Houser and illustrated by Will Sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later canceled, making the film the first in the franchise not to receive a comic adaptation.

===
Video games ===
The video game Star Wars Battlefront II (2017) released a free level set on Ajan Kloss.
In December 2019, the video game Fortnite Battle Royale released several cosmetics featuring character skins for Rey, Finn, a Sith Trooper, Kylo Ren, and Zorii Bliss along with a TIE fighter glider, a Millennium Falcon glider (which was given to players for free from the Winterfest Event), four emotes, and two free banners.
On December 14, Fortnite's publisher Epic Games released a preview of the film on an in-game theater screen as a live event.
At the end of the event, a message from Palpatine (the one mentioned in the film's opening crawl) was heard.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film was originally planned to be released in the United States on May 24, 2019, before being pushed back to December 20.
It had its world premiere at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles on December 16.
Unlike most studio films, Disney reportedly did not hold test screenings for The Rise of Skywalker, instead only showing it to Abrams' friends and family, as well as a terminally-ill fan.
Before the film's release, Disney issued a warning that the scenes with strobe-like flashing lights may trigger photosensitive migraines and seizures during some of those scenes.

===
Home media ===
The Rise of Skywalker was scheduled to be released on Digital HD on March 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Its DVD, Blu-ray, and 4K Ultra HD release was followed on March 31 by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment.
The 4K version of the film was also released in "The Skywalker Saga" Ultra HD Blu-ray box set that same date.
It was released on Disney+
on May 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of its previously scheduled release date.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $558.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.074 billion.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $300 million when factoring together all expenses and revenues.
Pre-sale tickets went on sale on October 21, 2019, and the film sold more tickets in their first hour of availability on Atom Tickets than the previous record-holder for ticket sales, Avengers: Endgame (2019).
It became Atom Tickets' second-best first-day seller of all time behind Endgame, selling more than twice the number of tickets as The Last Jedi sold in that same timeframe, while Fandango reported it outsold all previous Star Wars films.
Box office tracking had The Rise of Skywalker grossing around $200 million in its opening weekend, though some firms predicted a debut closer to $175 million.
The film made $90 million on its first day, including $40 million from Thursday night previews.
It went on to debut to $177.3 million, and it was also noted that Saturday (which saw a 47% drop from Friday's gross) was the busiest shopping day of the year, likely affecting ticket sales.
The film made $32 million on Christmas Day, the second-best total ever for the holiday after The Force Awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.
It went on to have a five-day total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the weekend.
In its third weekend, the film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in its fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).Worldwide the film was projected to gross around $450 million in its opening weekend, including $250 million from 52 international territories.
It made $59.1 million from its first day of international release in 46 countries.
The biggest markets were the United Kingdom ($8.3 million), Germany ($7.2 million), France ($5.3 million), and Australia ($4.3 million).
In China, the film made $1.6 million (RMB11.6 million) through its first day.
It went on to open to $198 million from overseas countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than The Last Jedi's total.
Its biggest opening totals remained the UK ($26.8 million), Germany ($21.8 million), France ($15.2 million), Japan ($14.6 million), Australia ($12.6 million), and China ($12.1 million).

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 51% of 507 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.1/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "The Rise of Skywalker suffers from a frustrating lack of imagination, but concludes this beloved saga with fan-focused devotion.
"
As of January 2020, the film is the lowest-rated live-action film of the Star Wars series.
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 61 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 53 out of 100, The Rise of Skywalker received "mixed or average reviews".
Richard Roeper, reviewing for the Chicago Sun-Times, gave the film three stars out of four, writing that it "rarely comes close to touching greatness, but it's a solid, visually dazzling and warmhearted victory [for] quality filmmaking."
The A.V. Club's A. A. Dowd gave the film a C+, stating that the film "is so freighted with obligation that it almost groans under the weight, flashing a weak smile as it vaguely approximates the appearance of a zippy good time."
Michael Phillips for Chicago Tribune wrote that the film "does the job.
It wraps up the trio of trilogies begun in 1977 in a confident, soothingly predictable way, doing all that is cinematically possible to avoid [upsetting the] tradition-minded quadrants of the Star Wars fan base.
"Mick
LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle described the film as "a disappointment" and wrote, "For all the movie's faults, it's likely that most people will consider The Rise of Skywalker and accept the trade: Sit through a
so-so 110 minutes to get to a strong half hour.
"
Owen Gleiberman of Variety called the film "the most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying Star Wars adventure since the glory days of Star Wars (1977) and The Empire Strikes Back (1980) [...]
but given the last eight films, the bar isn't that high.
"
The BBC's Nicholas Barber praised the film's acting and wrote, "The Rise of Skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a host of talented people, and yet the best they can do is pay tribute to everything he did several decades ago.
"Scott
Mendelson for Forbes described the film as "possibly worse" compared to the previous Skywalker saga films while ending the main saga and "denying this new trilogy its artistic reason for existence", and criticized the film for retconning The Last Jedi and its plot; saying that "patronizing reversals in the name of mollifying the fans who merely want to be reminded of the first three movies."
Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times described the film as "a Last Jedi corrective", which is "more accurate way to describe it" and is "an epic failure of nerve"; saying that "feels more like a retreat, a return to a zone of emotional and thematic safety from a filmmaker with a gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
"
Writing for The New Yorker, Richard Brody states that the film's faults "are those of the franchise over all"; as the film's director "J. J. Abrams is mainly a distiller and a magnifier and brings virtually no originality to it", using the controls of Michael Bay.
Whereas Asian actress Kelly Marie Tran was a main character in The Last Jedi, she appears for about a minute in The Rise of Skywalker.
The reduced role was interpreted by some critics as a concession to fans who disliked her character; Tran had been a target of online harassment following the release of The Last Jedi.
People involved on the previous film defended her, with some claiming some of the attackers were racist, and body shamers.
Critics said she was "sidelined" into a minor character, and commented on how she was written out "without any explanation" and her minor role was considered by one critic to be "one of the film's biggest disappointments".
In regards to the criticism towards her reduced screen-time, screenwriter Chris Terrio said it was due to the difficulty of including the deceased Carrie Fisher archive footage in scenes planned to feature both characters.

===
Audience response ===
According to CinemaScore, American audiences gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, the lowest among the live-action films.
On PostTrak, audiences gave the film an average four stars out of five, with 70% saying they would definitely recommend it; parents and children under 12 years old (who made up 16% of opening night attendance) gave it a full five stars out of five.
Men (who made up 67% of the audience) gave the film an overall positive score of 80% while women (32%) gave it an 84%.
RelishMix, which tracks social media posts and online presence, "noticed a divided reaction to Skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
Months prior to the film's trailer release, it was review bombed on Rotten Tomatoes to the point where the "Want to See" percentage went down as far as 5% within a day, with many of the reviews focusing on lingering negativity towards The Last Jedi.
Similar bombing with Captain Marvel (2019) caused Rotten Tomatoes to completely remove the "Want to See"  feature after temporarily changing it to a number.
===
Accolades ===
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Disney A to Z
The Star Wars Trilogy, also known as the original trilogy or the classic trilogy, is the first set of three films produced in the Star Wars franchise, an American space opera created by George Lucas.
It was produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century Fox, and consists of the original Star Wars film (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
Beginning in medias res, the original trilogy serves as the second act of the nine-episode Skywalker saga.
It was followed by a prequel trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a sequel trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
Collectively, they have been referred to as the "Skywalker Saga" to distinguish them from spin-off films set within the same universe.
The films center on the Galactic Civil War between the Rebel Alliance and the tyrannical Galactic Empire, as well as the archetypical hero's journey of Luke Skywalker in his quest to become a Jedi under the tutelage of exiled Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda.
Luke joins forces with Princess Leia, Han Solo, Chewbacca, C-3PO, R2-D2 and the Rebel Alliance in facing the Empire and the evil Sith Lord Darth Vader.
The original Star Wars received widespread acclaim from critics for its story, characters, John Williams' music and groundbreaking visual effects, and surpassed 1975's Jaws as the highest grossing film of all time,  turning science fiction films into a blockbuster genre, until it was surpassed by E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial in 1982.

The first film and The Empire Strikes Back have been hailed as the greatest sci-fi films of all time, whilst the third film, Return of the Jedi, received only positive reviews.
The trilogy's success has since led Star Wars into becoming a pop culture phenomenon, spawning multiple franchise instalments from the outset and a million dollar merchandising empire.

==
Background ==
In 1971, Lucas wanted to film an adaptation of the Flash Gordon serial, but could not obtain the rights.
He began developing his own story inspired by the work of Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Immediately after directing American Graffiti (1973), Lucas wrote a two-page synopsis for his space opera, titled Journal of the Whills.
After United Artists, Universal Studios and Disney rejected the film, 20th Century Fox decided to invest in it.
Lucas felt his original story was too difficult to understand, so on April 17, 1973, he began writing a 13-page script titled The Star Wars, sharing strong similarities with Akira Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress (1958).
By May 1974, he had expanded the script into the first draft of a screenplay,  but found that the script had grown too long for a single film.
Subsequent drafts evolved into the script of the original film.
Lucas negotiated to retain the sequel rights.
Tom Pollock, then Lucas's lawyer, writes: "We came to an agreement that George would retain the sequel rights.
Not all the [merchandising rights] that came later, mind you; just the sequel rights.
And Fox would get a first opportunity and last refusal right to make the movie.
"
Lucas was offered $50,000 to write, another $50,000 to produce, and $50,000 to direct the film; his directing compensation was later increased to $100,000.
He also negotiated the sequel rights and ownership of 40% of the merchandising profits.
American Graffiti cast member Harrison Ford had given up on acting to try to become a carpenter, until Lucas hired him to play Han Solo.
==
Casting ==
Thousands of actors were assessed in the search for the trilogy's main cast.
The selected actors are considered by many viewers to have onscreen chemistry even though some of them were inexperienced, with the notable exceptions of Alec Guinness and Peter Cushing.
Some, like Ford, have called the dialogue in the scripts clunky, and several lines were unscripted; some of these are considered the most memorable moments in the films.

==
Films ==
Star Wars was released on May 25, 1977; unlikely hero Luke Skywalker is drawn into a galactic conflict between the Empire and Rebel Alliance by two droids and an old Jedi Knight; he helps make one of the Rebellion's most significant victories.
The film's unanticipated success led Lucas to make it the basis of an elaborate serial.
With the backstory he created for the sequel, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies, with the original film given the subtitle Episode IV – A New Hope to establish it as the first part of the second trilogy.
The first sequel, Star Wars:
Episode V – The Empire Strikes Back, was released on May 21, 1980, and sees Luke begin training as a Jedi under the last living Jedi master, Yoda.
Luke confronts Sith Lord Darth Vader, who is revealed to be Luke's father.
Vader attempts to convert Luke to the dark side of the Force.
The third film, Episode VI – Return of the Jedi, was released on May 25, 1983, and follows Luke as a full-fledged Jedi.
Luke attempts to redeem Vader, thereby saving the galaxy from the Empire.
The sequels were self-financed by Lucasfilm, and generally advertised without the episodic number distinction present in their opening crawls.

===
Star Wars ===
A Rebel spaceship is intercepted by the Empire above the desert planet of Tatooine.
Aboard, the deadliest Imperial warlord Darth Vader and his stormtroopers capture Princess Leia Organa, a secret member of the Rebellion.
Before her capture, Leia makes sure the droid R2-D2 will escape with stolen Imperial blueprints for an armored space station, the Death Star, and a holographic message for the Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi, who has been living in exile on Tatooine.
Along with C-3PO, R2-D2 falls under the ownership of Luke Skywalker, a farmboy who has been raised by his aunt and uncle.
Luke helps the droids locate Obi-Wan, now a solitary old hermit known as Ben Kenobi.
He reveals himself as a friend of Luke's absent father, Anakin Skywalker, who was Obi-Wan's Jedi apprentice until being murdered by Vader.
He tells Luke he must also become a Jedi.
After discovering his family's homestead has been destroyed by the Empire, they hire the smuggler Han Solo, his Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca and their space freighter, the Millennium Falcon.
They discover that Leia's homeworld of Alderaan has been destroyed, and are soon captured by the planet-destroying Death Star itself.
While Obi-Wan disables its tractor beam, Luke and Han rescue the captive Princess Leia, passing through incredible dangers.
Finally, they deliver the Death Star plans to the Rebel Alliance with the hope of exploiting a weakness, and launch an attack on the Death Star.

The first rough draft, titled The Star Wars, introduced "the Force" and the young hero Luke Starkiller.
Annikin
[sic] appeared as Luke's father, a wise Jedi knight.
Between drafts, Lucas read Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, and was surprised to find that his story "was following classical motifs.
"
The third draft replaced (a deceased)
Annikin with Ben Kenobi.
Some months later, Lucas had negotiated a contract that gave him rights to two sequels.
Lucas hired Alan Dean Foster, who was ghostwriting the novelization of the first film, to write them—with the main creative restriction that they could be filmed on a low budget.
By 1976, a fourth draft had been prepared for principal photography.
The film was titled The Adventures of Luke Starkiller, as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I: The Star Wars.
During production, Lucas changed Luke's name to Skywalker and shortened the title to The Star Wars, and finally just Star Wars.
At that point, Lucas was not expecting the film to warrant full-scale sequels.
The fourth draft of the script underwent subtle changes to become a self-contained story ending with the destruction of the Empire in the Death Star.
The intention was that if the film was successful, Lucas could adapt Foster's novels into low-budget sequels.
By that point, Lucas had developed a tentative backstory to aid in developing the saga.
Star Wars exceeded all expectations.
The success of the film and its merchandise sales led Lucas to make Star Wars the basis of an elaborate film serial, and use the profits to finance his filmmaking center, Skywalker Ranch.
After the release of the first sequel, the original film was subtitled Episode IV:
A New Hope in the screenplay released in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars and for all subsequent rereleases beginning with a theatrical rerelease in 1981.
===
The Empire Strikes Back
===
Three years after the destruction of the Death Star, the Empire forces the Rebel Alliance to evacuate its secret base on Hoth.
Instructed by Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke travels to the swamp world of Dagobah to find the exiled Jedi Master Yoda.
Luke's Jedi training is interrupted by Vader, who lures him into a trap by capturing Han and Leia at Cloud City, governed by Han's old friend Lando.
During a fierce duel, Vader reveals a shocking truth about Luke's father.
Owing to financial concerns, Alan Dean Foster's sequel novel, Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978), restricted the story to Luke, Leia, and Darth Vader.
After the success of the original film, Lucas knew a sequel would be granted a reasonable budget, and hired Leigh Brackett to write it from Lucas's story.
She finished a draft by early 1978, but died of cancer before Lucas was able to discuss changes he wanted her to make.
His disappointment with the first draft may have made him consider new directions.
Lucas penned the next draft, the first screenplay to feature episodic numbering for a Star Wars story.
Lucas found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the yearlong struggle writing the first film, and quickly wrote two more in April 1978.
The plot twist of Vader being Luke's father had drastic effects on the series.
After writing these drafts, Lucas fleshed out the backstory between Anakin, Obi-Wan, and the Emperor.
With this new backstory in place, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies, designating the first sequel
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back in the next draft.
Lawrence Kasdan, who had just completed writing Raiders of the Lost Ark, was hired to write the next drafts, and given additional input from director Irvin Kershner.
Kasdan, Kershner, and producer Gary Kurtz saw the film as a more serious and adult story, and developed the sequel from the light adventure roots of the first film.

===
Return of the Jedi ===
About a year after Han's capture, Luke joins Leia and Lando in a rescue attempt to save him from the gangster Jabba the Hutt.
Afterward, Luke returns to Dagobah to complete his Jedi training, only to find Yoda on his deathbed.
In his last words, Yoda confirms the truth about Luke's father, and that Luke must confront Vader again in order to complete his training.
As the Rebels lead an attack on the second Death Star, Luke engages Vader in a lightsaber duel as the Emperor watches; both Sith Lords intend to turn Luke to the dark side and take him as their apprentice.
Ford had originally not signed on to appear in a second sequel, but was convinced to return under the condition that his character would die.
Kurtz wanted a bittersweet and nuanced ending outlined with Lucas that not only saw Han dead, but also depicted the Rebel forces in pieces, Leia struggling as a queen, and Luke walking off alone
(as in a Spaghetti Western)—while Lucas wanted a happier ending, partly to encourage toy sales.
This led to tension between the two, resulting in Kurtz leaving the production.

==
Themes ==
The Star Wars trilogy, unlike science fiction that features sleek and futuristic settings, portrays the galaxy as dirty and grimy in Lucas's concept of a "used universe".
This was in part inspired by the period films of Akira Kurosawa, which like the original Star Wars trilogy, often begin in medias res without explaining a complete backstory.
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
Darth Vader's design, initially inspired by Samurai armor, also incorporated a German military helmet.
Lucas originally conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler; this was condensed into one character in the form of Vader.
Lucas has also drawn parallels between Palpatine and historical dictators such as Julius Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and politicians like Richard Nixon.
Stormtroopers borrow the name of World War I "shock" troopers, Imperial officers wear uniforms resembling those of German forces during World War II, and political and security officers resemble the black-clad SS down to the stylized silver death's head on their caps.
World War II terms were used for names in the films; e.g. the planets Kessel (a term that refers to a group of encircled forces) and Hoth (Hermann Hoth was a German general who served on the snow-laden Eastern Front).
Shots of the commanders looking through AT-AT walker viewscreens in The Empire Strikes Back resemble tank interiors, and space battles in the original film were based on World War I and World War II dogfights.

==
Re-releases ==
The original Star Wars film was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982.
All three films were released on various home video formats, including LaserDisc and VHS, until 1996.
The trilogy was theatrically re-released in a 1997 "Special Edition", featuring various additions and changes, some of which were negatively received.
These versions were released on VHS, replacing the original versions of the films as Lucas's 'original' vision, and were created in part to reinvogorate interest in the saga ahead of the prequel trilogy.
Further changes to all three films were made for a DVD release in 2004, intended to bring the films into greater continuity with the prequels.
These were re-released in 2006 with bonus discs of the original versions of the films (transferred from the 1993 LaserDiscs).
In 2011, original and prequel trilogy box sets were released on Blu-ray, all including another round of alterations.

In the early 2010s, 3D releases were planned for the then-six-film franchise.
However, after the financially disappointing 2012 3D release of The Phantom Menace, the rest were cancelled.
In 2019, Kathleen Kennedy, president of Lucasfilm since the 2012 acquisition of the company by Disney, stated that she would not make alterations to Lucas's original trilogy, because "those will always remain his."
While promoting The Rise of Skywalker, director J. J. Abrams expressed his hopes that the original versions of the trilogy would be officially released, but said that the powers that be had told him "that that's not necessarily possible".
He further said that when making The Force Awakens, he had gotten into a disagreement about the dialogue between Vader and the Emperor in The Empire Strikes Back before realizing that different versions of the film were being referred to; he cited the Despecialized Editions of the films, while the other party had recalled the current official version.
It was initially unclear whether the first six films of the Star Wars franchise would be available on Disney+ upon the service's launch, as TBS held streaming rights through 2024 as part of its cable rights to the franchise.
However, on April 11, 2019, it was announced that the films would be available at launch.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
The original Star Wars film was released in the summer of 1977 to critical acclaim and was a huge  summer blockbuster, surpassing Jaws (1975), until 1982 when it was surpassed by E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial.
The following year, it won six out of its eleven nominations at the 50th Academy Awards.
The success of the first film led to it becoming a pop cultural phenomenon spawning countless TV spin-offs, video games, films and a multi-merchandising empire.
It was then proceeded by two instalments,
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983), which were also both very successful, with the former's climax, where Vader is revealed as Luke's father, becoming one of the most iconic plot twists in motion picture history.

The original trilogy was praised for its groundbreaking visual and sound effects, John Williams' music, writing, characters and concept.
Star Wars,  The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi are considered by many to be among the greatest movies ever made
(Jedi is somewhat less well-regarded).

====
Academy Awards ====


===
Box office performance ===


===
Accolades ===
In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back, was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.
By 2015, Star Wars had been transferred to a 2K scan which can be viewed by appointment.

==
Legacy ==


===
Popular culture ===
The popularity of the films have generated numerous references in popular culture works from TV series such as The Simpsons, Family Guy, South Park and Robot Chicken and films such as Clerks and Toy Story 2, and in the political lexicon, as in Ted Kennedy's nickname for Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative.
The trilogy's artistic and technological achievements have been influential on other filmmakers, including Ridley Scott, James Cameron, David Fincher, Joss Whedon, Peter Jackson and Christopher Nolan, as well as sequel trilogy director J. J. Abrams.

The trilogy's impact has led to future careers of its stars including Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Anthony Daniels (C-3PO), Kenny Baker (R2-D2), Peter Mayhew (Chewbacca), James Earl Jones (Darth Vader), Billy Dee Williams (Lando Calrissian) and Warwick Davis (Wicket W. Warrick).
===
Prequel and sequel trilogies ===
The success and large impact of the original Star Wars trilogy led to two more trilogies, beginning with the prequel trilogy, consisting of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), all directed by George Lucas.
The prequels feature Baker, Daniels, Oz, Mayhew and McDiarmid reprising their roles, alongside Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Hayden Christiansen, Liam Neeson and Samuel L. Jackson.
While financially successful, the prequel trilogy received mixed reviews, gradually improving with each installment to fairly positive feedback for Episode III.

Three years after Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, a sequel trilogy began to be released, consisting of The Force Awakens (2015), The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
George Lucas had little direct involvement in the creation of these films.
The new cast features Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Issac, Adam Driver, Domhnall Gleeson and Andy Serkis, with the main original cast reprising their roles.
While financially successful, this trilogy also received mixed reviews—this time starting positive, but gradually degrading with each installment.

===
Other media ===
The original Star Wars trilogy has been the main basis of the Star Wars franchise, which includes films outside the Skywalker Saga, numerous TV spin-offs like Star Wars: The Clone Wars, The Mandalorian and other upcoming live-action series for Disney+, hundreds of video games, books, comics and more.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Star Trek:
Discovery is an American television series created by Bryan Fuller and Alex Kurtzman for the streaming service CBS All Access (later rebranded as Paramount+).
Launched in 2017, it is the seventh Star Trek series and was the first since Star Trek:
Enterprise concluded in 2005.
It begins a decade before Star Trek:
The Original Series and follows the crew of the USS Discovery.

As of January 7, 2021, 42 episodes of Star Trek: Discovery have been released, concluding the third season.
A fourth season was officially ordered in October 2020 and is set to premiere on Paramount+
in 2021.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2017–18) ===


===
Season 2 (2019) ===


===
Season 3 (2020–21) ===


===
Season 4 ===
Development on a fourth season had begun by January 2020.
Pre-production on the season began on August 17, with filming set to take place from November 2, 2020, to June 10, 2021.
On October 16, CBS All Access officially announced the fourth season.
It is set to premiere on the rebranded streaming service Paramount+
in 2021.

==
See also ==
Lists of Star Trek episodes


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Trek
: Discovery – list of episodes at IMDb
Finn (Designation FN-2187) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.

The character first appeared in the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens as a First Order stormtrooper who, shocked by the Order's cruelty in his first combat mission, flees and joins forces with Rey and later the Resistance.
He is portrayed by English actor John Boyega, who reprised the role in Star Wars: The Last Jedi and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Boyega's performance and the character have received praise.
For his performance in The Force Awakens, Boyega won the BAFTA Rising Star Award, and was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor.

==
Casting and creation ==
The idea for the character, whose name during early pre-production was Sam, came from screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan.
Colleague Michael Arndt, who prepared an early draft of The Force Awakens, said:
And then we were struggling to figure out who the male lead was going to be.
I remember we talked about pirates and merchant marines and all this stuff, and finally Larry [Kasdan] got pissed at all of us
and he's just like, "
You guys, you're not thinking big.
What if he's a stormtrooper that ran away?"

For the roles of Finn and other new Star Wars characters for The Force Awakens, director J. J. Abrams intentionally looked for unknown actors, as he wanted audiences "to meet these characters [in the film] and not feel like it’s him from that thing
, it’s her from that thing.
"
Boyega, who had impressed Abrams in his debut role in British sci-fi film Attack the Block (2011), was invited to audition for the role of Finn, a process which lasted seven months before he was finally cast.
Kathleen Kennedy, one of the producers of The Force Awakens, stated: John Boyega was somebody we'd known of because of Attack the Block.
And we'd been sort of putting him on the top of our list right from the beginning.
But, then again, we went on a massive search just to see who was out there, and we kept coming back to realizing that John would be the perfect Finn.

Finn's stormtrooper code name, FN-2187, is a reference to the number of the cell in which Princess Leia was detained in the original 1977 film Star Wars. "
Cell 2187", in turn, references Arthur Lipsett's short film 21-87.Abrams stated that it was intentional that Finn was given no last name in promotional materials for The Force Awakens, suggesting that his full name and background would be revealed in future films.
However, the film itself revealed that "Finn" is an adopted name, derived from his stormtrooper number.

In 2021 whilst promoting the film Cherry, Marvel Cinematic Universe actor Tom Holland revealed he had also auditioned for the role of Finn before Boyega was cast.

==
Appearances ==


===
The Force Awakens ===
Finn, originally designated "FN-2187", is an ex-First Order stormtrooper who served under Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie) and Kylo Ren (Adam Driver).
He was taken from his family at a young age and sold to the First Order to become a part of their ever-expanding army.
He was trained for most his life to be an effective, loyal, and merciless soldier.

In spite of his training, Finn becomes disillusioned with the First Order during his first combat mission on the planet Jakku.
He is traumatized when a fellow stormtrooper dies in front of him, and is later horrified when Ren, having failed to secure the map that will lead to the missing Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), orders his squadron to massacre a village of Jakku civilians.
The other stormtroopers follow Ren's order without hesitation.
Finn, however, lowers his weapon, aghast, in a silent but firm refusal.
While on Jakku, Phasma and Ren both notice Finn's inability to kill, and Phasma later instructs him to report for reconditioning to better follow her orders.
Instead of heeding her word, Finn resolves to flee the First Order, and convinces the captured Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) to aid him in his escape.

With Poe piloting a stolen TIE fighter, the two escape from aboard the Finalizer—the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer where Poe was being held prisoner.
While piloting, Poe dubs FN-2187 "Finn" (from the "FN" in his designation), which the otherwise nameless stormtrooper embraces.
Moments after, their TIE fighter is shot down by the Finalizer's turrets and crash-lands back on Jakku.
When Finn comes to, he searches for Poe in the wreckage, but is only able to find the pilot's jacket before the shattered hull of their ship is swallowed by an enormous sinkhole.
Finn assumes that Poe is dead.
Alone, Finn decides to search for civilization, and dons Poe's jacket in place of his own stormtrooper armor.

Poe's astromech droid BB-8, now in the care of the junk scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley), recognizes the jacket that Finn is wearing belongs to Poe.
Rey assumes Finn to be a member of the Resistance after mentioning that BB-8 has a partially completed map leading to Luke.
Finn goes along with her mistaken assumption, hoping that she will help him get BB-8 to the Resistance.
The three of them escape the First Order on the Millennium Falcon with help from Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).
Han takes them to his friend Maz Kanata (Lupita Nyong’o) on Takodana, who promises to take them to the Resistance.
Finn decides to continue to flee the galactic conflict, but changes his mind when the First Order launches a preemptive strike on the capital of the New Republic and Ren's forces find them and take Rey prisoner.

Finn flies to the Resistance base, where he discovers that Poe is still alive and meets General Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), C-3PO (Anthony Daniels), and the hibernating R2-D2 (Kenny Baker).
Finn reveals some details about the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, and claims to be able to disable their shields.
When he arrives on the planet with Han and Chewbacca, however, Finn reveals that he only worked in the base's sanitation section.
Nevertheless, the team takes Phasma hostage and Finn forces her at gunpoint to disable the shields.
This allows the Resistance to attack, led by Poe.
They meet up with Rey, who has freed herself from captivity.
Later, Finn watches in horror with the others as Ren kills Han.
Ren confronts Finn and Rey in the woods, claiming that their fight is not over.
Finn picks up Luke’s old lightsaber after Rey is knocked out by Ren and tries to fight him, but Ren easily overpowers him and knocks him unconscious.
Rey stops Ren from killing Finn, and she and Chewbacca escape Starkiller Base in the Millennium Falcon and bring the comatose Finn to the Resistance base for medical care.

==== Related works and merchandising ====
Finn is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Finn is also a point of view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
Finn is a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0, voiced by Boyega.

===
The Last Jedi ===
Finn awakens from his coma aboard the main Resistance cruiser, and immediately demands to know where Rey is, learning that Leia has a beacon that will lead Rey back to her when necessary.
Later, following the attack on the cruiser that killed most of the Resistance's main leadership and rendered Leia unconscious, Finn takes the beacon and attempts to board an escape pod in the hopes of keeping both himself and Rey out of danger.
Before he can board the pod, he is found by Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran), a maintenance worker whose sister Paige, a bomber for the Resistance, has recently died in an attack on the First Order.
Seeing Finn trying to escape, Rose stuns him and intends to turn him in for desertion, but stops when Finn tells her that the First Order has found a way to track the cruiser through lightspeed.
She tells Finn that she might be able to disable the tracker, and Finn says that, having worked aboard a Star Destroyer, he would be able to find where the tracker is.
Rose and Finn run their plan by Poe, who contacts Kanata for help, but she claims that she is too busy and instructs them to find a "master code breaker" in a casino in Canto Bight, a resort city on planet Cantonica.
Operating against acting Resistance leader Vice Admiral Holdo’s
(Laura Dern) wishes, Finn and Rose, along with BB-8, steal a ship and go to Canto Bight.

Finn is initially entranced by the lavish lifestyle of the casino, but becomes disillusioned when Rose tells him that most of the people there have become wealthy by dealing arms to the First Order.
While they find the master code breaker, they are unable to recruit him as they are arrested and jailed for a parking violation.
In their cell they meet DJ (Benicio Del Toro), a thief and codebreaker who offers to help them; they refuse, but he nonetheless breaks them out of their cell.
Finn and Rose escape from the prison, where they set free a horde of horse-like racing creatures called Fathiers, escaping atop one of them.
Outside the casino they are greeted by BB-8 and DJ, having stolen a ship together.
DJ agrees to help them, despite Finn’s misgivings.
Eventually, Finn, Rose, and DJ arrive aboard the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy and disguise themselves as First Order officers; Finn finds the location of the tracker and DJ breaks them in, but before Rose is able to disable the tracker they are caught by Phasma.
Upon being captured, DJ, having overheard the Resistance's plan of escaping to Crait via transports, secretly tells the First Order of the plans in exchange for money and his freedom, and Finn and Rose are to be executed.
Before they are, Holdo rams the Resistance cruiser into Supreme Leader Snoke’s
(Andy Serkis) flagship at lightspeed, damaging the ship and sending it into chaos.
Finn has a one-on-one fight with Phasma, ending with him proudly declaring himself "rebel scum" before Phasma falls to her demise.
BB-8, aboard a First Order AT-ST, rescues Finn and Rose from Stormtroopers and the three of them very narrowly escape to Crait aboard a damaged shuttle.

As the First Order prepares an attack on the formerly abandoned Rebel base on Crait, Finn recognizes the weaponry that they plan to use to destroy the blast doors and leads a small strike on the First Order with the intention of disabling the cannon.
The attack goes poorly, and Poe orders all fighters to retreat, but Finn is determined to destroy the cannon and flies directly into the blast, planning to sacrifice himself to defeat the First Order.
At the last second, Rose stops him by ramming her speeder into his, pushing him out of the blast.
Finn asks her why she stopped him, and she tells him that wars are won "not by fighting what we hate, but saving what we love;" she then kisses him before falling unconscious.
Finn brings her body back to the Rebel base and summons a medic for her.
When Luke appears on Crait, Finn's first instinct is to send forces to help him, but Poe realizes that Luke is stalling to give the Resistance time to escape.
Finn and Poe lead the Resistance off the planet.
Finn finally reunites with Rey, and embraces her before boarding the Millennium Falcon.
Finn is last seen putting a blanket over the still unconscious Rose.

====
Related works and merchandising ====
Finn is a playable Hero in Star Wars Battlefront II, voiced by Boyega.
He was added through the DLC of The Last Jedi.
Finn's outfit in The Rise of Skywalker update.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
Finn, along with Poe, intercepts a message from a First Order mole that Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) has come back to life and is planning an attack on the Resistance and the New Republic in the form of the Final Order, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers designed by the Sith Eternal.
Finn then leaves along with Rey, Poe, C-3PO, and Chewbacca to the desert planet of Pasaana, where with the help of Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams)
they locate a dagger that contains a clue to a Sith wayfinder, a compass to the Sith planet Exegol.
Throughout the whole journey, Finn clearly has something he wants to tell Rey, but is unable to find the time to tell her.
Their journey takes them to Kijimi, where the location of the wayfinder is extracted from C-3PO's memory files, and later to the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast, where Finn and Poe go to rescue Chewbacca, who was taken by the First Order.
In the process, Finn and Poe are captured by Stormtroopers and set to be executed, but they are rescued by General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson), who reveals that he is the mole.
Going free, Finn and Poe rescue Rey aboard the Millennium Falcon and head to the Endor system, where the wayfinder is located among the wreckage of the second Death Star.

On Kef Bir, they encounter a group allied with the Resistance, led by a woman named Jannah (Naomi Ackie).
Finn gets to know Jannah, who reveals that she and the entire settlement on Kef Bir are former Stormtroopers who mutinied after a battle.
Finn tells her that he left the Order as well, and suggests that the Force brought them together and caused them all to leave the Order.
Finn and Jannah follow Rey aboard the wreckage to try and stop her from confronting Ren, but she does so and nearly kills him before healing him and leaving aboard Ren's ship.
Without Rey or the wayfinder, Finn, Poe, and Jannah return to the Resistance base, where they learn that Leia has died.
Poe is named Acting General, and Poe appoints Finn as Co-General.

Finn learns of Exegol's whereabouts based on Rey's transmissions, and he and Poe lead a strike against the Sith Eternal forces, with Finn and Jannah specifically leading a ground attack on the surface of the Steadfast to take out their navigation.
As the attack nears its end, Finn and Jannah are left on the surface of the damaged Resurgent Star Destroyer, but are ultimately rescued by Lando and Chewbacca in the Millennium Falcon and the rest of the Resistance fleet; Finn attributes his faith in his being rescued to a belief in the Force.
Following the successful attack, Finn celebrates among the Rebels on the Resistance base, reuniting with Rey and Poe.

===
The Lego Star Wars Holiday Special ===
Finn, having revealed what he was going to tell Rey to be of his own realization of being Force sensitive, is now training under her as her Jedi Padawan.
Rey accidentally hurts Finn's feelings during a training session, making Finn use a wooden toy lightsaber instead of her own.
Rey seeks out a path leading her to the World Between Worlds, allowing her to travel through time.
Meanwhile, Finn plans for Life Day celebrations with Poe, Jannah, Rose and Lando, as they await the arrival of Chewbacca's family.
During her travels, Rey learns from Yoda's ghost that patience and understanding is an important part of teaching a Padawan; Finn is shown to have prevented the Life Day tree from falling by using his wooden lightsaber.
When Rey returns home, she allows Finn to slice the Life Day roast with her lightsaber.
By mistake, Finn slices all the way through the table, but Rey reassures him that she'll help him get better.

==
Character ==
When asked about Finn's character traits, Boyega replied, I think the element of having to step up to a bigger calling, when your circumstances don't particularly reflect that.
Because I'm young, at the beginning of my life; you haven't really achieved much, and then you have to do that whole adulthood thing, get responsible,
work and all of that stuff, no more mommy and daddy taking care of things.
I feel like it's the same kind of journey that Finn has when he leaves the First Order.
He leaves a curriculum, he leaves a system and embarks on his own journey.
He also noted that initially "most of his decisions are based on adrenaline.
Like, 'Okay, you know what?
I'm just going to get this blaster and run away.'

" Boyega further noted that "[n]ot only is the character in over his head and someone who is just dropped into an extraordinary circumstance, the scenes and the script prove that
and it's not a problem that can just be erased.
"Finn was originally going to be accompanied to Canto Bight by Poe in The Last Jedi, but writer/director Rian Johnson found the storyline flat when he realized their dialogue was interchangeable.
This led to the creation of the character Rose Tico, who would challenge and contrast with Finn.
In The Rise of Skywalker, Finn tries to tell Rey something which he does not want to say in front of Poe, but this thread is never resolved within the film.
This was implied to involve him confessing he loved her, but Boyega denied this on Twitter.
The novelization of the film reveals that Finn is Force-sensitive, implying this to be what he intended to tell Rey.
Abrams later confirmed that Finn was indeed Force-sensitive shortly after the film's premiere.
The novelization also states that Rey believes this as well, speculating on the kind of Jedi he could become.

== Reception ==
The character and Boyega's portrayal were praised; reviewer Jamie Graham wrote, "of the new triangle of characters, Boyega brings intensity and surprisingly honed comic timing."
Reviewers also praised Finn's relationships with the other characters: The dynamic between Rey and Finn is something new for Star Wars, with her bright-eyed heroism complementing Boyega's roguish wit...
Gone is the clunky dialogue of the prequels—instead, it's replaced by some seriously clever writing that often leads to nice little moments, many with Han and Finn.
Drew McWeeny of HitFix notes, "Boyega has this great combination of self-interested fear and reluctant heroism that he plays beautifully, and he charts Finn's evolution as a person expertly here."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described the character as "bracingly comic and cunning".
Robbie Collin writes that Boyega has a "(very funny) half-brave, half-anxious, would-be-heroic schtick" and notes that despite being "brave, charming, and funny", Finn "only wants to be thought of as the daring freedom-fighter
he's not quite sure he's cut out to be."
Some reviewers were less than positive, however.
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote that "Boyega's Finn is the new movie's one weak link, a character who vacillates between noble impulses and cowardice until our interest drops away.
The performance is fine
but it's just fine, with little of the iconic bite a Wagnerian cartoon like this needs.
"The
character was also subject to racist reactions by some fans online, to which Boyega responded, "I'm not going to lose sleep over people."
After the first trailer premiered, Boyega responded to critics with, "To whom it may concern ...
Get used to it", and further commented that, "All the films I've done have had a secret commentary on stereotypical mentalities.
It's about getting people to drop a prejudiced state of mind and realise, 'Oh shit we're just watching normal people.'
"
In response to those who desired to boycott the film over their disagreements with the existence of a black stormtrooper, Boyega replied, "I'm proud of my heritage, and no man can take that away from me.
I wasn't raised to fear people with a difference of opinion.
They are merely victims of a disease in their mind.
"In
2016, Boyega was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Finn.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Finn in the StarWars.com Databank
Finn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Finn on IMDb
The baobhan sith is a female vampire in the folklore of the Scottish Highlands, though they also share certain characteristics in common with the succubus and fairy.
They appear as beautiful women who seduce their victims before attacking them and draining their blood.

==
Folklore ==
According to the Scottish folklorist Donald Alexander Mackenzie, the baobhan sith usually appears as a beautiful young woman wearing a long green dress that conceals the deer hooves she has instead of feet.
Like other vampires she drinks the blood of human victims and will vanish with the rising sun.
She may also take the form of a hooded crow or raven.
There are numerous stories about the baobhan sith with a general theme of hunters being attacked in the wilderness at night.
In one tale recorded by Mackenzie, there were four men who went hunting and took shelter for the night in a lonely shieling or hut.
One of the men supplied vocal music while the others began dancing.
The men expressed a desire for partners to dance with, and soon after that four women entered the hut.
Three of them danced while the fourth sat beside the vocalist.
He then noticed drops of blood falling from his companions and fled from the hut, taking refuge among the horses.
His vampiric partner chased him but was unable to catch him, and when daylight came she disappeared.
The man went back inside and found all three of his friends dead and drained of blood.
The folklorist Katharine Briggs suggested that the baobhan sith was unable to catch the fourth man among the horses because of the iron with which the horses were shod, iron being a traditional fairy vulnerability.
In a similar tale one of the men noticed that the women had deer hooves instead of feet and fled from them.
He returned the next morning to find that the other hunters had their "throats cut and chests laid open".
In a third story the hunters took refuge in a cave.
Each of the men said he wished his own sweetheart were there that night, but one of them, named Macphee, who was accompanied by his black dog, said he preferred his wife to remain at home.
At that moment a group of young women entered the cave, and the men who had wished for their sweethearts were killed.
Macphee was protected by his dog who drove the women from the cave.
One recurring motif in these stories is that the baobhan sith appear almost immediately after the hunters express their desire for female companionship.
This is connected with a traditional Scottish belief that if one were to make a wish at night without also invoking God's protection, then that wish would be granted in some terrible manner.

==
In literature ==
The baobhan sith have appeared on a number of occasions in author Mark Chadbourn's fantasy trilogies
The Age of Misrule, The Dark Age, and Kingdom of the Serpent.

Baobhan sith are mentioned in Nicole Peeler's Tempest Rising series.

They are also mentioned in Michael Scott's The Magician:
The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel.

They appear in Faerie Tale by Raymond E. Feist where they are portrayed as evil fairies of the Unseelie Court, who (aside from their great beauty) possess a strong compelling magic which they use to force solitary males in isolated locations to follow them to their deaths.

Cornelia Amiri is the author of the Dancing Vampire romance series of six novellas: Dance of the Vampires, Vampire Highland Fling, A Bonnie Vampire Dancer, Vampire Waltz, Valkyrie Vampire Sword Dancing, and Some Vampires Shimmy.
The series is about seven baobhan sith sisters and each book features a different sister as they fall in love.

Desdemona, an Oriental dancer and commander of the Fae army in Amy Hoff's Scottish urban fantasy series Caledonia, is a baobhan sith.

In Night and Silence, the twelfth installment of Seanan McGuire's October Daye series, the protagonist is attacked and repeatedly bitten by a starving baobhan sith.

In this portrayal, a baobhan sith is able to mimic both the appearance and supernatural abilities of anyone whose blood she has recently consumed.

A baobhan sith appears as an adversary in the Fighting Fantasy gamebook "Vault of the Vampire".

In The Book of Life (Harkness novel) from the All Souls Trilogy, the baobhan sith was said to have been inspired by Janet Gowdie, a Vampire-Witch hybrid and daughter of the real falsely accused witch Isobel Gowdie and a vampire named Nickie-Ben.

==
In film ==
Baobhan Sith
the feature film was released in 2017.
It was produced by Scottish independent company Eyedoll Productions and was written and directed by David W Hutchison.
It was inspired by the Baobhan Sith legend and features Polish actor Joanna Kaczynska  as the Baobhan Sith.

== See also ==
Banshee
Dames Blanches
Deer Woman
Glaistig
Huldra
Leanan sídhe
Patasola
Rusalka
Samodiva
Sayona
Sundel Bolong
Aicha Kandicha


=
= References ==
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars is a Lego-themed action-adventure video game based on The Clone Wars animated film and its follow-up television series with the same name, both of them set between the films
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
The game was developed by Traveller's Tales, published by LucasArts, and released in March 2011 for the PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, Wii, Nintendo DS, Microsoft Windows and Nintendo 3DS consoles.
Lego Star Wars III features missions and characters from The Clone Wars film and television series, as well as favourite characters from the original Star Wars saga, in both single-player and multiplayer gameplay modes.
The Mac OS X version of the game has been released by Feral Interactive.

==
Gameplay ==
Gameplay in Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars is similar to the previous titles in the series, and other Lego video games.
Up to two players can switch between different characters to fight enemies in combat, solve puzzles, and progress through various levels.
It introduces a few novelties, including scene swap, where players can switch between teams in separate locations to complete multi-part objectives, and boss battles.
The game also features some real-time strategy elements, such as commanding large ground armies across battlefields.
Also, the space fights have been remodelled to use a more instinctive, 3D-space battle sensation.
It is set during the Clone Wars animated series, as well as certain scenes from Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, unlike the original games, which featured characters from the six films of Star Wars such as Lego Star Wars: The Video Game and Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
The console version of the game features 115 characters.
The portable version features 77 characters.
The version for the PSP, 3DS, and DS have some differences from the console version.
For example, the ground battles are not featured.
The portable version features unlockable minigames like Snowball Fight, Volleyball Droids and more.
The rooms where vehicles are also not available to test in the ship itself unlike on the console version.
Some levels are removed from the portable version.
Some characters such as the Galactic Marine, Chi Cho, Ryo Chuchi, Thi-Sen and others, are featured on the portable version but not on the console version.

===
New features ===
Overall, the game engine used by previous Lego Star Wars games has been upgraded.
It can now hold more than 200 moving units or objects on-screen.
The graphics are more detailed than before, and the lighting has been improved.

New features include scenarios in which players can command large armies of clones to battle against droid armies (although not on DS), and Story Swap mode, in which players can switch between two characters in different areas whose stories run simultaneously.
The game includes split screen combat.
All new character features include lightsaber throwing, picking up droids and stepping on certain pads in which Jedi do "combo moves" to destroy certain objects.
Vehicle levels have been altered; now, players can land their ship and begin fighting on foot (similar to Star Wars: Battlefront II).
All the original elements seen in previous Lego Star Wars games have returned.
The hub has also been changed, taking place in a Republic Cruiser named the Resolute and also a Separatist Ship the Invisible Hand.
Characters can be purchased on these ships- Separatists on the Invisible Hand; characters from the Republic on the Resolute.

==
Plot ==
The plot is based on Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated film, and various episodes from the first two seasons of the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series, with no dialogue and humorous deviations.

The first level acts as a prologue and depicts the Geonosian Arena battle from Attack of the Clones, which saw the start of the Clone Wars.
The following 18 levels are divided into three separate chapters, each depicting an episode from the TV series, and having either Count Dooku, General Grievous or Asajj Ventress as the main antagonist.
Levels can be played in whatever order the player desires, though the levels from the same chapter can only be played in a specific order.
After all of the chapters are completed, a 20th level is unlocked, based on the episode "The Zillo Beast", which acts as an epilogue to the story.

The game also features two bonus levels.
The first is based on The Clone Wars film, and depicts the Separatists' plan to kidnap Jabba the Hutt's son Rotta, from Count Dooku's perspective.
The second level is based on the episode "Hostage Crisis", as played from Cad Bane's perspective.
Upon completion, the latter level unlocks the Bounty Hunter Missions, where the player goes through different levels from the main story in search of a particular character hidden somewhere in the level.

==
Development and marketing ==
The game had been in development since late 2009 when the second season of Star Wars: The Clone Wars started.
The game was covered up and in June 2010 after the second-season finale The Lego Group started to work on adding the last part of the second season in and new things such as a new hub and a new way to use the lightsaber.
Then in late 2010, LEGO finished the game and started to make promotions for it.
On 23 June 2010, LEGO released the first trailer for the game and later in 2011 they released some demos and cutscenes.
Nintendo have made 3DS trailers for the game too and also some E3 convention videos with the gameplay of Lego Star Wars III: The Clone Wars.
The official release date of the game was 22 March 2011.

== Reception ==
The game has received mixed to positive reviews.
GameSpot gave 6.5/10 for PC, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Wii while 6/10 for Nintendo 3DS.
IGN's Anthony Gallegos rated the PC, Xbox 360, and PlayStation 3 versions of the game 7.5/10, the Wii version 7/10, and the DS, 3DS, and PSP versions 6.0/10.
He commented on the vast variety in the in-game Hub; "the hub world is open to players to explore, but this time around, Traveller's Tales have really outdone themselves".
They further stated "like so much of the Lego games design, when you combine these two relatively unexciting portions together, something strange happens:
It becomes a simple, engaging game".
GameTrailers gave the game 6.5/10, and called it "one of the dullest in the entire series", strongly criticising the game's repetition.
As of May 2012, the game has sold over 4 million copies worldwide.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Lego Star Wars is a Lego theme that incorporates the Star Wars saga and franchise.
Originally it was only licensed from 1999 to 2008, but the Lego Group extended the license with Lucasfilm, first until 2011, then until 2016, then again until 2022.
The brand has spawned an eponymous video game series containing six video games, developed by Traveller's Tales—Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005), Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006), Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga (2007), Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011), Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016) and Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga (TBA).
Many short films and miniseries have also been produced.

==
Construction sets ==
The first few sets based on the original trilogy were released in 1999, coinciding with the release of The Phantom Menace.
The first wave of Lego Star Wars sets included model 7140, an X-wing fighter.
Sets based on the prequel trilogy (Episodes I to III) of Star Wars would follow, starting with Episode I – The Phantom Menace.
As each new film in the prequel trilogy neared its release date, Lego issued new models of ships and scenes in those films, as well as additional sets from the original trilogy.
Lego also produced models based on The Clone Wars, which was released early in 2008.
Sets based on Star Wars Rebels, The Force Awakens, Battlefront, Rogue One, Solo,
The Last Jedi, Star Wars Resistance, The Mandalorian, The Old Republic, and The Rise of Skywalker have also been produced.

===
Ultimate Collector Series (UCS) ===
In addition to the regular Minifigure-scale sets, Lego has released several sets (between 30-36) for the Ultimate Collector Series.
These models are often considerably larger, more detailed, and meant more for display purposes than other sets.
They often cost more than regular Lego sets as well.
Many of them include an information plaque and often a display stand.
The largest of these is 75192, the 2017 UCS version of the Millennium Falcon, complete with ten Minifigures.
At 7541 pieces, it is the largest Star Wars Lego set ever released; and the second largest set of any collection ever commercially released.
On June 5, 2015, an unopened box of the older 2007 #Millennium Falcon Lego set was auctioned at online auction house Catawiki for 5,000 euros (US$5556.5 at the time) making it the most expensive LEGO set ever.

In the Star Wars universe the first figure is the 1999 Han Solo.

===
Master Builder Series (MBS) ===
With similar complexity to the Ultimate Collector Series sets, sets under the Master Builder Series are built with the purpose of playing, featuring numerous play features, functions, and interior details as compared to the UCS, which are meant more for display purposes.
The first set of the MBS is the 75222 Betrayal at Cloud City, which was released in 2018.
In 2020, 75290 Mos Eisley Cantina was released as the largest MBS set with over 3,000 pieces and 21 minifigures.

===
The Helmet Collection ===
In 2020, Lego released three brick-built helmets of selected iconic characters from the Star Wars universe.
They are Boba Fett, Stormtrooper, and the TIE Fighter Pilot.
Meant to be displayed, name plaques of the helmets' characters are included.
In March 2021, Lego announced that it will be releasing the helmets of Darth Vader and the Scout Trooper on April 26, 2021.

=== Minifigures ===
Most characters from the Star Wars universe have materialized in Lego minifigure form.
The minifigure with the first code, i.e. sw0001, is a tan battle droid that appeared in The Phantom Menace.
Some minifigures repeatedly appear across multiple Lego sets, while others can be very rare, vastly increasing their resale value.
In 2019, the number of Lego Star Wars minifigures has surpassed 1000, with the Battlefront II protagonist Iden Versio bearing code sw1000.

==
Video games ==
Traveller's Tales president Jon Burton stated in a July 2008 interview with Variety that the series had collectively sold 15 million copies.
As of February 13, 2009, Lego Star Wars: The Video Game has sold over 6.8 million copies worldwide, Lego Star Wars II has sold over 8.3 million, The Complete Saga has sold over 4.1 million, and the three combined have sold over 21 million.
In May 2009, Wired reported combined sales of 20 million.
As of 2012, all Lego Star Wars video games had collectively sold more than 30 million copies.
As of 2016, more than 36 million games were sold.
As of 2019, the series has sold more than 50 million copies of Lego Star Wars video games.

== Films and videos ==
Several films and videos based on Lego Star Wars have been produced; additionally, Lego Star Wars characters cameo in The Lego Movie (2014).

===
Short films ===
Lego Star Wars: Revenge of the Brick is the first computer-animated Lego Star Wars short film.
It premiered on Cartoon Network in mid-2005, in conjunction with the theatrical release of Revenge of the Sith.

Lego Star Wars:
The Quest for R2-D2 is a short movie which aired on Cartoon Network on August 2009, and was uploaded to the Lego Star Wars website, in order to celebrate 10 years of Lego Star Wars,
Lego Star Wars: Bombad Bounty, is another CGI Lego short film, it was released in 2010.
In it, Vader hires Boba Fett to track down the Gungan Jar Jar Binks for an accident he caused to Vader.
The film also takes place at the same time as the original movies showing that Jar Jar was responsible for the destruction of the first Death Star and was with Boba Fett on Jabba's Barge during the events of Return of the Jedi.

===
Television specials ===
Lego Star Wars:
The Padawan Menace released on July 7, 2011, is a 30-minute, exclusive TV special written by Michael Price is about a Jedi Academy field trip.
When Master Yoda leads a group of rambunctious Jedi younglings through Senate chambers when he senses a disturbance in the Force.
Summoned to help save the Republic, he discovers that a young boy pretending to be a Jedi youngling secretly boarded his ship... and has a taste for adventure.
Meanwhile, C-3PO and R2-D2 are put in charge of the boisterous group and find themselves in over their heads.
Yoda and the droids proceed to save the younglings from Sith Lords as well as the vile Jabba the Hutt.
The special premiered in the United States on Cartoon Network on July 22, 2011, at 7 p.m. and in the United Kingdom on October 17 at 5:30.
The DVD and Blu-ray include several special features such as The Quest for R2-D2 and Bombad Bounty as well as other short films.

Lego Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Out released on September 26, 2012, airing on Cartoon Network in the United States, and would be one of the last Star Wars productions to be made before Lucasfilm was sold to The Walt Disney Company a month later.
In this special, Luke Skywalker embarks on a mission to find and destroy an Imperial base on Naboo, but is relentlessly chased by a group of fanatic fangirls, who think of him as a celebrity for destroying the Death Star.
Meanwhile, Darth Vader engages a "sithling" rivalry with Darth Maul, in order to prove he's the best Sith Lord to Emperor Palpatine, who is constructing a second Death Star.

The LEGO Star Wars Holiday Special was released on November 17, 2020 on Disney+, a spiritual successor to and satirisation of the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
In the special, set after Episode IX, Rey begins to doubt her abilities as a teacher to Finn.
She travels to a temple and finds a time key, which allows her to travel to different moments in time throughout the Star Wars saga to observe past Jedi Masters and their students.
However, she loses the key to Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader, who use it to go to the future, meeting Kylo Ren.
After learning from him about his demise at Vader's hands, Palpatine seeks to make Kylo his new apprentice (
unbeknownst to Vader) and ensure he will rule the galaxy forever.
Meanwhile, Finn, Rose and Poe try to organize the perfect Life Day party, but chaos ensues at every step.

===
Television series ===
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles trilogy:
"The Phantom Clone", aired on May 29, 2013.
General Grievous steals the lightsabers of a group of Padawans at the Jedi Training Academy, and he and Count Dooku plan to use the lightsabers' crystals to create an army of super-powered Sith clones on Kamino.
Yoda and Mace Windu embark on a quest to stop them.
Meanwhile, the Padawans try to retrieve their lightsabers, much to C-3PO's concern.

"Menace of the Sith" , aired on September 4, 2013.
The only surviving Sith clone, Jek-14, decides not to fight for the dark side of the force and wants to be left alone to build in peace, but both the Jedi and the Sith want him on their side, with the latter planning to use him to clone an evil army.
Meanwhile, C-3PO quits being the substitute teacher for the Padawans, and the Jedi Council hires Anakin Skywalker as his replacement.

"Attack of the Jedi", aired on November 27, 2013.
After the Sith's plan to create Sith clones has failed, they start teaching a group of "Badawans" on the planet Mustafar.
When the Jedi get a tip of this, they head there to stop them, but when they reach complications, they must persuade Jek-14 to help them, despite him not wanting to fight for either side of the Force.
Meanwhile, Darth Sidious tries to meet up with the evil padawans, but has trouble getting away from C-3PO.The series continued to a second season with five episodes airing in 2014 but now renamed "The New Yoda Chronicles" to avoid legal disputes over ownership between Disney and Cartoon Network.

Lego Star Wars:
Droid Tales aired on Disney XD between July and November 2015, as a 5-part animated mini-series.
The series serves as a comedic re-telling of the first six Star Wars films from C-3PO's point of view.

Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises aired on Disney XD between February and May 2016, as a 5-part animated mini-series.
The series serves as a comedic prequel to Star Wars: The Force Awakens.

Lego Star Wars:
The Freemaker Adventures aired on Disney XD.
It was announced by Disney on February 17, 2016, as a new Lego animated series.
Set between Episode V and Episode VI, it tells the story of the Freemakers, a family of scavengers that find themselves pulled into the conflict between the Rebels and the Empire.

Lego Star Wars:
All-Stars premiered on Disney XD on October 29, 2018.
It consists of five half-hour episodes, the first of which is a compilation of eight separately-released short films.
Set during multiple Star Wars eras, it tells the story of other relatives of the Freemaker family, including their parents Pace and Lena during the time of Solo, and Zander's daughter Moxie during Episode VII and Episode VIII.

==
References ==


===
Bibliography ===
LEGO (R) Star Wars Brickmaster.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2010.
ISBN 1-40535-622-7
LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40537-358-X
Lego Star Wars: Anakin: Space Pilot: Space Pilot (3d).
Authored by Ace Landers and Dave White.
Published by Scholastic, 2011.
ISBN 0-54530-440-7
LEGO (R)
Star Wars Heroes Ultimate Sticker Book.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40536-440-8
LEGO (R) Star Wars Villains Ultimate Sticker Book.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40536-439-4
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars:
The Phantom Menace.
Authored by Hannah Dolan.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2012.
ISBN 0-75668-693-8
Ultimate Sticker Collection: LEGO (R)
Star Wars: Minifigures:
More Than 1,000 Reusable Full-Color Stickers.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2012.
ISBN 0-75669-049-8
LEGO (R)
Star Wars Brickmaster Battle for the Stolen Crystals.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 1-40932-605-5
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars: Attack of the Clones.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 0-75668-695-4
DK Readers L3:
Lego Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 1-46540-869-X
Lego Star Wars: A New Hope.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-027-4
Lego Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-029-0
Lego Star Wars: Return of the Jedi.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-031-2
LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia, Updated and Expanded: With Minifigure.
Authored by Hannah Dolan and Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2015.
ISBN 1-10189-852-6
LEGO Star Wars: Yoda Chronicles
Trilogy No Level.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2015.
ISBN 0-54562-901-2
Lego Star Wars: Padawan Menace
No Level.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2015.
ISBN 0-54540-450-9
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
Authored by David Fentiman.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2016.
ISBN 1-46543-819-X
LEGO STAR WARS TALES OF REBELLION.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2016.
ISBN 0-54587-326-6
Ultimate LEGO Star Wars :
Includes two exclusive prints.
Authored by Chris Malloy and Andrew Becraft.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2017.
ISBN 0-24128-844-4
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars:
The Last Jedi.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2019.
ISBN
1-46546-663-0
LEGO Star Wars Visual Dictionary New Edition :
With exclusive Finn minifigure.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2019.
ISBN 0-24135-752-7
LEGO Star Wars Visual Dictionary, New Edition :
With exclusive Finn minifigure
Lego Star Wars Character Encyclopedia New Edition : With Exclusive Darth Maul Minifigure.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 1-46548-956-8
DK Readers Level 2:
Lego Star Wars the Rise of Skywalker.
Authored by Ruth Amos.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 1-46547-907-4
LEGO Star Wars Holiday Sticker Book.
Authored by Tori Kosara.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 0-24147-820-0
LEGO Star Wars Yoda's Galaxy Atlas.
Authored by Simon Hugo.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2021.
ISBN 0-24146-765-9


==
External links ==
Official website 
Brickset:
Your Lego Set Guide
MiniFigs.nl
Lego Star Wars minifigs
LEGO on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords is a role-playing video game developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by LucasArts.
It is the sequel to BioWare's Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and was released for the Xbox on December 6, 2004, for Microsoft Windows on February 8, 2005, and OS X and Linux on July 21, 2015.
Like its predecessor, it is set in the Star Wars universe 4,000 years before the events of the film
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace and is based on the d20 System developed by Wizards of the Coast.
The game uses the Odyssey Engine, which was originally used in Knights of the Old Republic.
The plot first started being written before the original Knights of the Old Republic was released, and development began in October 2003, after BioWare offered Obsidian their Star Wars license due to being confident in their previous work.

Knights of the Old Republic II starts five years after the events of the first game and follows the story of The Exile, a Jedi Knight who was exiled from the Jedi Order.
During this time, the Jedi Order has been almost completely wiped out by the Sith.
The game begins with the protagonist waking up from unconsciousness on an asteroid mining facility.
After he or she escapes with the help of their party members, they find the person who exiled them ten years ago, who sends the protagonist on a mission to seek out the remaining Jedi to fight against the Sith.

The game's critical reception upon its release was generally positive; praise was given to the story, characters, and writing, which were noted to be more grey than the original Knights of the Old Republic.
Particular praise was given to one of the game's party members Kreia,  with GameSpy naming her the best video game character of 2005.
However, the game received criticism for being too similar to its predecessor in terms of graphics and gameplay systems, as well as being launched in an incomplete state.
The game was included in the book 1001 Video Games
You Must Play Before You Die.

==
Gameplay ==
Knights of the Old Republic II is not a turn based game, but is a role-playing video game played from a third-person view that features pausable real-time combat.
Combat and interactions with the environment and non-player characters in Knights of the Old Republic II are based on the d20 System as in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
The game starts with a character creation screen with several choices to make, and there is also an option of letting the game do it automatically.
There are 30 new Force powers, which are manifestations of the Force, in Knights of the Old Republic II.
Like its predecessor, the game has several minigames, including swoop bike racing and a card game called Pazaak.
The interface has been streamlined from the original game and party management has been made easier; for example, the player can switch between two selected weapon sets in the menu.
As in the first game, the player can choose to align with either the light side or the dark side.
Choosing dialogue options that are respectful and empathetic gives the protagonist light side points, while options that are egotistic and evil result in dark side points.
The combat of Knights of the Old Republic II is identical to its predecessor.
Several new lightsaber forms were added to the game.
Each of them is useful for a different situation.
For example, one is best for enemies using blaster weapons, while another would be good for recovering from using Force powers.
The player can use a variety of melee and ranged weapons, including swords and firearms.
Fighting unarmed is also an option.
A new addition to the game is "prestige classes", add-ons to the Jedi classes that were established in Knights of the Old Republic.
They allow the player character to practice in lightsaber combat or Force powers, depending on player choice.
The player can travel with up to two party members at a time, who gain experience points at the same rate as the player character.
Equipment and perks for party characters can be selected for different statistical effects or abilities.
Players can loot corpses and various environmental objects.
The protagonist also has the ability to "influence" their party members; by doing things that impress them, the player increases their influence with them.
Depending on the level of influence, party members may support the player character unconditionally or turn against the protagonist.
The player can also exploit high influence by drawing party members to either the light side or the dark side, and some characters can even be trained to use the Force.
==
Synopsis ==


===
Setting ===
The game takes place five years after the events of Knights of the Old Republic and 4,000 years before Episode I:
The Phantom Menace, in a time when the Jedi have been nearly exterminated by the Sith.
The player's character, a former Jedi Knight exiled from the Jedi Order, is referred to as "The Exile" or "Jedi Exile".
Throughout the game, the Exile restores their connection to the Force while, with the help of playable companions, setting out to stop the Sith.
The player makes choices that turn the Exile to either the light side or the dark side of the Force, and they travel to six planets to either help or hinder the Republic's efforts to bring peace and stability to the galaxy.
New playable locations in Knights of the Old Republic II include Telos, Onderon and its moon Dxun, Nar Shaddaa, Malachor V, the Peragus Mining Facility, and various starships such as the hijacked Republic cruiser Harbinger, the Sith cruiser Ravager, and Goto's yacht orbiting Nar Shaddaa.
Two planets featured in the original game, Korriban and Dantooine, are revisited, both with ravaged buildings and intensified problems.
The Ebon Hawk, the main character's ship in the first game, is also the player's transportation in Knights of the Old Republic II.

===
Characters ===
The Exile's backstory reveals that the character served under Revan during the Mandalorian Wars and ordered the activation of a devastating weapon in the climactic battle over
Malachor V. The deaths that ensued created such a substantial "wound" in the Force that the character was forced to sever their connection to the Force to survive, and the Jedi Council ordered the character exiled from the Jedi Order.
As the game progresses, the Jedi Exile rebuilds a connection to the Force and creates unusually strong Force Bonds with other characters and places, while unknowingly sapping Force powers.
Among the characters who join the Jedi Exile are Kreia, who acts as the Exile's mentor; pilot and former Sith assassin Atton Rand; technician and Mandalorian War veteran Bao-Dur and his droid remote; the criminal droid G0-T0; and the Sith apprentice Visas Marr.
T3-M4 and Canderous Ordo (now identified as "Mandalore")
, both featured in the first game, also join the Exile's team.
Other characters join the Exile's party under certain conditions.
HK-47, who appears in the first game, joins the quest if the Exile collects and uses the parts necessary to reactivate him.
Depending on the player's alignment, the Exile will either be joined by the bounty hunter Mira (light side or neutral) or by her rival, a Wookiee bounty hunter known as Hanharr (dark side).
Depending on the player's gender (canonically female), the Exile will either be joined by Mical the Disciple (female Exile) or Brianna the Handmaiden (male Exile).The game features three main antagonists: Darth Traya, a mysterious assailant who remains in the dark through most of the game; Darth Sion, an undead Sith Lord who once served under Exar Kun in the Great Sith War (as seen in Tales of the Jedi); and Darth Nihilus, a Sith Lord whose physical being was destroyed due to his immense affinity to the Force.
These three Sith Lords are leaders of a loose affiliation of warriors and assassins leftover from Darth Malak's empire from the previous game.
In between the events of that game and this one, the Sith have launched a largely successful genocide campaign against the Jedi Order.
Another major antagonist is Atris, a former member of the Jedi Council whose unethical efforts to thwart the Sith come into conflict with the Exile.

===
Plot ===
While hiding on the Harbinger, a Republic cruiser, the Exile is sedated by an HK-50 assassin droid to be delivered to a crime syndicate called the Exchange, who have put out a bounty on live Jedi.
The Exile is rescued by Kreia, with whom the Exile forms a Force Bond, and the droid T3-M4 on the Ebon Hawk, and the three flee the Harbinger as it is hijacked by a squad of Sith assassins.
However, their ship is damaged during the escape by the Harbinger's gunfire, and they eventually arrive at the Peragus Mining Facility.
Teaming up with smuggler Atton Rand, the group escapes to the planet Telos IV.
While hiding out on Telos, they encounter Atris, a surviving member of the Jedi Council who sentenced the protagonist to exile ten years prior.
After settling a dispute regarding the Exile's past sentence, Atris forms an uneasy alliance with them, instructing them to seek out other surviving Jedi in order to rally against the Sith.
The Exile then travels to four worlds to find reclusive Jedi Masters and either beg for their aid or kill them in revenge for being exiled, depending on player choice.
As the Exile continues their journey, they are joined by several individuals in their quest.
After finding all the Masters, the Exile travels back to Dantooine and learns that the countless deaths at Malachor V resulted in the Exile unconsciously giving up their connection to the Force, which then became the teachings of the new Sith.
If the player aided the Jedi Masters, they prepare to strip the Exile of their Force connection permanently, as the Masters fear that these teachings could result in the actual death of the Force, but Kreia reveals herself to be the former leader of the Sith and murders them all in retribution.
If the player killed the Jedi Masters, Kreia attacks the Exile and leaves.
Tracking Kreia to Telos, the Exile fights and defeats a corrupted Atris, from whom it is learned that Kreia plans to strengthen a massive "wound" in the Force made ten years prior.
This "wound" had been created by the Exile during the Mandalorian Wars, when they activated a superweapon in order to end the battle on the planet Malachor V, causing mass death and destruction.
Before following her to Malachor V, where Kreia had since rejoined the Sith as Darth Traya, the Exile stops a Sith invasion of Telos, defeating one of Traya's former apprentices, the Sith Lord Darth Nihilus.
On Malachor V, the Exile is separated from their companions and fights through hordes of monsters on the planet's surface and the inhabitants of a large Sith Academy who survived the cataclysm.
On the final floor of the academy, the Exile kills the Sith Lord Darth Sion and confronts Darth Traya in the planet's core.
The Exile defeats the Sith Lord, but before Traya dies, she delivers a prophetic vision of the future pertaining to the player's companions and the worlds that were visited over the course of the story.
Depending on the Exile's alignment, they either order the destruction of Malachor V, escaping before it is destroyed, and travel into the Unknown Regions in search of Revan (light side), or remain on Malachor V as the new Dark Lord of the Sith (dark side).

==
Development ==
Knights of the Old Republic II was developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by LucasArts.
It is the sequel to BioWare's Knights of the Old Republic, and it uses the same Odyssey Engine as the original game.
BioWare suggested that Obsidian should be offered the Knights of the Old Republic license due to their familiarity with Obsidian's past work and the good relationship between the two developers, as well as due to finding LucasArts' development schedule for the sequel to be too tight.
The game was released in PC and Xbox versions, but due to the Xbox version being released two months prior to the PC version, it has multiple unfixed bugs.
Development of the game began in October 2003.
The overview of the game's story was originally drafted before the first Knights of the Old Republic was released, after which it saw many revisions and also some major redrafts.
In preparation to write Knights of the Old Republic II, lead designer Chris Avellone tried to learn as much about the Star Wars universe as possible.
He read many books, guides, modules, and graphic novels, and the Obsidian team also relied on the first Knights of the Old Republic and the original Star Wars films for inspiration.
Avellone said that Obsidian recognized one of the things that made Knights of the Old Republic great was the story and the companions, and that they tried to expand upon this by adding more depth to them.
Knights of the Old Republic II uses the same d20 System as the first Knights of the Old Republic with some changes, and the level cap has also been removed.
For the most part, the team didn't want to redo any of the design elements from the first game, as they felt that there was no need to change anything that had already proved successful; instead, they opted to look for areas that could be improved and expanded upon them in a way that retained the base style of Knights of the Old Republic.
Obsidian put much work into the game's graphics, including the appearances of non-player characters.
Other technological improvements include the lighting and weather effects, in addition to increasing the level sizes.
Knights of the Old Republic II's lead artist was Aaron Meyers; he decided which people would join the art team after looking through "tons of applications, resumes, and demo reels", and he said that he was pleased with the number of people who wanted to work for Obsidian.
Meyers also complained about the short deadline the development team had to deal with.
Obsidian's COO, Chris Parker, said that the schedule set for the development team was "extremely aggressive", and that the team felt a lot of pressure because they were "making a sequel to the game of the year for 2003".
For the music, the development team felt that symphony orchestra would work best for Knights of the Old Republic II.
The musical score was composed by Mark Griskey, who developed music and themes for characters and places, including the Jedi's theme, Darth Sion's theme and Darth Nihilus's theme (which both have many similarities with the Emperor's theme from Return of the Jedi).
He also created a theme for the main character, which is heard occasionally when he or she experiences internal conflict.
The ~55-minute score was recorded by the Sinfonia Orchestra in Seattle.
The opening crawl utilizes the version of John Williams' main Star Wars theme that was re-recorded for the prequel trilogy.

When Obsidian was preparing to present Knights of the Old Republic II at E3 2004, they tried to fit as much information as they could, saying that it would need to be a duration of 30 minutes as it was the only E3 event it would be showcased at; however, due to the limited time frame, they would have to cut it down to a five- to ten-minute presentation.
During this time, none of the levels Obsidian designed were ready to be shown, so they picked three levels and put them through a schedule to finish them on time.
The demo was finished a few days before the event, and the game was presented in May 2004.
The first trailer for Knights of the Old Republic II was later unveiled in July 2004, and the official website was launched in October.
When looking back at Knights of the Old Republic II in a 2013 interview, Avellone said that because of LucasArts forcing Obsidian to finish the game in a short time frame of 14 to 16 months, the game ended up being in an "unfinished" state.
However, Avellone said that Obsidian was at fault for this due to not cutting out enough things; he noted that all minigames should have been removed, and also said that there were too many in-engine cutscenes.
Obsidian's co-founder, Feargus Urquhart, said that the game was originally going to be released in 2005, but it was later moved up to December 2004 after E3; according to him, Obsidian had to choose between "get[ting] in trouble or get[ting] it done".
Due to this, several cuts had to be made; one of the most major was the droid planet M4-78, which was entirely removed from the game after the 2004 E3 event when the team realized that they wouldn't be able to fit it into the schedule.
M4-78's designer, Kevin Saunders, explained that he moved assets from that planet to Nar Shaddaa's yacht level in order to complete it on time, which was prior also likely to be cut from the game.
The Xbox version of Knights of the Old Republic II went gold on November 23, 2004; it was later released on December 6, 2004 in the United States, and the PC version was released on February 8, 2005.
In Europe, the game was released simultaneously for both platforms on February 11.
The game was later re-released in August 2012 on the digital distribution platform, Steam, and in January 2015 on GOG.com.

On July 21, 2015, OS X and Linux versions were released along with new support for Steam Workshop and other Steamworks features, controller input, and modern widescreen resolutions up to 5K. Backward compatibility for the Xbox One was announced in April 2018.
An iOS and Android version was released on December 18, 2020.Along with several official patches, a fan-released unofficial patch by a modding community fixed around 500 remaining bugs, along with restoring most of the content that was cut from the game.
There were also methods found by the community for improving compatibility on modern PC operating systems.

== Reception ==


===
Commercial performance ===
According to The NPD Group, Knights of the Old Republic II sold 458,000 copies in North America during the month of December 2004.
It entered their chart for the month at number 11, and at number 3 on the Xbox-only chart.
After its North American release on Windows, it debuted at number 2 on the PC chart for the month of February.
In the United Kingdom, the game debuted at the top of the weekly chart, beating Blizzard Entertainment's much-anticipated online game World of Warcraft, which was released in the same week.
Eurogamer reported that in the UK Knights of the Old Republic II sold much more in its first week than the first game, which the website speculates was helped by the former's simultaneous release on Windows and Xbox in PAL regions, as opposed to the latter's initial Xbox-only release.
During 2005 alone, the Xbox version sold more than 60,000 copies in the region.
By early 2006, Knights of the Old Republic II had sold almost 1.5 million copies.
Its sales in the United States alone reached 1.275 million by 2008.

===
Critical reception ===
Knights of the Old Republic II was met with positive reception upon its release; on Metacritic, it has an aggregate score of 85/100 and 86/100 on the PC and Xbox versions respectively, indicating "generally favorable reviews" according to the site.
IGN said that there is a bulk of pressure involved with developing the sequel to a game from a different developer which won several "Game of the Year" awards, and that Obsidian delivered.
The review also said that it will not disappoint fans of the original game and that it is mostly similar to it in terms of the model.
GamePro praised both the first and second Knights of the Old Republic and said that the second game continues the series' tradition of not fixing what is not broken.
GameSpot echoed this statement, also saying that both the good things and the shortcomings from the first game are present in Knights of the Old Republic II.GameSpy compared the game to The Empire Strikes Back from the original Star Wars film trilogy in that it is the best of the series in terms of story, and also said that the game has the best story in a video game since Planescape: Torment.
1UP.com wrote that Obsidian surpassed the original Knights of the Old Republic in terms of the writing, saying that the plot is more consistent, the dialogue is edgier and the moral choices are more significant; Computer Gaming World agreed, writing, "your decision making, as you pursue a light or dark path, is more ambiguous, with more unexpected consequences".
Eurogamer said that compared to the original game, Knights of the Old Republic II's plot is "far more grey".
The review also said that planets are "better developed and paced".
GameZone wrote that the game is a "Must Buy" for people who like well-written characters and story.
The combat was generally well-received, with some reviewers noting that it is mostly unchanged from the original Knights of the Old Republic.
GameSpot compared the combat from the first Knights of the Old Republic to the second, saying that it is not well-balanced in both; however, the reviewer wrote that it helps the combat remain spontaneous.
GameZone said that the combat is not changed from the first Knights of the Old Republic to the second, but that this is a good thing since the combat in the original was enjoyable.
IGN praised the game's AI, saying that it is easy to control the main character alone without controlling the party members.
GameSpy's reviewer, on the other hand, said that he encountered problems with the combat AI that were not present in the original Knights of the Old Republic.
GameSpot criticized Knights of the Old Republic II's graphics, calling them "lackluster".
GameSpy's reviewer felt that the game's graphics were disappointing, calling them "a little dated" and "half-baked".
The reviewer further criticized the graphics for looking the same as they were in the first game of the series, saying that they could only be considered "good" during the release of that game.
GameZone said that the game looks exactly the same as the original Knights of the Old Republic and that it does not compare to the majority of mainstream games released at the time.
GameSpy called the music in the game "excellent"; however, the reviewer noted that some of it is re-used from the first game of the series.
The GameSpy reviewer also said that while the majority of the voice-acting is good, there are "a few more examples of bad voice-acting" than in the first Knights of the Old Republic.
GameZone said that the "top-notch" voice acting complements the game's very well-written dialogue, and also praised the game's sound effects.
The game was criticized for its glitches; several players reported having problems with pathfinding bugs.
1UP.com's reviewer condemned Knights of the Old Republic II for having the same bugs and technical issues as in the first game, saying that his party "still had a tendency to warp and skip around the map at times", and he also criticized the pathfinding in the game.
GameSpy said that the game's bugs are "hard to forgive", and that these issues did not occur in the first Knights of the Old Republic.
In a different article, GameSpy said that the game is incomplete, and attributed this to its rushed deadline.
GameSpy called Kreia the best video game character of 2005, saying that she was "easily the most intriguing, complicated, enigmatic, well-designed and nuanced character in a video game this year".
The game received runner-up placements in GameSpot's 2004 "Best Role-playing Game", "Best Voice Acting", "Best New Character" and "Best Game
Based on a TV or Film Property" award categories across all platforms.
In 2010, the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games
You Must Play Before You Die.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords at MobyGames
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Boba Fett () is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
He is an armored bounty hunter featured in both the original and prequel film trilogies, but first appeared in the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), voiced by Don Francks.
In the original trilogy, the character is a supporting antagonist and was mainly portrayed by Jeremy Bulloch and voiced by Jason Wingreen.
Notable for his taciturn demeanor and for never removing his helmet, Fett appears in both The Empire Strikes Back (1980), employed by the Galactic Empire, and Return of the Jedi (1983), serving the crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
While seemingly killed in Return of the Jedi after falling into a sarlacc, he has since appeared in Star Wars media set after the film, confirming his survival.
Fett was retroactively added to the Special Edition of A New Hope released in 1997, making a non-speaking cameo appearance.
A preteen Boba is portrayed by Daniel Logan in the prequel film Attack of the Clones (2002), which reveals the character's origins as a clone and the adoptive son of the bounty hunter Jango Fett.

The character also appears in many forms of  Star Wars media outside of the films, such as books, comics, television series, and video games, many of which depict him as an antihero rather than a villain, and explore his background, motivations, and morality.
Daniel Logan reprised his role as the younger version of Fett in the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, while Temuera Morrison, who portrayed Jango in Attack of the Clones, voiced the character as an adult in most Star Wars projects since the release of the film.
Morrison later went on to play Fett in the live-action Disney+ series The Mandalorian, and will reprise the role in the spin-off The Book of Boba Fett.

During the development of The Empire Strikes Back, Fett was originally conceived as a member of a group of white-armored Imperial "supercommandos" before the idea was scrapped in favor of a solitary bounty hunter; this concept later evolved into the Mandalorians, a cultural group with strong warrior traditions, who sport armor and helmets similar to Fett's.
Since Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in 2012, followed by the decision to de-canonize most Star Wars works outside of the films, including many depicting Fett as a Mandalorian, the character's Mandalorian status has been heavily debated among fans.
This was briefly addressed in the The Mandalorian, in which the character confirms that his father, Jango, was a Mandalorian foundling, but doesn't acknowledge himself as a Mandalorian due to personal preference to not be affiliated with any particular group.
Despite this, he continues to use the Mandalorian armor that once belonged to Jango due to the advantages it provides in battle, including gadgets such as a jetpack, flamethrower, and vibroblades.

The character of Boba Fett quickly became a fan favorite despite his limited presence in the original Star Wars trilogy, and is a widely-recognized figure in popular culture.
His popularity within the Star Wars fanbase has earned him a cult following.

== Appearances ==
The character of Boba Fett made his first public appearance at the San Anselmo Country Fair parade on 24 September 1978.
In the parade, the Boba Fett costume was worn by Duwayne Dunham, working at the time as an assistant film editor and who later became a film and television director.
The character debuted on television two months later in an animated segment produced by Toronto-based animation firm Nelvana Productions for the Star Wars Holiday Special.
Fett appears as a mysterious figure who saves Luke Skywalker, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and R2-D2 from a giant monster, only to be revealed as a bounty hunter working for Darth Vader.
After his image and identity were revealed in the Holiday Special, costumed Fett characters appeared in shopping malls and special events, putting up wanted posters of the character to distinguish him from the franchise's Imperial characters.

===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
Fett's theatrical film debut was an unnamed bounty hunter in The Empire Strikes Back as the "next major villain" besides Darth Vader.
He is one of six bounty hunters assembled by Darth Vader, who promises a reward to whomever captures the crew of the Millennium Falcon.
Fett tracks the starship to Cloud City, where Vader captures its passengers and tortures its captain, Han Solo.
Aiming to collect the bounty Jabba the Hutt has placed on Solo (established in the original film), Fett questions Vader regarding the carbon freeze, which Vader intends to use on his true target, Luke Skywalker.
Vader promises that the Empire will compensate Fett if Solo dies, but the smuggler survives and Vader turns him over to Fett, who leaves to deliver him to Jabba in his ship, Slave I.
Return of the Jedi features Boba Fett at Jabba's palace on Tatooine, where Han Solo's friends are captured while trying to save him.
Fett aims his weapon at Princess Leia (disguised as bounty hunter Boushh)
when she threatens Jabba with a thermal detonator, and he later travels on Jabba's sail barge to the Great Pit of Carkoon (home of a sessile carnivorous creature known as a sarlacc) to witness the prisoners' execution.
When the prisoners revolt and fight back, Fett flies over and intervenes by tying up Luke, who manages to escape.
Chewbacca later warns Solo, who is still blind after being frozen in carbonite, that Fett is near.
As Solo turns around, he inadvertently hits Fett's rocket pack, setting it off and sending the bounty hunter falling into the Sarlacc's mouth.
The 1997 Special Edition release of the film includes an additional scene of Fett flirting with some of Jabba's female dancers.
In the 1997 Special Edition of A New Hope, Fett briefly appears in a reintroduced cut scene outside the Millennium Falcon while Jabba confronts Han Solo.
The character was never present in the original version of the scene, and was digitally superimposed onto the image.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
A preteen Boba Fett (played by Daniel Logan) appears in the 2002 prequel film Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones, which reveals that he is an unaltered clone of the bounty hunter Jango Fett (Temuera Morrison), who had him created on Kamino to be raised as his son as part of his price to serve as the template for the Grand Army of the Republic's clone army.
Boba helps Jango escape from Obi-Wan Kenobi and accompanies him to Geonosis, where he witnesses Jango's death at the hands of Mace Windu.

===
Television ===


====
Droids ====
Boba Fett appeared in the now non-canon 1985 animated series, Star Wars: Droids, set before the original trilogy.
The series was produced by the same studio that created the animated segment of the 1978 Holiday Special, and Fett was again voiced by Don Francks (who had been uncredited for his original role in the Holiday Special).
In the episode "A Race to the Finish", he is hired by the Fromms to help them get revenge on the masters of the droids
R2-D2 and C-3PO.
Fett later turns on them after failing their request, and decides to accept Jabba's bounty on the Fromms as compensation.

====
The Clone Wars ====
Logan reprised his role as the voice of Fett in the CGI-animated series The Clone Wars.
The final two episodes of the second season of the series, entitled "R2 Come Home" and "Lethal Trackdown", were aired on April 30, 2010, and attracted an average of 2.756 million viewers during the original broadcast.
The finale is significant for ending "with twin fandom bangs, courtesy of Boba Fett and a mammoth beast inspired by Godzilla".
Fett's entrance in the series commemorates the 30-year anniversary of the character's appearance in The Empire Strikes Back.
In the story arc, Boba infiltrates Mace Windu's flagship in the guise of a clone trooper cadet, hoping to exact revenge against the Jedi for killing his father.
After a failed attempt to bomb Windu in his quarters, he sabotages the ship's engines, causing it to crash on a nearby planet.
He and his bounty hunter accomplices then take hostages from the ship's crew, whom they try to use to bait the Jedi Master.
Throughout the ordeal, Fett balks at committing violence against his fellow clones, which comes to a head when his mentor Aurra Sing executes Windu's clone trooper second-in-command.
Plo Koon and Ahsoka Tano eventually track Fett and his compatriots to pirate Hondo Ohnaka's base.
Fett is ultimately captured by the Jedi and sentenced to prison on Coruscant; although he expresses regret for the collateral damage he has caused, he vows to never forgive Windu.

Fett escapes prison in the fourth-season episode "Deception".
He later forms his own bounty hunter syndicate, Krayt's Claw, which includes Bossk and Dengar (both of whom first appeared in The Empire Strikes Back alongside Fett).
In the episode "Bounty", Krayt's Claw is hired to deliver a package to a dictator.
When the bounty hunters discover that their cargo is in fact a young woman destined for a forced marriage to the despot, Fett is indifferent to her plight and insists the team proceed with their mission.
Temporary member Asajj Ventress, enraged, turns on Fett; she strangles him with the Force, binds, and gags him, and shoves him into the container in the captive's place, whereupon he is delivered to the nonplussed client.

====
The Mandalorian ====
Boba Fett's presence in the original Disney+ series
The Mandalorian was first hinted at in the first-season episode "Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger", which ends with a mysterious figure wearing boots and seemingly a cape approaching the body of assassin Fennec Shand on Tatooine.

In May 2020, it was reported that Temuera Morrison would appear as Fett in the second season of The Mandalorian.
As the series takes place five years following Return of the Jedi, this would confirm the character's survival after his fall into the sarlacc's mouth and retcon his apparent death.
In the second season's premiere, "Chapter 9:
The Marshal"
, it is explained that Fett's armor was salvaged by Jawas after his supposed death, and then bought by Cobb Vanth, a character first introduced in the Star Wars:
Aftermath trilogy of novels, who used it to protect the Tatooinian village of Mos Pelgo from various threats.
In the episode, the armor is eventually obtained by the Mandalorian, after Vanth relinquishes it so that it could be returned to its rightful owners: the Mandalorian people.
As he leaves with the armor, the Mandalorian is watched from the distance by a heavily scarred Fett.
Fett's first full appearance in the series occurred in the episode "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", in which it is explained that he saved Fennec's life after she was mortally wounded, leaving her in his debt, and that he is looking to retrieve his armor from the Mandalorian.
Fett and Fennec follow him in Slave I to the planet Tython, where the former explains that his armor belonged to his late father Jango, a Mandalorian foundling, and is, thus, Fett's birthright.
In exchange for the armor's return, Fett and Fennec ensure the safety of Grogu, an alien infant the Mandalorian has adopted.
When Moff Gideon's Imperial forces attack the group, Fett dons his old armor and helps to fend off the stormtroopers deployed to capture Grogu, but the group ultimately failed to prevent him from being taken by Gideon's Dark Troopers.
After revealing to Djarin his status as a true Mandalorian, Fett insists that he and Fennec shall remain indebted to the Mandalorian until the child is safe, and aid his efforts to rescue Grogu in both  "Chapter 15:
The Believer" and ''
Chapter 16:
The Rescue'', which show Fett as having cleaned and repainted his armor.
In the latter episode, Fett is initially at odds with Bo-Katan Kryze, the former ruler of Mandalore and one of the allies that the Mandalorian tries to recruit to help save Grogu because she calls him a disgrace to his Mandalorian armor due to his origins as a clone.
Despite this, the two reluctantly work together to rescue the child from Moff Gideon, with Fett creating a distraction that allows the rest of the crew to board Gideon's ship.
After this, Fett flies into hyperspace and is not seen again until a post-credits scene, in which he and Fennec return to Tatooine and kill Bib Fortuna, who has been in charge of Jabba's palace since his death.
Fett then sits on the throne that once belonged to Jabba, with Fennec at his side.

====
The Book of Boba Fett ====
The Book of Boba Fett is a spin-off of The Mandalorian focused on Boba Fett, which is scheduled to premiere on Disney+
in December 2021.
Morrison and Ming-Na Wen will reprise their roles as Fett and Fennec Shand, respectively.

===
Other media ===
In the first issue of Marvel Comics' Darth Vader (2015), the title character hires Boba Fett to capture the pilot who destroyed the Death Star.
In the concurrent Star Wars comic (2015), Fett tracks the pilot, Luke Skywalker, to Tatooine, although the latter escapes after a brief fight.
Fett then tells Vader the pilot's surname, unknowingly informing the Sith lord (formerly Anakin Skywalker) that he has a son.
Fett also features in Marvel's Bounty Hunters (2020), which is set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
The upcoming comic miniseries War of the Bounty Hunters (2021) will be set in the same era, and be preceded by standalone comics including tie-ins with Star Wars, Bounty Hunters, Darth Vader, and Doctor Aphra.
Fett appears as a playable character in Star Wars Battlefront (2015) and Star Wars Battlefront II (2017), as well as a number of Star Wars video games for mobile devices.

===
Legends ===
The character appears extensively in the Star Wars Expanded Universe of novels, comic books, and video games, dating to as early as the newspaper comic strip and Marvel's Star Wars series (produced concurrently to the original film trilogy).
In April 2014, such works were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the rest of the franchise in order to create a blank slate for the sequel trilogy.

Boba Fett appears in many other works set during the original trilogy, including the choose-your-own-adventure book The Bounty Hunter (1994), the 1996 Shadows of the Empire multimedia project, Dark Horse's short comic Boba Fett: Salvage (1997), volumes of the young-reader series Galaxy of Fear (1997–1998), The Bounty Hunter Wars book trilogy (1998–1999), issues of Empire (2002–2005) and Star Wars (2013–14), and the one-shot comic Boba Fett: Overkill (2006).
Fett appears in the years leading up to A New Hope in the comic Boba Fett: Enemy of the Empire (1999), in which Vader hires Fett before trying to kill him, as well as Agent of the Empire (2012–2013), Blood Ties (2010–2012), and Underworld:
The Yavin Vassilika (2000–2001).

A 1983 issue of the original Marvel Star Wars comic book set just after Return of the Jedi depicts Fett temporarily escaping the sarlacc pit.
Works such as Dark Horse's Dark Empire series (1991–1992) further utilized Fett's survival.
A 1995 anthology story by Daniel Keys Moran narrates some of his time in the sarlacc, and a 1996 story by Dave Wolverton narrates how Dengar finds him and restores him back to health.
In the comic Boba Fett: Twin Engines of Destruction (1997), while Fett recovers after being freed from the sarlaac, he is impersonated by a bounty hunter named Jodo Kast, whom Fett then hunts.
Four Boba Fett comics set several years after Return of the Jedi were released between 1995 and 2000.
Fett encounters Han Solo in the short story
The Last One Standing: The Tale of Boba Fett (1996), set 15 years after the events of the same film, and fights side by side with him in The New Jedi Order:
The Unifying Force (2003), set a decade later.
He also appears in the e-novella Boba Fett: A Practical Man, set 20 years after Jedi.
In the Legacy of the Force series (2006–2008), set some 35 years after Jedi, Han and Leia's daughter, Jaina, asks Fett to train her to help her defeat her corrupted brother, Jacen.
In The Last One Standing, Daniel Keys Moran developed a backstory for Fett in which he was once named Jaster Mereel, a "Journeyman Protector" lawman who was convicted of treason.
His backstory was depicted differently in Attack of the Clones, leading to the Dark Horse comic Jango Fett: Open Seasons (2003) retconning Mereel to Jango's mentor.
A young-adult book series called Boba Fett (2002–2004) depicts Fett's roots as a bounty hunter during the Clone Wars, when he takes his father's ship and begins working for Jabba the Hutt.

====
The Bounty Hunter Wars ====
The Bounty Hunter Wars is a trilogy of novels by K.W. Jeter set during the events of the original trilogy.
The books were published by Bantam Spectra in July 1998, November 1998, and July 1999, respectively.
The trilogy depicts Fett as being more communicative than in the films because its plot requires Fett to show "an ability to convince people as well as kill them".
The first book, The Mandalorian Armor, starts during the events of Return of the Jedi, shortly after Jabba's sail barge is destroyed.
Dengar stays with Fett after the latter's near-death experience, and encounters Neelah, a dancer in Jabba's palace who has lost her memory, and thinks Fett can help her.
Kuat of Kuat, an Imperial executive, reviews footage from the Great Pit of Carkoon, leading him to suspect that Fett is still alive.
It is related in flashbacks set between A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back that Fett stole a bounty Bossk and Zuckuss
were hunting on behalf of the Bounty Hunters Guild.
After delivering the bounty, Fett accepted a contract to join the Bounty Hunters Guild in order to break it up.
The Emperor met with Darth Vader and Prince Xizor, where the latter revealed that it was he who planned for Fett to join the guild in order to eliminate its weakest members, leaving only the best for the Empire to exploit.

In the second book, Slave Ship, Fett abandons Slave I to avoid dispelling rumors of his death, and instead steals Bossk's ship.
Riding along, Dengar tells Neelah about the split of the Bounty Hunters Guild.
After Bossk killed his father, the guild split into two factions: one composed of the older members, and another composed of Bossk and other younger members.
Prince Xizor placed an enormous bounty on a renegade stormtrooper who slaughtered his entire ship's crew.
Fett, Bossk, and Zuckuss captured the trooper, but Fett jettisoned his partners in an escape pod.

In the third and final book, Hard Merchandise, it is related that Fett tried to claim his bounty, but found Xizor waiting to kill him in order to tie up loose ends related to his plot.
In an attack on the megalomaniacal prince, Kuat of Kuat had falsified some evidence implicating him in the murder of Luke Skywalker's aunt and uncle.
This information was on the renegade stormtrooper's ship (which is why Kuat wanted to make sure the bounty hunter was dead) but is retrieved by Fett in the present, as Neelah realizes she is from an elite Kuat family and stops her sinister sister from taking over the now-suicidal Imperial executive's shipyard.

====
Boba Fett: A Practical Man ====
Boba Fett:
A Practical Man is an e-novella by Karen Traviss, which was published online in August 2006 by Del Rey Books.
Set 20 years after the events of Return of the Jedi, it focuses on what led Boba Fett and the Mandalorians to fend off the extragalactic Yuuzhan Vong invaders in The New Jedi Order:
The Unifying Force (set a few months later).

A Yuuzhan Vong named Nom Anor meets Fett on Mandalore and begins giving him and the Mandalorians directions to help their invasion.
Fett plans to do as much damage to the invaders as possible, even as he pretends to help them.
He instructs a pilot to deliver his plea for help to the New Republic, but with the Vong's next target still unwarned, the world falls without a fight.

A Vong warrior asks Fett to assist in killing a Jedi; instead, Fett convinces the Jedi to deliver his message.

The Jedi returns and confirms that Fett has a deal
: the Mandalorians will continue to masquerade as Vong mercenaries while passing intel to the Republic.
Fett agrees to have a few of his best commandos train planetary militias to fight the Vong.

===
Unproduced works ===
A planned live-action TV series developed by Star Wars creator George Lucas before the sale of Lucasfilm to Disney, under the working title Star Wars: Underworld, would have featured Fett.
====
Star Wars 1313 ====
The cancelled LucasArts video game Star Wars 1313, announced at E3 2012, would have told the story of Boba Fett's career as a young adult bounty hunter between the prequel and original trilogies.
Fett would have navigated past the scum of civilization in an underground area of Coruscant known as Level 1313.
In 2013, as a result of Disney's acquisition of the franchise, all LucasArts projects then in production were shelved.
In a December 2015 interview with /Film, Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy stated that the concept art for the game was "unbelievable" and that, along with Star Wars: Underworld, it was "something we're spending a lot of time looking at, poring through, discussing, and we may very well develop those things
further".
Level 1313 appears in Star Wars media such as The Clone Wars, in which it is visited by Ahsoka Tano, and Star Wars Adventures:
Return to Vader's Castle.

====
The Clone Wars episodes ====
Fett was to have appeared in more episodes of The Clone Wars before its cancellation.
A series of Western-inspired episodes would have featured Fett teaming up with Cad Bane to rescue a child kidnapped by Tusken Raiders on Tatooine; Aurra Sing would have appeared as well.
The story arc would have depicted Fett donning his Mandalorian armor for the first time, and ended with Bane blasting Fett in the head, creating the iconic dent in his helmet (an idea which came from George Lucas).
Animatic footage of the climactic scene was shown at Star Wars Celebration.

====
Standalone film ====
In early 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger announced the development of a Star Wars spin-off film written by Simon Kinberg, which Entertainment Weekly reported would focus on Boba Fett during the original trilogy.
In mid-2014, Josh Trank was officially announced as the director of an undisclosed spin-off film, but had left the project a year later due to creative differences with Kinberg, causing a teaser for the Fett film to be scrapped from Star Wars Celebration.
In May 2018, it was reported that James Mangold had signed on to write and direct a Fett film, with Kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
The author of a Fett-focused Legends story stated that Lucasfilm had considered adapting it into a film.
By October, the Fett film was reportedly dead, with the studio instead focusing on the Mandalorian series on Disney+; The Fett film was afterwards reported to have also featured the other bounty hunters from The Empire Strikes Back.

==
Concept and development ==
George Lucas created Boba Fett in his April 1978 draft of The Empire Strikes Back, basing the character on Sergio Leone's Man with No Name (Clint Eastwood).
The character needed to be designed quickly, as Lucas had agreed for him to be featured in the Star Wars Holiday Special later that year.
The character's design stemmed from initial concepts for Darth Vader, who was originally conceived as a rogue bounty hunter.
While Vader became less a mercenary and more of a dark knight, the bounty hunter concept remained, and Fett became "an equally villainous" but "less conspicuous" character.
Concept artist Ralph McQuarrie influenced Fett's design, which was finalized by and is credited to Joe Johnston.
Norman Reynolds and the film's art department built the costume.
Fett's armor was originally designed for "super troopers", and was adapted for Fett as the script developed.
Screen-tested in all-white, Fett's armor eventually garnered a subdued color scheme intended to visually place him between white-armored "rank-and-file" Imperial stormtroopers and Vader, who wears black.
This color scheme had the added bonus of conveying the "gray morality" of his character.
The character's armor was designed to appear to have been scavenged from multiple sources, and it is adorned with trophies.
A description of Fett's armor in the mid-1979 Bantha Tracks newsletter catalyzed "rampant speculation" about his origins.
By 1979, Fett's backstory included having served in an army of Imperial shock troops which had battled the clone troopers of the Republic during the Clone Wars.
Despite two years of widespread publicity about Fett's appearance in The Empire Strikes Back, script rewrites significantly reduced the character's presence in the film.
Fett's musical theme, composed by John Williams, is "not music, exactly" but "more of a gurgly, viola-and-bassoon thing aurally cross-pollinated with some obscure static sounds."
Sound editor Ben Burtt added the sound of jangling spurs, created and performed by the foley artist team of Robert Rutledge and Edward Steidele, to Fett's appearance in Cloud City, intending to make the character menacing and the scene reminiscent of similar gunfighter appearances in Western films.
At one point in Return of the Jedi's development, Fett was conceived as being a main villain, but he was finally replaced with Emperor Palpatine when Lucas decided to not make a third trilogy of Star Wars.
Lucas also considered Fett fighting Lando during the sarlacc sequence.
An official reference book states that Fett charges "famously expensive" fees and that he undertakes only when the mission meets "his harsh sense of justice".

Daniel Keys Moran, who wrote a few stories featuring Boba Fett, cited Westerns as an influence on his development of the character.
Moran said:

The difficult thing with Fett was finding a worldview for him that permitted him to proclaim a Code — given the stark Evil that permeated the Empire, Fett pretty much had to be either 1)
Evil, or 2) an incredibly unforgiving, harsh, "greater good" sort of guy.
The second approach worked and has resonated with some readers.

Lucas at one point considered depicting Vader and Fett as brothers in the prequel films, but discounted it as too "hokey".
In continuing to develop the character in the prequel films, Lucas closed some avenues for expanding the character's story while opening others.
Lucas considered adding a shot of Fett escaping the sarlacc in later editions of Return of the Jedi, but decided against it because it would have detracted from the story's focus.
Lucas also said that, had he known Fett would be so popular, he would have made the character's death "more exciting".
In 2014, Star Wars historian Jonathan W. Rinzler revealed that Lucas had told him that Fett escaped from the sarlacc, although this was not confirmed until Fett's appearance in The Mandalorian six years later.

===
Film casting and production ===
Boba Fett is primarily played by Jeremy Bulloch in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Bulloch's half-brother alerted him to the role.
He was cast as Fett because the costume happened to fit "as if a Savile Row tailor had come out and made it"; he did not have to do a reading or screen test, and Bulloch never worked from a script for either film.
Filming the role for Empire lasted three weeks.
The actor was pleased with the costume and used it to convey the character's menace.
Bulloch based his performance on Clint Eastwood's portrayal of the Man with No Name in A Fistful of Dollars; similar to the Western character, Bulloch cradled the blaster prop, made the character seem ready to shoot, slightly tilted his head, and stood a particular way.
Bulloch did not try to construct a backstory for the character, and said later that "the less you do with Boba Fett, the stronger he becomes".
Playing Fett in Empire was both the smallest and most physically uncomfortable role Bulloch has played; Bulloch said donning the heavy jetpack was the worst aspect of the role.
Bulloch spent four weeks on Return of the Jedi.
He was unaware of Fett's demise before filming began and was "very upset" by the development; he would like to have done more with Fett.
Still, Bulloch believed killing Fett made the character stronger, and that his "weak" death makes fans want the character to return.
Bulloch thought a scene created for the Special Edition in which Fett flirts with one of Jabba's dancers was not in keeping with the character's nature.
A younger version of the character was played by Daniel Logan in Attack of the Clones.
Logan had not seen any of the Star Wars films prior to being cast as Fett, but he watched the original trilogy at Lucas' request.
The actor had to rely on his imagination for the bluescreen filming.
Both Bulloch and Logan had also expressed interest in reprising their role of Fett in the planned Underworld TV series, but the series remains undeveloped.

====
Other portrayals ====
According to the official Star Wars website, Fett was voiced by Don Francks in the Holiday Special.
Bulloch wore Fett's costume in Empire and Jedi, but John Morton filled in during one scene for Empire, and Jason Wingreen voiced the character in Empire.
His brief appearance in A New Hope was performed by Industrial Light & Magic creature animator Mark Austin.
The character's appearance in the Special Edition footage of Jedi was performed by Don Bies and Nelson Hall.
For the 2004 rereleases, Temuera Morrison replaced the character's original voice for continuity with Attack of the Clones establishing that Boba is a clone of his father, Jango, also portrayed by Morrison.
The character's voice in National Public Radio's Star Wars radio dramas was provided by Alan Rosenberg in The Empire Strikes Back
and Ed Begley, Jr. in Return of the Jedi, Tim Glovatsky in the audio adaptation of Dark Forces:
Rebel Agent, Joe Hacker in an audio adaptation of the Dark Empire comics, Temuera Morrison for Empire at War, Battlefront II and Battlefront:
Elite Squadron, Dee Bradley Baker in The Force Unleashed,
The Force Unleashed II and Star Tours:
The Adventures Continue, Chris Cox in Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike, Tom Kane in Galactic Battlegrounds, Demolition and Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy, and Daniel Logan for The Clone Wars animated TV series and Lego Star Wars: The Video Game.
The first live-action depiction of Fett outside the theatrical films was in the second season of the original Disney+ series The Mandalorian, wherein Morrison reprised the role.
The character also made a cameo appearance in a live-action mockumentary filmed on the set of Return of the Jedi titled Return of the Ewok (1982).
Post-production was never completed, and it has never been officially released.

== Reception ==
Boba Fett is a "cult figure" and one of the most popular Star Wars characters.
In 2008, Boba Fett was selected by Empire magazine as the 79th greatest movie character of all time, and he is included on Fandomania's list of The 100 Greatest Fictional Characters.
IGN ranked Boba Fett as the eighth top Star Wars character, due to his status as a fan-favourite and cult following.
He personifies "danger and mystery", and Susan Mayse calls Fett "the unknowable Star Wars character" who "delivers mythic presence."
Although Tom Bissell asserts that no one knows why Boba Fett has become so popular, nor cares why, both Lucas and Bulloch cite Fett's mysterious nature as reasons for his popularity.
Bulloch, who has never fully understood the character's popularity, attributes it to the costume and the respect Fett garners from Darth Vader and Jabba the Hutt.
The initial Boba Fett toy, more than Fett's actual film appearance, might be responsible for the character's popularity; Henry Jenkins suggests children's play helped the character "take on a life of its own".
Moran said Vader's admonition specifically to Fett in The Empire Strikes Back—"No disintegrations"—gives Fett credibility; he was interested in Fett because the character is "strong, silent, [and] brutal".
Jeter says that even when Fett appears passive, he conveys "capability and ruthlessness".
Bissell credits Bulloch for giving Fett "effortless authority" in his first scene in The Empire Strikes Back, using such nuances as cradling his blaster and slightly cocking his head.
Fett's small role in the film may actually have made the character seem more intriguing.
Logan, who was a Young Artist Award nominee for his portrayal of Fett, compares Fett to "that boy in school who never talks" and who attracts others' curiosity.
Bissell adds that Boba Fett, along with other minor characters like Darth Maul and Kyle Katarn, appeals to adolescent boys' "images of themselves: essentially bad-ass but ... honorable about it."
This tension and the absence of a clear "evil nature" (distinct from evil actions) offer Fett dramatic appeal.
Furthermore, Fett "is cool because he was designed to be cool", presenting a "wicked ambiguity" akin to John Milton's portrayal of Satan in Paradise Lost and Iago in William Shakespeare's Othello.
Bissell compares Fett to Beowulf, Ahab, and Huckleberry Finn: characters "too big" for their original presentation, and apt for continued development in other stories.
Moran finds Fett reminiscent of the Man with No Name.
Fett has been featured extensively in pop culture and parodies.
Breckin Meyer provides his voice in various Robot Chicken sketches.
Nerdcore rapper MC Chris included a Star Wars-themed song titled "Fett's Vette" on his 2001 debut album.
The creator of the Spartan helmets for the 2006 film 300 painted one of them to look like Fett's helmet.

The San Francisco Chronicle describes Boba Fett fans as "among the most passionate", and the character is important to Star Wars fan culture.
Boba Fett's popular following before the character even appeared in The Empire Strikes Back influenced Damon Lindelof's interest in developing Lost across multiple media.
Between filming The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, Mark Hamill pitched the idea that Fett was Luke Skywalker's mother to George Lucas, which "he didn't like".
In about 2000, a feminist campaigned online to have the character unmasked as a woman.
Fan parodies include Boba Phat, a cosplay "intergalactic booty hunter" created by David James.

===
In The Clone Wars ===
IGN reviewer Eric Goldman rated the first episode 8.2/10 and the second 8.8/10, stating "this was a very layered, exciting episode to end Season 2 on", though he did not appreciate Boba Fett's limited dialogue.
Bryan Young, a writer for The Huffington Post and Examiner.com, also disliked Fett's responses at the end of the episode when confronting Mace Windu: "He says something incredibly whiny.
"
Young does state, however, that "[o]verall, this pair of episodes was a satisfying conclusion to season two, which really upped the game in this series in terms of animation, storytelling, and suspense."
GalacticBinder.com's reviewer Chris Smith wrote, "Lucasfilm delivers another exciting episode to finish off a tremendous second season."
Adam Rosenberg writing in MTV Movies Blog discusses Boba Fett's return: "He's going to have to be put through a lot more
hell before he embraces his inner badass.
I'll say though...
he's off to a mighty good start with the dual blasters he wears on his belt.
Sure, they're almost the size of his thighs, but hey... he's still just a kid."

===
In The Mandalorian ===
Temuera Morrison received positive reviews from critics for his portrayal of Boba Fett in season 2 of The Mandalorian.

===
Merchandising ===
Fett is one of the top five best-selling Star Wars action figures, and Boba Fett-related products are "among the most expensive" Star Wars merchandise.
Fett was the first new mail-away action figure created for The Empire Strikes Back; although advertised as having a rocket-firing backpack, safety concerns led Kenner to sell his rocket attached.
Gray called the early toy "a rare and precious commodity", and one of the rocket-firing prototypes sold at auction for $16,000 in 2003.
In 2018 and 2019, two of the prototypes were sold at auction, for £69,000 ($USD92,000) and £90,000 ($USD120,000), respectively—each setting the world record for the highest auction price of a Star Wars toy at that time.
A fully painted figure with a rare variant on the firing mechanism is planned to be auctioned and estimated to be worth $200,000.In August 2009, Hasbro released a Fett action figure based on McQuarrie's white-armored concept, and Boba Fett as both a child and bounty hunter have been made into Lego minifigures and a helmet statue of boba fett in his armor.
Wizards of the Coast's Star Wars Trading Card Game includes several Boba Fett cards.
Hallmark Cards created a Boba Fett Christmas tree ornament.

In January 2015, an unopened Boba Fett figure sold for £18,000 at auction in the UK, the figure was in factory fresh condition and did not have the packaging punched for hanging in a shop.

==
Discrepancies ==
For a long time, Fett's status as an actual Mandalorian has been questioned, as was his father's, Jango Fett.
In the Star Wars Legends continuity, it was known that both were true Mandalorian warriors, while in the current Star Wars Canon, it remained ambiguous, as there were sources that described them both simultaneously as Mandalorians and non-Mandalorians.
This discrepancy was solved in Chapter 14:
The Tragedy, the sixth episode of the second season of the "The Mandalorian" TV series, where it was revealed that both Boba and Jango are also true Mandalorians in Canon.

== See also ==
Space western


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Boba Fett in the StarWars.com Databank
Meet Boba Fett – screen-test footage of the prototype Boba Fett costume
Boba Fett on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Boba Fett on IMDb
Boba Fett fan club
Cad Bane is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Created by George Lucas, Dave Filoni and Henry Gilroy, he made his debut as an antagonist in the 2008 animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, in which he is voiced by Corey Burton.
The character is depicted as a ruthless bounty hunter from the planet Duro who is usually employed by other villains in the series, such as the Separatist Alliance and the Hutt crime families.
Known for utilising weapons and gadgets specifically designed to counter the abilities of Jedi, Cad Bane was the "preeminent blaster-for-hire" during the Clone Wars.
Aside from the television series, the character appears in several canon and non-canon Star Wars media, such as comic books and video games.
Since his first appearance in The Clone Wars, Cad Bane quickly became a fan favorite, and has been highlighted as one of the best bounty hunter characters in the franchise, usually alongside the likes of Boba Fett and Jango Fett.

==
Appearances ==


===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Cad Bane recurs in the 2008 animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
He first appears in the first season's finale "Hostage Crisis", in which he and Aurra Sing assemble a team of fellow bounty hunters to rescue Ziro the Hutt from the Republic's prison facility.
They infiltrate the Senate building on Coruscant, murdering all of the guards and taking a group of senators hostage as leverage to demand for Ziro's release.
Their plan is successful, and the bounty hunters manage to escape with Ziro, despite Anakin Skywalker's attempt to stop them.

Bane makes his first chronological appearance in the second season premiere "Holocron Heist", in which he is hired by Darth Sidious to steal a Holocron from the vault of the Jedi Temple.
He escapes with the Holocron and manages to evade Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka Tano in "Cargo of Doom".
Bane subsequently helps Sidious use the Holocron to kidnap several Force-sensitive children in "Children of the Force" before he is captured by the Jedi.
Obi-Wan Kenobi and Mace Windu force him to take them to the Holocron, and Bane leads them into a trap in his headquarters, giving himself time to flee.

The third season explores the events leading up to Bane's takeover of the Senate building in season one.
"
Evil Plans" features Bane capturing the droids R2-D2 and C-3PO, who involuntarily give him the schematics of the Senate building.
The following episode "Hunt for Ziro", which takes place after "Hostage Crisis", reveals that Bane was hired to extract Ziro from Republic custody by Jabba the Hutt as Ziro possessed a datapad with incriminating evidence against the Hutt crime families.
Shortly after Bane is congratulated by Jabba for his success, Ziro escapes and the bounty hunter is hired to track down and capture the rogue Hutt.
He eventually finds Ziro's corpse on Teth but realises the datapad is missing.
After a short altercation with Obi-Wan Kenobi and Quinlan Vos, who were also searching for the Hutt, Bane escapes once again.

Prior to the fourth season's episode "Deception", Bane is revealed to have intentionally been captured in order to infiltrate a Republic prison; he is hired by Count Dooku to break Moralo Eval out of the facility.
Unbeknownst to them, Obi-Wan Kenobi poses as bounty hunter Rako Hardeen and seeks to gain the duo's trust to uncover Dooku's plans.
Following a successful prison break and pursuit throughout the Outer Rim, the trio finally reach The Box: a competition to decide which of a small group of chosen bounty hunters will participate in the Separatist plot to kidnap Chancellor Palpatine on Naboo.
Bane and "Hardeen" survive the events of the box and go on to kidnap the Chancellor in "Crisis on Naboo", but Kenobi's deception is soon revealed and he manages to foil the plot, leading to Bane's arrest once more.

Following the series' cancellation in 2014, creator Dave Filoni confirmed that Bane was slated to return in an unfinished story arc which saw him and a group of bounty hunters mentoring the young Boba Fett, helping him follow in his late father's footsteps.
The end of the arc would see Bane and Fett having a standoff, which presumably resulted in the former's death.

====
Rebels ====
Years after the Clone Wars came to an end, Sabine Wren somehow heard of Cad Bane, and designed a graffiti image of him, inspired by his daring combat skills.
This image can be briefly seen in the second episode of the first season of Star Wars Rebels, "Fighter Flight".
===
Comics ===
Bane also appears in the five-part Marvel Comics comic book miniseries Star Wars:
Darth Maul, set before the events of the prequel trilogy, where he aides the titular character in kidnapping a Jedi Padawan.
===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the rest of the franchise by Lucasfilm.
Cad Bane has appeared in several comics and video games set in the Legends continuity.
==
Characteristics ==


===
Character creation ===
The character was created as a recurring antagonist for the 2008 Star Wars: The Clone Wars television series set during the prequel film trilogy.
The season one finale "Hostage Crisis" director Giancarlo Volpe compared Cad Bane to another Star Wars bounty hunter, Boba Fett, stating:

The crew loves Cad Bane, and I really think the fans will, too.
He brings a serious bad-ass sensibility to Star Wars.
He's a lethal and ruthless bounty hunter, and you see that right away in the episode.
Unlike Boba Fett, Cad doesn't take prisoners.

Originally, supervising director Dave Filoni and series writer Henry Gilroy planned to create the Durge character that was already introduced in the 2003 micro-series.
Durge would instead be redesigned as a human character but this exploration was short lived after the suggestion of series producer and Star Wars creator George Lucas to go Western.
Lucas took inspiration from western film actors such as Lee Van Cleef's portrayals of Angel Eyes in The Good, The Bad, and the Ugly and of Colonel Mortimer in For a Few Dollars More while Corey Burton uses Peter Lorre's voice as inspiration.
These characters' Western influences help to bring Bane to life while still containing the features of the Duros species in the Star Wars universe with his own original characterization.
Burton's voice would then be modified on the computer by the series' sound production team.
While Filoni researched the character, he happened to come across an unlabeled concept art of a gun-toting bounty hunter with a wide-brimmed hat from the original trilogy and that concept helped bring the character to life.
Filoni speculated on George Lucas' original idea for the character that became Bane:
Something you notice about George Lucas after a while is that he'll mention a name like 'Mace Windu' in a [1973] version of Star Wars, and then it pops up in 1999.
So, this, I guess might have been an idea George had for the character
Cad Bane way back when,
and now finally he's getting around to bringing him to the screen in The Clone Wars.

==
Promotion and reception ==
Cad Bane has been featured in two Hasbro toys concerning himself, his blaster and his ship respectively, as well as one involving him merged with his ship in a crossover for Transformers.
Both Cad Bane and his speeder were included as part of the Lego Star Wars toy line.
Cad Bane also appears as a playable character in two prominent Star Wars mobile games, both available for iOS and Android, Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes and Star Wars: Force Arena.
In 2009, UGO Networks ran a feature on Cad Bane, noting his cool looks and calling him "quintessentially cold, cruel and calculating".
IGN listed him as the 31st top Star Wars character, praising his first impression and saying his creators succeeded in introducing "an inarguably cool and effective villain".
IGN also noted he "continued to be an excellent foil" to the main protagonists in his later appearances.
IGN's Eric Goldman said that Bane was a successful attempt at creating a new ongoing villain, and later called him a "very cool and effective new villain".
Goldman also called Bane's introduction and his torture of Bolla Ropal (a Jedi) two of The Clone Wars's darkest moments, adding that Bane lived up to the hype that surrounded him in his introduction.
Christian Bauvelt, writing for Entertainment Weekly's PopWatch, said that one of the three top reasons the "Evil Plans" episode worked for him was because Cad Bane appeared in it, and noted Bane's similarities to Angel Eyes from The Good, the Bad and the Ugly.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Cad Bane in the StarWars.com
Databank
Cad Bane on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Star Wars franchise has spawned multiple films and television series.
Two animated series were released in the mid-1980s.
Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the prequel trilogy-era Clone Wars.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only The Clone Wars was kept in the canon of continuity of the episodic Star Wars films.
Two additional half-hour animated series were created: Rebels, which ties into the original trilogy, and Resistance, which ties into the sequel trilogy.
An additional series spun off from The Clone Wars, titled The Bad Batch, will debut on Disney+
in 2021.

At least seven original Star Wars series will be released on Disney+.
The first live-action series in the franchise, The Mandalorian, premiered in November 2019, and spawned three spin-offs, The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic and Ahsoka.
Additional live-action series include Andor, Obi-Wan Kenobi, The Acolyte, and Lando.

==
Animated series ==


===
Droids and Ewoks (1985–1987) ===
Nelvana, the animation studio that produced the animated segment of the Holiday Special, was hired to create two animated series which aired together on ABC: Droids (1985–1986) follows the adventures of C-3PO and R2-D2, and its sister series Ewoks (1985–1987) features Wicket and other members of the titular species from Return of the Jedi, both set before the events of the original trilogy.
One reviewer calls Droids "rudimentary" and Ewoks "unremarkable", but writes that both "marked the first major effort to expand the Star Wars 'brand' beyond its original live-action film existence."
===
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) ===
George Lucas created his own animation company, Lucasfilm Animation, and used it to produce his first in-house Star Wars CGI-animated series, using Cartoon Network's 2003 Clone Wars micro-series as a "pilot".
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) was introduced through a 2008 animated film of the same name.
The series is set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith of the prequel trilogy.
It focuses mainly on the Jedi characters of Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi, as well as Anakin's Padawan apprentice, Ahsoka Tano (an original character created by Filoni for the series), with other characters from the live-action films in supporting roles.
The series marked the beginning of Dave Filoni's involvement in Star Wars animation projects.

After Disney's acquisition of the Star Wars franchise, The Clone Wars was cancelled in 2014 before its intended final episodes were completed.
The remaining unaired episodes were released on Netflix as "The Lost Missions".
The chronological storyline order was released after the series had initially finished airing.
The film and series were included in the canon established in 2014.
The show was later revived for an additional final season that premiered on February 21, 2020, on the streaming service Disney+.
===
Rebels (2014–2018) ===
In 2014, Disney XD began airing Star Wars Rebels, the first CGI-animated series produced following the Disney acquisition.
It follows a band of rebels as they fight the Galactic Empire in the years leading up to A New Hope.
It closed some of the arcs introduced in The Clone Wars.
Due to the film Rogue One being produced at the same time, the film and the series acknowledged each other.
The series also included an in-canon version of Grand Admiral Thrawn from the Legends  Thrawn trilogy.

===
Resistance (2018–2020) ===
The animated series Star Wars Resistance debuted in late 2018, shifting the animation style towards anime-inspired cel-shading visuals, and focuses on a young Resistance pilot Kazuda Xiono before and during The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, leading up to The Rise of Skywalker.
Sequel trilogy characters such as Captain Phasma, General Hux, and Kylo Ren appear.
The second and final season premiered on October 6, 2019.
===
The Bad Batch ===
Set after the events of The Clone Wars, The Bad Batch follows the titular squadron making their way through the galaxy as mercenaries in the early days of the Empire.
The series was announced in July 2020, to debut on Disney+
on May 4, 2021.
Dave Filoni, Athena Portillo, Brad Rau, and Jennifer Corbett serve as executive producers, with Carrie Beck as co-executive producer and Josh Rimes as producer.
Rau also serves as supervising director with Corbett the head writer.

===
Visions ===
Announced on December 10, 2020, Star Wars: Visions is an anime anthology series of ten short films by different creators set in the Star Wars universe.
It is scheduled for release on Disney+
in 2021.

== Micro-series ==


=== Clone Wars (2003–2005) ===

After the release of Attack of the Clones, developed and drawn by Genndy Tartakovsky.
Cartoon Network produced and aired the micro-series Clone Wars from 2003 to weeks before the 2005 release of Revenge of the Sith, as the series featured events set between those films.
The plot in the series was intended as prequel to then upcoming feature movie Episode III: Revenge of The Sith and directly leads to the starting point in the movie.

It won the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program in 2004 and 2005.
===
Blips (2017) ===
Star Wars Blips is an animated micro-series created to promote The Last Jedi.
It features droids such as
BB-8 and R2-D2, in addition to porgs.

===
Forces of Destiny (2017–2018) ===
The animated micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny debuted in 2017; it focuses on the female characters of the franchise and is set in various eras.

===
Galaxy of Adventures (2018–2020) ===
Star Wars Galaxy of Adventures debuted on the "Star Wars Kids" YouTube channel and website in late 2018.
Using stylized animation, the series of shorts reimagine key scenes from the saga, initially leading up the release of Episode IX.
The shorts feature audio from the original films (with narration by Dante Basco) and are animated by Titmouse,
Inc.


==
=
Roll Out (2019–2020) ===
Star Wars Roll Out debuted on the Star Wars Kids YouTube channel and website in August 2019.
The shorts depict the main characters from the franchise as ball-shaped, similar to BB-8, and utilize a kid-friendly cutout animation style.
io9 calls the design of the series "adorable".

== Live-action series ==


===
The Mandalorian (2019–present) ===
In March 2018, Jon Favreau was hired to write and produce a live-action Star Wars series for Disney+.
The series follows "a lone gunfighter in the outer reaches of the galaxy far from the authority of the New Republic" a few years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
In August 2018, it was reported that the series would cost about "$100 million for 10 episodes".
Pedro Pascal stars as the titular character, and is joined by supporting actors Gina Carano, Nick Nolte, Giancarlo Esposito, Emily Swallow, Carl Weathers, Omid Abtahi, and Werner Herzog.
The series premiered on November 12, 2019, with the launch of Disney+.
The second season premiered on October 30, 2020.
===
The Book of Boba Fett ===
In November 2020, Deadline Hollywood reported that a miniseries focused on Boba Fett could begin filming before the end of the year, before a third season of The Mandalorian went into production.
The series, known as The Book of Boba Fett, was revealed the following month, and confirmed to be in production ahead of The Mandalorian season three.
Favreau and Filoni executive produce along with Robert Rodriguez, with Temuera Morrison and Ming-Na Wen reprising their roles as Boba Fett and Fennec Shand, respectively.
It will be released in December 2021.
===
Andor ===
The series will follow Rebel spy Cassian Andor, five years before the events of Rogue One, during the formative years of the Rebellion.
In November 2018, a prequel series to the 2016 film Rogue One centered on Cassian Andor was confirmed to be in development, and described as a "rousing spy thriller".
Diego Luna will reprise his role for the series.
Stephen Schiff was hired to serve as showrunner and executive producer of the series, which was developed by Jared Bush, who wrote a series bible and a draft of the pilot episode.
In April 2019, Alan Tudyk was confirmed to be reprising his role of K-2SO.
In April 2020, Tony Gilroy, who worked on the reshoots of Rogue One, replaced Schiff as showrunner.
Gilroy was going to write and direct the pilot, and direct other episodes as well.
It was also revealed in April 2020 that Stellan Skarsgård, Kyle Soller,
Denise Gough had joined the cast in undisclosed roles, along with Genevieve O'Reilly reprising her role of Mon Mothma.
In September 2020, it was announced that Gilroy would step down from his directing duties in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and would be replaced by Toby Haynes, who is set to direct the first three episodes.
Filming began in late November 2020 in London.
Andor will be released in 2022, and consist of 12 episodes.

===
Obi-Wan Kenobi ===
In August 2019, it was reported that a streaming series focused on Obi-Wan Kenobi was in development, with Ewan McGregor in talks to reprise his role from the prequel trilogy.
The series was initially thought to have been developing as a standalone film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the performance of Solo at the box office.
During the 2019 D23 Expo, Lucasfilm officially announced that the series was in development, with McGregor confirmed to reprise his role as the titular character.
It will take place eight years after Revenge of the Sith and prior to the events of A New Hope, thus exploring the time during Kenobi's exile on Tatooine.
In September 2019, Deborah Chow and Hossein Amini were announced as the series' director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive producers alongside McGregor.
In October 2019, McGregor said the series would comprise six episodes.
According to Amini, filming for the series was set to begin around July 2020, but after he departed from the series, it was reported in January 2020, that production had been pushed to January 2021.
In April 2020, it was announced that Joby Harold would officially be taking over writing duties from Amini.
In August 2020, Kennedy told TheWrap that it would be a limited series.
In September 2020, McGregor said that the series is now scheduled to begin filming in early 2021.On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that Hayden Christensen would reprise his role as Darth Vader, and that the series would be titled Obi-Wan Kenobi.

===
The Acolyte ===
In April 2020, Variety reported that a female-centric live-action Star Wars series is in development for Disney+
with Russian Doll co-creator Leslye Headland serving as a writer and showrunner.
In early November, Headland expounded that the series would be set "in a pocket of the universe and a pocket of the timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the geography of the Star Wars universe than its existing visuals.
On November 5, Deadline reported that the series was expected to be an "action thriller with martial arts elements".
On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that it would take place during the late High Republic era.

===
Ahsoka ===
In December 2020, Ahsoka was announced.
Developed by Favreau and Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett and Rangers of the New Republic through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".
Rosario Dawson headlines the series, reprising her role as Ahsoka Tano.
It will be a limited series.

===
Lando ===
In December 2020, Lando was announced as a Disney+ limited series, focusing on the titular character, with a story by Justin Simien.

===
Rangers of the New Republic ===
In December 2020, Rangers of the New Republic was announced.
Developed by Favreau and Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett and Ahsoka through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".

==
Game show ==


===
Jedi Temple Challenge (2020) ===
Star Wars:
Jedi Temple Challenge is a web-based children's game show developed by Lucasfilm.
First announced in December 2019, the series debuted on the Star Wars Kids website and YouTube channel on June 10, 2020.
The series features young contestants competing as Jedi Padawans in a series of obstacle courses and knowledge tests in the attempt to gain the rank of Jedi Knight.
The show is hosted by Ahmed Best, who plays the character of Kelleran Beq, the Jedi Master mentor of the contestants who is joined by his droid companions, AD-3
(voiced by Mary Holland and performed by Gordon Tarpley) and LX-R5.
Sam Witwer provides the voice of an unknown character of the Dark Side of the Force during the final challenge of each episode.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings ===


===
Critical response ===


===
Emmy Awards ===


==
Abandoned projects ==


===
Underworld ===
In 2005, plans for a live-action television series set between the prequel and original trilogies were announced at Star Wars Celebration.
In 2007, Lucas described the project as "one show that will split into four shows, focusing on different characters.
"
It entered development in early 2009.
The series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as Han Solo, Chewbacca, Lando Calrissian, Boba Fett, C-3PO, and Emperor Palpatine.
Lucas described the series as "more talky.
It's more of what I would call a soap opera with a bunch of personal dramas in it.
It's not really based on action-adventure films from the '30s—
it's actually more based on film noir movies from the '40s!"
Producer Rick McCallum revealed the working title, Star Wars: Underworld, in 2012, and that it would focus on criminal and political power struggles in the "period when the Empire is trying to take things over.
"Over one hundred 42-minute episodes were planned, with 50 scripts written.
These were mostly second drafts, but due to their complex content, were too expensive to produce.
Ronald D. Moore was one of the writers, and extensive artwork including character, costume, and set designs were developed at Skywalker Ranch under the close supervision of Lucas and McCallum.
The project was still being considered after Lucasfilm was sold to Disney, including by ABC, with stories being reviewed as of December 2015.
According to Kathleen Kennedy,
That's an area we've spent a lot of time, reading through the material that he developed is something we very much would like to explore. ...
So our attitude is, we don't want to throw any of that stuff away.
It's gold.
And it's something we're spending a lot of time looking at, pouring [sic] through, discussing, and we may very well develop those things further.
We definitely want to.

The plot of the anthology film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story was originally pitched as an episode of the series.
The story of Han winning the Millennium Falcon from Lando was planned to be featured and later developed as Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
In early 2020, Stargate Studios shared test footage made to promote the series to networks, as well as a Google Doc listing production details for the series.

===
Detours ===
Star Wars Detours is an unaired animated parody series from the creators of Robot Chicken, which was postponed in 2013 and ultimately unaired.
Production began in 2012 prior to the Disney acquisition, with 39 episodes completed and 62 additional scripts finished.

===
Cara Dune-centered series ===
By November 2020, a Mandalorian spin-off series centered on the character Cara Dune was being considered for Disney+, which Lucasfilm intended to announce the following month at Disney's Investor Day event.
Deadline Hollywood, however, reported at that time that despite being rumored, the series was not in development.
Any series development was no longer being considered after Gina Carano, the actress who portrayed Cara Dune in The Mandalorian, made controversial social media posts in November 2020.

== See also ==
Lego Star Wars § Films and videos
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars films


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars: Droids – The Adventures of R2-D2 and C-3PO is a 1985 animated television series spin off from the original Star Wars trilogy.
It focuses on the exploits of droids R2-D2 and C-3PO between the events of Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope.
The series was produced by Nelvana on behalf of Lucasfilm and broadcast on ABC with its sister series Ewoks (as part of The Ewoks and Droids Adventure Hour).The series ran for one season of 13 half-hour episodes; an hour-long special broadcast in 1986 serves as the finale.
The opening theme, "Trouble Again", was performed by Stewart Copeland of the Police.
During their adventures, the droids find themselves in the service of successive new masters, and encounter minor characters from the original trilogy such as Boba Fett and IG-88.
==
Premise ==
Droids follows the adventures of R2-D2 and C-3PO as they face off against gangsters, criminals, pirates, bounty hunters, the Galactic Empire and other threats.
During their adventures, the droids find themselves in the service of successive new masters and in difficult situations as a result.

The series was retroactively placed four years after Revenge of the Sith and fifteen years before the events of A New Hope.
In the latter film, C-3PO tells Luke Skywalker that his and R2-D2's "last master was Captain Antilles.
"
The droids are placed in Antilles' care by Bail Organa at the end of Revenge of the Sith, creating an apparent continuity error.
This is explained by the droids being accidentally separated from Antilles during the events of the animated series.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
; Daniels also portrayed the character in the films.

R2-D2


===
Recurring/Guest ===
Don Francks as Jann Tosh, Boba Fett, Kybo Ren-Cha
Winston Rekert as Sise Fromm, Mungo Baobab
Graeme Campbell as Proto One, Admiral Terrinald Screed, and Lord Toda
Peter MacNeill as Jord Dusat
Taborah Johnson as Jessica Meade
John Stocker as Vlix Oncard, Greej, Zatec-Cha, and Sollag
Rob Cowan as Thall Joben
Dan Hennessey as Jord Dusat (episode 4), Uncle Gundy, Jyn Obah, Vinga, Yorpa, Governor Koong, and Captain Cag
Cree Summer as Princess Gerin
Jan Austin as Auren Yomm
Long John Baldry as the Great Heep
Lesleh Donaldson as Kea Moll
Chris Wiggins as Mon Julpa
Stephen Ouimette
as the narrator
Winston Rekert
as Tig FrommOther guest stars include George Buza, Andrew Sabiston, Eric Peterson, Jamie Dick, Donny Burns, Alan Fawcett, Don McManus, and Gordon Masten.

==
Production and broadcast ==
The series was produced by the Canadian company Nelvana for Lucasfilm.
Several episodes were written by Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt.
Hanho Heung-Up Co. was the Korean company hired to animate the series.
In the UK, BBC Television bought rights to screen the series in its entirety between 1986 and 1991 as part of the Children's BBC programming strand.
The entire series was shown twice within this time (in 1986 and 1988 to coincide with the full release of the Star Wars trilogy as well as Droids on VHS).
The Great Heep only made one showing in 1989 on BBC's Going Live!
,
which was a Saturday morning children's show—it was split into two parts over two weeks.
Different episodes from different cycles were also screened across the five-year licence, with the Trigon cycle being shown in full in early 1991 on another Saturday morning children's show called The 8:15 from Manchester.

The opening theme, "In Trouble Again", was performed by Stewart Copeland of the Police and written by him and Derek Holt.

The series was broadcast on ABC with its sister series Ewoks (as part of The Ewoks and Droids Adventure Hour).
It debuted in 1985 as part of a fitness special hosted by Tony Danza and live-action versions of the droids.
It ran for one season of 13 half-hour episodes; an hour-long special broadcast in 1986 serves as the finale.
Droids and Ewoks were later shown in reruns on Sci-Fi Channel's Cartoon Quest in 1996, although somewhat edited for time.

==
Episodes ==
Over the course of the series, the droids team up with three different sets of masters.
The series falls into three cycles or arcs; the droids usually run into their new masters at the beginning of each, and at the end are forced to leave.

The Great Heep, a 48-minute television special following the series, is set before the final arc.

==
Merchandising ==
In 1985, Kenner produced a toy line based on the series, including action figures, ship models, and other items.
Two action figures, Boba Fett and A-wing Pilot, were repackaged figures from the main Star Wars line.
The toy line was canceled after the first group of 12 figures due to decreasing popularity with Star Wars.
In 1987 and then 1988, Glasslite of Brazil issued remaining Kenner stock and produced a very limited run of remaining Return of the Jedi and Droids toys from a sell off.
Certain vehicles, mini-rigs and action figures were issued by the company in new packaging.
The character Vlix (Tig Fromm's henchman) was an action figure exclusive from unused molds by Kenner.
Like the remainder of the Glasslite line, very few were made, even less were sold and most were recycled due to the failing economy when money was tight across the country.
Vlix was the most valuable Star Wars action figure (at about $6,000 carded or $1,200 loose), until a Fett figure sold for £69,000 ($USD 92,000) at an auction.
A book was issued in the UK of the Episode "A Race to the Finish" as well as another book that had limited print runs.
Plans to release a storybook and cassette of the Trigon cycle for the publishing company Rainbow were abandoned after they lost the rights to re-issue their Star Wars run which included A New Hope
, The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, Planet of the Hoojibs, Droid World and Return of the Jedi:
The Battle of Endor due to poor reflective sales of Buena Vista's "Further Adventure" series overseas which included Mission to Ord Mantell, An Ewok Adventure and Ewoks: The Battle for Endor.

A computer game was released in 1988 for the ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC and Commodore 64 by Mastertronic.
The game went largely unnoticed and was pulled from production due to licensing rights of the end title theme tune being used.

===
Comic book series ===
In 1986, Marvel's Star Comics imprint published a Star Wars:
Droids comic series spun off from the cartoon.
The bi-monthly series ran for eight issues.
Four issues and issue 5's cover of the series were drawn by John Romita, Sr.
The "Lost in Time" crossover story from Droids #4 was continued in an issue of Ewoks.
The last three issues are part of an arc recounting the original Star Wars film from the droids' point of view.
Additionally, Spanish comics publisher Editorial Gepsa produced two-page Droids comics as part of an anthology series.

==
Home media ==
Almost all episodes of the series (except "Coby and the Starhunters") were released on VHS in the 1980s and 1990s, most notably the UK PAL releases over four cassettes (Droids 1–3 and The Great Heep), which had the opening sequences and credits edited out.
In 1996, Rick McCallum produced The Pirates and the Prince, a direct-to-video movie compiled from four episodes.
In late 2004, McCallum and 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment produced a DVD titled Star Wars: Animated Adventures – Droids, which featured The Pirates and the Prince and Treasure of the Hidden Planet, a new compilation film including narration from Mungo Baobab (voiced by Alex Lindsay).
Both titles included some soundtrack changes.
On April 2, 2021, it was announced that the entire series would be released on Disney+
later in 2021.

== Reception ==
According to David Perlmutter, compared with Ewoks, Droids "was rudimentary, with short enough story lines for as many as four narratives in a single episode.
Obviously, neither Lucas nor the animation studio had enough faith in the characters to trust them as anything other than second bananas."
==
Legacy ==
Ben Burtt wrote liner notes for the Shadows of the Empire soundtrack, which referenced the Roonstones he had written about in Droids; Burtt made a cameo appearance in Episode I – The Phantom Menace, and named his character after the Baobabs.
Several references to the animated series are made in the prequels, such as the Boonta Eve Classic in The Phantom Menace, the planet Bogden and a four-armed cook in Attack of the Clones, and General Grievous' wheel bike design in Revenge of the Sith.
Genndy Tartakovsky gave C-3PO moving, expressive eyes in Clone Wars (2003) to pay homage to his previous animated appearances in Nelvana's Star Wars Holiday Special (1978) and Droids.
While Droids was excluded in the 2014 rebranding of Star Wars canon, recurring villain Admiral Screed—"the Emperor's right-hand man during the early days of the Empire"—makes appearances in canon novels such as Tarkin (2014) and Aftermath:
Life Debt (2016).
Additionally, possible sources of inspiration for sequel trilogy main characters Rey and Kylo Ren have been noticed.

==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Star Wars: Droids 1985, George Lucas, Ben Burtt
Star Wars Insider #27
A Guide to the Star Wars Universe
The Star Wars Encyclopedia by Stephen J. Sansweet, ISBN 0-345-40227-8 Del Rey; first edition (June 30, 1998)


==
External links ==
Star Wars: Droids at IMDb
The Great Heep at IMDb
The Pirates and the Prince at IMDb
Treasure of the Hidden Planet at IMDb
Star Wars:
Droids at TV.com
Star Wars:
Droids at the Big Cartoon DataBase
The Droids
Re-Animated, Part 1 - StarWars.com
The Droids
Re-Animated, Part
2 - StarWars.com
starwars.com
DVD
"Closer look"
A history of home video releases of Star Wars:
Droids
Episode review of The White Witch
A fan "Droids encyclopedia" blog at StarWars.com
The First Order is a fictional autocratic military dictatorship  in the Star Wars franchise, introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Formed following the fall of the Galactic Empire after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983), the First Order is the central antagonistic faction in the sequel trilogy.
Aside from the films, the First Order appears in various related Star Wars media.

In The Force Awakens, the First Order is commanded by Supreme Leader Snoke and seeks to destroy the New Republic, the Resistance, and Luke Skywalker.
Snoke's apprentice, Kylo Ren, is the master of the Knights of Ren, a mysterious group of elite warriors who work with the First Order.
In the 2017 sequel The Last Jedi, Ren kills Snoke and becomes the new Supreme Leader.
In the 2019 film The Rise of Skywalker, the First Order allies with the Sith Eternal, a secret Sith cult led by Palpatine, who is revealed to have been secretly controlling the First Order via his puppet ruler, Snoke, prior to the latter being usurped by Ren.
== Depiction ==


===
Origins ===
According to Star Wars: The Force Awakens:
The Visual Dictionary (2015) and the novel Star Wars:
Aftermath trilogy by Chuck Wendig, after the Galactic Empire was defeated in Return of the Jedi at the climactic Battle of Endor in 4 ABY, thousands of worlds rose up to join the Rebel Alliance and destroy the disorganized Empire, which fell victim to warlordism.
The Alliance formally reorganized itself as the New Republic, and retook the Core Worlds, including the galactic capital Coruscant.
One year after Endor, the remaining Imperial Fleet made a final, massive attempt at a counter-offensive which came to a climax at the planet Jakku, the biggest battle in the war since Endor.
The Imperial counter-offensive was decisively defeated.
The remaining Imperial forces were pushed back to a handful of sectors on the fringe of the Outer Rim, containing only a small fraction of the galaxy's population and industrial base.
These sectors were a heavily fortified final redoubt, and the New Republic deemed that they posed too small a threat to justify the high cost in life that liberating them would require.
The New Republic forced the Empire to settle for the Galactic Concordance, a humiliating armistice agreement which imposed strict disarmament plans and punishing reparations on the remaining Imperials.
The Aftermath trilogy establishes Imperial Admiral Rae Sloane, introduced as a captain in John Jackson Miller's 2014 novel A New Dawn, as well as Commandant Brendol Hux as the de facto founders of the First Order, with Sloane, after achieving the rank of Grand Admiral, coining the term "First Order" as she establishes the reborn empire that will eventually take that name.
She is additionally inferred as a future mentor figure for General Hux, who appears as a child in Empire's End.
Over time, elements of the Imperial Remnant reorganized themselves, becoming a firmly entrenched and isolationist hermit kingdom, which spent the next three decades instigating a "cold war" against the New Republic, gradually rebuilding its military strength and secretly re-arming in violation of its armistice agreements.
The vestigial Empire secretly expanded from its original few sectors (in the galactic north), aggressively pushing into the Unknown Regions (the unexplored swaths of territory in the galactic west) to seize new undeveloped worlds in order to supplement their resource base, as well as build new shipyards and industrial infrastructure far from the eyes of the New Republic.

The 2016 novel Star Wars:
Bloodline explained how this faction officially reorganized into the "First Order", and that this final transition only occurred about six years before The Force Awakens.
By that time, the New Republic Senate had become divided into two parties: the Populists led by Leia Organa, who wanted to decentralize authority, and the Centrists, who wanted power to remain concentrated in a strong central government.
Many of the Centrists were former Imperials who admired the old Empire for bringing order to the galaxy, and who feared that without strong central control the New Republic would become as weak and ineffectual as the Old Republic.
Ultimately, many Centrist worlds seceded from the New Republic to reunite with the holdout Imperial remnants on the fringe of the galaxy, and formally combined into a new government called "the First Order".
First Order conspirators publicly revealed that Leia was in fact the daughter of Darth Vader, severely harming her political standing among the remaining Populists.
The vast majority of the New Republic's worlds remained intact, but with the exodus of the Centrists its Senate became dominated by the remaining Populists, who favored decentralization and demilitarization, not confrontation.
Even after these events, most in the remaining Senate were happy to see the Centrists go, feeling that the new First Order still controlled far too few sectors of the galaxy to ever pose a serious threat to galactic peace.
In their view, it was easier to just let the Centrist worlds peacefully leave of their own volition and rejoin the Imperial worlds rather than fight a war to keep them by force.

The new "First Order" came to be ruled by the mysterious Force-wielder known as Supreme Leader Snoke, who was secretly created by the resurrected Emperor Palpatine to control the First Order after purging its previous leadership.
Through Snoke, Palpatine seduced Leia's own son Ben Solo to the dark side of the Force, who renamed himself "Kylo Ren".
On his turn to the dark side, Ben/Kylo slaughtered most of his uncle Luke Skywalker's other Jedi apprentices (with the rest joining him) and destroyed his new academy.
Blaming himself, Luke fled into self-imposed exile to search for the ancient first Jedi Temple.
Kylo Ren, meanwhile, took on a position as Snoke's right hand within the First Order's military.

With her political standing severely weakened, and the New Republic Senate gridlocked and unwilling to recognize the First Order's military buildup, Leia Organa decides to withdraw and form her own small private army, known as the Resistance, to fight the First Order within its own borders.
She is joined by other members of the former Rebel Alliance such as Admiral Ackbar.
Publicly the New Republic continues to disavow direct association with the Resistance to maintain plausible deniability, and though the majority of the Senate does not want to intervene against the First Order, several Senators privately channel funds and resources to the Resistance.
This state of affairs continued on for the next six years until the events of The Force Awakens.
Comic book writer Charles Soule, creator of the 2015 Marvel Comics series Star Wars: Poe Dameron, explained that immediately prior to the events of The Force Awakens, "The New Republic and the First Order are in a position of detente, and while there have been a few small skirmishes between the Resistance and the First Order, it's very much a sort of cold war."
===
Military ===
The First Order's handful of sectors simply do not possess the galaxy-wide resources the old Empire used to be able to draw upon, and in addition the armistice treaties with the New Republic put strict limitations on how many ships it could physically build.
Therefore, unlike the old Galactic Empire's swarm tactics, the First Order's military has had to adapt to a more "quality over quantity" philosophy, making efficient use of what few resources it has.
Culturally, the Galactic Empires' Sith-influenced philosophies have been incorporated and streamlined.
Its military is built upon "survival of the fittest"; if one soldier cannot fulfill their duty and dies serving the First Order, then so be it.
The Order can only become stronger by culling the weak from their ranks.
A major plot point in The Last Jedi is that the First Order has developed new "hyperspace tracking" technology, allowing them to continue to chase enemy vessels through hyperspace from one jump to the next (until one or the other runs out of fuel).
This technology was first mentioned in passing in Rogue One as another research project the Empire was starting to develop almost forty years before.
However, it appears that such technology existed at the time of A New Hope, as Darth Vader was able to track the Tantive IV from Scarif to Tatooine even through hyperspace.

====
Starfleet ====
Star DestroyersThe First Order lacked the resources to build and crew thousands of Star Destroyers.
While its fleet is a fraction of the size of the Imperial fleet at its height, on a one-for-one basis its new ships are much more powerful.
In addition, they boast thirty years' worth of advances in military technologies compared to the old Empire.
As a result, the First Order now deploys starships such as the new Resurgent-class Star Destroyer, nearly twice as large as the old Imperial-class Star Destroyer which it replaced as the mainstay of the First Order fleet.
With a naval doctrine that accepted the renewed importance of starfighters within their overall strategy, the Resurgent-class adopted the carrier-centric designs of the Galactic Republic's Venator-class Star Destroyer.

TIE pilot corpsThe First Order's TIE fighters, designated TIE/fo, are more advanced than the old Empire's TIE/ln model, and show greater concern for unit stamina and survivability.
The First Order's Special Forces use a more heavily armed two-man TIE/sf variant.

Visually, their color scheme is reversed from the old Imperial design: the Empire's TIE fighters have black solar panels on a light grey metal body frame, while the First Order TIE fighters have white solar panels on a dark metal frame.
The Last Jedi also introduces a new starfighter element to the First Order fleet, the TIE Silencer superiority fighter.
Much as TIE Interceptors were the next generation fighter starting to phase out the original Imperial TIE fighters, TIE Silencers are a next-generation fighter given only to the most elite units.

Visually they somewhat resemble a cross between a TIE Interceptor and Darth Vader's TIE Advanced x1 prototype, being wider and more elongated, while boasting heavier weapons and shields to be able to face X-wings head-on.
Their technical designation is "TIE/vn" (because in earlier drafts, the ship was called "TIE vendetta").
Kylo Ren pilots his own personal TIE Silencer in The Last Jedi, which he uses to assault the Resistance ship Raddus.

In The Rise of Skywalker, another new TIE is introduced, the TIE Whisper.
This fighter is similar to the TIE Silencer but has a spherical hull more in line with typical TIE lines.
Kylo Ren uses the TIE Whisper as his personal craft in The Rise of Skywalker, using two ships in his pursuit of both Palpatine and Rey; both ships used are destroyed by Rey.

Troop TransportsFor space to surface delivery
, the First Order is also seen deploying several standard troop transports.

Elite units and high value command personnel such as Kylo Ren use the Upsilon-class command shuttle, a stylistic evolution of the old Imperial Lambda-class T-4a shuttle (but without the third fin on top, and now sporting large wings that retract upon themselves on landing).

DreadnoughtsThe
Last Jedi introduces several more ships of the First Order.
Mandator IV-class Siege Dreadnoughts are larger but rarer than Resurgent-class Star Destroyers, used as orbital bombardment platforms which can functionally wipe out entire planets' population centers (albeit through conventional weapons, just short of being considered superweapons).
Dwarfing even these other vessels are Supreme Leader Snoke's personal flagship and mobile capital, the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy: a wing-shaped vessel wider than it is long, the size of a small country.
The Supremacy measures 60 kilometers at its greatest width—equal to about 18 Resurgent-class Star Destroyers
lined up end to end.

====
Ground forces ====
The First Order employs a quality-over-quantity philosophy with its soldiers and personnel.
Unable to conscript quadrillions of soldiers to fill its Stormtrooper ranks, yet unwilling to invest huge resources in breeding a rapidly produced clone army, First Order Stormtroopers are kidnapped from their homeworlds and trained from birth, raised their entire lives for no other purpose.
First Order soldiers and crews have constantly trained for combat in war games and simulations, making them much more effective one-on-one than the endless waves of Stormtrooper conscripts fielded by the old Empire.
First Order Stormtroopers are regularly put through mental indoctrination and propaganda programs, to make sure that they remain fanatically loyal and never hesitate or question orders.
Soldiers are not even given individual names for themselves but merely serial numbers, such as "FN-2187".
First Order Stormtroopers are formally deployed in squads of ten, with the tenth spot reserved for a heavy weapons specialist as the needs of the mission require: usually a heavy gunner, but sometimes also flamethrower troops, or riot troops equipped with energy batons (which are incidentally capable of blocking a lightsaber).
The design of the armour of regular and heavy gunner Stormtroopers bears significant resemblances to the design used by the Galactic Empire, such as the helmet visor, nasal filters, and overall shape.
However, the filter was extended, among other practical features.
According to First Order officer Captain Phasma, not even a Wookiee could crush the said armour.
Some stormtroopers held high ranks—a significant improvement from the one-rank system of the Empire.
These were indicated by the colour of shoulder pauldrons.
In the rare instance of a stormtrooper earning the rank of captain, they often earned a blasterproof cape.
Occasionally, they modify their outfit even further—Captain Phasma made blasterproof, chrome copies of all her equipment and greatly improved vision modes of her helmet's visor.
Captain Cardinal, the bodyguard of a First Order founding father, received almost all-red armour from his superior as a sign of trust.
Introduced in The Rise of Skywalker, a new variant of troopers were introduced in the form of jet troopers, equipped with G125 projectile launchers and jet packs.

The First Order also fields its own evolution of the old AT-series of armored transports, the AT-M6, used as a heavy siege weapon.
Dwarfing the older AT-AT, the AT-M6 has numerous design improvements including heavy serrated cable-cutters mounted on its legs—to avoid being tripped up again like AT-AT's were at the Battle of Hoth.

These cutters are positioned in such a way that the AT-M6 walks on its "knuckles" instead of the pads of its feet, which—combined with a heavy siege cannon which gives it a hunched-over appearance—gives the AT-M6 an almost gorilla-like profile compared to the more elephant-like AT-AT.
===
Depictions in film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
In the film, the First Order is led by a mysterious figure named Snoke, who has assumed the title of Supreme Leader.
Like the Empire before them, the Order commands a vast force of stormtroopers.
The First Order uses regular and Special Forces versions of the Empire's venerable TIE fighter.
Its primary base of operations is Starkiller Base, a mobile ice planet which converted into a superweapon capable of destroying entire star systems across the galaxy by firing through hyperspace.
The base commander of Starkiller is General Hux, a ruthless young officer dedicated to the First Order.
Snoke is a powerful figure in the dark side of the Force and has corrupted Ben, the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa who had been an apprentice to his uncle, the Jedi Master Luke Skywalker.
Masked and using the name Kylo Ren, he is one of Snoke's enforcers, much like his grandfather Darth Vader
had been the enforcer of Emperor Palpatine during the days of the Empire decades earlier.
Kylo is the master of the Knights of Ren, a mysterious group of elite warriors who work with the First Order.
Kylo and Hux are rivals for Snoke's approval, and the third member of the "commanding triumvirate" of the First Order is the formidable Captain Phasma, the commander of the stormtroopers.
Kylo is searching for Luke, who vanished some years earlier.
Snoke believes that as long as Luke lives, a new generation of Jedi Knights can rise again.
The First Order launches a preemptive strike on Hosnian Prime, the New Republic's current capital world (as well as Hosnian Prime's Sun and the other planets in the 'Hosnian system' (Hosnian Prime's solar system), as well as the spaceships there), by test-firing the Starkiller superweapon.
This devastating first strike takes the New Republic completely by surprise, not only killing most of its leadership in the Galactic Senate, but wiping out a substantial portion of the New Republic's core military fleets.
This paves the way for a resulting Blitzkrieg of the rest of the galaxy by the First Order, using the disproportionately powerful military it has rebuilt over the past three decades.

Kylo fails to retrieve the map fragment that would lead him to Luke, and the Resistance manages to destroy Starkiller Base moments before it is able to fire on the Resistance base on D'Qar, though Kylo and General Hux are able to escape the explosion, as well as Captain Phasma offscreen.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
At the start of The Last Jedi, the First Order's fleet attacks the Resistance base on the planet D'Qar.
Poe Dameron rashly leads an assault against a Mandator IV-class Siege Dreadnought – one of only a handful of heavy orbital bombardment platforms in the First Order fleet – and manages to destroy it, but at the cost of the entire bomber wing of the Resistance.
Kylo Ren leads an assault in his TIE silencer, destroying several Resistance fighters.
First Order TIEs destroy the Resistance carrier ship, wiping out the Resistance leadership.
General Leia survives but is incapacitated.
Vice Admiral Holdo assumes control of the Resistance fleet while Leia recovers.

The First Order tracks the small Resistance fleet via a hyperspace jump using new "hyperspace tracking" technology.
Running low on fuel, the remaining Resistance fleet is pursued by the First Order.
This devolves into a siege-like battle of attrition, as one by one the smaller Resistance ships run out of fuel and are destroyed by the pursuing First Order fleet.
Finn and a Resistance mechanic, Rose, embark on a mission to disable the First Order's tracking device.

Meanwhile, Kylo Ren kills Snoke, replacing him as Supreme Leader of the First Order.
Poe Dameron stages a mutiny against Holdo, believing her inept and without a plan.
Holdo reveals, however, that she didn't trust Poe with her plan due to his reckless assault on the dreadnought.
The plan is for the Resistance to flee in cloaked shuttles to an old Rebel Alliance base on the planet Crait, while Holdo remains on the Resistance command ship.
The First Order discover the ruse, however, destroying most of the shuttlecraft.
Finn and Rose locate the tracking device but are captured by Captain Phasma.
Holdo sacrifices herself by directing the Resistance command ship to lightspeed jump directly into the Mega-Destroyer, destroying much of the First Order fleet in the process.
Finn manages to kill Captain Phasma and escape with Rose to Crait.

The First Order blast the door of the Rebel base with miniaturized Death Star technology.
Leia sends out transmissions to allies "in the Outer Rim" begging for aid, but they inexplicably do not appear.
Just as the First Order breaches the base, Luke Skywalker appears to challenge them.
A full barrage by their artillery has no effect on Luke, so Kylo Ren descends to duel him in person.
Ren realizes that Luke is a Force projection; while Ren is distracted, the surviving Resistance escape the planet.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
The Rise of Skywalker takes place a year after The Last Jedi.
The First Order is now led by Supreme Leader Kylo Ren after Snoke's death.
Allegiant General Pryde, who served Palpatine in the Empire, has now joined General Hux at the top of the military hierarchy.
Kylo Ren discovers a physically impaired Palpatine in exile on the Sith world Exegol.
Palpatine reveals he created Snoke as a puppet to control the First Order and has built the Sith Eternal's massive armada of Xyston-class Star Destroyers, the Final Order.
In a bid to form a new Sith Empire, Palpatine promises Kylo control over the fleet on the condition that he find and kill Rey, who is revealed to be Palpatine's granddaughter.
Kylo begins to scour the galaxy for Rey.
The Resistance acquires information on Palpatine's location and embarks on a quest to find Exegol.
Hux is revealed to have been a spy inside the First Order, due to his contempt for Kylo Ren; he is found out by Pryde and executed for treason.
Rey confronts Kylo Ren on Kef Bir at the wreckage of the second Death Star.
She impales Kylo after he is distracted by Leia calling out to him through the Force.
Rey heals Kylo and flees.
Afterwards, Kylo sees a vision of his father, Han Solo, through a memory.
This causes Kylo to abandon the dark side, and reclaim his identity as Ben Solo.
Palpatine tells Pryde to obliterate Kijimi as a show of force and orders him to come to Exegol, effectively making Pryde leader of the First Order.

After encouragement from the spirit of Luke Skywalker, Rey uses her T-65B X-wing to travel to Exegol and leads the Resistance there too.
Finn and Poe engage the Sith Eternal forces while Rey confronts Palpatine herself.
Lando Calrissian and Chewbacca arrive with reinforcements from across the galaxy, and they manage to defeat the remaining forces of the Sith Eternal.
With help from Ben and the spirits of past Jedi, Rey finally destroys Palpatine for good.
The galaxy rises up against the First Order, ultimately defeating it after 30 years of its existence.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
First Order on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Cloned, Recruited, and Kidnapped:
Military Evolution in the Star Wars Universe
Tor.com
March 30, 2016
Adam Douglas Driver
(born November 19, 1983) is an American actor.
He is the recipient of numerous accolades, including the Volpi Cup for Best Actor, as well as nominations for a Tony Award, two Academy Awards, and four Primetime Emmy Awards.

Driver made his Broadway debut in Mrs. Warren's Profession (2010) and subsequently appeared in Man and Boy (2011).
He rose to prominence with a supporting role in the HBO comedy-drama series Girls (2012–2017), for which he received three consecutive Primetime Emmy nominations.
Driver began his film career in supporting roles in Steven Spielberg's Lincoln (2012), Noah Baumbach's Frances Ha (2012), the Coen Brothers' Inside Llewyn Davis (2013), and Martin Scorsese's Silence (2016).
He won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor for his lead role in the drama Hungry Hearts (2014) and starred as a poet in Jim Jarmusch's Paterson (2016).

Driver gained wider recognition for playing Kylo Ren in the Star Wars sequel trilogy (2015–2019).
In 2019, he returned to theater with Burn This, for which he was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play.
He garnered consecutive Academy Awards nominations; Best Supporting Actor for Spike Lee's BlacKkKlansman (2018), and Best Actor for Noah Baumbach's Marriage Story (2019).Driver is a veteran of the U.S. Marine Corps.
He is the founder of Arts in the Armed Forces, a non-profit that provides free arts programming to American active-duty service members, veterans, military support staff, and their families around the world.

==
Early life ==
Adam Douglas Driver was born on November 19, 1983, in San Diego, California, the son of Nancy Wright (née Needham), a paralegal, and Joe Douglas Driver.
He has Dutch, English, German, Irish, and Scottish ancestry.
His father's family is from Arkansas and his mother's family is from Indiana.
His stepfather, Rodney G. Wright, is a minister at a Baptist church.
When Driver was seven years old, he moved with his older sister and mother to his mother's hometown Mishawaka, Indiana, where he graduated from Mishawaka High School in 2001.
Driver was raised Baptist, and sang in the choir at church.
Driver has described his teenage self as a "misfit"; he told M Magazine that he climbed radio towers, set objects on fire, and co-founded a fight club with friends, inspired by the 1999 film Fight Club.
After high school, he worked as a door-to-door salesman selling Kirby vacuum cleaners and as a telemarketer for a basement waterproofing company and Ben Franklin Construction.
He applied to the Juilliard School for drama but was rejected.
Shortly after the September 11 attacks, Driver enlisted in the United States Marine Corps.
He was assigned to Weapons Company, 1st Battalion, 1st Marines as an 81mm mortar man.
He served for two years and eight months before fracturing his sternum while mountain biking, right before his unit got shipped to Iraq.
He was medically discharged with the rank of Lance Corporal.

Subsequently, Driver attended the University of Indianapolis for a year before auditioning again for Juilliard, this time succeeding.
Driver has said that his classmates saw him as an intimidating and volatile figure, and he struggled to fit into a lifestyle so different from the Marines.
He was a member of the Drama Division's Group 38 (2005–2009), where he met his future wife, Joanne Tucker.
He graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts in 2009.

==
Career ==


=== 2009–2014
: Early work and Girls ===
After graduating from Juilliard, Driver began his acting career in New York City, appearing in both Broadway and off-Broadway productions.
Like many aspiring actors, he occasionally worked as a busboy and waiter.
Driver appeared in several television shows and short films.
His first television role was in 2009 in the final episode of The Unusuals, as a repentant witness and reluctant accomplice to an unsolved assault.
He made his film debut in 2011 in Clint Eastwood's biographical drama film J. Edgar.

In 2012, Driver was cast in the HBO comedy-drama series Girls, as the emotionally unstable Adam Sackler, the boyfriend of the lead character Hannah Horvath (Lena Dunham).
He received three nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series for his role.
The same year, Driver played supporting roles in two critically acclaimed films, as telegraph and cipher officer Samuel Beckwith in Steven Spielberg's historical drama Lincoln, and Lev Shapiro in Noah Baumbach's comedy-drama Frances Ha.
He also appeared in the drama
Not Waving But
Drowning and the romantic-comedy Gayby.
He garnered major off-Broadway recognition for playing Cliff, a working-class Welsh houseguest in Look Back in Anger, winning the Lucille Lortel Award for Outstanding Featured Actor in a Play.
In 2013, Driver appeared in the drama Bluebird and the romantic-comedy
What If.
He played Al Cody, a musician, in the Coen Brothers' black comedy Inside Llewyn Davis, and photographer Rick Smolan in the drama Tracks.
In 2014, he played Jude, a despairing father, in the drama Hungry Hearts; Jamie, an aspiring filmmaker, in Noah Baumbach's comedy
While We're Young; and Phillip, the black sheep of a dysfunctional Jewish family, in the comedy-drama
This Is Where I Leave You.
For his performance in Hungry Hearts, Driver won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor at the 71st Venice International Film Festival.

=== 2015–present: Mainstream success ===
In early 2014, Driver was cast as villain Kylo Ren in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015).
The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015 to commercial and critical success.
He reprised the role in The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
His performance was positively received, with his character lauded as the best in the series: David Edelstein of Vulture wrote, "the core of The Last Jedi — of this whole trilogy, it seems — is Driver's Kylo Ren, who ranks with cinema's most fascinating human monsters."
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian highlighted Driver's performance in his review of The Force Awakens, calling him "gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious... very suited to Kylo Ren's fastidious and amused contempt for his enemies' weakness and compassion.
"In
2016, Driver played a supporting role in Jeff Nichols' sci-fi thriller Midnight Special, which was released on March 18, 2016.
He also co-starred in Martin Scorsese's historical drama Silence (2016) as Father Francisco Garupe, a 17th-century Portuguese Jesuit priest, alongside Andrew Garfield and Liam Neeson.
In preparation for the role, Driver lost almost 50 pounds.
Jim Jarmusch's drama Paterson was Driver's final film of 2016, in which he played the title character, a bus driver who writes poetry.
The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival and was released on December 28, 2016.
Driver's performance was acclaimed and he received multiple nominations for Best Actor from critics' associations, winning several, including the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor.
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote "Driver's indelibly moving portrayal is so lived-in and lyrical
you hardly recognize it as acting.
"
Paterson was included in many critics' top ten lists of best films of 2016.In 2017, Driver played a cameo in Noah Baumbach's The Meyerowitz Stories as Randy, marking his third appearance in one of Baumbach's films.
The film premiered at Cannes Film Festival and was released on October 13, 2017 on Netflix.
He also portrayed Clyde, a one-armed Iraq War veteran, in Steven Soderbergh's Logan Lucky, which was released on August 18, 2017.
In 2018, Driver portrayed a Jewish police detective, Phillip "Flip" Zimmerman, who helps infiltrate the Ku Klux Klan in Spike Lee's comedy-drama BlacKkKlansman.
The film premiered at Cannes Film Festival and was theatrically released on August 10.
He received critical acclaim for his performance in the film and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor.
Driver also starred as the lead character Toby Grummett in Terry Gilliam's adventure-comedy The Man Who Killed Don Quixote, which also premiered at Cannes.
In early 2019, Driver starred as Daniel Jones in Scott Z. Burns' political drama
The Report, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in Utah.
He returned to Broadway to play Pale against Keri Russell in a Michael Mayer-directed production of Lanford Wilson's Burn This, receiving acclaim for his explosive performance and a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play.
He was part of the ensemble cast of the Jim Jarmusch zombie comedy film
The Dead Don't Die, which was released on June 14, 2019.
That same year, he co-starred with Scarlett Johansson in Noah Baumbach's Marriage Story, which premiered at the Venice Film Festival.
Reviewing the film in The Hollywood Reporter, critic Jon Frosch noted that Driver "delivers a brilliantly inhabited and shaded portrait" of a man undergoing a divorce.
He received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor.
During 2020, Driver became the subject of a running gag on Last Week Tonight with John Oliver, in which Oliver expressed several strange masochistic fantasies about Driver, referencing his muscular build and masculine appearance.
Driver eventually appeared on the final episode of the season and "demanded an apology".
Driver will next star in Leos Carax's musical drama Annette, and in Ridley Scott's films The Last Duel and House of Gucci.
Driver is set to star in the science fiction film 65 and Jeff Nichols' historical film Yankee Commandante.

==
Personal life ==
Driver married his longtime partner Joanne Tucker in June 2013.
The couple have a son, whose birth they kept private from the press for two years.
They live in the Brooklyn Heights neighborhood of New York City with their son and dog.
Driver is the founder of Arts in the Armed Forces (AITAF), a non-profit that performs theatre for all branches of the military in the United States and abroad.
Driver has said on multiple occasions that he does not like to watch or listen to his own performances.
During a radio interview with NPR's Fresh Air, he chose not to continue with the interview after the host played a clip from Marriage Story.
The executive producer of the radio show later claimed that Driver was warned to take off his headphones before the clip played and that the show did something similar with Driver during a 2015 interview.
During that same 2015 interview, Driver is quoted as saying he hates watching or listening to his acting work.

==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


===
Stage ===
Video games
Theme park attractions


==
Awards and nominations ==
For his work on television Driver has received four Primetime Emmy Award nominations.
He received three nominations for his performance in Girls from 2013, 2014, and 2015, in the Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series category.
In 2020, he also received a nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for his guest hosting role on Saturday Night Live.
For his work in film, he has been nominated twice for an Academy Award, for his performances in Spike Lee's BlacKkKlansman (2018), and Noah Baumbach's Marriage Story (2019).
He also received British Academy Film Award, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award (SAG) nominations for those films as well.
He also received a SAG Award nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture as a part of the ensemble of Steven Spielberg's Lincoln.
In 2019, for his work in theater he received a Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Play for his performance in Burn This at the 73rd Tony Awards.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Adam Driver at IMDb
Adam Driver at the Internet Broadway Database
Adam Driver at the Internet Off-Broadway Database
Adam Driver at the TCM Movie Database
Adam Driver at AllMovie
Adam Driver at Rotten Tomatoes
Adam Driver:
Theatre Credits on Broadwayworld.com
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D CGI animated television series produced by Lucasfilm and Lucasfilm Animation.
Beginning fourteen years after Revenge of the Sith and five years before A New Hope, Rebels takes place during an era when the Galactic Empire is securing its grip on the galaxy.
Imperial forces are hunting down the last of the Jedi Knights while a fledgling rebellion against the Empire is taking form.

The series was previewed throughout August 2014 with a set of shorts introducing the main characters before the television film pilot episode premiered on Disney Channel on October 3, 2014.
The regular series premiered on Disney XD on October 13, 2014.
The second season started on June 20, 2015, and the third season premiered on September 24, 2016.
The two-part season three finale aired on March 25, 2017.
On March 31, it was announced that the show would return for a fourth season.
On April 15, executive producer Dave Filoni announced that the fourth season would also be the final season.
On September 2, 2017, a second trailer for season four was released during a panel at Fan Expo in Canada, and the date for the season's premiere was announced as October 16, 2017.

Season 4 premiered on October 16, 2017, with the two-part episode "Heroes of Mandalore", and continued to air until November 13, 2017.
The series picked up on February 19, 2018, after a winter break and preparations for the release of the film Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Disney XD then proceeded to release two episodes a week, before airing the final two episodes on March 5, 2018.
A total of 75 episodes were aired.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Shorts (2014) ===


===
Season 1 (2014–15) ===


===
Season 2
(2015–16) ===


===
Season 3 (2016–17) ===


===
Season 4 (2017–18) ===


==
References ==
Star Trek is an American media franchise based on the science fiction television series created by Gene Roddenberry.
The first television series, simply called Star Trek and now referred to as The Original Series, debuted in 1966 and aired for three seasons on NBC.
The Star Trek canon includes The Original Series, seven spin-off television series, two animated series, and thirteen films.

==
Television series ==
Nine television series and one short-form companion series make up the bulk of the Star Trek franchise: The Original Series, The Animated Series, The Next Generation, Deep Space Nine, Voyager, Enterprise, Discovery, Short Treks, Picard and Lower Decks, along with multiple upcoming series which include Prodigy and Strange New Worlds.
All series in total amount to 797 episodes across 37 seasons of television.
===
The Original Series (1966–1969) ===
Star Trek, more commonly known as Star Trek: The Original Series, often abbreviated as TOS, debuted in the United States on NBC on September 8, 1966.
The series tells the tale of the crew of the starship Enterprise and its five-year mission "to boldly go where no man has gone before."
The original 1966–69 television series featured William Shatner as Captain James T. Kirk, Leonard Nimoy as Spock, DeForest Kelley as Dr. Leonard "Bones" McCoy, James Doohan as Montgomery "Scotty" Scott, Nichelle Nichols as Uhura, George Takei as Hikaru Sulu, and Walter Koenig as Pavel Chekov.
During the series' original run, it earned several nominations for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and won twice: for the two-part episode "The Menagerie", and the Harlan Ellison-written episode "The City on the Edge of Forever".
NBC canceled the series after three seasons; the last original episode aired on June 3, 1969.
A petition near the end of the second season to save the series signed by many Caltech students and its multiple Hugo nominations would indicate that despite low Nielsen ratings, it was highly popular with science fiction fans and engineering students.
The series later became popular in reruns and found a cult following.
In the 2000s, the series was remastered for television, which included special-effect changes including CGI versions of the ships.

===
The Animated Series (1973–1974) ===
Star Trek, later marketed as Star Trek:
The Animated Series (TAS) to differentiate it from the live-action series, was produced by Filmation, and ran for two seasons from 1973 to 1974.
Most of the original cast performed the voices of their characters from The Original Series, and some of the writers who worked on The Original Series returned, including D. C. Fontana, David Gerrold and Paul Schneider.
While the animated format allowed the producers to create more exotic alien landscapes and life forms, animation errors and liberal reuse of shots and musical cues have tarnished the series' reputation.
Although it was originally sanctioned by Paramount, which owned the Star Trek franchise following its acquisition of Desilu in 1967, Gene Roddenberry often spoke of TAS as non-canon.
As of June 2007, it has references in the library section of the official Star Trek website.
The Animated Series won Star Trek's first Emmy Award on May 15, 1975.
The Animated Series briefly returned to television in the mid-1980s on the children's cable network Nickelodeon.
Nickelodeon parent Viacom would purchase Paramount in 1994; in the early 1990s, the Sci-Fi Channel also began rerunning TAS.
The complete series was also released on Laserdisc format during the 1980s.
The complete series was first released in the United States on eleven volumes of VHS tapes in 1989.
All 22 episodes were released on DVD in 2006.

===
The Next Generation (1987–1994) ===
Star Trek:
The Next Generation, frequently abbreviated as TNG, takes place about a century after The Original Series (2364–2370).
It features a new starship, Enterprise-D, and a new crew led by Captain Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart) and Commander William Riker (Jonathan Frakes).
Some crew members represent new alien races, including Deanna Troi, a half-Betazoid counselor played by Marina Sirtis.
Michael Dorn plays Worf, the first Klingon officer in Starfleet, alongside Gates McFadden as Dr. Beverly Crusher, LeVar Burton as chief engineer Geordi La Forge, the android Data portrayed by Brent Spiner, and Dr. Crusher's son Wesley Crusher played by Wil Wheaton.

The series premiered on September 28, 1987 and ran for seven seasons, ending on May 23, 1994.
It had the highest ratings of any of the Star Trek series and became the #1 syndicated show during the last few years of its original run, allowing it to act as a springboard for ideas in other series.
Many relationships and races introduced in TNG became the basis of episodes in Deep Space Nine and Voyager.
During its run, it earned several Emmy Awards and nominations—including a nomination for Best Dramatic Series during its final season—two Hugo Awards and a Peabody Award for Outstanding Television Programming for the episode "The Big Goodbye".
The series was released in high definition on Blu-Ray and Netflix with some special effect changes in the 2010s.

===
Deep Space Nine (1993–1999) ===
Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine, frequently abbreviated as DS9, takes place during the last years and the immediate post-years of The Next Generation (2369–2375) and aired for seven seasons, from January 3, 1993 to June 2, 1999.
Like The Next Generation, Deep Space Nine aired in syndication in the United States and Canada.
Unlike the other Star Trek series, DS9 takes place primarily on a space station rather than aboard a starship.

The series begins after the brutal Cardassian occupation of the planet Bajor.
The liberated Bajoran people ask the United Federation of Planets to help run a Cardassian-built space station, Deep Space Nine, near Bajor.
After the Federation takes control of the station, the protagonists of the series discover a uniquely stable wormhole that provides immediate access to the distant Gamma Quadrant making Bajor and the station one of the most strategically important locations in the galaxy.
The series chronicles the events of the station's crew, led by Commander (later Captain)
Benjamin Sisko, played by Avery Brooks, and Major (later Colonel) Kira Nerys, played by Nana Visitor.
Recurring plot elements include the repercussions of the Cardassian occupation of Bajor, Sisko's spiritual role for the Bajorans as the Emissary of the Prophets, and in later seasons a war with the Dominion.

Deep Space Nine stands apart from earlier Trek series for its lengthy serialized storytelling, conflict within the crew, and religious themes—all elements that critics and audiences praised but Roddenberry forbade in the original series and The Next Generation.

===
Voyager (1995–2001) ===
Star Trek:
Voyager ran for seven seasons, airing from January 16, 1995, to May 23, 2001, launching a new Paramount-owned television network, UPN.
It features Kate Mulgrew as Captain Kathryn Janeway, the first female commanding officer in a leading role of a Star Trek series, and Commander Chakotay, played by Robert Beltran.
Voyager takes place at about the same time period as Deep Space Nine and the years following that series' end (2371–2378).
The premiere episode has the USS Voyager and its crew pursue a Maquis (Federation rebels) ship.
Both ships become stranded in the Delta Quadrant about 70,000 light-years from Earth.
Faced with a 75-year voyage to Earth, the crew must learn to work together to overcome challenges on their long and perilous journey home while also seeking ways to shorten the voyage.
Like Deep Space Nine, early seasons of Voyager feature more conflict between its crew members than seen in later episodes.
Such conflict often arises from friction between "by-the-book" Starfleet crew and rebellious Maquis fugitives forced by circumstance to work together on Voyager.
Eventually, though, they settle their differences, after which the overall tone becomes more reminiscent of The Original Series.
Isolated from its home, the starship Voyager faces new cultures and dilemmas not possible in other series based in the Alpha Quadrant.
Later seasons brought in an influx of characters and cultures from prior series, such as the Borg, Q, the Ferengi, Romulans, Klingons, Cardassians and cast members of The Next Generation.

===
Enterprise (2001–2005) ===
Star Trek: Enterprise, originally titled Enterprise, is a prequel to the original Star Trek series.
It aired from September 26, 2001 to May 13, 2005.
Enterprise takes place in the 2150s, some 90 years after the events of Zefram Cochrane's first warp flight and about a decade before the founding of the Federation.
The series centers on the voyages of Earth's first warp 5 capable starship, Enterprise, commanded by Captain Jonathan Archer (played by Scott Bakula), and the Vulcan Sub-Commander T'Pol (played by Jolene Blalock).
The series originally did not include "Star Trek" in its name and logo, adding it later on in the series' run.

During the series' first two seasons, Enterprise featured self-contained episodes, like The Original Series, The Next Generation and Voyager.
The entire third season consisted of one arc related to the Xindi, and had a darker tone and serialized nature similar to that of Deep Space Nine.
The fourth and final season consisted of several mini-arcs composed of two to three episodes.
The final season showed the origins of some elements of previous series, and resolved some of their continuity problems.
Ratings for Enterprise started strong but declined rapidly.
Although critics received the fourth season well, both fans and the cast criticized the series finale, partly because of the episode's focus on the guest appearance of cast members of The Next Generation.
The cancellation of Enterprise ended an 18-year run of back-to-back new Star Trek television series, which began with The Next Generation in 1987.

===
Discovery (2017–present) ===
Star Trek:
Discovery is a direct prequel to The Original Series, set roughly ten years prior.
It premiered September 24, 2017 in the United States and Canada on CBS before moving to CBS All Access, while Netflix streams the series outside the United States and is also providing most of the series' funding.
The series centers on the voyages of the USS Discovery, a unique starship with an experimental "spore drive", commanded in Season 1 by Captain Gabriel Lorca (Jason Isaacs), and in Season 2 by Captain Christopher Pike (Anson Mount), on temporary assignment during a refit of the Enterprise.
Lieutenant Commander Michael Burnham (Sonequa Martin-Green), is the lead character of the series.
This marks the first Star Trek series to feature a First Officer as the lead.
The series opens with the Klingon T'Kuvma attempting to unite the 24 great Klingon houses, leading to a war between his race and the United Federation of Planets that involves the crew of the Discovery.

===
Short Treks (2018–2020) ===
Star Trek:
Short Treks is a spin-off companion series of stand-alone short films which focus on characters and situations from Discovery.
Some of the episodes are animated.

===
Picard (2020–present) ===
Star Trek:
Picard is the eighth series in the franchise that is set 20 years after the end of Nemesis.
Jonathan Frakes, who has directed episodes of multiple Trek series, directs two episodes of the first season.
The series premiered on January 23, 2020.
===
Lower Decks (2020–present) ===
Star Trek:
Lower Decks was announced on October 25, 2018, by CBS
All Access as a two-season order for a half-hour adult animated comedy series created by Mike McMahan, the head writer and executive producer of Rick and Morty.
It focuses on the support crew of "one of Starfleet's least important ships", and shares a name with a Next Generation episode.
The first season premiered on August 6, 2020, and consists of 10 episodes.
===
Future television series ===
An animated and two live-action television series are currently in development.

====
Prodigy ====
In February 2019, it was announced that an animated series developed for young viewers was in development.
The series is being co-written and created by Dan and Kevin Hageman and will air on Nickelodeon as a joint-venture with CBS.
It focuses on a group of teens who embark on an adventure upon an abandoned Starfleet ship.
On July 23, 2020, it was announced that the title would be Star Trek: Prodigy and that it will premiere in 2021.

====
Strange New Worlds ====
Announced in May 2020, Star Trek:
Strange New Worlds will depict the early days of the Enterprise and feature Discovery actors Anson Mount, Ethan Peck and Rebecca Romijn reprising their roles as Pike, Spock and Number One, respectively.
Creator Akiva Goldsman intends for the series to use an episodic format similar to The Original Series and The Next Generation.
It will be released on CBS All Access.
In June 2020, Jonathan Frakes confirmed he had been asked to return as a director for the series.

==== Section 31 ====
Announced in January 2019, a live-action television series, currently untitled, will focus on the mirror universe's Philippa Georgiou and her adventures as a member of Starfleet's Section 31 division.
Michelle Yeoh will reprise her role from Discovery, with Bo Yeon Kim and Erika Lippoldt serving as co-showrunners.
The series is reported to feature an ensemble cast.
In February 2021, it was announced that the series would only move forward once at least one of the current slate of five concurrent series (Discovery, Picard, Lower Decks, Prodigy and Strange New Worlds) concludes its run.

====
Other series ====
In February 2021, it was announced that new series would only move forward once at least one of the current slate of series (Discovery, Picard, Lower Decks, Prodigy and Strange New Worlds) concludes its run.
There are several series reportedly in development, including a series by Stephanie Savage and Josh Schwartz that is set at Starfleet Academy, as well as Ceti Alpha V, a limited series based on the character Khan Noonien Singh and his The Wrath of Khan storyline, written by Nicholas Meyer.

===
Failed television series ===


====
Phase II ====
Star Trek:
Phase II was a 1970s follow-up live-action television series to The Original Series.
Though sets were constructed, scripts written, characters cast, and production started, the series was cancelled in favor of The Motion Picture, the first Star Trek feature film.
The series would have anchored a fourth U.S. television network, the Paramount Network.
This would later happen when Star Trek: Voyager anchored the launch of UPN, the United Paramount Network in the 1990s.

==
Feature films ==
Paramount Pictures has produced thirteen Star Trek feature films, the most recent being released in July 2016.
The first six films continue the adventures of the cast of The Original Series; the seventh film, Generations was designed as a transition from that cast to the cast of the Next Generation series; the next three films, 8–10, focused completely on the cast of the Next Generation series.
The eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth films take place in an alternate timeline, officially known as the Kelvin Timeline, with a new cast playing younger versions of the original series characters and Leonard Nimoy portraying an elderly Spock.
Three major attempts at continuing or reigniting the film franchise have been made, but so far have not continued for various reasons.

===
The Original Series films ===
Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry first suggested the idea of a Star Trek feature in 1969.
When the original television series was canceled, he lobbied to continue the franchise through a film.
The success of the series in syndication convinced the studio to begin work on a feature film in 1975.
A series of writers attempted to craft a suitably epic screenplay, but the attempts did not satisfy Paramount, so the studio scrapped the project in 1977.
Paramount instead planned on returning the franchise to its roots with a new television series (Phase II).
The massive worldwide box office success of Star Wars in mid-1977 sent Hollywood studios to their vaults in search of similar sci-fi properties that could be adapted or re-launched to the big screen.
Following the huge opening of Columbia's Close Encounters of the Third Kind in late December 1977, production of Phase II was cancelled in favor of making a Star Trek film.

====
Star Trek:
The Motion Picture (1979) ====
A massive energy cloud from deep space heads toward Earth, leaving destruction in its wake, and the Enterprise must intercept it to determine what lies within, and what its intent might be.

The movie borrows many elements from "The Changeling" of the original series and "One of Our Planets Is Missing" from the animated series.
Principal photography commenced on August 7, 1978 with director Robert Wise helming the feature.
The production encountered difficulties and slipped behind schedule, with effects team Robert Abel and Associates proving unable to handle the film's large amount of effects work.
Douglas Trumbull was hired and given a blank check to complete the effects work in time and location; the final cut of the film was completed just in time for the film's premiere.
The film introduced an upgrade to the technology and starship designs, making for a dramatic visual departure from the original series.
Many of the set elements created for Phase II were adapted and enhanced for use in the first feature films.
It received mixed reviews from critics; while it grossed $139 million the price tag had climbed to about $45 million due to costly effects work and delays.

====
Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan (1982) ====
Khan Noonien Singh (Ricardo Montalbán), whom Kirk thwarted in his attempt to seize control of the Enterprise fifteen years earlier ("Space Seed"), seeks his revenge on the Admiral and lays a cunning and sinister trap.

The Motion Picture's gross was considered disappointing, but it was enough for Paramount to back a sequel with a reduced budget.
After Roddenberry pitched a film in which the crew of the Enterprise goes back in time to ensure the assassination of John F. Kennedy, he was "kicked upstairs" to a ceremonial role while Paramount brought in television producer Harve Bennett to craft a better—and cheaper—film than the first.
After watching all the television episodes, Bennett decided that the character Khan Noonien Singh was the perfect villain for the new film.
Director Nicholas Meyer finished a complete screenplay in just twelve days, and did everything possible within budget to give The Wrath of Khan a nautical, swashbuckling feel, which he described as "Horatio Hornblower in outer space."
Upon release, the reception of The Wrath of Khan was highly positive; Entertainment Weekly's Mark Bernadin called The Wrath of Khan "the film that, by most accounts, saved Star Trek as we know it".
Both the first and second films have television versions with additional footage and alternate takes that affect the storyline.
(
Subsequent Star Trek films tended to have shorter television versions).
Especially notable in The Wrath of Khan is the footage establishing that a young crew member who acts courageously and dies during an attack on the Enterprise is Scotty's nephew.

====
Star Trek III:
The Search for Spock (1984) ====
The plot picks up shortly after the conclusion of the previous film.
When McCoy begins acting irrationally, Kirk learns that Spock, in his final moments, transferred his katra, his living spirit, to the doctor.
To save McCoy from emotional ruin, Kirk and crew steal the Enterprise and violate the quarantine of the Genesis Planet to retrieve Spock, his body regenerated by the rapidly dying planet itself, in the hope that body and soul can be rejoined.
However, bent on obtaining the secret of Genesis for themselves, a renegade Klingon (Christopher Lloyd) and his crew interfere, with deadly consequences.

Meyer declined to return for the next film, so directing duties were given to cast member Leonard Nimoy.
Paramount gave Bennett the green light to write Star Trek III the day after The Wrath of Khan opened.
The producer penned a resurrection story for Spock that built on threads from the previous film and the original series episode "Amok Time".
====
Star Trek IV:
The Voyage Home (1986) ====
While returning to stand court-martial for their actions in rescuing Spock, Kirk and crew learn that Earth is under siege by a giant probe that is transmitting a destructive signal, attempting to communicate with the now-extinct species of humpback whales.
To save the planet, the crew must time-travel back to the late 20th century to obtain a mating pair of these whales, and a marine biologist (Catherine Hicks) to care for them.

Nimoy returned as director for this film.
Nimoy and Bennett wanted a film with a lighter tone that did not have a classic antagonist.
They decided on a time travel story with the Enterprise crew returning to their past to retrieve something to save their present—eventually, humpback whales.
After having been dissatisfied with the script written by Daniel Petrie Jr., Paramount hired Meyer to rewrite the screenplay with Bennett's help.
Meyer drew upon his own time travel story Time After Time for elements of the screenplay.
Star William Shatner was promised his turn as director for Star Trek V, and Nicholas Meyer returned as director/co-writer for Star Trek VI.
====
Star Trek V:
The Final Frontier (1989) ====
Spock's half-brother (Laurence Luckinbill) believes he is summoned by God, and hijacks the brand-new (and problem-ridden) Enterprise-A to take it through the Great Barrier, at the center of the Milky Way, beyond which he believes his maker waits for him.
Meanwhile, a young and arrogant Klingon captain (Todd Bryant), seeking glory in what he views as an opportunity to avenge his people of the deaths of their crewmen on Genesis, sets his sights on Kirk.

This is the only film in the franchise directed by William Shatner.

====
Star Trek VI:
The Undiscovered Country (1991) ====
When Qo'noS' moon Praxis (the Klingon Empire's chief energy source) is devastated by an explosion, caused by over-mining, the catastrophe also contaminating Qo'noS' atmosphere, the Klingons make peace overtures to the Federation.
While on the way to Earth for a peace summit, the Klingon Chancellor (David Warner) is assassinated by Enterprise crewmen, and Kirk is held accountable by the Chancellor's Chief of Staff (Christopher Plummer).
Spock attempts to prove Kirk's innocence, but in doing so, uncovers a massive conspiracy against the peace process with participants from both sides.

This film is a sendoff to the original series cast.
One Next Generation cast member, Michael Dorn, appears as the grandfather of the character he plays on the later television series, Worf.
It is the second and last Star Trek film directed by Nicholas Meyer and last screenplay co-authored by Leonard Nimoy.

===
The Next Generation films ===
Both the sixth and seventh films acted as transitions between the films featuring the original cast and those with the Next Generation cast, with the sixth focusing on the original cast and the seventh focusing on the TNG cast.
The Next Generation cast made four films over a period of eight years, with the last two performing only moderately well (Insurrection) and disappointingly (Nemesis) at the box office.

====
Star Trek Generations (1994) ====
Picard enlists the help of Kirk, who is presumed long dead but flourishes in an extra-dimensional realm, to prevent a deranged scientist (Malcolm McDowell) from destroying a star and its populated planetary system in an attempt to enter that realm.
This film also included original crew members Scotty (James Doohan) and Chekov (Walter Koenig).

Following seven seasons of The Next Generation, the next Star Trek film was the first to feature the crew of the Enterprise-D, along with a long prologue sequence featuring three cast members of the original series and the only appearance of the Enterprise-B.


====
Star Trek:
First Contact (1996) ====
After a failed attempt to assault Earth, the Borg attempt to prevent First Contact between Humans and Vulcans by interfering with Zefram Cochrane's (James Cromwell) warp test in the past.
Picard must confront the demons which stem from his assimilation into the Collective
("The Best of Both Worlds") as he leads the new Enterprise-E back through time to ensure the test and subsequent meeting with the Vulcans take place.

The first of two films directed by series actor Jonathan Frakes.

====
Star Trek: Insurrection (1998) ====
Profoundly disturbed by what he views as a blatant violation of the Prime Directive, Picard deliberately interferes with a Starfleet admiral's (Anthony Zerbe) plan to relocate a relatively small but seemingly immortal population from a mystical planet to gain control of the planet's natural radiation, which has been discovered to have substantial medicinal properties.
However, the admiral himself is a pawn in his alien partner's (F. Murray Abraham) mission of vengeance.

Insurrection brought in Deep Space Nine writer Michael Piller instead of Ronald D. Moore and Brannon Braga who had written for Generations and First Contact.
====
Star Trek: Nemesis (2002) ====
A clone of Picard (Tom Hardy), created by the Romulans, assassinates the Romulan senate, assumes absolute power, and lures Picard and the Enterprise to Romulus under the false pretext of a peace overture.

Written by John Logan and directed by Stuart Baird, this film was a critical and commercial failure (released December 13, 2002 in direct competition with Die Another Day, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets and The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers) and was the final Star Trek film to feature the Next Generation cast and to be produced by Rick Berman.

===
The Kelvin Timeline ===
After the poor reception of Nemesis and the cancellation of the television series Enterprise, the franchise's executive producer Rick Berman and screenwriter Erik Jendresen began developing a new film, entitled Star Trek: The Beginning, which would take place after Enterprise but before The Original Series.
In February 2007, J. J. Abrams accepted Paramount's offer to direct the new film, having been previously attached as producer.
Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman wrote a screenplay that impressed Abrams, featuring new actors portraying younger versions of the original series' cast.
The Enterprise, its interior, and the original uniforms were redesigned.

This revival of the franchise is often considered to be a reboot, but is also a continuation of the franchise, with Nimoy reprising his role of the elderly Spock.
This route was taken to free the new films from the restrictions of established continuity without completely discarding it, which the writers felt would have been "disrespectful".
This new reality was informally referred to by several names, including the "Abramsverse", "JJ Trek" and "NuTrek", before it was named the "Kelvin Timeline" (versus the "Prime Timeline" of the original series and films) by Michael and Denise Okuda for use in official Star Trek reference guides and encyclopedias.
The name Kelvin comes from the USS Kelvin, a starship involved in the event that creates the new reality in Star Trek (2009).
Abrams named the starship after his grandfather Henry Kelvin, whom he also pays tribute to in Into Darkness with the Kelvin Memorial Archive.

====
Star Trek (2009) ====
In the 24th century, a supernova destroys Romulus.
Piloting a one-man vessel, Spock (Leonard Nimoy) attempts to contain the supernova by generating an artificial black hole, but is assaulted by a Romulan mining vessel captained by Nero (Eric Bana), who is bent on vengeance for Spock's failure to save Romulus; both vessels are pulled into the black hole and sent back in time to the 23rd century.
Nero then captures Spock and uses the black-hole technology to destroy Vulcan.
Spock's present-day younger self (Zachary Quinto), who is a Starfleet Academy instructor, and a volatile and arrogant cadet named James Kirk (Chris Pine) must then set aside their current differences, and join forces to prevent Nero from consigning Earth and the rest of the Federation worlds to similar fates.

This film acts as a reboot to the existing franchise by taking place in an alternate reality, using the plot device of time travel to depict an altered timeline, featuring younger versions of the primary original series characters.
It is the first production to feature an entirely different cast of actors playing roles previously established by other actors, with the exception of the aged Spock played by Nimoy.
It was directed by J. J. Abrams (who produced it with Damon Lindelof) and written by Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman.
According to Lindelof, this production was designed to attract a wider audience.
It received positive reviews and a number of awards, including the film franchise's only Academy Award, for "makeup and hairstyling".
A story that covered the events between Nemesis and Star Trek was released as the graphic novel Countdown in early 2009.

====
Star Trek Into Darkness (2013) ====
A Starfleet special agent (Benedict Cumberbatch) coerces an officer into blowing up a secret installation in London, shoots up a subsequent meeting of Starfleet brass in San Francisco, and then flees to Qo'noS.
The crew of the Enterprise attempt to bring him to justice without provoking war with the Klingon Empire, but find there is much more to the agent's mission, and the man himself, than what the Fleet Admiral (Peter Weller) has told them
; the agent is none other than Khan Noonien Singh; his allegiance and his motives are initially not at all clear.

====
Star Trek Beyond (2016) ====
The Enterprise is ambushed and destroyed by countless alien micro-vessels; the crew abandon ship.
Stranded on an unknown planet, and with no apparent means of escape or rescue, they find themselves in conflict with a new sociopathic enemy (Idris Elba) who has a well-founded hatred of the Federation and what it stands for.

Star Trek Beyond was released on July 22, 2016, in time for the franchise's 50th anniversary celebrations.
Roberto Orci had stated that Star Trek Beyond would feel more like the original series than its predecessors in the reboot series while still trying something new with the established material.
In December 2014, Justin Lin was confirmed as the director for the upcoming sequel, marking the first reboot film not to be directed by J. J. Abrams, whose commitments to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens restricted his role on the Star Trek film to that of producer.
In January 2015, it was confirmed that the film would be co-written by Doug Jung and Simon Pegg, who revealed the film's title that
May. Idris Elba was cast as the villain Krall, while Sofia Boutella was cast as Jaylah.
Filming began on June 25, 2015.
This was the last film of Anton Yelchin (Chekov), who died in an automobile accident on June 19, 2016.

====
Star Trek 4 (2023) ====
Pine and Quinto had signed contracts to return as Kirk and Spock for a fourth film should one be made.
In July 2016, Abrams confirmed plans for a fourth film and stated that Chris Hemsworth would return as Kirk’s father, George, whom he played in the prologue of the first film.
Later that month, Paramount confirmed the return of Hemsworth, as well as most of the Beyond cast, producers Abrams and Lindsey Weber, and writers J.D. Payne and Patrick McKay.
That same month, Abrams said that Chekov would not be recast, after Anton Yelchin died in an accident outside his residence in California.
In December 2017, it was revealed that Quentin Tarantino had pitched an idea for a potential Star Trek film to Abrams and Paramount, who were reportedly enthusiastic about the idea.
Tarantino was mentioned as a possibility to direct the film if his schedule allowed, and that Abrams and Paramount would attempt to assemble a writers’ room to explore the concept.
On December 22, writer Mark L. Smith was hired by Paramount and Bad Robot to write a screenplay based on Tarantino’s original pitch, with Tarantino still expected to direct.
In April 2018, it was announced that two new Star Trek films were in development at Paramount.
Later that month, it was announced that S. J. Clarkson would direct the second Star Trek film in development, and that the film would enter production before Tarantino’s film.
J.D. Payne and Patrick McKay would co-write the screenplay, while Abrams and Lindsey Weber would co-produce the project.
In August 2018, Pine and Hemsworth walked away from negotiations to star in the film after refusing to take pay cuts as a result of Star Trek Beyond's alleged under-performance at the domestic box office.
According to Hemsworth, the reason for his exit was because he found the script underwhelming.
In January 2019, Paramount reportedly cancelled development of the fourth installment, refusing to offer a comment.

In May 2019, Tarantino confirmed that his Trek film was still in development, saying: It’s a very big possibility.
I haven’t been dealing with those guys for a while
cause I’ve been making my movie.
But we’ve talked about a story and a script.
The script has been written and when I emerge my head like Punxsutawney Phil, post-
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, we’ll pick up talking about it again.

On November 19, 2019, it was reported that Pine had signed-on to return for a fourth installment alongside Quinto, Saldana, Pegg, and Urban, and that Noah Hawley was in talks to write and direct the film.
Simon Pegg later stated that he had no knowledge of the reboot cast’s return in the film.
The following year, it was announced that Hawley's movie had been put on indefinite hold, reportedly by Paramount's new president to get a better handle on how to move the film franchise forward.
In late November 2020, it was revealed that the project was cancelled and Hawley left.
In December 2019, it was reported that Tarantino had left his proposed film, looking to make a smaller budget film.
In January 2020, Tarantino stated the film "might" be made, but he would not direct it.
In March 2021, Star Trek:
Discovery writer Kalinda Vazquez was hired by Paramount to pen a new Star Trek film, which is said to be based on an original story.
The following month, it was announced that the next installment in the franchise would be released on June 9, 2023 with J.J. Abrams returning to produce.

===
Reception ===


====
Box office performance ====


====
Critical response ====


====
Academy Awards ====


==
See also ==
List of Star Trek production staff


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
Trimble, Bjo (October 1986).

Stine, Hank (ed.).
On the Good Ship Enterprise: My 15 Years with Star Trek (Reprint ed.).
Norfolk, Virginia:
The Donning Company.
ISBN 0-89865-253-7.

Turnbull, Gerry, ed.
(
October 1979).
A Star Trek Catalog.
New York: Grosset & Dunlap.
ISBN 0-441-78477-1.
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (or simply Rogue One) is a 2016 American epic space opera film directed by Gareth Edwards.
The screenplay by Chris Weitz and Tony Gilroy is from a story by John Knoll and Gary Whitta.
It was produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures.
It is the first installment of the Star Wars anthology series and an immediate prequel to Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977).
The main cast consists of Felicity Jones, Diego Luna, Ben Mendelsohn, Donnie Yen, Mads Mikkelsen, Alan Tudyk, Riz Ahmed, Jiang Wen, and Forest Whitaker.
Set a week before A New Hope, the plot follows a group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the Death Star, the ultimate weapon of the Galactic Empire.
The film also details the Rebel Alliance's first effective victory against the Empire, first referenced in A New Hope's opening crawl.
Based on an idea first pitched by Knoll ten years before it entered development, the film was made to be different in tone and style from the traditional Star Wars films, omitting the customary opening crawl and transitional screen wipes.
Principal photography on the film began at Pinewood Studios, Buckinghamshire, in early August 2015 and wrapped in February 2016.
The film then went through extensive reshoots directed by Gilroy in mid-2016.
With an estimated production budget of at least $200 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on December 10, 2016, and was released in the United States on December 16.
It received positive reviews from critics, with praise for its acting, story, visuals, musical score, and dark tone, but criticism for its pacing, characters, and digital recreations of Peter Cushing and Carrie Fisher.
It grossed over $1 billion worldwide, making it the 20th-highest-grossing film of all time and the second-highest-grossing film of 2016 during its theatrical run.
It received two Oscar nominations for Best Sound Mixing and Best Visual Effects.

==
Plot ==
Research scientist Galen Erso and his family are in hiding on the planet Lah'mu when Imperial weapons developer Orson Krennic arrives to press him into completing the Death Star, a space station-based superweapon capable of destroying entire planets.
Galen's wife, Lyra, is killed in the confrontation while their daughter, Jyn, escapes and is rescued by rebel extremist Saw Gerrera.

Fifteen years later, cargo pilot Bodhi Rook defects from the Empire, taking a holographic message recorded by Galen to Gerrera on the desert moon Jedha.
Rebel Alliance intelligence officer Cassian Andor learns of Rook's defection and the Death Star from an informant.
Jyn is freed from an Imperial labor camp at Wobani and is brought to the Rebel leader Mon Mothma, who convinces her to find and rescue Galen so the Alliance can learn more about the Death Star.
Cassian is covertly ordered to kill Galen rather than extract him.

Jyn, Cassian, and reprogrammed Imperial droid K-2SO travel to Jedha, where the Empire is removing kyber crystals from the holy city to power the Death Star; Gerrera and his partisans are engaged in an armed insurgency against them.
With the aid of blind spiritual warrior Chirrut Îmwe and his mercenary friend Baze Malbus, Jyn makes contact with Gerrera, who has been holding Rook captive.
Gerrera shows her the message, in which Galen reveals he has secretly built a vulnerability into the Death Star and directs them to retrieve the schematics from an Imperial data bank on the planet
Scarif.

On the Death Star, Krennic orders a low-powered test shot which destroys Jedha's capital.
Jyn and her group take Rook and flee the moon, but Gerrera remains to die with the city.
Grand Moff Tarkin congratulates Krennic before using Rook's defection and security leak as a pretext to take control of the project.
Rook leads the group to Galen's Imperial research facility on the planet Eadu, where Cassian chooses not to kill Galen.
Jyn makes her presence known moments before Rebel bombers attack the facility.
Galen is mortally wounded by the bombers and dies in his daughter's arms, before she escapes with her group on board a stolen Imperial cargo shuttle.
Krennic is summoned by Darth Vader to answer for the Death Star's attack on Jedha City.
Krennic seeks his support for an audience with the Emperor, but Vader instead Force-chokes him and orders him to ensure no further breaches occur.

Jyn proposes a plan to steal the Death Star schematics using the Rebel fleet but fails to gain approval from the Alliance Council, who feel victory against the Empire is now impossible.
Frustrated at their inaction, Jyn's group lead a small squad of Rebel volunteers to raid the databank themselves.
Arriving at Scarif on the stolen Imperial ship, which Rook dubs "Rogue One", a disguised Jyn and Cassian enter the base with K-2SO while the other Rebels attack the Imperial garrison as a diversion.
The Alliance learns of the raid from intercepted Imperial communications and deploys their fleet in support, revealing their full might to the Empire.
K-2SO
sacrifices himself so Jyn and Cassian can retrieve the data.
Îmwe is killed after activating the master switch to allow communication with the Rebel fleet, and Malbus is killed in action shortly afterward.
Rook is killed by a grenade after informing the Rebel fleet that it must deactivate the planetary shield to allow the transmission of the schematics.
The Rebel commander, Admiral Raddus, uses a Hammerhead corvette to destroy two Star Destroyers, and the wreckage crashes atop the shield generator, punching a hole in the shield.
Jyn and Cassian obtain the schematics, but they are ambushed by Krennic, who is eventually shot and wounded by Cassian.
Jyn transmits the schematics to the Rebel command ship.
The Death Star enters orbit above Scarif, where Tarkin uses another low-power shot to destroy the compromised base, killing Krennic, Cassian, and Jyn, along with all remaining ground Imperial and Rebel forces.

The Rebel fleet prepares to jump to hyperspace, but many of the fleet's ships are intercepted by Vader's arriving Star Destroyer.
Vader boards the Rebel command ship and kills many of the rebel troops in an attempt to regain the schematics, but a small starship escapes with the plans on board.
Aboard the fleeing ship, Princess Leia declares that the schematics will provide hope for the Rebellion.

== Cast ==
Felicity Jones as Jyn Erso, a young renegade woman who is detained for her crimes against the Empire until she is freed by the Rebel Alliance.
Beau Gadsdon as 8-year-old Jyn
Dolly Gadsdon as 4-year-old Jyn
Diego Luna as Cassian Andor, a Rebel captain and intelligence officer.

Ben Mendelsohn as Orson Krennic, the director of advanced weapons research for the Imperial military.

Donnie Yen as Chirrut Îmwe, a blind warrior who believes in the Force.
He is said to be one of the Guardians of the Whills.

Mads Mikkelsen as Galen Erso, Jyn's father and a research scientist.

Alan Tudyk as K-2SO, a former Imperial enforcer droid who was reprogrammed by Cassian Andor to serve the Rebellion.

Riz Ahmed as Bodhi Rook, a former Imperial cargo pilot who defects to the rebels under the influence of Galen Erso.

Jiang Wen as Baze Malbus, a longtime companion of Chirrut Îmwe and one-time devoted Guardian of the Whills, now a Rebel warrior and mercenary.

Forest Whitaker as Saw Gerrera, a veteran of the Clone Wars and a friend of the Erso family who had mentored Jyn in her later childhood years.
Jimmy Smits, Genevieve O'Reilly, Anthony Daniels, and Jimmy Vee reprise their roles from previous films as Bail Organa, Mon Mothma, C-3PO, and R2-D2, respectively; Vee is uncredited for his role.
James Earl Jones also reprises his role from previous films as the voice of Darth Vader, who is physically portrayed by Spencer Wilding during the meeting with Krennic and aboard the Star Destroyer, and by Daniel Naprous for the end scene.
Grand Moff Tarkin and Princess Leia Organa are played by Guy Henry and Ingvild Deila, respectively, with the digital likenesses of Peter Cushing and Carrie Fisher superimposed.
Henry also provides the voice for Tarkin, while archival audio of Fisher is used for Leia.
Angus MacInnes and Drewe Henley are featured as Gold Leader Dutch Vander and Red Leader Garven Dreis, respectively, via unused footage from A New Hope; MacInnes returned to record new dialogue for Vander, while new dialogue for the deceased Henley was assembled from archival material.
David Ankrum, who voiced Wedge Antilles in A New Hope, reprises his role in a vocal cameo.
Ian McElhinney, Michael Smiley, Andy de la Tour, and Tim Beckmann play General Jan Dodonna, Dr. Evazan, General Hurst Romodi, and Captain Raymus Antilles, respectively.
Warwick Davis plays Weeteef Cyubee, a member of Saw Gerrera's Partisans.
Dave Filoni reprises his role as C1-10P from Star Wars Rebels.
Stephen Stanton voices
Admiral Raddus, while Paul Kasey appears in costume as the alien character on-screen.

Additionally, Alistair Petrie plays General Davits Draven, Ben Daniels plays General Antoc Merrick, and Valene Kane plays Lyra Erso, Jyn's mother.
Jonathan Aris, Fares Fares, and
Sharon Duncan-Brewster appear as Senators Nower Jebel, Vasp Vaspar, and Tynnra Pamlo, respectively.
Simon Farnaby plays a member of Blue Squadron.
Jordan Stephens appears as Rebel Alliance member Corporal Tonc.
Nick Kellington plays Bistan, the door gunner on a U-wing during the battle on Scarif.
Ian Whyte plays Moroff, a member of Saw Gerrera's Partisans.
Daniel Mays appears as Tivik.
Rian Johnson and Ram Bergman, director and producer of Star Wars: The Last Jedi, respectively, cameo as two Death Star technicians.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Rogue One is the first film in the Star Wars anthology series, a series of standalone spin-off films in the Star Wars franchise.
John Knoll, visual effects supervisor for the Star Wars prequel trilogy, pitched the idea as an episode of the unproduced series Star Wars: Underworld 10 years before the film's development; after the Disney acquisition he felt as if he had to pitch it again or forever wonder "what might've happened if I had".
In May 2014, Disney announced Gareth Edwards would direct the film and Gary Whitta would write the script.
That October, cinematographer Greig Fraser revealed that he would work on the film.
In January 2015, it was revealed Whitta had completed his work on the script, and would no longer be with the project.
Simon Kinberg was considered as a replacement.
Later that month, it was announced Chris Weitz had signed to write the script for the film.
In March 2015, the title was announced.
Edwards stated the style of the film would be similar to that of a war film, stating, "It's the reality of war.
Good guys are bad.
Bad guys are good.
It's complicated, layered; a very rich scenario in which to set a movie."
Assuming Disney would not allow a dark ending, Edwards had the main characters surviving in the original version of the script, but the producers opted for a more tragic ending and never filmed the original version.
In May 2016, reports emerged the film would undergo five weeks of reshoots with Tony Gilroy writing additional scenes, as well as acting as a second-unit director under Edwards.
With input from Edwards, Gilroy oversaw the edit and additional photography of the film which tackled several issues, including the ending.
In August, Gilroy was given screenplay credit alongside Weitz and was paid $5 million for his work on the film.
Additionally, Christopher McQuarrie, Scott Z. Burns, and Michael Arndt all contributed to the script at various stages in development.
In July 2016, discussing whether the film would feature an opening crawl, Kathleen Kennedy said, "we're in the midst of talking about it, but I don't think these [anthology] films will have an opening crawl."
Edwards explained "The idea is this film is supposed to be different than the saga films," and that "This film is born out of a crawl. ...
There's this feeling that if we did a crawl, then it'll create another movie."
In November 2016, Kennedy confirmed the film would not feature an opening crawl, instead beginning in "a way that is traditional, with just the title.
"At
the 2016 Star Wars Celebration, Edwards said the title had three meanings: "a military sign", referring to the Red Squadron from A New Hope; "the 'rogue' one" of the franchise, given it
is the first film to not be part of the main saga; and a description of Jyn Erso's personality.

===
Casting ===
In January 2015, The Hollywood Reporter stated numerous actresses, including Tatiana Maslany, Rooney Mara, and Felicity Jones were being tested for the film's lead.
In February 2015, it was announced Jones was in final talks to star in the film, while Aaron Paul and Édgar Ramírez were being eyed for the male lead role.
In March 2015, Jones was officially cast.
In March 2015, Deadline Hollywood reported a rumor that Ben Mendelsohn was being considered for a lead role.
The next month, TheWrap reported that Sam Claflin was being eyed for a role, while Riz Ahmed was in negotiations to join the film.
In May, Mendelsohn, Ahmed, and Diego Luna were added to the cast of the film, in the lead roles.
Forest Whitaker was added to the cast in June 2015.
In July 2015, Jonathan Aris was cast to play Senator Jebel.
Genevieve O'Reilly was cast as Mon Mothma, reprising her role from Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
James Earl Jones was confirmed to return as the voice of Darth Vader in June 2016.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography on the film began at Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire on August 8, 2015.
Much of the other photography was completed at or near Pinewood Studios at Buckinghamshire, UK where huge sets were built to complement scenes filmed elsewhere in the world.
The film was shot using Ultra Panavision 70 lenses with Arri Alexa 65 large format digital 6K cameras.

Filming locations were used around the world.
In Iceland, the crew shot in Reynisfjara, and around the mountains of Hjörleifshöfði and Hafursey at Mýrdalssandur, which were used to represent Lah'mu and Eadu.
Also used were the Krafla area with its volcanic crater and around Lake Mývatn's rock formations.
The islands of Gan and Baresdhoo of the Laamu Atoll in the Maldives, as well as the former RAF Bovingdon airfield, were used to represent Scarif.
Wadi Rum in Jordan was used to represent Jedha.
Pymmes Park in Edmonton
, London was also used for location filming, and scenes set on Yavin 4 were filmed at Cardington Airfield.
Gareth Edwards selected the London Underground's Canary Wharf station as a location for a chase scene in an Imperial base; the location shoot took place between midnight and 4 am, when the station was closed to the public.
The film spent an estimated total of $265 million and received a $45.5 million subsidy from the United Kingdom's film incentive program.
===
Post-production ===
On February 11, 2016, Disney executives stated the film was "virtually completed".
Several weeks of pre-scheduled reshoots began in June 2016.
Tony Gilroy, who was an uncredited writer on the film at the time, was hired to direct the reshoots and rework aspects of the film, earning him a screenwriting credit.
It was created solely using digital tools.
Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) produced the film's visual effects.
ILM used CGI and digitally altered archive footage to insert Peter Cushing's likeness over the body of actor Guy Henry.
Lucasfilm secured permission from the late actor's estate to include him in the film.
The team reportedly searched through countless hours of Cushing footage in order to find suitable reference material, and Henry provided the motion capture and voice work.
A digital model of Cushing was mapped over Henry's performance like a digital body mask.
Cushing's mannerisms, including his manner of speaking, were studied by the creative team and applied to the digital Tarkin model.
Cushing's estate was heavily involved with the creation and had input right down to "small, subtle adjustments".
A similar process was used in the portrayal of Princess Leia; Carrie Fisher's appearance as Leia in the first film was superimposed over Norwegian actress Ingvild Deila's face and archival audio of Fisher saying "Hope" was used to voice the character.
Post-production wrapped on November 28, 2016.
== Music ==
In March 2015, it was reported that Alexandre Desplat, who had worked with Edwards on Godzilla, would compose the score for Rogue One.
Despite rumors that a contract had not been initially set in place by Lucasfilm, Desplat confirmed in an April 2016 interview that he would serve as composer for the film.
Concerning the film, Desplat commented that "[Edwards and I] had a great partnership on Godzilla, and I can't wait to be starting with him.
It will be in a few weeks from now, and it is very exciting and frightening at the same time because it's such a legendary project.
To be called to come after John Williams ...
it's a great challenge for me."
But then, in September 2016, it was announced that Michael Giacchino would be replacing Desplat as composer, after the film's reshoots altered the post-production schedule, and reportedly left Desplat no longer available.
Giacchino only had four and a half weeks to compose the music for the film, beginning almost immediately after finishing production on Doctor Strange.
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly in November 2016, Giacchino stated: "It is a film that is in many ways a really great World War II movie, and I loved that about it.
But it also has this huge, huge heart at the center of it, and that was the one thing I just didn't want to discount.
Yes, it's an action movie, and it's a Star Wars film, and it has all the things that you would come to expect and love about that,
but I didn't want to forget that it was also an incredibly emotional movie as well.
That was what really pulled me in.
"Giacchino
incorporated John Williams' themes from previous films into the score.
The official soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on December 16, 2016.All music was composed by Giacchino except where noted.
Giacchino, who has a history of using track titles that contain wordplay, shared his alternate list in the liner notes of the soundtrack release.
These names are listed in the notes.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Rogue One premiered at the Pantages Theatre in Los Angeles on December 10, 2016.
The film was released in certain European countries on December 14, 2016, and was released in North America on December 16, with China getting the film on January 6, 2017.
===
Marketing ===
Promotion of Rogue One was initially delayed by the release of the film Mission:
Impossible – Rogue Nation in July 2015, because the titles are similar.
Paramount Pictures registered and cleared the title with the Motion Picture Association of America in January 2015, well before Disney announced the title of its forthcoming Star Wars spinoff.
Disney and Lucasfilm had to reach an agreement with Paramount over promotion in order to avoid any confusion in the public mind.
Disney agreed to embargo promotion on Rogue One until after mid-2015, with the exception of a very short teaser which was screened at Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim that year.
A teaser trailer for Rogue One, released by Lucasfilm on April 7, 2016, was praised by reviewers for its portrayal of strong female characters.
The Daily Telegraph described Jyn Erso's character as "a roguish, Han Solo-style heroine", calling the film "progressive", while noting its painstaking faithfulness to the production design style of the original Star Wars trilogy.
The Hollywood Reporter also noted the visual nods to the original trilogy, and examined the film's possible narrative direction, considering that the outcome is to some extent already revealed in the opening crawl of A New Hope.
The Atlantic writer David Sims stated that the trailer brought "back some memorable pieces of architecture, from the lumbering AT-AT walkers to the Death Star itself, not to mention the glorious 70s costuming of Star Wars."
He added that the trailer has "the look", blending the old with the new.
The trailer was viewed close to 30 million times in its first 29 hours, at a rate of 800,000 views per hour, from Facebook and YouTube, which is 200,000 views shy of what the first teaser trailer for Star Wars: The Force Awakens was receiving in November 2014.In June 2016, Rogue One was promoted at the Star Wars Celebration Europe III event in London.
During the event, a new official poster was unveiled, which depicts a battle taking place on the tropical planet Scarif, with the Death Star looming large in a blue sky, above which is printed the tagline "A Rebellion Built on Hope".
A second teaser trailer was also unveiled, screened exclusively for the Celebration audience, and not streamed online.
This new trailer was reviewed favorably by critics; The Daily Telegraph noted that the trailer revealed new locations such as the planets Jedha and Scarif, and that its most significant revelation came in the final seconds of the teaser, with the appearance of Darth Vader, reflected in a computer screen and accompanied by his classic breathing sound effect.
Variety also hailed the Vader reveal, and noted that the emphasis of the production was much more on the kinetic depiction of large battle sequences and full-on warfare, comparing it to Francis Ford Coppola's 1979 Vietnam War epic Apocalypse Now.
A showreel was also shown during the event, which featured footage from the film, cut with behind-the-scenes shots and interviews with the director and cast members.
The second trailer was shown publicly during a broadcast of the 2016 Summer Olympics and received positive responses; Wired stated that the trailer was "littered with nostalgic throwbacks to the original trilogy", while Rolling Stone described the CGI landscape shots seen in the footage as "eye-poppingly gorgeous".
A further trailer released in October 2016 prompted The Hollywood Reporter to comment that the newly revealed footage looked like "a trailer to a different movie than the one advertised earlier", remarking that Jyn Erso appeared to be portrayed as a more vulnerable character, and highlighting the appearance of Galen Erso as a protective father figure.
Vanity Fair also commented on the emphasis given to Jyn's relationship with her father, suggesting that Rogue One was drawing on "the Star Wars franchise's greatest natural resource: daddy issues".
The film's publicity tour began in Mexico on November 23, 2016.In Asia, Disney focused marketing efforts on Donnie Yen, where his individual poster is used for marketing in territories including Japan, Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, Hong Kong, China, Vietnam, and Malaysia.
The official Star Wars Facebook page of the respective Asian countries also featured clips and videos of Donnie Yen speaking various languages, greeting fans and telling them to support the film.
In addition, Disney also released various versions of international trailers with more footage of Yen.

===
Home media ===
Rogue One was released on Digital HD on March 24, 2017, and by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu-ray, Blu-ray 3D, and DVD on April 4, 2017.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Rogue One grossed $532.2 million in the United States and Canada and $523.8 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $1.056 billion.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $319.6 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film, making it the third-most profitable release of 2016.In late November 2016, box office projections for the United States and Canada had the film grossing $100–150 million during its opening weekend.
Disney chairman Bob Iger noted that Disney and Lucasfilm did not expect Rogue One to match The Force Awakens' total gross of $2.1 billion, nor its $248 million opening.
Pre-sale tickets for the film went on sale at 12:01 AM EST on November 28, 2016.
Within 10 minutes, ticket sale sites such as Fandango crashed, much like they had in advance of The Force Awakens the year prior.
In its first 24 hours, the film had the second-highest number of pre-sale tickets ever sold, behind only The Force Awakens.
Worldwide, the film was expected to gross $280–350 million in its opening weekend.
In the United States, the film made $29 million from its Thursday night previews, making it the highest-grossing Thursday opening of 2016.
On Friday, the film grossed $71.1 million, and $46.3 million the next day, securing a total of $155.1 million in its opening weekend, the third-biggest debut of 2016.
It topped the box office once again in its second weekend, grossing $64 million (down 58.7%) over the three day weekend, and $96.1 million over the four day weekend.
On Christmas Day, it grossed $25.9 million.
It finished first at the box office again in its third weekend, grossing $49.6 million (-22.5%) over the three-day weekend and $65.5 million over the four-day weekend.
In its fourth weekend, Sunday projections had the film grossing $22 million, besting newcomer Hidden Figures' $21.8 million.
However, final figures the following day revealed the film tallied a weekend total of $21.9 million, falling to second place behind Hidden Figures' $22.8 million.
===
Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 84% based on 446 reviews, with an average rating of 7.48/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Rogue One draws deep on Star Wars mythology while breaking new narrative and aesthetic ground and suggesting a bright blockbuster future for the franchise.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score 65 out of 100, based on 51 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave the film a 91% overall positive score.
IGN reviewer Eric Goldman gave the film 9/10, saying, "Rogue One is a movie crammed with fan service, but when fan service is done this well, there's little to complain about and much to adore."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars, writing, "
this spin-off/prequel has the same primitive, lived-in, emotional, loopy, let's-put-on-a-show spirit that made us fall in love with the original trilogy."
/Film gave Rogue One 8/10, writing that the film is enjoyable but does not have the emotional weight of The Force Awakens, because "no character in Rogue One was strongly compelling".
PopMatters wrote, "Rogue One seems to enjoy spending time on a whole new batch of moons and planets we haven't seen before, reveling in the clutter and clamor of far-flung settlements where anti-Imperial sentiments fester.
But the film is bogged down in engineering the complex maneuverings of spy games, dogfights, and the most sprawling Rebel-versus-Empire land battle scene since the opening of The Empire Strikes Back."
Justin Chang, writing for the Los Angeles Times, called Rogue One "a swiftly paced, rough-and-ready entertainment".
The New York Times wrote, "All the pieces are there, in other words, like Lego figures in a box.
The problem is that the filmmakers haven't really bothered to think of anything very interesting to do with them.
A couple of 9-year-olds on a screen-free rainy afternoon would come up with better adventures, and probably also better dialogue."
Richard Brody of The New Yorker called the film "lobotomized and "depersonalized", and wrote it "isn't so much a movie as a feature-length promotional film for itself; it's a movie that is still waiting to be made."
The Washington Post wrote "Rogue One represents an unobjectionable exercise in franchise extension.
It's fine.
It'll do.
For now.
"IndieWire's David Ehrlich gave the film a C+ rating, calling it "a spirited but agonizingly safe attempt to expand cinema's most holy blockbuster franchise and keep the wheels greased between proper installments ... just a glorified excuse to retcon some sense into one of the silliest things about the original".
While he praised the set design and visuals, calling them "gorgeous", he criticized a lack of interesting character development and a script that felt "completely constricted by its purpose".
Peter Bradshaw, film critic of The Guardian says, "Rogue One doesn't really go rogue at any stage, and it isn't a pop culture event like The Force Awakens, in whose slipstream this appears; part of its charm resides in the eerie, almost dreamlike effect of continually producing familiar elements, reshuffled and reconfigured, a reaching back to the past and hinting at a preordained future.
There are some truly spectacular cameos from much-loved personae, involving next-level digital effects—almost creepily exact, so that watching feels at various stages like going into a time machine, back to the 80s and 70s".
Rogue One introduced many new characters into the Star Wars mythology, with Chirrut Îmwe, played by Donnie Yen, and K-2SO, played by Alan Tudyk, being the most popular.
In a poll on the official Star Wars website in May 2017, in which more than 30,000 people voted, Chirrut Îmwe was voted as the most popular Rogue One character.
George Lucas was reported to have enjoyed the film more than The Force Awakens; upon hearing this, Gareth Edwards said, "I can die happy now.
"The
film was praised for its exploration of ethics in engineering; in a reviewer's words, "the core ethical arc of the film is one man's decision to engineer the Death Star in such a way as to prevent its use for galactic domination.
One could fairly retitle the movie to 'Rogue One: an Engineering Ethics Story.'
"

====
Digital recreation ====
While much of the computer-generated imagery (CGI) received praise, some news organizations published criticism about certain aspects, including the visual effects (VFX) that were used to revive Peter Cushing, who had died in 1994, as Grand Moff Tarkin.
The Guardian's Catherine Shoard described the "resurrection" as a "digital indignity".
Joseph Walsh of The Guardian raised legal and ethical issues about bringing a long-dead actor to life.
However, Lucasfilm had obtained permission from Cushing's estate before deciding to use his likeness.
The Washington Times' Eric Althoff rejected the entire concept of using CGI to recreate a deceased actor: "Alas, what we get is, basically, not a simulation, but an approximation of a simulation—a dead character portrayed by a living actor inhabiting not the character, but imitating the dead actor.
"Some
journalists also criticized the quality of the CGI that was used to represent a younger Carrie Fisher in order to portray Princess Leia at an earlier time, as well as its suitability in movie-making.
Eliana Dockterman of Time wrote that "there was something particularly plastic about this version of the young Carrie Fisher—so smooth and so perfect it couldn't be real—that pulled me out of the moment."
Kelly Lawler of USA
Today said: "... while Tarkin is merely unnerving, the Leia cameo is so jarring as to take the audience completely out of the film at its most emotional moment.
Leia's appearance was meant to help the film end on a hopeful note (quite literally, as 'hope' is her line), but instead it ends on a weird and unsettling one."
Michael Cavna of The Washington Post described the facial effect as feeling "distractingly artificial and nearly alien, like a plastered death mask robbed of authentic actorly effect, well beyond the usual artifice of Botox."
Nonetheless, Fisher was shown the CGI rendition of her younger self for the film by Kathleen Kennedy and "loved it."
===
Accolades ===


==
In other media ==


===
Television ===
Rogue One
utilized Saw Gerrera, a character introduced in the animated television series The Clone Wars, as well as featuring cameo appearances of the Ghost and Chopper from the animated series Star Wars Rebels, and mentioning Hera Syndulla from that series.

Characters from the film also appeared in the second half of Rebels, starting with Saw in the hour-long Season 3 episode "Ghosts of Geonosis".
The Imperial Death Troopers appeared in the same season's hour-long finale, "Zero Hour".
More characters and vehicles that were first introduced in the film appear in the series' fourth and final season, while the film's main antagonist, Orson Krennic, is mentioned by name.

====
Andor ====
On November 8, 2018, it was announced that a live-action prequel series was officially in development and set to air on Disney's streaming service, Disney+.
The series will take place five years before the events in Rogue One and will focus on Cassian Andor with Diego Luna reprising the role.
Additionally, Alan Tudyk is also reprising his role as K-2SO.

===
Tie-in novels ===
A tie-in novel to the film, Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel, was released on November 15, 2016.
Written by veteran Star Wars novelist James Luceno, the story is set some years before the events of Rogue One, and provides a backstory to the 2016 film.
The novelization of the film was written by Alexander Freed, and released on December 16, 2016.Months after the film was released, Disney | Lucasfilm Press published another novel titled Star Wars: Rebel Rising on May 2, 2017.

Written by Beth Revis, the novel explains what happened to Jyn Erso between the time her mother died and the day when Rebel agents freed her from an Imperial labor camp, a time period that the film skips over in its opening minutes.

On the same day Rebel Rising was released, the novel Guardians of the Whills was released as well by Disney | Lucasfilm Press.
Written by novelist and comic writer Greg Rucka, it focused on the characters Chirrut and Baze, telling their backstories as well as giving more context to the events that happened on Jedha prior to the film and even the Imperial occupation.

===
Comics ===
Months after the film was released, Marvel Comics adapted the film into a six-part comic book miniseries, which adds extra content.

The miniseries' complete collection was released on December 12, 2017.

In August 2017, IDW Publishing announced that it would make a one-shot graphic novel adaptation of the film, which was released one day after the Marvel miniseries' collection was released.

Unlike the Marvel miniseries, this graphic novel will have slightly more cartoonish visuals.
In the same month, Marvel Comics released the Star Wars: Rogue One – Cassian & K-2SO Special, a 40-page one-shot comic focusing on the first meeting between Cassian Andor and K-2SO.
The comic was written by Duane Swierczynski and pencilled by Fernando Blanco.

===
Video games ===
A downloadable expansion pack was released for the Star Wars Battlefront reboot, titled Rogue One: Scarif, that allows players the ability to play through the various locations, characters and set pieces from the planet introduced in Rogue One.
A free virtual reality mission for PlayStation 4 was also released alongside the expansion.
The sequel to the Star Wars Battlefront reboot, Star Wars Battlefront 2 (2017), released an update including the planet Scarif as a location for several of its gamemodes.
Several characters and concepts from the film were also included in the mobile games Star Wars: Force Arena, Star Wars Commander, and Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, all available on iOS and Android.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Official website
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at Starwars.com
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at Lucasfilm.com
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at IMDb
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
A stormtrooper is a fictional soldier in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
Introduced in Star Wars (1977), the stormtroopers are the elite shock troops/space marines of the Galactic Empire, under the leadership of Emperor Palpatine and his commanders, most notably Darth Vader and Grand Moff Tarkin, during the original film trilogy (1977–1983).
The prequel trilogy (1999–2005) establishes their origin as the Galactic Republic's clone troopers, clones of the bounty hunter Jango Fett, used by Supreme Chancellor Palpatine to "win" the Clone Wars and later to take over the government and exterminate the Jedi.
Despite this, later stormtroopers are established as recruits; at the time of the original trilogy, only a few stormtroopers are clones, with the only known legion to still contain a significant number of clones being the 501st Legion, aka "Vader's Fist".
In the sequel trilogy (2015–2019), the upgraded stormtroopers serve the First Order under the leadership of Supreme Leader Snoke and his commanders, most notably Kylo Ren, General Hux, and Captain Phasma.
The final film of the trilogy, The Rise of Skywalker (2019), introduces Sith Troopers, an upgraded variant of the First Order stormtroopers that sport red armor and serve the Sith Eternal, led by a resurrected Emperor Palpatine.

The order of battle of the Stormtrooper Corps is unspecified in the Star Wars universe.
Accompanying the Imperial Navy, stormtroopers are able to be deployed swiftly and respond to states of civil unrest or insurrection, act as a planetary garrison, and police areas within the Galactic Empire.
They are shown in collective groups of varying organizational sizes ranging from squads to legions and for some, their armor and training are modified for special operations and environments.
==
Development ==
Stormtroopers' designs were intended to look "terrifying, but also supercool, super clean", with the helmets being "very stylized skulls".
In early drafts of Star Wars and Ralph McQuarrie's concept designs, stormtroopers were to wield lightsabers and hand-held shields as common weapons not limited to the Jedi or Sith.
George Lucas, when composing background information in 1977, stated that females did exist in the Stormtrooper Corps, although there were few stationed on the Death Star.
He suggested that there were numerous in other units.

===
Performers ===
While stormtrooper performers like Michael Leader (Episode IV), Laurie Goode (Episode IV), Peter Diamond (Episode IV-VI), Stephen Bayley (Episode IV), and Bill Weston (Episode IV) have generally been uncredited in the film series, there have been a few exceptions.

In Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005), the clone troopers, which serve as the basis of what would become the Empire's stormtrooper force, were computer-generated images and voiced by Temuera Morrison, who played the bounty hunter Jango Fett, the template of the clone army.
The child clone troopers were played by Daniel Logan, who also played Jango's clone son Boba Fett, and the clone troopers as young men were played by Bodie Taylor, who was cast for his resemblance to a younger Morrison.
In Revenge of the Sith, Morrison also played Commander Cody, the only named clone trooper who is seen unmasked in the prequel trilogy.

In The Force Awakens (2015), John Boyega stars as Finn, the former Stormtrooper FN-2187 who defects from the First Order and joins the Resistance, and Gwendoline Christie portrays Captain Phasma, commander of the First Order's stormtroopers.

Daniel Craig has a small uncredited role as a stormtrooper whom Rey compels using the Jedi mind trick to let her escape from captivity,  and director J. J. Abrams also cast Alias and Lost composer Michael Giacchino as FN-3181, and Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich as FN-9330.
A riot control stormtrooper who calls Finn a traitor during the battle on Takodana, portrayed by stunt performer Liang Yang and voiced by sound editor David Acord, is identified as FN-2199 in the anthology book Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka.
The trooper, armed with a "Z6 baton" and dubbed "TR-8R" by fans, quickly inspired multiple memes and fan art.
Actor/director Kevin Smith also voiced a stormtrooper in the Takodana sequence.
In Star Wars Rebels, different voice actors have provided the voices of the stormtroopers, including David Acord, Dee Bradley Baker, Steven Blum, Clancy Brown, Robin Atkin Downes, Greg Ellis, Dave Fennoy, Dave Filoni, Tom Kane, Andrew Kishino, Phil LaMarr, Liam O'Brien, Freddie Prinze, Jr., André Sogliuzzo, Stephen Stanton, Greg Weisman, Gary Anthony Williams, and Matthew Wood.
In Ralph Breaks the Internet, the stormtroopers in the "Oh My Disney" website are voiced by Jesse Averna, Kevin Deters, Jeremy Milton, and Rich Moore.
Jason Sudeikis and Adam Pally play scout troopers in "Chapter 8:
Redemption", the 2019 first-season finale episode of The Mandalorian.
==
Background ==


===
Skywalker saga ===
Introduced in Star Wars (1977), the Imperial stormtroopers serve as the army of the Galactic Empire, establishing Imperial authority and putting down any revolts.

In the prequel film Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), the first clone troopers are cloned from bounty hunter Jango Fett, to be the Army of the Republic in the Clone Wars.
In Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005), Chancellor Palpatine orders them to slay their Jedi generals in the Great Jedi Purge.
After the change in regimes from the Galactic Republic to the Galactic Empire, the clone troopers who had served the Republic became the first generation of stormtroopers, enforcing the Emperor's will as military units, and law enforcement, policing the Emperor's ever increasingly oppressive laws.
The Imperial Stormtrooper Corps swell in size after Palpatine completely replaced the clones with recruits and conscripts of the Empire, though the replacement of clones with natural beings lowered the effectiveness of the Empire's soldiers.
With the Empire firmly stabilized and an Imperial Army and Navy established, the stormtroopers are integrated into Palpatine's personal army and stationed on Imperial bases and cruisers, as well as on the Death Star.

As established in The Force Awakens (2015), after Palpatine's death, stormtroopers continue to serve under the factions that broke apart from the Empire.
With redesigned armor, they eventually serve under the leadership of the First Order.
In the First Order, an undisclosed number of stormtroopers are abducted as young children, given serial numbers for names and mentally conditioned for loyal service.
Stormtrooper FN-2187, later known as Finn, plans his escape when his resistance to this conditioning puts him in line to be reprogrammed.
Additionally, Rey's goggles were based on scavenged stormtrooper lenses.

===
Other appearances ===
The streaming series The Mandalorian, which is set after the fall of the Empire, portrays stormtroopers as freelance mercenaries in the service of Moff Gideon, a former officer of the Imperial Security Bureau.
Star Wars Legends media such as games and comics feature a number of specialized stormtrooper units.
The Marvel-produced comics of the late 1970s and early 1980s featured Shadow Troopers.
Other specialists have included commandos and troopers equipped to work in the vacuum of outer space, such as
the zero gravity Spacetroopers depicted engaging in extra vehicular battle in the 1991 novel Star Wars: Heir to the Empire, and its 1995 Dark Horse Comics adaptation.

A distinct variant known as "Shadowtroopers" appear in Star Wars Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast, wearing black armour that incorporates a lightsaber-resistant mineral called cortosis.
As a project of the Dark Jedi named Desann aligned with a Remnant of the Empire, the Shadowtroopers themselves had been immersed in a Force nexus on Ruusan, temporarily empowering them with Force sensitivity.
This armour has a green synthetic gem set into the breastplate which sustained the otherwise temporary effect of their Force empowerment and combines with their abilities to render them near-invisible, with only a faint area of blue discoloration giving them away.
In conjunction with their Force-granted telekinesis, reflexes, and agility, the Shadowtroopers are armed and trained in the use of mass-produced red lightsabers.
Their combination of abilities allow them to lie in wait and ambush the enemy, representing formidable opponents even for trained Jedi, most often the game's Jedi protagonist, Kyle Katarn.
Shadow stormtroopers appear in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed and wear exactly the same type of Phase III armor as normal stormtroopers but not white in color, but rather a mixture of silver, grey and red detailing.
These troopers also possess the invisible feature and use this tactic to ambush their enemies, but only if stormtrooper officers call out for support.

In Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy, Speedo-clad and stormtrooper-helmet-wearing "Beach Troopers" appear relaxing at the beach.
In Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, they also wear life jackets.

== Description ==
According to Star Wars lore, Imperial stormtroopers are human men and women who have been recruited (or conscripted) at a young age to serve as expendable foot soldiers of the Empire, gradually replacing clone troopers as their accelerated aging forces them to retire.

These recruits are trained at Imperial Academies spread out across the galaxy where they undergo intense conditioning that instills fierce loyalty, strict discipline and ruthless efficiency while removing any sense of individualism or empathy.

As the backbone of the Imperial Army, stormtroopers are dreaded for their brutality, carrying out atrocities in the name of Emperor Palpatine, and their fanaticism, engaging the enemy with no regard to casualties.
Inevitably, some use their position for personal gain against a civilian population too terrified to resist.
However, inconsistencies in academy standards led to stormtroopers of varying combat skill and ability.
After subduing any remaining Separatist holdouts left over from the Clone Wars, stormtroopers primarily serve as an internal security and peacekeeping force until the Galactic Civil War where they start to engage the Rebel Alliance in large-scale battles.
Unable to conscript millions of soldiers to fill its stormtrooper ranks, yet unwilling to switch back to using a rapidly produced clone troopers, First Order stormtroopers are bred, trained and indoctrinated from birth, raised their entire lives for no other purpose.
First Order soldiers and crews have constantly trained for combat in war games and simulations, making them much more effective one-on-one than the endless waves of stormtrooper conscripts fielded by the Galactic Empire.

First Order stormtroopers are regularly put through mental indoctrination and propaganda programs, to make sure that they remain fanatically loyal and never hesitate or question orders.

Being taken from their families at birth, these soldiers are not even given individual names for themselves but merely serial numbers, such as "FN-2187".
=== Equipment ===
Standard imperial stormtrooper armor was white and had a utility belt and helmet.

====
Vehicles ====


====
Weapons ====
The standard firearm for Imperial stormtroopers is the BlasTech E-11 blaster rifle, described in Star Wars sources as combining excellent range and firepower in a compact and rugged design.

Features include a telescopic range-finding sight, accessory mounting rail, power setting adjuster, three-point folding stock, magnatomic adhesive pistol grip, and advanced cooling system.

Plasma cartridges provide enough gas for 500 shots, though a standard power cell which energizes the gas to produce blaster bolts will last for approximately 100 shots.
In addition to the E-11, stormtroopers employ a variety of different weapons as seen in the Star Wars films and other media.

Examples include thermal detonators, sniper rifles, crew-served heavy repeating blasters, and mortars.
Both firing and non-firing prop models of the E-11 were based on the Mk 4 Sterling submachine gun, with approximately 20 models built for the first Star Wars movie
A New Hope.

External modifications to the Sterlings to transform them into blaster rifles varied based on the parts available
but most were similar in design.

This included an American Mk38 azimuth tank scope and a Hengstler industrial counter box affixed to the top and left side of the receiver respectively.

The Sterling would continue to serve as the basis for or inspire other blaster rifle designs in the rest of the Star Wars films.
Background literature explains how the First Order's stormtroopers were armed in secret by the Sonn-Blas Corporation, a subsidiary of BlasTech Industries and Merr-Sonn Munitions created to circumvent the New Republic's disarmament treaties.

Building on classic design templates, they are meant to possess greater battlefield accuracy, ammunition yields and operational lifespans.

Examples include the F-11D blaster rifle, SE-44C blaster pistol, and FWMB-10 repeating blaster cannon.

For subduing civilian populations, First Order stormtroopers will also carry ballistic riot shields and riot control batons.
At the beginning of the season 1 finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", two scout troopers attempt to shoot at a can around 2 meters (6 feet) away.
They both fail to hit the shot, and one of them shakes their pistol in confusion.
A loud rattling sound can be heard from the weapon, so it can be assumed that the equipment of the Empire were rather cheaply made.

====
Armor ====
As established in the original Star Wars trilogy of films, the troopers' most distinctive equipment is their white battle armor, which completely encases the body and typically has no individually distinguishing markings.

According to in-universe reference material, this armor was developed and manufactured by the Imperial Department of Military Research, and consists of 18 white plastoid armor plates magnatomically attached to a black body glove.

These plates are generally impervious to most projectile weapons and blast shrapnel, and will protect against glancing hits by other blaster rifles through a direct hit will penetrate.

The armor also provides protection against inhospitable environments, including the vacuum of space for a short period of time.

Their helmets are fitted with filtration systems for polluted environments, with hookups for incorporating an external atmospheric tank while operating in space or to filter potent toxins.

The helmets also include built-in communication system and multi-frequency targeting and acquisition system linked to in-lens displays that provide tactical information, protection from excessive brightness, and vision modes for seeing through smoke, fire and darkness.
Based on conceptual drawings by Ralph McQuarrie, Liz Moore and Nick Pemberton sculpted designs for the helmet, Brian Muir sculpted armor pieces for the stormtrooper costume.
Muir, who was also responsible for sculpting the Darth Vader costume, worked out of the Art Department at Elstree Studios.
The suit was molded and initially cast in plaster, with Muir sharpening the detail at the plaster stage.
The plaster casts were then remolded and cast in fiberglass to use as the "tools" for the vacuum forming process.
The suits were produced in house by Tashy Baines, the resident vacuum former, but then a problem developed with the machine.
As Shepperton Design Studios had already been used to vacuum form the helmets, the fiberglass molds for the armor were then sent to them for vacuum forming the suits.
By the end of production, two different helmets were produced; one for the common stunt trooper and a second design for close-ups.
Fifty stunt helmets were produced in white-painted HDPE and six hero helmets were produced in white ABS plastic.
Besides the material used, the two designs can be differentiated by differences in the eyes, the ears, and the mouth area.
The copyright status of the armor design has undergone legal challenges.
A 2004 lawsuit by Lucasfilm against one of the original prop designers, Andrew Ainsworth, who had been selling helmet replicas, confirmed the design to be under copyright in the US.
However, a 2011 UK court decision in Ainsworth's favor deemed the costume to be industrial design, which is protected there only for 15 years.
This puts the armor design in the public domain in the UK, and likely throughout the European Union.
To differentiate the First Order stormtroopers from their earlier Imperial counterparts, the helmet and armor were redesigned for the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens by costume designer Michael Kaplan with input from director J. J. Abrams.
Within the Star Wars setting, this armor is described as being an improvement over the previous iteration, including better joint design for greater flexibility, stronger betaplast armor plating, and upgraded helmet communication and targeting systems.

=== 501st
Legion ===
The 501st Legion Elite Stormtrooper Unit, or "Vader's Fist", is a stormtrooper unit from the Star Wars movies and Star Wars Legends continuity.
Commanded by the ruthlessly cunning General Maximilian Veers and composed of the best trained soldiers in the Star Wars galaxy, the legion earned a fierce reputation for completing missions considered unwinnable or suicidal.
The 501st serves as Darth Vader's personal death squadron, whom he leads in the Jedi extermination.
The 501st spearhead the assault upon the Tantive IV consular ship, and capture Princess Leia.
During the Battle of Hoth, the 501st is instrumental in the destruction of the Rebel Alliance base, and nearly succeeds in capturing the Millennium Falcon.
Most of the background story linked to the 501st comes from Star Wars novels, the games Star Wars: Battlefront II and Star Wars
The Force Unleashed, and the TV show Star Wars:
The Clone Wars.
The elite 501st designation is resurrected by Grand Admiral Thrawn, who in the Thrawn trilogy is charged with the defense of the "Hand of the Empire" imperial remnant forces.
Thrawn's 501st is composed of aliens, humans and Jango Fett clones.

The Legion's name is based on a fan organization of the same name; their inclusion in the official continuity was based on the worldwide organization's dedication to Star Wars fandom.

===
Specialists ===
Within the Star Wars franchise, several types of "military occupation specialist" stormtrooper units are seen.
These include:


====
Imperial variants ====
Sandtroopers are first seen on the desert world of Tatooine during Star Wars (1977).
They are trained to serve in arid environments and their armor is equipped with cooling units, anti-glare lenses, extra rations and water supplies.
Sandtroopers can be distinguished by their colored pauldrons which indicate rank: black for enlisted, white for sergeants, and orange for unit leaders.
Sandtroopers that ride Dewbacks are known as Dewback riders.

Snowtroopers, also known as cold weather assault stormtroopers, are first seen during the battle of Hoth in The Empire Strikes Back (1980).
Their armor is insulated against cold weather and modified with polarized snow goggles, heated breather mask, insulated belt cape and ice boots.
Battery packs can keep their systems powered for up to two weeks, while additional cold-weather gear is carried including grappling hooks, ion flares and homing beacons.

Scout Troopers are first seen on Endor in Return of the Jedi (1983).
They are trained in advanced reconnaissance and with an unusual degree of independence so they can serve as scouts and snipers far from Imperial support.
Their armor is lighter than standard stormtrooper suits, with protection only covering the upper body and head, while their helmets incorporate a boosted communication system and enhanced macrobinocular viewplate for spotting targets at long range.
On Endor, scout troopers piloted swift 74-Z speeder bikes to patrol the area around the Death Star II's shield generator.

Shock Troopers are an upgraded variant of the Clone Shock Troopers, the red-armored clone troopers, who first appeared in Revenge of the Sith (2005).
They patrol government facilities and serve as bodyguards for Emperor Palpatine and those closest to him.

Death Troopers are elite soldiers of Imperial Intelligence which make their first appearance in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016).
Undergoing rigorous training and receiving top-secret augmentations which boost their performance beyond human limitations, death troopers are assigned to defend VIPs such as Director Orson Krennic, Grand Admiral Thrawn and Moff Gideon, and take part in operations involving stealth and espionage.
Their black, classified armor monitors biofeedback implants in their bodies and can stimulate sensory organs for increased performance, features targeting systems far superior to standard stormtrooper versions, and is sprayed with a polymer called "reflec" that warps electromagnetic waves to defeat enemy sensors.
The in-universe origin for their name is that it was specially chosen by Emperor Palpatine to play on rumors of an Imperial project to reanimate dead tissue.
The Star Wars novel Death Troopers, part of the non-canon Legends continuity, revolves around the outbreak of a zombie virus aboard an Imperial Star Destroyer.

Shoretroopers, also known as coastal defender stormtroopers, are introduced in Rogue One, where they are seen patrolling the beaches and bunkers of Scarif.
They are described as uncommon stormtrooper specialists trained for combat in coastal environments on tropical worlds.
Their armor is flexible and lightweight, designed to withstand corrosive aquatic environments and repel excess moisture, and can be modified to operate underwater.
Shoretroopers are generally of sergeant rank or higher and command squads of other stormtroopers during instances of seaside combat.
Shoretroopers returned in "Chapter 15:
The Believer" of The Mandalorian, in which they serve in an Imperial remnant stationed at a mining facility on Morak.

Combat assault tank pilots and commanders, also known as tank troopers, operate the Empire's arsenal of armored repulsorlift vehicles, from troop transports to heavily armored hovertanks.
Combat drivers are lightly armored, relying instead on the thick skin of their vehicles to protect them in battle.
The commander stays in contact with his crew and with headquarters to keep updated on changing combat conditions.
This type of troopers were introduced in the 2016 Han Solo comic book series, and made their on-screen debut in Rogue One.

Patrol Troopers are enforcement-based stormtroopers, commonly found in large cities with particular strategic importance where they take the place of local security forces.
The urban counterpart to scout troopers, they ride speeder bikes much like them.
Patrol troopers are first seen in Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018), where one such trooper briefly pursues Han Solo and Qi'ra on Corellia.

Swamp Troopers, also known informally as mudtroopers, are Imperial Army troopers assigned to fight on swampy, war-torn worlds.

Army troopers are regular infantry who fight alongside stormtroopers; many were members of planetary forces before being conscripted into Imperial service.

Mudtroopers wear water-resistant clothing, partial armor with respirator masks and polarized goggles.

Swamp troopers are first seen on the planet Mimban in Solo, with Han Solo having been one such trooper during his service for the Empire.

Wet-weather gear stormtroopers, also known as Mimban stormtroopers (for those stationed on Mimban), are trained to serve in swampy environments.
Their armor is that of a standard stormtrooper, but heavily customized to allow for optimal operation in the areas where they are dispatched.
They can be distinguished by their grey, muddy armor and waterproof capes.
This type of stormtroopers are featured in Solo.

Range Troopers are first seen on Vandor in Solo.
Considered to be one of the toughest branches of the Imperial Army, this type of troopers are selected from the ranks of the most skilled Imperial soldiers and usually assigned to protect valuable cargo, but sometimes can also be deployed to combat zones.
Range troopers are outfitted with snowtrooper-like armor, including heavy fur-lined armor for protection against cold environments, and magnetic boots.
In Solo, a group of range troopers guard a cargo train transporting coaxium which is raided by Tobias Beckett, Han Solo and Chewbacca.

Jumptroopers, also known as rocket troopers, are outfitted with jetpacks.
They are trained to act in unison, often swarming and overwhelming their targets.
There are multiple variants of jumptroopers, such as the Arctic Jumptrooper, deployed in cold environments, the Desert Jumptrooper, deployed in arid environments, and the Forest Jumptrooper, deployed in forested areas.
Jumptroopers are featured in various Star Wars media, both Legends and canon, with varying designs.

Dark Troopers have made various appearances in Star Wars Legends material, often with varying designs.
They are commonly depicted as dark-armored cybernetically enhanced humans, or in some variations droids, and are used in small numbers by the Empire.
Dark Troopers were reintroduced in the current Star Wars canon through the mobile game
Star Wars: Commander (2015), and made their live-action debut in the second season of The Mandalorian (2020).

Shadow Troopers, also known as black hole troopers, are elite special-ops troopers featured mostly in Star Wars Legends material.
Assigned to the Empire's mysterious Shadow Guard, one of their most prominent appearances is in the video game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, where they have shiny, reflective black armor that allows them to become invisible.
Shadow Troopers returned in Star Wars Battlefront, which reintroduced them in the Star Wars canon.

Purge Troopers are a specialized class of stormtroopers trained and equipped to assist Darth Vader and his Imperial Inquisitors in hunting down surviving Jedi and other Force-sensitive beings who threaten the Empire.
Many Purge Troopers are former clone troopers.
They appear in the comic series Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith (2018) and the video game
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order (2019).

Lava Troopers are an elite class of stormtroopers stationed at Fortress Vader on Mustafar.
They are outfitted with heat-resistant black armor.
Lava Troopers are featured in the comic book series Tales from Vader's Castle.

Forest Troopers are trained to serve in forested environments.
They are distinguished by their camouflaged armor.
Forest Troopers are featured in the novel Aftermath:
Life Debt.

Seatroopers specialize in underwater operations.
They are outfitted with breathing tubes attached to a scuba backpack and underwater propulsion jets.
Seatroopers were originally introduced in Star Wars Legends in Marvel Comics' Star Wars comic book series, before being later reintroduced in the current Star Wars canon.

Spacetroopers are stormtroopers trained to operate in Zero-G environments.
They resemble the standard stormtroopers, but are outfitted with a rebreather pack to survive the harsh conditions of space.
Two spacetroopers can be seen outside the Death Star in Star Wars (1977).
They have since made appearances in a few other pieces of Star Wars media.
In Star Wars Legends material, a different variation of spacetroopers with a bulkier appearance, called Zero-G assault stormtroopers, are featured.

Flametroopers specialize in the use of flamethrowers.
They have appeared in various Star Wars media, with varying designs.

Incinerator Troopers are outfitted with flamethrowers and heat-resistant armor.
They are distinguished by their red pauldrons and the red markings on their armor.
They are likely an improved variant of the flametroopers.
An Incinerator trooper is seen in the season one finale of The Mandalorian (2019).

Mortar Stormtroopers are outfitted with mortars and heavy armor.
They are distinguished by their yellow pauldrons and the yellow markings on their armor, similar to the markings of the Incinerator Troopers.
A Mortar Stormtrooper is seen in "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy" of The Mandalorian.

Special Commando Advanced Recon Troopers, or SCAR troopers, are an elite class of stormtroopers in the Imperial Special Forces division.
Most of these stormtroopers are unique in terms of armor design, equipment, and specialization, and are deployed in small groups by the Empire, to complete tasks that require their talents.
One notable SCAR trooper squad is Task Force 99, featured in the 2016 Star Wars comic book series.

Storm Commandos, also known as shadow scouts, are elite stormtroopers, trained to perform tasks that regular trooper are incapable of accomplishing.
They operate in small groups and are outfitted with silver scout trooper armor to make them less visible for the enemy.
Storm commandos are featured in various Star Wars Legends material, and were reintroduced in the current Star Wars canon through the mobile game
Star Wars: Galactic Defense.

Heavy Troopers are an elite class of stormtroopers that specialize in melee combat.
They are outfitted with electrostaffs and special combat armor.
Heavy Troopers are featured in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, and were reintroduced in the current Star Wars canon through Star Wars: Galactic Defense.

Riot control stormtroopers specialize in melee combat.
They are outfitted with batons and sometimes a shield.
Most riot control stormtroopers are used as a security force tasked with the dispersion and arrest of insurgents taking part in disruptive activities.
A different variation appears in the Legends game
Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II, where they are outfitted with electrostaffs and sport unique armor rather than standard stormtrooper armor.

Rocket stormtroopers are stormtroopers outfitted with rocket launchers.
They are usually tasked with destroying armored vehicles or buildings.
Rocket stormtroopers have appeared in several Star Wars games.

Demolition Troopers are stormtroopers that specialize in the use of explosive weapons, such as smart rockets.
They are featured in the video games
Star Wars: Battlefront (2015) and Star Wars: Battlefront II (2017).

Heavy Weapons Stormtroopers, also known as heavy assault stormtroopers, heavy troopers, or heavy gunners, are stormtroopers that specialize in the use of large rapid-fire blasters.
Heavy troopers have appeared in various Star Wars media, with varying designs.

Stormtrooper snipers are outfitted with sniper rifles.
They can be distinguished by their visor and blue pauldron.
A variant of the stormtrooper sniper, known as Imperial sharpshooters, appear in Star Wars: Commander; this type of sharpshooters are drawn from the ranks of elite scout troopers and outfitted with E-11s sniper rifles and a grey variant of the scout trooper armor.

Magma Troopers are stormtroopers used by the Empire to crush revolts on volcanic mining worlds, such as Sullust and Mustafar.
They are outfitted with heat-resistant armor and a respirator connected to a backpack via a tube to protect them from volcanic ash and gasses.
They can be distinguished by their black pauldrons (colored for the officers) and extra armor on their legs.
Magma troopers first appeared in Star Wars: Battlefront (2015).

====
First Order variants ====
Flametroopers are first seen during the attack on the Tuanul village on Jakku in The Force Awakens (2015).
Often deployed alongside standard First Order infantry, these specialized units flush out entrenched enemies with roaring sheets of flame from their flamethrowers.
They wear backpack-style propellant tanks, special helmets with slit-like lenses that reduce glare, and temperature-control body gloves beneath their armor.

Megablaster heavy assault troopers, more commonly known as heavy troopers, are introduced in The Force Awakens.
They carry large FWMB-10 repeating blasters and web gear loaded with extra ammunition.

Riot Control Troopers are first seen during the battle of Takodana in The Force Awakens.
While they resemble the standard First Order stormtroopers, these specialized units excel in riot control and are outfitted with non-lethal betaplast shields and Z6 batons.
One such trooper, FN-2199, calls Finn a traitor and fights him with a baton in the aforementioned battle before being killed by Han Solo.

Snowtroopers are first seen on Starkiller Base in The Force Awakens.
They wear specialized armor and gear that let them operate effectively in icy conditions.
Snowtroopers carry a backpack-style personal environment unit and wear insulated helmets with glare-reducing slit lenses, gloves, a kama, and a heat-resistant body glove beneath an oversuit of wind-resistant fabric.
Snowtrooper teams scouted the planet that once housed Starkiller Base, eliminating native life forms that posed a potential threat.

Executioner Troopers, introduced in The Last Jedi (2017), are a branch of military police specialists specifically founded to dispense final justice toward stormtroopers who are found guilty of treason.
They are outfitted with BL-155 Laser axes used for execution and are distinguished by the black markings on their armor.
In The Last Jedi, a pair of executioner troopers attempt to execute Finn and Rose Tico.

Jet Troopers are first seen on Pasaana in The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
They are equipped with agile rocket packs that they use to soar into battle.
Jet troopers specialize in aerial and space operations.

Treadspeeder drivers are seen on Pasaana in The Rise of Skywalker.
Reminiscent of the Imperial scout troopers, they are outfitted with lighter armor and specialize in riding speeder bikes; in this case, the 125-Z treadspeeder bike, from which they take their name.

Electropod troopers are featured in The Rise of Skywalker.
They are outfitted with electrical staffs called "electropods", but are otherwise identical to the standard First Order stormtroopers.

Raiders, featured in Star Wars Resistance, are an elite variant of First Order stormtroopers that specialize in hunting, especially relic hunting.
They are mainly used by Supreme Leader Kylo Ren in his search for Sith relics.

SCUBA troopers, featured in Star Wars Resistance, specialize in underwater operations.
They are outfitted with underwater blasters, flippers, and a breathing apparatus.

Tech stormtroopers, featured in Star Wars Resistance, specialize in extracting, decrypting, and analyzing data from droid memory cores or other sources.

====
Sith Eternal variants ====
Sith Troopers are introduced in The Rise of Skywalker.
Loyal only to the Sith Eternal, the resurrected Emperor Palpatine's secret Sith cult, these elite stormtroopers make up most of the Sith Eternal's military.
As the next evolution of stormtroopers, Sith Troopers were raised by the Sith Eternal on Exegol to be the perfect soldiers, and outfitted with highly impact-resistant armor and better equipment than the First Order stormtroopers.
They are distinguished by their bright red armor, which feature a slightly more textured pattern, although the overall design is reminiscent of past clone troopers.
Sith Troopers draw their power and inspiration from the ancient Sith Order, with their armor's color meant to be reminiscent of the Sith's red lightsaber and strike fear into the hearts of their enemies.

Sith Trooper Officers are trained to command squads of Sith Troopers.
Their armor is outfitted with advanced sensor technology.

Sith Jet Troopers are outfitted with jet packs.
They closely resemble the First Order jet troopers, but are outfitted with red armor like the standard Sith Troopers.

Sovereign Protectors serve as the resurrected Emperor Palpatine's elite bodyguards on Exegol.
Outfitted with red armor and full-body capes, they are reminiscent of the old Emperor's Royal Guard, but carry two-pronged blaster rifles instead of force pikes.
Within Star Wars Legends material, Sovereign Protectors are the most elite variant of Imperial Guards.

==
Cultural impact ==
Stormtroopers have become cultural icons, and a widely recognized element of the Star Wars franchise.
In 2015, an Imperial stormtrooper helmet from The Empire Strikes Back that was expected to sell at auction for $92,000 sold for $120,000.
In 2019, a team of biologists named a new genus of Colombian spiders, Stormtropis, after the stormtroopers, noting the spiders, like the fictional soldiers, are "very similar to each other, with some capacity for camouflage but with unskillful movements".

== See also ==
501st
Legion
Clone trooper
Emperor's Royal Guard


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Stormtroopers in the StarWars.com Databank
Stormtrooper on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Stormtrooper (First Order) on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
How Stormtroopers Changed In Star Wars 7, And Why It Matters
In Scottish folklore, the Beast of Buchan is a big cat or phantom cat reportedly sighted mainly in the historic Buchan area of Aberdeenshire in northeastern Scotland.
Sightings throughout other areas of Scotland, stretching from the northern highlands down to the border with England, have also been claimed; the earliest claims date back to the 1930s.

==
Background ==
Sightings of the Buchan beast have been recorded since the 1930s; preliminary reports of big cats throughout Britain, however date to much earlier times.
Writing in his book Rural Rides, the author William Cobbett described seeing a cat similar in size to a medium-sized spaniel when he was a child in Surrey during the 1760s; he identified it as being the same type of animal as a lynx he saw years later in America.
The keeping of exotic pets on large British country estates was not unheard of by the middle of the 18th century and circuses began travelling with menageries.
In 1868 five leopards escaped from their cages while being transported between Lockerbie and Moffat but were all re-captured.
The UK has two native species of cat that live in the wild, domestic feral cats and wildcats.
Throughout the UK reports of large cats became widespread; in 2006 a survey indicated there were 6,000 sightings of exotic cats in the preceding five years while an article in The Guardian speculated there could be up to 7,000 sightings annually.
Author and environmentalist George Monbiot, however quotes a lower figure giving an estimated number of 2,000 sightings a year.
The use of alliteration particularly appeals to the media and it was in the 1980s the animals began to be generally referred to as the "Beasts of ...".
During the first six years of the 21st century fifty sightings were reported including areas stretching from Ardersier in the north through to Inverurie and Fraserburgh occasionally as far south as the English border, although the highest concentration is in rural areas of Aberdeenshire.
In the period from May 2000 until January 2002, twenty-two sightings were reported to Grampian Police but the force believed it likely 80 percent of sightings were never reported.
Alex Salmond raised concerns about attacks on farm livestock by the Beast in the House of Commons in 1997; at the time he was the Member of parliament for the Banff and Buchan constituency.
The matter was raised again in 2002 when Ross Finnie, at that time Minister for the Environment and Rural Development, was asked by Richard Lochhead, the Scottish National Party member of parliament for northeast Scotland, to instigate a formal enquiry concerning the reports.

== Claims of sightings ==
A Cruden Bay farmer found the carcass of one of his sheep spread across a field in 2006; he was sure it was not savaged by a dog and stated that workers had recently seen a "huge, slinky cat skulking around".
Two years later, in October 2008, a cat resembling a leopard was allegedly seen by a woman in the same area.
A large catlike creature was blamed for the slaughter of sheep during 1998 around Inverness.
The Formartine and Buchan Way follows the 53-mile (85 km) route of the former railway lines in Buchan; converted into a pathway and cycle lane at the beginning of the 1990s, it is attractive to wildlife and the animal frequents it.
The creature was seen by a resident of Old Deer on two occasions on it in August 2011 just a few days apart.
He described the animal as being timid yet not scared, larger than his own average-sized Labrador, solid black in colour with a bushy head and tail.
According to a Scotland on Sunday newspaper reporter writing in 2006, the size of the beast varies from being like an Alsatian or Greyhound.
Reports of humans being attacked by the Beast are rare; in 2002, however, a woman was leaving a stable near Insch when the creature bit and clawed her leg before being chased away.
She sustained bruising and puncture marks to her upper thigh.
Her friend who witnessed the attack described a cat-like Labrador sized "sleek black beastie".

==
Likely explanations ==
In Scotland the hounds are known as Cù Sìth, although the colour is generally a dark shade of green The feline folklore equivalent, the Cat Sìth, may have been inspired by sightings of Kellas cats – a felid hybrid of domestic cats and wildcats – specimens of which have been discovered in  Buchan.
The Zoology Museum at the University of Aberdeen holds a mounted specimen of a Kellas.
In April 2002, the headless carcass of a larger than average feline was found at a Boddam roadside.
Discovered by a local farmer who described it as being the size of a medium dog or fox, it was some three feet (0.91 m) in length; a member of the Scottish Big Cat Society felt it was too big to be a Kellas whereas an expert from the University Zoology Department considered it likely to be a large cat or a fairly common hybrid.
A Kellas cat was unlikely to be big enough to kill fully grown sheep and  the farmer considered it doubtful that the animal whose carcass he discovered would be able to do so either.
The woman attacked near Insch in 2002 was familiar with Kellas cats and was adamant the animal that attacked her was not a Kellas.
Sightings of the creatures from just after the Second World War may have occurred after pumas owned by USAAF personnel were set free if the pilots did not return; they had kept the animals as mascots when based in Scotland.
The Dangerous Wild Animals Act passed into law in 1976, and some reports may be sightings of pumas or jaguars released from captivity after owners felt unable to meet the licensing conditions introduced by the new legislation.
Attacks on poultry labelled as being caused by the beast in 2009 were attributed to foxes but later a "particularly ferocious wildcat" was caught after an incident when a pet German Shepherd was attacked.
The wildcat was examined by a local wildlife veterinary surgeon who later set it free at an unknown location.
Writing in The Folklore Society journal Folklore in 1992 the folklorist Michael Goss suggests that while some sightings may be authentic, the majority are a type of contemporary legend.

==
References ==


===
Notes ===


===
Citations ===
===
Bibliography ===
Supreme Leader Snoke is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He was created by J. J. Abrams, Lawrence Kasdan, and Michael Arndt for the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, in which he is introduced as the Supreme Leader of the First Order, a rogue military junta formed from the fallen Galactic Empire.
In the films, Snoke is a CGI character voiced and performed by Andy Serkis via motion capture.

The character appears as a main villain in the first two films of the sequel trilogy—
The Force Awakens (2015) and
The Last Jedi (2017)—and is referenced in The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
The Star Wars universe establishes Snoke as a Force-sensitive artificial being who was created by Emperor Palpatine to reclaim control of the galaxy.
As Palpatine's puppet ruler, Snoke seduces Luke Skywalker's nephew, Ben Solo, to serve the First Order as Kylo Ren.
Aside from the films, Snoke appears in related Star Wars media.

==
Character ==


===
Development ===
Snoke's appearance changed throughout principal photography and post-production of The Force Awakens.
Andy Serkis said, "It's the first time I've been on set
not yet knowing what the character's gonna look like.
I mean, talk about secrecy!"
According to the actor, the character's appearance, voice, and movements evolved as he and the film's writer/director J. J. Abrams challenged the visual effects team.
According to The Force Awakens senior sculptor Ivan Manzella, "Snoke almost became a female at one point.
J. J. picked out a maquette he liked and then we took it to a full-size version, sculpted in plasteline.
J. J. and [creature creative supervisor Neal Scanlan] didn't want him to be old and decrepit, like [Emperor Palpatine].
"

===
Portrayal ===
While Serkis secretly joined the project in February 2014, his casting in The Force Awakens was first announced on April 29, 2014.
When asked about his role in July 2014, he joked, "I'm not Yoda."
In May 2015, a StarWars.com interview with photographer Annie Leibovitz about her
The Force Awakens shoot for Vanity Fair
revealed that Serkis would be playing a CGI character named Supreme Leader Snoke, and featured an image of the actor in motion capture gear.
Serkis had previously played several CGI characters using motion capture technology, including Gollum in The Lord of the Rings film series (2001–2003), the titular ape in 2005's King Kong, and Caesar in the Planet of the Apes reboot series.
In November 2015, Serkis said of the process of creating Snoke:

When we first started working on it, [Abrams] had some rough notions of how Snoke was gonna look, but it really hadn't been fully-formed and it almost came out of discussion and performance ...
We shot on set of course, and I was in the scenes I have with other actors, but the beauty of this process is you can go back and reiterate, keep informing and honing beats and moments.
So J.J., after we shot last year, we've had a series of sessions where I'd be in London at The Imaginarium, my studio, while he’s been directing from L.A., and we've literally been creating further additions and iterations to the character.
That's been fascinating.
And in the meantime I've been able to see the look and design of the character grow and change as the performances change.
So it's been really exciting in that respect.

According to Serkis' costar Lupita Nyong'o, who played the CGI character Maz Kanata in The Force Awakens, the actor coached her on performance-capture work, telling Nyong'o that "a motion-capture character you develop the same way as any other.
You have to understand who the character is and what makes them who they are."
Serkis said of filming:

It was quite an unusual situation.
I worked specifically with Domhnall Gleeson and with Adam Driver.
My first day was basically standing on a 25-foot podium doing Lord Snoke without the faintest idea what he looked like ... or in fact who he was!
I was very high up, totally on my own, away from everybody else, but acting with them ...
we used sort of a "Kongolizer" method of having sound come out of speakers to give a sense of scale and distance for the character.
So it was very challenging and scary, in fact probably one of my most scary film experiences I’ve ever had.

Costume designer Michael Kaplan had the idea to give Snoke gold robes to contrast from his red and black throne room in The Last Jedi.
Director Rian Johnson said the red motif was intended to evoke curtains in a nod to The Wizard of Oz, in which the titular character hides behind a curtain.
The throne room was designed to look theatrical as opposed to Palpatine's, which was more utilitarian.
The conceptual designers of the set were inspired by unused concept art for Return of the Jedi depicting the Emperor's lava-based lair under the surface of Coruscant.
According to The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary (2017), the gold ring Snoke wears is set with obsidian from Darth Vader's castle on Mustafar.
The glyphs it is set with are a reference to four philosophers Palpatine had statues of in his office, first seen in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones.
Additionally, Palpatine's theme can be heard during the scene in which Snoke tortures Rey.
===
Description ===
In the context of the story, Snoke is a "genetic strandcast" created by Emperor Palpatine to serve as his proxy in power.
Snoke, whom Abrams called "a powerful figure on the dark side of the Force", was introduced as the leader of the First Order and master to the sequel trilogy's primary villain, Kylo Ren.
Serkis described Snoke as "quite an enigmatic character, and strangely vulnerable at the same time as being quite powerful.
Obviously he has a huge agenda.
He has suffered a lot of damage."
Serkis called Snoke "a new character in this universe", adding "I think it'd be fair to say that he is aware of the past to a great degree.
"Explaining
why CGI was the only way to create Snoke's unique appearance, Serkis said before the film's premiere, "The scale of him, for instance, is one reason.
He is large.
He appears tall.
And also just the facial design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics ...
he has a very distinctive, idiosyncratic bone and facial structure.
"
Chief of creature and droid effects Neal Scanlan said, "This character is much better executed as a CGI character.
That's just a practical reality when he's 7-foot-something tall; he's very, very thin.
"
Snoke's "scarred, cavernous face" was not revealed before the release of the film, in which he appears as a "massive, ominous hologram".
The character's deep voice was first heard in the teaser trailer released on November 28, 2014.Robbie Collin of The Telegraph described the disfigured and skeletal Snoke as a "sepulchral horror", Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times called him "hissing and grotesque", and Andrew O'Hehir of Salon dubbed the character "a spectral demonic figure".
Variety's Justin Chang wrote that Snoke resembled "a plus-sized, more articulate Gollum", and Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly described him as "essentially Emperor Palpatine crossed with one of the aliens from Close Encounters."
Stephanie Zacharek of Time called the character "a giant, scary, noseless dude who sits placidly in an oversized chair like a dark-lord version of the Lincoln Monument.
"There were multiple fan theories regarding the origins and identity of Snoke prior to the 2019 film The Rise of Skywalker.
Such theories included that he was Darth Plagueis, a Sith Lord anecdotally mentioned in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and the mentor of Palpatine, allegedly possessing the power to prevent death; Palpatine himself, "the Operator" Gallius Rax, a mysterious First Order manipulator from Chuck Wendig's Aftermath novel trilogy; or Ezra Bridger, a main character from the animated series Star Wars Rebels.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
In his first appearance in the film, Snoke is introduced as Supreme Leader of the First Order, and master to Kylo Ren (Adam Driver).
Seduced to the dark side by Snoke, the masked Kylo is really Ben Solo, the son of Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher).
Snoke senses an "awakening" in the Force, and warns Ren that the limits of his power will be tested when he faces his father in pursuit of the wayward droid BB-8, which carries a map to the missing Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill).
Later, Snoke orders General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson) to destroy the New Republic with the Starkiller superweapon.
He then orders Ren to bring Rey (Daisy Ridley) to him after she refuses to disclose the map to Luke.
After Ren is defeated in a lightsaber duel with Rey, Snoke orders Hux to bring Ren to him to complete his training.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Following the events of The Force Awakens, Snoke leads the First Order forces as they pursue the outnumbered Resistance.
He reprimands Hux for his failings as a military leader, and Kylo Ren for his failure to defeat Rey and find Luke Skywalker.
Towards the end of the film, Ren brings Rey to Snoke, who tortures her for information on Luke's location.
Snoke reveals that he created a psychic bond between Ren and Rey as part of a plan to destroy Luke.
He then orders Ren to kill Rey.
Ren, however, kills Snoke by using the Force to cut him in half with a lightsaber.
Ren then declares himself the new Supreme Leader of the First Order, pinning Snoke's death on Rey.
====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
In The Rise of Skywalker, Kylo Ren finds several clones resembling Snoke at Palpatine's (Ian McDiarmid) lair on the Sith world Exegol.
Snoke's voice is briefly used by Palpatine when talking to Ren.
It is revealed that Palpatine had created Snoke as a puppet to lure Ren towards the dark side, and to reclaim the galaxy through the First Order.

===
Related works ===
Snoke appears in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
In the novel, Leia tells Han in more detail how Snoke, aware that their son would be "strong with the Force" and possess "equal potential for good or evil", had long watched Ben and manipulated events to draw him to the dark side.
An unplayable Lego minifigure version of Snoke appears in cutscenes in the 2016 video game Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In the spring of 2018, Snoke was added to the mobile MOBA Star Wars: Force Arena as a playable Dark Side squad leader.
Prior to the release of The Rise of Skywalker, the 2019 comic book Star Wars: Age of Resistance – Supreme Leader Snoke implied a direct connection between Snoke and Palpatine.
In the book, Snoke speaks of Luke Skywalker to Kylo Ren, stating, "If I had your uncle by my side instead of you, the galaxy would have been mine a long time ago".
Canon works reveal that Snoke acquired Palpatine's Senate office.
According to The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary (2019), Snoke's physical appearance was purposefully designed by Palpatine to ensure his species remained unidentifiable.
Furthermore, Snoke's reluctance to meet in person with his First Order underlings helped conceal the fact that he was an artificial being.
General Pryde (Richard E. Grant), a supporting villain in The Rise of Skywalker, was one of the few characters who knew Snoke was subservient to a higher power (Palpatine).
The Star Wars Book (released in 2020 and co-authored by Lucasfilm creative Pablo Hidalgo) suggested Snoke may not be aware of his origins.

== Reception ==
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, "Supreme Leader Snoke is a larger-than-life, vaguely Harry Potter-ish hologram voiced with deep gravity by Andy Serkis; the full weight of this character's malignancy and dramatic power will presumably be better assessed in subsequent episodes."
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times called Serkis "the undisputed champion of the performance-capture roles".
Though praising the "unobtrusive sophistication" of the visual effects used to portray the character, Variety's Justin Chang said that Serkis is "fine but not galvanizing" in the role.
Lindsay Bahr of the Associated Press deemed Snoke one of the "less memorable" characters in The Force Awakens.
In 2016, Serkis was nominated for an MTV Movie Award for Best Virtual Performance for the role.
Some viewers felt that Snoke's character arc was underdeveloped.
Various fan theories about his origins were held so strongly among some viewers that it was difficult for them to accept his demise in The Last Jedi.
Serkis addressed the criticisms by saying producers wanted the character "to have a great deal of mystery", but that he "has been asked to not shed anything
should they want to bring him back in any way, whether prequel or whatever".
Forbes criticized The Force Awakens for not developing Snoke as a character, or exploring his backstory and inexplicable rise to power after the events of the original trilogy, calling the character "a bandage poorly placed over a gaping plot-hole".
Serkis acknowledged that some fans found the lack of backstory "incredibly frustrating", but suggested this as an opportunity to layer Snoke in a future story.
Despite the criticisms towards the writing, Forbes praised Serkis' performance in both films, and was much more positive towards his appearance in The Last Jedi, highlighting his death and his relationship with his apprentice, Kylo Ren.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Supreme Leader Snoke in the StarWars.com Databank
Snoke on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Matthew Russell Wood (born August 15, 1972) is an American sound editor and voice actor.
For the last 28 years, he has worked on numerous film projects, his work being credited as sound editing and sound design.
He has been an innovative force within the industry, pioneering new technologies for motion pictures.
He is a supervising sound editor at Skywalker Sound in Marin County, California.
He also voices General Grievous in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith
, Star Wars:
The Clone Wars and various video games.

==
Career ==
Starting at Lucasfilm as a game tester at LucasArts, Wood then moved to the company's sound department and worked on all three films of the Star Wars prequel trilogy as supervising sound editor and also did an uncredited acting role in The Phantom Menace as Bib Fortuna and the voice of Ody Mandrell.
In Attack of the Clones, he played Seboca and Magaloof.
In Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, in addition to a brief appearance as Orn Free Taa, Wood plays the voice role of General Grievous, a role originated by voice actors John DiMaggio and Richard McGonagle in the series
Star Wars:
Clone Wars.
In the film, he dubbed the voice of stuntman Kyle Rowling, who played General Grievous utilizing motion capture.

He would later come back to work with the Star Wars
expanded universe.
He reprised his voice role of General Grievous in General Grievous Halloween audiocast as well as all video game appearances of Grievous with the exception of Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron where Grievous was played by David W. Collins.
He reprised his role as General Grievous and the battle droids in the Star Wars: The Clone Wars film and associated television series.
In the series, he once again voiced Grievous as well as Wat Tambor, HELIOS-3D, senate guards, the battle droids and Poggle the Lesser.
He provided the voice of RO-GR/Roger, a reprogrammed battle droid in Lego Star Wars: The Freemaker Adventures.

He has received five Academy Award nominations for Sound Editing: for Paul Thomas Anderson
’s
There Will Be Blood at the 80th Academy Awards, for the Pixar sci-fi film WALL-E at the 81st Academy Awards, for Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at the 88th Academy Awards, for Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at the 90th Academy Awards, and for Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at the 92nd Academy Awards.

Wood made an appearance in Adult Swim's Robot Chicken in 2008.

==
Filmography ==


===
Sound editing ===
===
Voice acting ===


====
Film ====


====
Television ====


====
Video games ====


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Matthew Wood - Skywalker Sound
Matthew Wood at IMDb
Alexandra Petri (, born March 15, 1988) is an American humorist and newspaper columnist.

In 2010, she became the youngest person to have a column in The Washington Post.
Petri runs the ComPost blog on the paper's website, on which she formerly worked with Dana Milbank.
In 2017, a piece of satire she wrote about president Donald Trump was miscategorized as news and included in one of the White House's daily press briefings.
She was recognized in the Forbes 30 Under 30 in 2018.

==
Biography ==


===
Early life and education ==
=
Petri grew up in Georgetown, Washington, D.C., the only child of Wisconsin congressman Tom Petri  and nonprofit executive Anne D. Neal, and attended the National Cathedral School.
In high school she wrote plays for a competition at Arena Stage; three of hers were chosen for performance.
She would also perform standup comedy.
She graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Harvard University with a degree in English, concentrating in classics, in 2010; while there she joined the Harvard Stand Up Comedy Society, worked with the Hasty Pudding Club, and wrote for the Internet comedy series On Harvard Time and for the Harvard Crimson.
Her college roommate was Megan Amram.
She was a summer intern at The Washington Post prior to receiving a job with the paper.
She is also a member of a playwrights' collective in Washington, D.C., called The Welders.

=== Career ===
Her book of essays A Field Guide to Awkward Silences was published in 2015.
She has appeared on Jeopardy!,
won prizes in the O. Henry Pun-Off, and performed at an international whistling competition.
Her play The Campsite Rule, a sex comedy whose title is derived from an idea taken from Dan Savage, was premiered at the Capital Fringe Festival in 2013.In December 2015
, Petri created the parody Twitter account "Emo Kylo Ren", which envisioned the Star Wars:
The Force Awakens character Kylo Ren as an angsty teenager obsessed with Darth Vader.
The account went viral after being retweeted by Hot Topic and receiving attention from media outlets such as USA Today and People Magazine, soon gaining more followers than Hot Topic.
During the 8th Shorty Awards in 2016, the account won the award for best parody account.
Petri revealed that she created this parody account in an interview with Syfy published on January 25, 2018.Of her writing, Petri has said, "My goal is to be weirder than everybody else and hope that no one stops me.
So far no one has.
"
Writers and comedians she has listed as influences include James Thurber, Dave Barry, Mitch Hedberg, Mark Twain, Oscar Wilde, and William Shakespeare.
She made her comic book debut by writing the one-shot She-Hulk Annual #1, released on August 28, 2019.

==
Personal life ==
In June 2018, Petri married Stephen Stromberg, an editorial writer at the Washington Post.

== Works ==
A field guide to awkward silences,  New York New American Library, 2016.
ISBN 9780451469618
Nothing is wrong and here is why : essays,  New York : W. W. Norton & Company, 2020.
ISBN 9781324006459


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Alexandra Petri's page on The Washington Post
Emo Kylo Ren parody Twitter account
The  First Galactic Empire is a fictional autocracy featured in the Star Wars franchise.
It was first introduced in the 1977 film Star Wars and appears in its two sequels:
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
It is the main antagonistic faction of the original trilogy.
The government collapses a year following the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War in Return of the Jedi, and the First Order is formed by Imperial remnants.
An oppressive, autocratic regime with a complicated bureaucracy, the Galactic Empire seeks to ensure singular rule and social control over every planet and civilization within the galaxy.

At its peak, the Galactic Empire sprawls over much of the known Star Wars galaxy, which consists of millions of star systems and billions more fringe colonies, shipyards, fortress worlds, and outer territories.
The Empire's origins are depicted in the prequel Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), where it replaces the Galactic Republic at the end of the Clone Wars orchestrated by Sheev Palpatine, who was then the Republic's Supreme Chancellor.
Palpatine is also secretly a Dark Lord of the Sith named Darth Sidious, intending to purge the Jedi and restore the Sith Empire to power.

Palpatine falsely accuses the Jedi of causing the Clone Wars, a secessionist war, to weaken the Republic and gain power.
Palpatine manipulates the Galactic Senate into using clone troopers created during the conflict to kill the Jedi.
After engineering these threats himself, Palpatine reorganizes the Republic into a state that could "ensure the security and continuing stability, and [provide] a safe and secure society" – a galactic empire with himself as its Emperor.
The Senate overwhelmingly applauds this decision and lauds Palpatine's apparent resolve, bravery, and selflessness.

Though Palpatine's Sith identity remains a secret to all but a handful of individuals, his apprentice, the Sith Lord Darth Vader maintains a more public presence, acting as a personification of the Empire's power.
By the time of Episode IV – A New Hope, the Empire has transformed into an authoritarian regime, opposed by the Alliance to Restore the Republic.
The completion of the Death Star, a doomsday weapon, allows Palpatine to dissolve the powerless Imperial Senate.
The Galactic Empire is described and portrayed in various Star Wars media as an arrogant and brutal dictatorship, one based on "anthropocentrism, nationalization, state terrorism, xenophobia, enslavement and genocide of non-humans, power projection, threat of lethal force, and, above all else, constant fear".

==
Appearances ==
Star Wars (1977)
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
Return of the Jedi (1983)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005)
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016)
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018)
Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018)
The Mandalorian (2019–present)
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch (2021)


==
Themes ==
Star Wars creator George Lucas sought to make the First Galactic Empire aesthetically and thematically similar to Nazi Germany and to appear to be fascist.
Similar to Nazi Germany, the Galactic Empire is a dictatorship based on rigid control of society that dissolved a previous democracy and is led by an all-powerful supreme ruler.
The Empire, like the Nazis, desires the creation of totalitarian order and utilizes excessive force and violence to achieve their ends.
The name of the Empire's main soldiers, the stormtroopers, is somewhat similar to the name given to Hitler's Sturmabteilung (SA, "storm department") paramilitary bodyguards.
The visual appearance of Darth Vader in his all-black uniform combined with his devout obedience to the Emperor has allusion to the black-uniformed Nazi Schutzstaffel (SS).
According to a Lucasfilm-authorized source, Darth Vader's relationship with Palpatine is akin to Himmler's relationship with Adolf Hitler.
The uniforms of Imperial military officers also bear resemblance to uniforms used in Nazi Germany as well as 19th century Polish ulans (mounted lancers)—who wore a tunic,
riding breeches, and boots like the Empire's officers wear—as well as the Imperial officers' cap resembling the field caps historically worn by German and Austrian troops.
In addition to Nazi Germany, there was also at least one portion of the Galactic Empire that was based on the Soviet Union, which is the various military personnel and TIE Fighters that are flying in formation as Palpatine arrives on the Death Star in Return of the Jedi.
According to Lucas, that the ceremony for the Emperor's arrival was inspired by May Day military parades in the Soviet Union.
Lucas has also indicated that the Galactic Empire's struggle against a smaller guerilla force was inspired by America's involvement in the Vietnam War and his surprise at how few people spoke up against the war.
Palpatine's rise to power, and transforming a democracy into a dictatorship has been related to those of Julius Caesar, Augustus, Napoleon Bonaparte, and Adolf Hitler.
Palpatine's consolidation of power and declaring himself emperor is like the Roman political figure
Octavian (later renamed Augustus), in that Octavian manipulated the Roman Senate as Palpatine did with the Galactic Senate; he legitimized authoritarian rule by saying that corruption in the Senate was hampering the powers of the head of state; he pressured the Roman Senate to give him extraordinary powers as Consul of the Republic to deal with a crisis and he falsely claimed that he would rescind those powers once the crisis was over; and, like the transition of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire, Octavian, like Palpatine, relied on his strong control over military force.

== Depiction ==


===
Origins ===
The Galactic Empire was born out of the collapsing Galactic Republic.
However, its seeds are planted during the Clone Wars, the epic war between the Republic and the separatist Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) depicted in Episode II: Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.
Because of a corrupt senate, and a civil war, Palpatine was easily able to take control over the Republic.

In Episode I: The Phantom Menace, amid a trade dispute and invasion of his home world, Senator Palpatine convinces Queen Padmé Amidala to call for a vote of no confidence in Supreme Chancellor of the Republic Finis Valorum.
Palpatine is elected Supreme Chancellor.
As fighting intensifies in Episode II, the Galactic Senate, the legislature of the Republic, grants Palpatine emergency powers to deal with the crisis.
Palpatine promises to return his powers once peace and order is restored.
His first order is to create a massive army of clone troopers.
He exploits the Clone Wars to amass political power, and, by the time of Episode III, he is effectively a dictator.

The Jedi distrust Palpatine's motives, fearing he has come under the influence of a Dark Lord of the Sith named Darth Sidious.
Their concerns are shared by several senators, who suspect Palpatine may not return his emergency powers.
Among them are two who had long supported Palpatine:
Padmé Amidala and Bail Organa.

The film eventually reveals that Palpatine and Sidious are one and the same, and Palpatine engineered the conflicts as a false flag.

Palpatine reveals himself as a Sith Lord to Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, promising to save Padmé and her unborn child.
Skywalker reports Palpatine's true identity to the Jedi.
However, when Jedi Master Mace Windu confronts Palpatine, Skywalker comes to Palpatine's aid and helps him kill Windu.
Knowing that his involvement in Windu's death will cause him to be expelled from the Jedi Order, Skywalker is left with no choice but to become Palpatine's third apprentice, Darth Vader.
Palpatine declares the Jedi to be traitors and all but exterminates the Jedi Order in a massive galaxy-wide slaughter.
Secure in his power and position, Palpatine reorganizes the Republic into the Galactic Empire, with himself as Emperor for life.
The Senate enthusiastically supports Palpatine, although a few senators, like Padmé and Bail Organa, see through the plot.
Two remaining Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, mount a counterattack.
Obi-Wan defeats Vader and leaves him for dead, but Yoda's duel with Palpatine ends in a stalemate and he is forced to flee for his life; both Jedi are forced to go into exile.
Grievously wounded, Vader is rescued by Palpatine and fitted with cybernetics and a black suit of armor with a life support system.
Padme's children, with their mother dead and their father a Sith Lord, are placed into adoptive families.

===
Government ===
With the end of the Clone Wars, the purge of the Jedi Order and the formation of the First Galactic Empire, Palpatine rules with absolute power as Emperor.
Between the events of Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope, Palpatine rules the galaxy from the confines of his heavily guarded Imperial Palace on Coruscant, once known as the Jedi Temple.

Coruscant was introduced in Timothy Zahn's then-canon novel Heir to the Empire.

Its film debut was in the special edition of Return of the Jedi.

Inspiration for the world-spanning city came from 1940s science fiction works, especially Isaac Asimov's Trantor.

Visually, it resembles the Art Deco skyscrapers of Manhattan.
Star Wars Battlefront II depicts Palpatine as intentionally having no clear line of succession, desiring either immortality or the destruction of the Empire.

Lord Darth Vader is the Emperor's ruthless chief enforcer, greatly feared throughout the galaxy; a command from Vader is to be considered a command from Palpatine.
Darth Vader and the Inquisitors are routinely given control over Imperial assets but lay outside the traditional chain of command; they travel extensively to most of the galactic regions to enforce the Emperor's rule and exterminate nearly every Jedi survivor of the purge.
His personal Imperial armada—the 501st Legion and Death Squadron—participate in the capture of Princess Leia Organa, the Battle of Hoth and the Battle of Endor.

The Senate, now known as the Imperial Senate, nominally continues to exist, though it is virtually powerless.
Palpatine dissolves the Senate (off-camera) in A New Hope after discovering that several members of the Senate are founding members of the Rebellion.
Aside from Palpatine, power resides in the hands of "Administrators" (planetary governors), the "Moffs" (sector governors) and the "Grand Moffs" (oversector governors).
Through this chain of command, Palpatine dictates direct control over all population centers.

Grand Moff is a political title in the hierarchy of the Galactic Empire.
Governor Wilhuff Tarkin suggests the creation of the role and becomes the first ever Grand Moff.

===
Military ===


====
Notable Officers ====
Grand Moff Tarkin- Head of the Death Star construction after Krennic's death, until it was destroyed with him on board.

Grand Admiral Thrawn- Commander of the Seventh Fleet of the Imperial Navy, until being MIA upon his defeat in the liberation of Lothal.

Director Orson
Krennic- One of the directors of the Death Star until Scarif was destroyed by the Empire to kill all the rebels on the planet, with him included.
Krennic was also the Head of Advanced Weapons research.

Grand Vizier Mas Amedda - Vice chair of the Galactic Senate.
He is Grand Vizier and head of the Imperial Ruling Council, and in Aftermath:
Life Debt, is installed by Gallius Rax as the puppet leader of the Empire following Palpatine's death.
Amedda formally surrenders the Empire to the New Republic in Aftermath:
Empire's End.
====
Tarkin Doctrine ====
In Star Wars, the Tarkin Doctrine was the plan presented by Grand Moff Tarkin to Emperor Palpatine in 18 BBY that outlined the Empire's goal and structure:
bringing order to the galaxy and restoring rule of law to sectors overtaken by piracy and organized crime, ending destructive conflicts through grand strategy and military doctrine, a plan for maximizing social control and propaganda, maintaining economic order and increasing security in the Galactic Empire.
Tarkin believed the chief factor that contributed most to the demise of the Republic was not, in fact, the war, but rampant self-interest... and in the end, left the body politic feckless and corrupt.

Consider the self-interest of the Core Worlds, unwavering in their exploitation of the Outer Systems for their resources; the Outer Systems themselves, undermined, by their permissive disregard of smuggling and slavery; those ambitious members of the Senate who sought only status and opportunity.
By partitioning the galaxy into regions, we, The Empire, actually achieve a unity previously absent; where once our loyalties and allegiances were divided, they now serve one being, with one goal: a cohesive galaxy in which everyone prospers.
For the first time in one thousand generations our sector governors will not be working solely to enrich Coruscant and the Core Worlds, but to advance the quality of life in the star systems that make up each sector — keeping the spaceways safe, maintaining open and accessible communications, assuring that tax revenues are properly levied and allocated to improving the infrastructure.

The plan which Palpatine ultimately had implemented in its entirety contained three main principles: territorial consolidation, rapid communication, and coercive diplomacy.
Tarkin's concept was that rule could be established and maintained "through fear of force rather than force itself", and he believed grand display of power—when combined with oppressive means of terrorizing communities—could suppress dissent and rebellion into submission.
This Doctrine became the Empire's core military doctrine of peacekeeping, internal security, counter-insurgency, and state terrorism-philosophy.
The instrument of this power is the military, which includes the Imperial stormtroopers, a massive fleet of 25,000 Star Destroyers, 50 Super Star Destroyers, and the Death Star, a moon-sized superweapon capable of destroying entire planets.
Plans for the Death Star first appear (in universe chronology) in Attack of the Clones and construction
begins at the end of Revenge of the Sith.
Summarized measures set forth by the Tarkin Doctrine:

Establish "Oversectors" which contain tumultuous systems; to monitor and react to rebellious activities within those systems.
Oversectors would be formed without regard for the borders of standard sectors and would receive more forces than other regions of the Empire.
This Imperial presence would be designed to stop small rebel factions before they could become a larger established threat.
An average of three Sector Groups would be deployed in an Oversector.

Assign command of each Oversector to a single individual who reports directly to the Emperor, in order to eliminate any delays created by political opportunism by Imperial advisors.

Improve communication resources and Imperial response time by placing modified HoloNet transceivers (cannibalized from existing HoloNet transceivers) aboard each flagship of every Sector Group within an Oversector command.
Place similar facilities aboard the Emperor's flagship and in Imperial City on Imperial Centre (formally Coruscant).

Control unruly portions of the Galaxy through a fear of force rather than force itself.
Through the combination of superior coordination of multiple Oversector groups and the control of information (news media)
an impression of overwhelming force will be installed within the citizenry, thereby instilling the idea that resistance is futile.

Continue to research and develop new and more powerful starships and weapons designed to inspire fear in the resistant systems.
Present the citizen with a weapon so powerful, so immense as to defy all conceivable attack against it, a weapon invulnerable and invincible in battle, that shall become a symbol for the Empire.
This weapon must possess a power great enough to dispatch an entire system.
Only a handful or one of these weapons would be required to accomplish this task.

====
Imperial Naval Command ====
The Imperial Naval Command (INC), also referred to as the Imperial Starfleet, is the military arm of the Galactic Empire in charge of maintaining security, peace and order in the galaxy.
Commanded by Darth Vader, it absorbed the military forces of the Galactic Republic after Palpatine's declaration of the New Order.
Organization of the Imperial Navy is assigned to the Moffs.

At its peak, the Imperial Navy fields millions of warships, including an estimated 25,000 Star Destroyers, fulfilling the Emperor's will throughout the galaxy.
The Empire's central warship cadre is well structured and uniformed, but the Imperial Navy suffers against strike craft, largely due to the inadequacies of its own starfighters and point defense.
The Empire's focus on size, firepower, and terror comes at the expense of a well-balanced fleet.
After its defeat at the Battle of Endor, the Galactic Empire splits up into warring factions, and the Imperial Starfleet along with it.
While much of the remnants of the Imperial Navy are later reunited under impressive Imperial commanders, the military organization ceases to exist shortly after the death of the Emperor.

Specific responsibilities of the Imperial Navy include defending Imperial citizens from space-based threats (such as pirates, smugglers and rebel contingents), enforcing Imperial will, and overseeing commerce through customs and blockade operations.
The Imperial Navy also performs orbital bombardments and transports major ground force deployments, supporting them with space, orbital, and aerial support.
Imperial Navy officers wear the same standard uniform that their Army counterparts use but is colored grey, and both services use colored chest plaques to denote rank.

====
Imperial Starfighter Corps ====
The Imperial Starfighter Corps (ISC) was the starfighter pilot branch of the Galactic Empire.
Although the Corps was a component of the Navy, most pilots were assigned to ground operations with the Imperial Army.
Some Imperial starfighters include TIE (Twin Ion Engine) fighters, TIE Interceptors, TIE Defenders, TIE Strikers, TIE Silencers (by the First Order), and TIE Bombers.
The corps was scattered after the Battle of Endor (4 ABY).

====
Imperial Stormtrooper Corps ====
Imperial Stormtrooper Corps (ISC) are elite corps of rapid response all-environment shock troops—organized like the Marine Corps with their own separate divisions.
The Stormtroopers operate in conjunction with the Army Ground Troopers and Navy Marine Troopers—who were used as garrison forces—to reinforce and hold defensive positions until the regular military arrived.
When not in their signature white armor, Stormtrooper officers wear black uniforms.

===
Galactic Civil War ===
With the formation of the Empire and the purge of the Jedi now complete, martial law is immediately declared throughout the galaxy.
Those in hiding, or attempting to either flee from or oppose the New Imperial Order, are subject to persecution or death.
This is the start of the bloody decades-long Galactic Civil War fought between the Empire and the Rebel Alliance.

While Force-sensitive kyber crystals are sacred to the Jedi and are at the core of every lightsaber, the Empire explores ways to weaponize them.
They mine for kyber crystals across worlds and are thwarted twice in securing massive crystals by the Ghost crew and
Saw Gerrera.
But on Jedha they uncovered a surplus of kyber, which would be enough to power their dreaded Death Star.

The Death Star, a moon-sized battle station with sufficient firepower to destroy an entire planet, is designed to be the supreme weapon of the Empire's power.
Grand Moff Tarkin, the station's commander, shortly after informing the heads of the Imperial Military that Palpatine has dissolved the Senate, demonstrates that power in A New Hope, when he destroys Alderaan as a show of force.
In the film's climactic scene, however, the station is assaulted by a small force of Rebel starfighters who have come into possession of the station's blueprints.
The battle ends with the Death Star's destruction at the hands of Luke Skywalker, which is the Rebel Alliance's first major success against the Empire.
After three more years of conflict, the Alliance achieves a decisive victory over the Empire in Return of the Jedi.
In the film's climactic battle, the Rebellion destroys the second Death Star and a number of capital ships that contain a great portion of the Imperial Navy's highest-ranking officers.
During this battle, Vader redeems himself by killing Palpatine in order to save his son Luke Skywalker, but in this act of self-sacrifice he is himself mortally wounded in the process.
In the aftermath of Endor, the dual loss of the Emperor and the majority of decorated military leadership creates a power vacuum of chaos and instability.
The Empire is a wounded beast thrashing around in a hundred directions, causing random and wanton destruction across the galaxy.
By design, the Empire had no clear line of succession; and there was no second-in-command.
The insidious kratocratic-philosophies of the Sith ideology were engineered into the Imperial administration and have permeated military culture of the Empire's remaining upper echelon.
Revolts, infighting, fiefdoms and warlordism gradually fracture the Empire apart more effectively than any damage capable of being inflicted by the Rebel Alliance, as the Moffs and Grand Moffs maneuver to grab power for themselves amidst civil unrest.

Palpatine left posthumous orders.
Upon verification of the Emperor's death, messenger droids are sent to select Imperial officers to relay the last orders of the Emperor: to begin Operation:
Cinder at once.
Operation:
Cinder—a central piece of the late Emperor's contingency plan—tasks hardline Imperial fanatics to destroy entire planets, heedless of their former loyalties, as part of Palpatine's scorched earth policy.
Palpatine does not desire the Empire continue without his presence; if he cannot live forever as the galaxy's Emperor, he would rather see it destroyed.

If an Empire cannot protect its Emperor then that Empire must be deemed a failure.
It collapses not only because its central figure is gone, but because it must not be allowed to remain!

A year after the Battle of Endor, the bolstered Rebellion defeats the weakened Empire during the Battle of Jakku and formally establish the New Republic.

===
New Republic Era ===
By the time of The Mandalorian, set five years after the Battle of Endor, the Galactic Empire no longer exists as an official government or a major power, and is essentially a failed state being replaced by warlords and rump states competing with each other and the New Republic over the power vacuum left behind.
One Imperial remnant established a base on the planet Nevarro, where Mandalorian bounty hunter Din Djarin was hired to acquire an asset, later revealed to be a Force-sensitive infant named Grogu.
Djarin abandoned his job and decided to protect the child, making an enemy of Imperial warlord Moff Gideon and his army of mercenary stormtroopers.

Djarin later returned to Nevarro, reuniting with his allies Greef Karga and Cara Dune, as well as an unnamed Mythrol, to take down an Imperial facility to eradicate the Empire's presence on the planet.
The group soon discovered that it was housing Imperial experiments, using blood rich in midichlorians obtained from Grogu.
The group succeeded in taking down the base.
Gideon was informed of the developments while overseeing a unit of enhanced droids known as darktroopers, who would later help him capture Grogu.
Djarin led a mission to rescue Grogu, assisted by several allies include Dune, Boba Fett, Fennec Shand, and Mandalorian warrior Bo-Katan Kryze.
The group boarded Gideon's command ship and subdued him.
Djarin turned Grogu over to Luke Skywalker, who took down the Moff's darktroopers.

===
Successor ===
The most successful remnants of the Empire reforms as the First Order, led by Supreme Leader Snoke and former Imperial officers.
They become a major faction in the galaxy in The Force Awakens and face a reformed Rebel Alliance called the Resistance.
The First Order rises to power through the use of Starkiller Base, a converted planet turned into a superweapon that later destroys the Hosnian system, the location of the New Republic's capital.
Starkiller Base was later destroyed by the Resistance, but First Order forces drew them out of hiding and wiped out a majority of their fleet.
During the battle, Snoke was killed by his apprentice Kylo Ren, who assumed the title of Supreme Leader.
Aspects of the First Order would later ally with the "Final Order", led a faction of Sith cultists known as the Sith Eternal, overseen by none other than Palpatine, who had transferred his essence into an imperfect cloned body and formerly positioned himself to control the First Order over Snoke, a puppet ruler of his.
The cult was stationed on the isolated Sith planet of Exegol.
Palpatine offered Ren, who had tracked him to the planet, control of the Final Order in exchange for killing the young Jedi Rey, Palpatine's own granddaughter.
Ren initially accepted the assignment, but later abandoned his dark side identity after a duel with Rey in the wreckage of the second Death Star.
With Ren's defection, Palpatine turned command over to Allegiant General Enric Pryde, previously an Imperial officer.

With help from the spirit of Luke Skywalker, Rey eventually made her way to Exegol, guiding the Resistance fleet a way to the planet to take down the Final Order.
With help from a redeemed Ren and the spirits of Jedi past, she resisted Palpatine's promises of power and turned his own Sith lightning against him, killing the Sith Lord once and for all.
The Resistance fleet, with help from their allies across the galaxy, took down Pryde and the Sith Eternal fleet to officially wipe out the Final Order and the Galactic Empire with it, after 54 years of its existence.

===
Legends ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the original 1977 film, known as the Expanded Universe, were rebranded as Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 25 2014.

====
Agent of the Empire ====
Agent of the Empire is a 10-issue comic book series published by Dark Horse Comics from 2011–2013.
It was written by John Ostrander and illustrated by Stephane Roux, and is set three years before the original Star Wars film.
Two 5-issue story arcs follow an Imperial secret agent, and feature characters such as Han Solo, Princess Leia and Boba Fett.

Both arcs were collected in trade paperback volumes.

====
Jedi Prince ====
In the Jedi Prince novel series, a group of impostors calling themselves the Prophets of the Dark Side install a three-eyed mutant named Trioculus as Emperor by claiming that he is Palpatine's son, reforming the Empire (as Trioculus's Empire).
By the end of the series, Palpatine's true son, Triclops, helps the Rebels defeat this new enemy.

====
Thrawn trilogy ====
In the Thrawn trilogy book series, the New Republic is almost brought to its knees by Grand Admiral Thrawn, the new leader of the remnants of the Empire (which are known as Thrawn's Empire or Empire of the Hand) and a military genius.
By the time of the third book in the series, Thrawn has nearly defeated the New Republic, but they claim victory in a last-ditch effort, and Thrawn is killed by his own bodyguard, shattering the Empire's unity.

==== Dark Empire ====
In the Dark Empire comic book series, Palpatine is reborn in a clone body and unites most of the scattered remnants of the Empire (forming the Dark Empire), hoping to retake control of the galaxy.
By the sequel, Empire's End, he is defeated and destroyed once and for all.

====
Jedi Academy trilogy ====
In the Jedi Academy trilogy, an Imperial admiral named Daala commandeers the remainder of the Imperial Navy (the Crimson Empire) and mounts a ferocious assault on the New Republic.
She nearly succeeds in taking over the galaxy, but is foiled by New Republic pilots Wedge Antilles and Lando Calrissian in the final entry, Champions of the Force.

====
Darksaber ====
In the 1995 novel Darksaber, Admiral Daala, frustrated with the Imperial warlords in the Core fighting and bickering amongst themselves, orchestrates the warlords' deaths and unites and becomes the leader of the remaining Imperial forces.
After being defeated in battle once again by the New Republic, she resigns and selects Gilad Pellaeon (originally in the Thrawn Trilogy) as the new leader, where he becomes Grand Admiral Pellaeon.

====
New Jedi Order ====
By the time of the New Jedi Order series, the remaining Imperial military factions sign a truce with the New Republic, becoming the Imperial Remnant.
The former enemies then become allies against the invading Yuuzhan Vong.
A few years later, the Remnant help the Galactic Alliance fight an assimilating insect species known as the Killiks, and in the early Legacy era they are a third party in the Second Galactic Civil War but made peace with the Alliance and Confederation.
All three of these were represented by former Imperial commanders.

====
Legacy ====
The Star Wars: Legacy comic book series, set 127 years after the original Star Wars film, explains that, during a civil war, the New Galactic Empire known as the Fel Empire declares war on the Galactic Federation of Free Alliances (Galactic Alliance), the successor state of the New Republic, after 83 years of a cold war that began in 44 ABY.
This conflict begins the Sith-Imperial War, which after three years leads to the eventual defeat of the Galactic Alliance and the Galactic Empire asserting its domination over the galaxy once again in 130 ABY.
A few months later the Sith overthrew the Fel Empire in a coup and the Sith Lord Darth Krayt the leader of the One Sith, usurped the throne and forces Emperor Roan Fel to take refuge in the fortress planet of Bastion and the Sith renamed the Fel Empire as Darth Krayt's Galactic Empire.
In 138 ABY, the Galactic Alliance Remnant led by Admiral Gar Stazi, Fel's forces known as the Empire-in-exile led by Empress Marasiah Fel, and the New Jedi Order led by Jedi Master K'Krukk united against Darth Krayt's Galactic Empire and successfully destroyed it in the Battle of Coruscant and the three united factions then formed a new galactic government out of their organizations called the Galactic Federation Triumvirate, thus ending a grand total of 157 years of the Galactic Empire's history, as opposed to Palpatine's promised 10,000 years of rule.
The One Sith however led by Darth Wredd, remained at large and waged a war against the GFT known as the Darth Wredd's insurgency but one year later in 139 ABY, the former Empire-in-exile worked with the other two factions, killed Wredd and dissolved the One Sith.
A year later in 140 ABY, the GFT would defeat the secular alliances of the One Sith and in the aftermath of that conflict, the Galaxy had entered an era of peace and unity.

== See also ==
Isaac Asimov's Galactic Empire
Imperium of Mankind
List of Star Wars characters
Utopian and dystopian fiction
State terrorism
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Galactic Empire in the StarWars.com Databank
Galactic Empire on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
DomusPublica.net (No longer active, this archive as of September 27, 2005 has at least some of the essays intact)
The Case for the Empire, The Weekly Standard
Web.
Archive.org, "No Case for the Empire"
GalacticEmpireDatabank.com
Why did The Galactic Empire Hate Aliens?

Tarkin in the Star Wars Databank


===
Fan societies ===
The Empire Reborn - Roleplaying and gaming society (PC Games)
The Galactic Empire - Roleplaying game with strong emphasis on political and military training.

The Emperor's Hammer Strike Fleet - PC Gaming club for all Star Wars games and Star Conflict.
The Jedi (), Jedi Knights, or the Knights of the Jedi Order are the main protagonists of many works of the Star Wars franchise, often working symbiotically alongside the Galactic Republic and the Rebel Alliance.
The Jedi Order are depicted as an ascetic, monastic, academic, and meritocratic organization whose origin dates back approximately 25,000 years before the events of the first film released in the franchise.
The fictional organization has inspired a real-world new religious movement, Jediism.
The Jedi Order were powerful Force-wielding "sorcerers'" and adjudicators tasked by the Galactic Republic to be the guardians of peace and order in the Star Wars galaxy, with galaxy-wide jurisdiction in the Galactic Republic, headquartered in the Republic City, Coruscant capital.
Their creed demands that they defend and protect all sapient life, and must never attack or act aggressively.
The Order consisted of polymaths representing the best of what the Republic had to offer, their members were required to be equal parts teachers, philosophers, scientists, engineers, physicians, diplomats, negotiators, soldiers, explorers, and peacekeepers.

A level of diversity extends throughout the organization, composed of hundreds of different species, thousands of different worlds, and those outside the Republic itself.
When operating beyond the limits of Republic territory, they were expected to have the moral capacity to act autonomously and make decisions, without oversight or support, with the potential to drastically affect both the future of the Republic and countless lives.
They were often the first representatives of the Republic encountered by new species and nations.
Throughout its existence, the Jedi have investigated crimes ranging from murder to political corruption, acted as peacekeepers and as detectives, protected the chancellors of the Republic, tracked down fugitives, and functioned as a investigative law enforcement agency and quasi-militaristic force at the service of the Republic.

The Jedi Order moral value system viewed purity of thought and detachment of emotions as essential to "Force enlightenment".
Jedi philosophy emphasized self-improvement through knowledge and wisdom, adherence to slave morality, and selfless service through acts of chastity, charity, obedience, citizenship, and volunteerism; this ideology is a recurring theme in the Star Wars universe.
The Jedi denounce emotions as the root cause of mortal suffering; they believe fear, anger, and love cause sentient beings to lash out in conflict and impede rational action to do what is objectively correct action.
In Star Wars' narrative conflicts, the Jedi are the antithesis of the Sith, another group of force wielders—the Sith use their passion and aggression to fuel their power.
Ideologically, the Sith are "dark mirrors" to Jedi; Sith emphasize violence and domination, while Jedi instead teach co-existence and connecting with nature in the universe.

A Jedi's traditional weapon is the lightsaber, a device which generates a blade-like plasma powered by a Kyber crystal or other focusing item.

==
Etymology ==
The word Jedi is said to have been adapted by George Lucas from Japanese 時代劇 (jidaigeki) (meaning 'period drama' motion pictures about samurai), or perhaps inspired by the words Jed (Leader) and Jeddak (King) in the Barsoom series by Edgar Rice Burroughs, a series that Lucas considered adapting to film.
The film Rogue One suggests that within the Star Wars mythology itself, it relates to the planet Jedha, source of the crystals used in lightsabers.

===
Influences ===
George Lucas acknowledged Jedi, Sith, and other Force concepts have been inspired by many sources.
These include: samurai's bushido, Shaolin Monks, Shamanism, Hindu mythology, Shintō, Buddhism not to mention countless cinematic precursors.
The works of philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche and mythologist Joseph Campbell, especially his book The Hero with a Thousand Faces (1949), directly influenced Lucas, and was what drove him to create the 'modern myth' of Star Wars.

== Depiction ==
As depicted in the canon, the Jedi study and utilize the Force, in order to help and protect those in need.
The Jedi members, known as Jedi Knights, respect all life by defending and protecting those who cannot do it for themselves, striving for peaceful and non-combative solutions to any altercations they encounter and fighting only in self-defense and for the defense of those they protect.
By training the mind and the body, the Jedi seek to improve themselves by gaining unfettered access to the Force while also seeking to improve those individuals and groups they come in contact with.
Like their evil counterparts, the Sith, the main weapon of the Jedi is the lightsaber.
However, according to Lucas, "The Force really doesn't have anything to do with the lightsaber.
Anybody can have a lightsaber.
It's just a weapon like a pistol.
"Qui-Gon Jinn gives us an insight into the Force in Episode I when he tells Anakin: "Your focus determines your reality."
And later, he explains: "Midi-chlorians are microscopic lifeforms that reside within all of your cells.
And we are symbionts with them.
Lifeforms living together for mutual advantage.
Without the midi-chlorians, life could not exist and we would have no knowledge of The Force.
They continually speak to us, telling us the will of The Force.
When you learn to quiet your mind you’ll hear them speaking to you."

In Episode IV, Obi-Wan Kenobi tells Luke Skywalker: "The force is what gives a Jedi his power.
It's an energy field created by all living things.
It surrounds us, penetrates us, it binds the galaxy together."
". . .
a Jedi can feel the force flowing through him.
It [partially] controls your actions, but it also obeys your commands."

===
The Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
For over a thousand generations, the Jedi Knights were the guardians of peace and justice in the Old Republic.
Before the dark times, before the Empire.

The Jedi are first introduced in the 1977 motion picture Star Wars as an order of warrior monks who serve as "the guardians of peace and justice in the galaxy" and embrace the mystical Force.
Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) explains that the Galactic Empire has all but exterminated the Jedi, and seeks to train Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) to be the Jedi Order's last hope.
Darth Vader (David Prowse/James Earl Jones) is also established as the Jedi's main enemy.
By the end of the film, which depicts the Battle of Yavin, Luke is on the path to becoming a Jedi.
In the sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, Luke receives extensive Jedi training from the elderly (and only surviving)
Jedi Master Yoda (Frank Oz), even as he learns that Vader is, in fact, his father, former Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker.
The third film in the original trilogy, Return of the Jedi, ends with Luke redeeming Vader and helping to destroy the Empire, thus fulfilling his destiny as a Jedi.

The two last Jedi Masters die during the events of the films, after which they return as Force ghosts to help Luke.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
The prequel trilogy depicts the Jedi in their prime, headquartered at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, and dealing with the rising presence of the dark side of the Force and the return of the Sith.
In Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) discovers nine-year-old Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), whom he believes to be the "Chosen One" of a Jedi prophecy, destined to bring balance to the Force.
At the end of The Phantom Menace, Anakin is paired with Qui-Gon's apprentice, the young Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor), who promises to train him.

The sequel, Episode II: Attack of the Clones, establishes that the Jedi forswear all emotional attachments, including romantic love, which proves problematic when Anakin, now a young adult (Hayden Christensen), falls in love with Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman).
The Clone Wars, first spoken of in the original 1977 film, begin with hundreds of Jedi participating in the Battle of Geonosis.

In Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, Yoda confides to Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson) that the prophecy of the Chosen One could have been misread.
Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid), who is revealed to be Darth Sidious, manipulates Anakin's love for Padmé and distrust of the Jedi in order to turn him to the dark side and become his Sith apprentice, Darth Vader.
The latter begins helping Sidious hunt down and destroy the Jedi, who are nearly exterminated during the events of Revenge of the Sith; Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda are among a handful of Jedi that avoided the initial purge.
As revealed in the Clone Wars series, each of the clones were implanted with chips that Palpatine would activate with the command Order 66: Operation Knightfall, a law that states:
In the event of Jedi officers acting against the interests of the Republic, and after receiving specific orders verified as coming directly from the Supreme Commander (Chancellor), GAR commanders will remove those officers by lethal force, and command of the GAR will revert to the Supreme Commander (Chancellor) until a new command structure is established.

This resulted in clone troopers to suddenly turn against their generals and kill them, and Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker leading the 501st Legion to carry out "Operation Knightfall" against the Jedi Temple, burning and slaughtering all Jedi within including Temple-Defender Shaak Ti.
Sidious convinced the people of the Republic that the Jedi were corrupted warmongers responsible for prolonging the Clone Wars, labeling them criminals with bounties placed on them.
Darth Vader continued to hunt and kill nearly every surviving Jedi during the early years of the Empire, in what is known as the Great Jedi Purge; only Yoda survived long enough to die of old age, and Ahsoka Tano, who outlasted the Empire, while others like Obi-Wan and Kanan have died fighting the Empire years later.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Now that they're extinct, the Jedi are romanticized, deified.
But if you strip away the myth and look at their deeds, the legacy of the Jedi is failure.
Hypocrisy, hubris.
At the height of their powers, they allowed Darth Sidious to rise, create the Empire, and wipe them out.
It was a Jedi Master who was responsible for the training and creation of Darth Vader.

In The Force Awakens, the first film in the sequel trilogy, it is revealed that Luke had attempted to rebuild the Jedi Order, but failed when his nephew Ben Solo (Adam Driver) fell to the dark side, lured by the mysterious Snoke (Andy Serkis).
Ben is renamed Kylo Ren and destroys all that Luke built.
After Kylo's fall and the destruction of the New Jedi Order, Luke goes into a self-imposed exile on Ahch-To, believing himself and the Jedi to be a negative influence on the galaxy.
In the sequel The Last Jedi, the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) discovers Luke on Ahch-To and convinces him to train her in the ways of the Force.
During her training, Luke describes the hubris of the past Jedi that allowed Darth Sidious to rise to power.
She also discovers several ancient Jedi texts hidden away in a tree.
Rey learns the truth about Ben's fall to the dark side and believes herself to be his only chance of redemption.
Luke decides to stay on Ahch-To and attempts to burn down the tree with the texts, but cannot bring himself to do so.
However, Yoda appears as a Force Ghost and burns the tree, teaching him that failure is just as important as success, and that masters are defined by those who surpass them.
Near the end of the film, Luke confronts Kylo on the planet Crait.
It is subsequently revealed that Luke had been projecting himself from Ahch-To; he dies from the effort and becomes one with the Force.
Rey is shown to have taken the sacred Jedi texts before she left Ahch-To, in order to continue her training.
In The Rise of Skywalker, the final film of the sequel trilogy, it is discovered that Darth Sidious has returned from death and has been secretly manipulating events from the Sith world Exegol.
In his last attempt to reclaim the galaxy, Sidious unveils the Final Order fleet, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers capable of planetary destruction.
He offers the fleet to Kylo Ren in exchange for killing the last remaining Jedi, Rey, who is revealed to be Sidious' granddaughter.
After the death of Kylo's mother, Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), Kylo returns to the light and reclaims his identity as Ben Solo.
At the end of the film, Ben joins Rey as she confronts Sidious.
Rey channels the power of the past Jedi to destroy Sidious and the Sith, before dying herself.
Ben sacrifices his life to revive Rey and becomes one with the Force.
With peace and justice restored to the galaxy, Rey lives on to start the Jedi Order again.
===
Anthologies and derivative works ===
In a deleted scene from Attack of the Clones, the "Lost Twenty" is the name given to a group of Jedi Masters—numbering twenty in total—who left the Jedi Order throughout its history.
The first 12 of these Lost Twenty became "Dark Jedi" who eventually founded the first Sith Empire.
In the years preceding the Clone Wars, Jedi Master Dooku left the Jedi Order as a result of differences with his fellow Jedi, becoming the 20th Jedi Master in the history of the Order to do so.
To showcase the failures of the Jedi they created statues of the fallen Jedi and placed them in the Jedi Temple Archives.

The animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars depicts the battles of the Clone Wars, focusing on the Jedi and clone troopers they lead against the Separatists and its Sith leaders.
The feature-film pilot reveals that Anakin trained an apprentice, Ahsoka Tano, between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
Later arcs explore the foundations of Order 66 and Palpatine's manipulation of the Jedi Order.

The animated television series Star Wars Rebels reveals that Ahsoka and a Jedi named Kanan Jarrus survived the purge; the latter trains a new apprentice, Ezra Bridger.
The series also reveals that, following the start of the purge with Order 66, the Emperor commissioned the Inquisitorius, a group of former Jedi who had turned to the Dark Side for various reasons, to aid Darth Vader in hunting down the remaining Jedi.

The canon video game
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order introduces Cal Kestis, a former Padawan hiding from the Empire who accidentally exposes his Force abilities to aid someone putting him on the Inquisitors' radar.
Kestis gets aid from Cere Junda, another Jedi Knight in hiding.

===
Members ===
The exact size of the pre-purge Jedi's membership and operations are never specified.
However, in the Star Wars Rebels episode "Path of the Jedi", Kanan Jarrus stated: "...
There were around 10,000 Jedi Knights defending the galaxy.
Now, we are few.
But in those days, we had small outposts, temples spread throughout the stars.
The Empire sought out these temples and destroyed many of them..."


====
Yoda ====
Yoda was a wise, experienced, and powerful Grand Master of the Jedi of an unknown species and the oldest known prophet in existence (having lived at least 900 years), considered the wisest and most powerful Jedi Master within the Star Wars universe.
He was knighted at age 100, and spent the next eight centuries mentoring several generations of Jedi, about 20,000 of which he took as Padawans.
During this period, the green Jedi Master formed good relations with the Wookies of Kashyyyk on numerous occasions, such as when he saved their Terentatek.
Following the Galactic Republic's transformation into the Galactic Empire, Yoda was one of the few Jedi survivors of Order 66, and spent the rest of his life on the swamp planet Dagobah.
Hiding from the Empire, he trained Luke Skywalker in the Jedi arts, until dying of old age, though he returned as a Force spirit.
In the sequel trilogy, Yoda appears both as a Force spirit, teaching an older and wiser Luke about failure, and as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

==== Mace Windu ====

Mace Windu was a human male Jedi Master of the Order and one of the last members of the Order's upper echelons before the fall of the Galactic Republic.
Born into a tribe of nomads on the Haruun Kal, Windu was offered to Jedi anthropologists as a blessing to regain his people's connection to the Force when he was 6 months old, sometime after his parents died in the bordering jungle.
He was taken as a Padawan by Mirialan Jedi Master Cyslin Myr, and began using a unique talent of seeing "shatterpoints", or faultlines in the Force that could affect the destinies of certain individuals, and indeed the galaxy itself.
Knighted early in his career, the esteemed Windu progressed up the Jedi ranks until reaching his place on the Council, from which he was known as one of the most powerful Jedi and possibly the greatest swordsman of his time.

He first appeared in Star Wars:
Episode I - The Phantom Menace, where he expressed doubt regarding Qui-Gon Jinn's conclusion about Darth Maul being a Sith Lord, but
nonetheless assured the Council that their full resources will be utilized to verify the theory that the Sith could have returned.
Out of all members of the Jedi Council, Windu was the most reluctant to allow young Anakin Skywalker (who Jinn believed to be the prophesied Chosen One), to be trained as a Jedi, believing he was dangerous due to his fragile emotional state.
In Star Wars: Episode II - Attack of the Clones, he led a party of 200 Jedi on a mission to rescue Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala from Separatist captivity on Geonosis, where he killed the bounty hunter Jango Fett in the battle that followed.
During the Clone Wars, he served the Republic as an overseer of the war effort and advisor to Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, as well as taking part in conflicts such as the Battles of Malastare and Felucia.
Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith, upon being informed by Anakin that Palpatine was the Sith Lord Darth Sidious
, Windu attempted to arrest the Chancellor and beat him in a lightsaber duel, but died after having his arm cut off by Anakin, who subsequently turned to the Dark Side, and being electrocuted with Force Lightning by Palpatine.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, Windu appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Palpatine.

====
Count Dooku ====
Count Dooku of Serenno was a human male Jedi Master who was trained by Yoda and in turn trained Qui-Gon Jinn, and one of the main antagonists of the prequel trilogy.
Born to the royal family of the planet Serenno, Dooku was rejected by his family as an infant upon the discovery of his connection to the Force, which his father in particular feared and, as such, abandoned him after contacting the Jedi Order to come and take him to Coruscant.
During his training under Yoda, Dooku proved himself to be both strong with the Force and a master duelist, regarded by many as one of the best in the Order.
Upon becoming a Jedi Master, he left the Order and returned to Serenno to reclaim his title and heritage as a nobleman.
He later fell to the Dark Side and became the Sith Lord Darth Tyranus, Darth Sidious' second apprentice.
Dooku helped Sidious with his galactic conquest plans, recruiting the bounty hunter Jango Fett as the template of the clone army that would be used by the Galactic Republic, and forming the Confederacy of Independent Systems from various planets and systems that wanted to become independent from the Republic, resulting in the Clone Wars.
Dooku served as the figurehead of the Separatist Alliance throughout the Clone Wars, until meeting his demise at the hands of Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith, who decapitated him at Chancellor Palpatine's (secretly Darth Sidious) urgings, thus revealing that Sidious never cared about Dooku and merely used him to aid his plans.

====
Qui-Gon Jinn ====
Qui-Gon Jinn was a wise and powerful human male Jedi Master, and the Master of Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Unlike other, more conservative Jedi, he valued living in the moment as the best way to embrace the Force.
While other Jedi respected him highly, they were frequently puzzled by his unorthodox beliefs and ultimately denied him a seat on the Jedi Council, despite him being among the wisest and most powerful of the Jedi.
Jinn was both the Jedi to discover the Sith's return after more than a millennium, upon being attacked by Darth Maul during a mission to protect Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo, and the one to find the ability of becoming a Force spirit after death, though he wasn't capable of having a physical body.
Following his death at Darth Maul's hands, Jinn guided both Yoda and Obi-Wan to the ability of becoming a physical Force spirit after death.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, he appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

====
Obi-Wan Kenobi ====
Obi-Wan Kenobi was a human male Jedi Master who trained Anakin Skywalker, at the behest of his deceased master Qui-Gon Jinn, and later his son Luke Skywalker, making him one of the main characters in the Star Wars franchise.
Having fought in the Clone Wars, Obi-Wan proved himself an adept strategist, duelist, and spy, as his leadership style heavily favours subterfuge and misdirection while commanding clone troopers, or wielding the Force.
Due to his charisma and persuasion skills, he became known as 'The Negotiator' during the Clone Wars.
Obi-Wan best exemplifies the Jedi Code: in spite of Darth Vader's betrayal, his master and the woman he loved being killed by his nemesis, Darth Maul, he never fell into darkness.
As one of the few survivors of Order 66 following the Galactic Republic's transformation into the Galactic Empire, Obi-Wan hid on the desert planet Tatooine, watching over Vader's son Luke, knowing that he would one day grow to become a Jedi and defeat Vader.
He briefly mentored Luke in the Jedi arts, before meeting his demise at the hands of his former apprentice aboard the Death Star, though he continued guiding Luke as a Force spirit.
In Star Wars: The Force Awakens, Obi-Wan's voice can briefly be heard just after Rey's force vision when she came into contact with Anakin's lightsaber.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, Obi-Wan appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

====
Anakin Skywalker ====
Anakin Skywalker was a human male Jedi Knight Master, one of the main protagonists of the prequel trilogy, and the primary antagonist of the original trilogy.
He is the Chosen One, being born of the Force.
He was apprenticed to Obi-Wan Kenobi and proved to be a very gifted duelist and Force user, being appointed to the Jedi High Council at the age of 22.
He secretly married Padmé Amidala at the onset of the Clone Wars and has two children, Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa.
He was eventually seduced to the Dark Side by the Sith Lord, Darth Sidious (Emperor Palpatine), and became Sith Lord, Darth Vader, serving the Galactic Empire.
While he was a member of the Jedi Council, he trained a Padawan of his own, Ahsoka Tano during the Clone Wars.
Vader was eventually redeemed by his son in Return of the Jedi and gave his own life to save Luke, killing Palpatine and fulfilling the prophecy of the Chosen One.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, Anakin appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Palpatine.

====
Ahsoka Tano ====
Ahsoka Tano was a Togruta female Jedi Padawan discovered on her homeworld of Shili by Jedi Master Plo Koon.
Plo brought her to Coruscant to train as a Jedi.
She eventually became the Padawan learner of Anakin Skywalker during the Clone Wars.
Among many campaigns, Ahsoka found herself advising rebels on the planet Onderon, including Steela and Saw Gerrera, in their fight against the Confederacy.
These rebels would eventually form part of the basis of the Alliance for the Restoration of the Republic, a relationship that would later prove beneficial to her.
She was accused of bombing the hangar at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant before clearing her name with Anakin's help.
However, the Jedi Council's response during the ordeal soured her faith in the Order, and she left the Order to forge her own path in the galaxy.
She briefly returned in the service of the Republic during the final days of the Clone Wars, when she led part of the 501st Clone Legion in the Siege of Mandalore to capture the former Sith Lord Darth Maul, who attempted to warn her that Anakin would soon fall to the Dark Side.
Shortly after capturing Maul, Ahsoka was betrayed by her clone troopers as part of Order 66, but she managed to escape alongside Clone Captain Rex (whose control chip she removed).
Years later, Ahsoka served the nascent Rebel Alliance as the spymaster and head of its intelligence network, directing operations behind the codename Fulcrum.
She is one of the few Jedi to survive past the Galactic Empire era and into the New Republic era.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, Ahsoka appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

====
Cal Kestis ====
Cal Kestis was a human male Jedi Padawan who trained under Master Jaro Tapal.
After the events of Order 66 and failing to save his master's life, he went into hiding on the planet Bracca where he worked as a scrapyard rigger.
While scrapping a freighter, an accident forced Cal to reveal his Force abilities to save a co-worker, exposing him to the Empire and the Inquisitorius.
On the run, Cal was aided by Cere Junda, a Jedi Knight also in hiding, who became his unofficial mentor.
Cal is the protagonist of Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order.

====
Cere Junda ====
Cere Junda was a human female Jedi Knight who went into hiding following Order 66.
As a Padawan, Junda was sent with her master Eno Cordova to the planet Ontotho to regulate a dispute between corporate security forces and local freedom fighters.
After an attack separated them, the impulsive Junda fought alongside the freedom fighters to find Cordova.
Following the Clone Wars and the start of the Jedi Purge, Junda secretly sought to rebuild Jedi Order.
After saving him from the Inquisitors, Junda began to mentor former Padawan Cal Kestis.
Prior to the Purge, Junda also mentored a Padawan named Trilla Siduri, who later fell to the Dark Side and became an Inquisitor known as the Second Sister.

====
Kanan Jarrus ====
Kanan Jarrus was a human male Jedi Padawan who fought for the Rebellion during its formation.
First introduced as a main character of the animated television series Star Wars Rebels, Jarrus was known to be the leader of a small rebel cell called the Spectres, operating on the planet Lothal.

As a survivor of Order 66, Jarrus was forced to break certain Jedi traditions to avoid being detected by Imperial forces that continued their mission to eliminate any Jedi on sight, such as eschewing traditional Jedi robes or occasionally using a blaster, a weapon typically shunned by Jedi.

Although he lost his master Depa Bilaba to Order 66 before he could ascend the ranks of the Jedi Order, he was tasked with training the young Force-sensitive Ezra Bridger throughout his eventual service to the larger Rebellion.
He was known as Caleb Dume before Order 66, and changed his name to avoid detection.
Though Jarrus died saving Hera Syndulla, his legacy would live on through their son, Jacen Syndulla.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, he appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

====
Ezra Bridger ====
Ezra Bridger was a human male Jedi Padawan who was born on the planet Lothal on the same day the Galactic Empire was established.
He witnessed many injustices of the Imperial occupation of his homeworld for much of his childhood and was separated from his parents from a very early age.
He was able to survive alone using street smarts and skills, but was discovered by Kanan Jarrus to have potential Force sensitivity after he encounters the Spectres for the first time.
After discovering how much of a team player he could be during a rescue operation, they recruited Bridger, who began training him in the ways of the Jedi under Jarrus, himself still a Jedi Padawan.

Bridger took a long time learning how to wield a lightsaber and use it to deflect blaster bolts, modifying his first one to fire stun blasts in the interim.

He was not well skilled in lightsaber duels against Inquisitors and Darth Vader, but later discovered his unique ability to use the Force to control and command animals, a skill that proved more useful several times during his service in the Rebellion.
Bridger later went missing in action during the battle to liberate Lothal from Imperial occupation, where he successfully defeated Grand Admiral Thrawn, regarded by many as the Empire's best tactician.

====
Luke Skywalker ====
Luke Skywalker was a human male Jedi Knight (later Master) and the protagonist of the original trilogy.
As the last Padawan of Obi-Wan Kenobi, he became an important figure in the Rebel Alliance's struggle against the Galactic Empire.
Luke was heir to a family deeply rooted in the Force, being the twin brother of Rebellion leader Princess Leia Organa of the planet Alderaan, the son of former Queen of Naboo and Republic Senator Padmé Amidala and Jedi turned Sith Lord Darth Vader (Anakin Skywalker), and the maternal uncle of Ben Solo.
After redeeming his father from the Dark Side of the Force, who died killing his master and the last Sith, Emperor Palpatine / Darth Sidious, in order to save Luke, he set out to train a new generation of Jedi to rebuild the Order, only to have them wiped out by Supreme Leader Snoke, a puppet created by a revived Palpatine, who also turned Ben to the Dark Side, adopting the Kylo Ren persona.
Skywalker then spent the rest of his life in exile on Ahch-To, the original headquarters of the Jedi Order, blaming himself for Ben's turn and the destruction of his Order, until he was found by Rey, the last Jedi and the secret granddaughter of Palpatine, whom he reluctantly trained in the Jedi arts.
Shortly after, he gave his life to distract Kylo Ren, now Supreme Leader of the First Order, on the planet Crait via a Force Projection, allowing the Resistance to escape.
When Rey learned of her lineage and exiled herself on Ahch-To out of fear of turning to the Dark Side, Luke appeared before her as a Force spirit and encouraged her to face Palpatine.
Along with the spirits of other past Jedi, he then empowered Rey during her final confrontation with Palpatine, which marked the definitive defeat of the Sith, and later watched from afar alongside his sister's spirit (who had died redeeming Kylo Ren) as Rey renounced her lineage, becoming a Skywalker instead.

====
Ben Solo ====
Ben Solo was a human male Jedi Padawan and the primary antagonist of the sequel trilogy.
He was the son of smuggler and Rebel Alliance General Han Solo and Rebellion leader Princess Leia Organa, and the nephew of Jedi Master Luke Skywalker, having been born shortly after the Galactic Empire's defeat.
As part of his uncle's new generation of Jedi, Ben trained under him, but was eventually seduced to the Dark Side by Supreme Leader Snoke, a puppet created by a revived Emperor Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the last Sith, and sought to become a Sith Lord, as powerful as his late grandfather, Darth Vader (Anakin Skywalker).
Following the destruction of Luke's New Jedi Order, Ben adopted the Kylo Ren persona and became a commander within the First Order, as well as the leader of the Knights of Ren, an organization of fellow Force-wielders.
He later killed his father when he unsuccessfully tried to redeem him, and formed a unique connection with Rey, the last Jedi and Palpatine's secret granddaughter, called a "dyad in the Force".
After killing Snoke, Ren took over as Supreme Leader of the First Order, until ultimately being redeemed by his mother, who died in the process, and helping Rey face Palpatine, giving his own life to save hers.

====
Rey ====
Rey was a human female Jedi Padawan and the protagonist of the sequel trilogy.
She was the illegitimate granddaughter of Emperor Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the last surviving Sith, and was born in the years following the Galactic Empire's defeat.
Abandoned on the desert planet of Jakku at a young age by her parents in order to keep her safe, she became involved in the conflict between the Resistance and the First Order, and formed a unique connection with Kylo Ren, called a "dyad in the Force".
She was briefly trained by Luke Skywalker and, following his death, continued her Jedi training under the guidance of his sister and Resistance leader Leia Organa, as well as the ancient Jedi texts.
Rey eventually learned of her lineage and, with the help of a redeemed Kylo Ren and the spirits of past Jedi, faced a revived Palpatine, killing him and ending the Sith Order once and for all.
She then renounced her lineage, becoming a Skywalker instead, prepared to find her own path.

====
Legends ====


====
A’Sharad Hett ====
A’Sharad Hett was a human male Jedi Master.
He was a general in the Clone Wars, and one of the closest friends of Anakin Skywalker.
He was taught under Ki-A-Mundi, and became a survivor of Order 66.
Shortly after the Rise of the Empire, Hett fell to the Dark Side.
He started a new Sith Empire 130 years after the fall of Darth Vader and Darth Sidious.
He met his demise in the hands of Cade Skywalker.

====
Kreia ====
Kreia was a human female Jedi Master who taught Revan.
After Revan had maverick ideas during the Mandalorian Wars, Kreia was exiled.
She then became the Sith Lord Darth Traya, and then trained Darth Nihilus and Darth Sion.
They in turn, betrayed her, as it is the way of the Sith.
She overpowered the two, but managed to be defeated by Meetra Surik.

====
Jacen Solo ====
Jacen Solo was a human male Jedi Knight Master.
He was trained under Luke Skywalker, who in turn trained Luke’s son Ben Skywalker.
He became a hero of the Yuuzhan Ving Wars, but then succumbed to the Dark Side, by Lady Lumiya.
He became the mastermind of the Second Galactic Civil War, but then was killed by his sister Jaina Solo.

=== Force-sensitive organizations ===
Not every "dark side"-user is a Sith; nor is every "light side"-user a Jedi.
Within the Star Wars Expanded Universe, people of all species have demonstrated varying "force-sensitive" powers and abilities.
These "force-wielders" are often depicted with little to no formal Jedi training in the Force, originating from primitive planets.

====
The Sith Organization ====


=====
Dark side adept =====
A dark side adept is someone with the power to use the dark side of the Force outside of the traditions of the Jedi or the Sith.
They were often steeped in the lore of the dark side and opposed to those who used the light side, such as Jedi.
While all Sith were technically dark side adepts, non-Sith individuals such as Asajj Ventress, Kylo Ren, and the Grand Inquisitor were also considered dark side adepts.
Dark side adepts were referenced in passing in James Luceno's canon novel Tarkin.

====
Force-wielders without affiliation ====
Bendu debuted in the Star Wars Rebels Season 3 episode "Steps Into Shadow".
Bendu was a Force-sensitive individual who resided on the remote planet of Atollon and represented the "center" of the Force, between the light side and the dark side.
"
Jedi and Sith wield the Ashla and Bogan.
The light and the dark.
I'm the one in the middle.
The Bendu..." stated Bendu.
He is depicted as one who seeks balance, and has been likened to Tom Bombadil of The Lord of the Rings.
The term "Bendu" first appears in the original script for Star Wars as the name of the Jedi Knights, the "Jedi-Bendu".
Most notably, Anakin Skywalker's padawan Ahsoka Tano left the Jedi Order, and continued to wield the Force, she never affiliated or created any Force sensitive organization.

== Description ==


===
The Jedi Code ===
The Jedi Code was a set of rules that governed the behavior of the Jedi Order.
It taught its followers to not give in to feelings of anger toward other lifeforms, which would help them resist fear and prevent them from falling to the dark side of the Force.

The Code:
There is no emotion, there is peace.

There is no ignorance, there is knowledge.

There is no passion, there is serenity.

There is no chaos, there is harmony.

There is no death, there is the Force.

===
The Four Councils ===
The Four Branches of the Jedi Council are fictional institutions from the Star Wars universe.
They serve the Jedi Order as an organized administrative body that provide the necessary auxiliary and support services that sustain and governed the Order's academies, temples, interests and organizations.

====
Jedi High Council ====
The Jedi High Council is the main ecclesiastical leadership of the Jedi Order with both legislative and executive powers.
The Jedi High Council is made up of some of the strongest, wisest and most experienced members of the Jedi Order.
They are elected to lead the Jedi.
The Jedi High Council has twelve members at any given time: five members who serve for life, four members who serve long-term, and three limited-term members.
Sifo-Dyas had a seat on the Council until his extremist views on a war that he foresaw caused his removal.
Other older members include Jor Aerith, Tera Sinuba, and Yula Braylon.

In Jedi: Fallen Order: Dark Temple (which is set an unknown amount of time before The Phantom Menace), the Jedi Council includes Yoda, Mace Windu, Eeth Koth, Yarael Poof, Poli Dapatian, and Jocasta Nu.
In Master & Apprentice, set seven years before The Phantom Menace and after the events of Dark Temple, the council includes Yoda, Mace Windu, Depa Billaba, Poli Dapatian (who is in the process of retiring), Eeth Koth, and Saesee Tiin.

Members of the Jedi High CouncilThe final roster of the Jedi High Council during The Phantom Menace, before the Order fell was:


====
Council of First Knowledge ====
The Council of First Knowledge administered the Temple-based academy and its curriculum, and funded scholars' scientific research.
To this end, the Council guarded and maintained the Temple Archives and its holocron vaults, as well as the "Shadow program" at the Jedi Temple:
Jedi Sentinels tasked with hunting down Sith artifacts.

====
Council of Reconciliation ====
The Council of Reconciliation dealt with the Galactic Senate and the Republic Diplomatic Corps in order to help bring diplomatic resolutions to conflicts and end political standoffs.
The "first face" of the Republic presented to worlds interested in joining the Republic, this Council would dispatch Jedi diplomats and ambassadors to moderate debate and hammer out treaties


====
Council of Reassignment ====
The Council of Reassignment administered the Jedi Service Corps and each of its branch councils.
Organizing work for those Initiates who failed out of the academy and Knights with special talents, the Reassignment Council oversaw this branch's missions and assignments.

===
Ranks of authority and educational progress ===
Every Jedi, regardless of species or world, is trained for their career at Jedi Academy.
Entrance is determined by rigorous examination and psychological tests.
When Jedi Sentinels discover or test a suitable "force-sensitive" candidate, they are taken to the Jedi Academy at the age of 5 (depending on the species and arbitrary years) with the parent's permission.
Jedi scholarship educations are considered prestigious, as most parents are portrayed as either happy or proud of the opportunity presented to their child, who could never afford an education.
However, parents also are generally sad since they know they are unlikely to see their child again before adulthood.
Members of the Order progress through four educational stages, at times referred to as levels:


====
Initiate ====
Initiation is the first part of Jedi training; they are mentored by Jedi Masters in rudimentary control over the Force and basic self-defense techniques.

Most Initiates were typically Younglings (a child Jedi-in-training), receiving early and first-class education.
The first ten years of a youngling's training demands segregation from outside distractions and is deliberately designed to reinforce detachment from earthly emotions, including loyalty or love for their parents.
This is why Yoda initially denied both Anakin and Luke Skywalker for being "too old for training".

Release all your earthly attachments; let go all you've grown to love...
Surrender yourself.

Younglings were portrayed training under Jedi Master Yoda in a scene on Attack of the Clones and hiding during the assault on the Jedi Temple in Revenge of the Sith.

The “Young Jedi” story arc and the episode “Path of the Jedi”  explored the Jedi tradition called "The Gathering," where initiates traveled to the "Crystal Caves" to harvest kyber crystals, which they would use to build their first lightsabers.
Crystals were attuned to individual Jedi and lacked color.
The Force spoke to each of the younglings through their crystals.
To find their crystal, each initiate had to learn a lesson: courage, hope, patience, trust, confidence, and selflessness.

====
Padawan ====
An Initiate who successfully completes "fundamental training" is given a second-class education and then undergoes Padawan training under the tutelage of a Mentor (usually a Jedi Knight or Jedi Master).
They are also called "Apprentices" and "Padawan learners".
As a rite of passage and the final test before the trials to knighthood, Padawans must build their own lightsabers.
In the Old Republic, Padawans usually wore a hair braid on the right side of their head which was removed with a lightsaber upon attaining knighthood.
They also served as Commanders in the Clone Wars.

====
Knight ====
Disciplined and experienced, Jedi Knights become so only when they have completed "the trials" (final tests), they officially graduate, being eligible for specialized advance courses, and may continue to pursue a third-class education (see below) to obtain the equivalent of a habilitation or post-doctoral degree.
As the most common rank, it is interchangeably referred to as "Jedi", "Jedi Knight" and "Master Jedi" (although the latter are honorifics used only by Younglings and Padawans when addressing Jedi Knights or above).

The five tests are usually known as Trial of Skill, the Trial of Courage, the Trial of the Flesh, the Trial of Spirit, and the Trial of Insight (or Knowledge).
In Return of the Jedi, Master Yoda gives his apprentice, Luke Skywalker, the trial of confronting Darth Vader for a second time so he might become a full-fledged Knight.
Occasionally, performing an extraordinary (usually heroic) act can earn a Padawan learner Jedi status, such as when Obi-Wan Kenobi defeats the Sith Lord, Darth Maul.
By the time of the Skywalker Saga films, distinct "battle classes" were not necessary as the Republic had not seen war in over a thousand years, and the title of Knight was simply a rank once again.

====
Master ====
Jedi Master is a term of respect used by beings who respect the Jedi.
Regarded as among the most accomplished and recognized polymaths in the Star Wars galaxy.
Upon completion of vocational or postgraduate education, a Jedi Knight becomes a Jedi Master after successfully training several Padawan learners to Knight status, such as when Obi-Wan Kenobi became a Jedi Master after he successfully trained Anakin Skywalker to the point where he was able to complete the trials and become a Jedi Knight.
Though this is the most common manner, there are other ways of attaining the rank.

===
Specializations and occupations ===
Various careers, occupations, ranks and titles were available to all Jedi.
Upon a Padawan's ascension to "Knighthood-status", a Jedi pursued higher education or vocational education and training in a field of expertise; choose a careers based on preference, personal talents and skills.
Before the Great Jedi Purge, numerous divisions existed across the whole of the order, but most personnel are represented within the three order divisions: the Order of the Guardian, the Order of the Consular, or Order of the Sentinel.

In addition to their specialization, in times of war, the High Council could demand that the members of the Order assume military ranks in order to defend the Republic.

====
Hierarchy ====
Grand Master of the Jedi Order:
The Grand Master is the oldest, the most experienced, the most accomplished and the best trained of all Jedi.
A Grand Master is voted unanimously by the Jedi High Council.
The Grand Master serves as the organization's figurehead in charge of ceremonial duties and dictates the organization's general policies, while providing direction and guidance to the entire Jedi Order.
Yoda and Luke Skywalker were Jedi Grandmasters.

Chief Master of the Jedi High Council (or 'Master of the Order'):
The Chief Master of the High Council is elected by the Jedi High Council, which effectively acts as chairman and chief operating officer.
Its chief responsibilities include; presiding over High Council meetings of the assembled group, conducts Jedi businesses in an orderly fashion, managing the executive particulars of the day-to-day administration of the Jedi Order, act as representative or spokesperson to the Galactic Senate, and serving as the Grand Master's junior partner.
Jedi Master Mace Windu filled this position at the time of the Clone Wars.

Chief Librarian of the Jedi Archives:
The overseer of the Jedi Archives, Holocron Vault, Librarian's Assembly and the Educational Corps.
Second only to the Grand Master in administrative importance, the Chief Librarian worked closely with the Council of First Knowledge.
Around the time of the Clone Wars, the Chief Librarian was the elderly Jedi Master Jocasta Nu.

Jedi General:
A title given to those given commanding roles in the Grand Army of the Republic during the Clone Wars.

Jedi Commander:
This title was given to Jedi Padawans under the leadership of Jedi Knights and Jedi Masters with their roles as Jedi Generals in the Grand Army of the Republic during the Clone Wars.

==== Divisions ====
Jedi Guardian:
Jedi Guardians focused all aspects of combat as an extension of their being, and trained on combining and perfecting their athletic, aviation and martial art skills with mastery of the Force.
The Force skills studied by the Guardians were typically those used for quickly disabling an opponent and aiding in agility and stamina.
Many were stationed within Republic planetary or sectoral government's security agencies where they worked as special peacekeepers and law enforcement agents, helping to quell riots and capture terrorists.
The highest ranking Jedi Guardians were stationed at the Jedi academies as instructors tasked with passing down their experience to the young students of the Order.
Those Jedi who mastered lightsaber-combat techniques (such as Mace Windu) were dubbed Weapon Masters and were among the greatest warriors of the Order.

Jedi Consular:
Jedi Consulars focused on further mastery of the Force and the sharpening of mental faculties, and wielded a lightsaber only for self-defense.
Overseen by the Council of Reconciliation, Jedi Consulars were often called upon to act as impartial advisers, diplomats, and historians.
Most Consulars specialized as historians, archivists, librarians, archaeologists, geologists, biologists, mathematicians, and astronomers; they contributed to the growth and preservation of the Jedi Archives as "Lore Keepers" directed by the Librarian's Assembly.
Some Consulars worked closely with the Republic bureaucrats to assist in greeting unaligned governments and helping them join the Republic and given the authority to hammer out a compromise or treaty during tense negotiations, backed by the full support of the Senate and Jedi Order.
Some Consulars joined the Circle of Jedi Healers (headquartered out of the Coruscant Temple's Halls of Healing) and focused on the medical and humanitarian aspects of the Force, manipulating the Living Force to perform the art of healing.
Those Jedi specifically predisposed to receive visions through the Force were known as "Seers", maintaining and updating the Order's holocrons; the most perceptive of these Jedi (such as Yoda) were known as Prophets and foretold the future of the galaxy.

Jedi Sentinel:
Jedi Sentinels focused on diverse disciplines, applying their force abilities as engineers, technicians, intelligence and security experts.
Most Sentinels were stationed at numerous locations for decades, to serve as liaison officers between the system or sector and the Republic.
The anonymous "Jedi Temple Guard" Sentinels were charged with guarding the Jedi Temple.
Some Sentinels aided police as detectives through the use of the Force.
Since Republic law required all newborns undergo "Force-sensitivity" testing, Sentinels who worked as members of the Acquisition Division of the Order routinely tracked down and identified Force-sensitive children to assess whether they met the qualifications to receive training in the Jedi Order.
The most elite Sentinels became "Shadows" or "Watchmen": the Jedi-secret police who worked under the supervision of the First Knowledge Council to destroy all remnants of the Sith.

=== Resources and technology ===
Within the Star Wars universe, the Jedi are usually portrayed wearing simple robes and carrying specialized field gear for their missions.
Their philosophical lifestyles mirror those of real-world religious vows and evangelical counsels, as their personal possessions are provided exclusively by the Jedi Order, and are only meant to allow self-sufficiency.

====
Weapons ====
The most notable instrument wielded by a Jedi is the lightsaber.
Both Jedi and Sith use lightsabers, though the former regard them as a tool, the latter, a weapon.
The Jedi's lightsabers emit cool colors, usually blue or green blades (sometimes yellow, or purple, as seen in the case of Mace Windu), while the Sith emit warm colors (red).
Lightsabers can be of many different colors depending on the crystal fixture.

Most Jedi use naturally formed crystals, whereas Sith tend to use synthetic crystals, which are usually red in color.

Although rare, multi-bladed lightsabers can exist, especially among Sith such as Darth Maul's double bladed lightsaber, the Inqusitors' double-bladed/rotating ones, or Kylo Ren's crossguard-bladed one (due to a cracked kyber crystal).

====
Vehicles ====
Eta-2 Actis Jedi Interceptors first appeared in Revenge of the Sith.
Delta-7B
Aethersprite Jedi starfighters appear in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
In Attack of the Clones, Obi-Wan Kenobi travels via Jedi starfighter to Kamino to investigate the attempted assassination of Padmé Amidala; he also flies a Jedi starfighter to Geonosis in an attempt to track down the bounty hunter Jango Fett.
Lacking a hyperdrive, the starfighter relies on an external sled to propel it through hyperspace.
Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) fly updated Jedi starfighters (called Jedi Interceptors) in the opening sequence of Revenge of the Sith.
Later, Plo Koon (Matt Sloan) flies a Revenge of the Sith-era starfighter when he is shot down by clone troopers carrying out Emperor Palpatine's
(Ian McDiarmid) Order 66.The Jedi starfighter's triangular shape in Attack of the Clones stems from the shape of Imperial Star Destroyers in the original Star Wars trilogy.
Industrial Light & Magic designer Doug Chiang identified the Jedi starfighter as one of the first designs that bridges the aesthetic between the prequel and original trilogies.
Chiang noted that viewers' familiarity with the Star Destroyer's appearance and Imperial affiliation gives added symbolism to the Jedi craft's appearance and foreshadows the Empire's rise to power.
The starfighter seen in Revenge of the Sith is a cross between the previous film's vessel and the Empire's TIE fighters from the original trilogy.
Hasbro's expanding wings in the Attack of the Clones Jedi starfighter toy inspired the opening wings in the Revenge of the Sith vessel.
The starfighter in the Revenge of the Sith is called a Jedi Interceptor Starfighter.

====
Jedi Archives ====
The Jedi Archives, known as The Great Library of Ossus or The Great Library of the Jedi, contained the galaxy's most priceless and ancient of texts sacred to Jedi scholars and archaeologists.
Among these were Sith artifacts, considered by the Jedi Order to be the most dangerous artifacts in the galaxy, that were accessible only to those able to control the Dark Side of the Force.
The Jedi archives of the Jedi Temple in the movie
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones bear a startling resemblance to the Long Room of the Trinity College Library in Dublin.
This resemblance resulted in controversy as permission had not been sought to use the building's likeness in the film.
However, Lucasfilm denied that the Long Room was the basis for the Jedi archives, and officials from Trinity College Library decided not to take any legal action.

====
Jedi Academy ====
The Jedi academies were established to train Force-sensitive beings accepted into the Jedi Order in the ways of the Force.
Overseen by the Council of First Knowledge, each academy was governed by an advisory Council appointed by their superiors on Coruscant.
Mainstreaming the majority of teachings at the Temple, certain practices were permitted to vary from world to world.
However, at all sanctioned academies, a group of Jedi Masters would instruct Initiates to the Order in the ways of the Force.
The size of the school varied from world to world; the smallest consisted of a single clan of younglings, and the largest was the main academy housed within the Jedi Temple of Coruscant.
Most academies had been established during the Old Sith Wars and were located in the Galactic Rim.
Some were located on or near Force-wellsprings or places significant to the Order like crystal caves or nexuses of dark side energies that needed constant monitoring.
In addition to the traditional academies established by the Order, the Exploration Corps maintained several spacefaring mobile academies such as the Chu'unthor
so that roaming the galaxy and exploring new worlds could be achieved while still teaching traditional doctrine.
By the fall of the Galactic Republic in 19 BBY, many of the ancient academies had been shut down for decades, with the Council of First Knowledge preferring the central teachings of the Coruscant Temple.
After the dissolution of the Order during the Great Jedi Purge, all orthodox Temples and academies were routed and burned in order to prevent any more Jedi from learning the secrets of the Force.
However, the Galactic Empire's chokehold on Force-education did not last and the Order was reformed following the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War.
After Grand Master Luke Skywalker's New Order became a single class of twelve students including his nephew Ben Solo, it was reduced to only himself when his nephew turned to the darkside and became Kylo Ren.

====
Jedi Temple ====
In the prequel trilogy, the primary Jedi Temple is located on the Republic's capital planet of Coruscant.
As the chief administrative headquarters, the Temple served the Order in three capacities: a monastery and library for the Jedi seeking enlightenment and to reflect on the will of the Force; an academy and training center for Jedi younglings and Padawans who endeavored to join the ranks of the Jedi Knights; and government, in which the Masters of the Jedi High Council guided the Order's direction.
It was originally built atop an old "dark-side nexus" shrine during the birth of the Republic, so as to be symbolic to the Coruscant people that the tyrannical rule of the Sith was over.
In Revenge of the Sith, the Jedi Temple is attacked by clone troopers of the 501st Legion, led by the newly christened Darth Vader, who butchered the Jedi within and set the Temple alight.
After the fall of the Jedi Order and the Galactic Republic, the Temple became the Palace of the Emperor and a location for his dark side artifacts.
It would serve as Sidious' residence for over two decades until his death at the Battle of Endor.
The Temple is visible in the celebrations on Coruscant at the end of Return of the Jedi.
After the destruction of the Sith, Luke Skywalker—the last of the Jedi—recovered fragments of a Force-sensitive tree that was once located at the heart of the Jedi Temple.
Architects' Journal rated the temple third on its top-ten architecture of Star Wars list behind the second Death Star and Jabba the Hutt’s palace on Tatooine, and ahead of Coruscant, the capital city of the Old Republic.
The temple is described in the article as adapting "the robust typology of Mayan temples, with durasteel cladding specified for the external stone walls for improved defensive strength" and said to be a ziggurat that "is built above a Force-nexus and has ample room for training facilities, accommodation and the Jedi Archive.
"
The temple has five towers, the tallest is Tranquility Spire, that are stylistically similar to the minarets surrounding the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul.
Star Wars Insider listed it as the one hundredth greatest thing about Star Wars in its one hundredth issue special.

==
Legends depiction of the Jedi ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

===
Je'daii ===
The Je'daii Order, precursors to the modern Jedi, studied and used both the light and dark sides of the Force equally.
The preview issue of Dawn of the Jedi states that the Je'daii originated ten thousand years before the saga takes place (approximately 36,453 years BBY).
They were more monk than warrior, and their capital was Tython in the Deep Core.
===
The New Jedi Order ===
In novels set after the events of the film series, Luke Skywalker re-established the Jedi High Council as part of his New Jedi Order.
The most notable difference between the format of the new council and the old is that only half of the council are made up of Jedi, while the other half consisted of politicians.
Following the war with the Yuuzhan Vong, the Jedi withdrew their support from any one political entity and relocated to Ossus, where Luke had a full Jedi Council re-established.

In novels set after the events of the original film trilogy, the New Jedi Order was the restored and reformed Jedi organization, in the wake of the Great Jedi Purge and subsequent fall of the Galactic Empire.
The Jedi Knights, reduced in number to only a handful, were slowly restored, primarily under the leadership of Grandmaster Luke Skywalker.
Skywalker abolished the traditional Master/Padawan system.
He believed all Jedi should be both teachers and students; that they should both learn from and mentor each other, and not just from one Master.

Within the Expanded Universe, The New Jedi Order indicates that the Jedi Temple on Coruscant is no longer standing but it is rebuilt as a gift to Jedi for their services and achievements during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion.
The new temple is in the form of a massive pyramid made from stone and transparisteel that is designed to fit into the new look of Coruscant, though internally it is identical to the design seen in Revenge of the Sith.

==
Cultural impact and critical response ==
The United States Army had a group of officers in the early 1980s who promoted maneuver warfare tactics, and who were derisively referred to as Jedi by more conventional officers who were satisfied with attrition warfare tactics and methods.

===
Analysis ===
In Star Wars and Philosophy, William Stephens compares the Jedi to Stoicism:
To recap, the virtues the Jedi shares with the Stoic sage are patience, timeliness, deep commitment, seriousness (as opposed to frivolity), calmness (as opposed to anger or euphoria), peacefulness (as opposed to aggression), caution (as opposed to recklessness), benevolence (as opposed to hatred), joy (as opposed to sullenness), passivity (as opposed to agitation), and wisdom.
Given all these virtues, Yoda certainly resembles what the ancient Stoics described as the sage—the ideal person who has perfected his reason and achieved complete wisdom.

Functionally, the Jedi order resembles a Praetorian Guard.

===
Media ===
Jedi have made their way into certain areas of pop culture, such as "Weird Al" Yankovic's song "
The Saga Begins", a parody of "American Pie".
In the film
The Men Who Stare at Goats (2009), a reporter follows a former soldier who claimed to be a "Jedi warrior", a nickname for psychic spies in the US military.

===
Religion ===
One of the enduring influences the Star Wars saga has had in popular culture is the idea of the fictional Jedi values being interpreted as a modern philosophical path or religion, spawning various movements such as the Jediism (religious) and the Jedi census phenomenon.

==
See also ==
Sith
Jediism


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
Wallace, Daniel (2017)
[2010].
The Jedi Path:
A Manual for Students of the Force.
San Francisco, CA:
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 978-1-4521-0227-6.
OCLC 752590192.

==
Further reading ==
Sword Fighting in the Star Wars Universe:
Historical Origins, Style and Philosophy by Nick Jamilla (McFarland & Company, 2008)
Star Wars and History by Nancy Reagin & Janice Liedl
(John Wiley & Sons, 2012)
The Science Fiction Reboot: Canon, Innovation and Fandom in Refashioned Franchises by Heather Urbanski (McFarland & Company, 2013)
Star wars: the essential chronology by Kevin J. Anderson & Daniel Wallace (Ballantine Books, 2000)
Culture, identities, and technology in the Star wars films: essays on the two trilogies by Carl Silvio & Tony M. Vinci (McFarland & Company, 2007)
The Star Wars Heresies by Paul F. McDonald (McFarland & Company, 2013)


==
External links ==
The Jedi Order in the StarWars.com Databank
Jedi Temple in the StarWars.com Databank
Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
A droid is a fictional robot possessing some degree of artificial intelligence in the Star Wars science-fiction franchise.
Coined by special effects artist John Stears, the term is a  clipped form of "android", a word originally reserved for robots designed to look and act like a human.
The word "droid" has been a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Ltd since 1977.

==
Behind the scenes ==
Droids are performed using a variety of methods, including robotics, actors inside costumes (in one case, on stilts), and computer animation.

===
Trademark ===
Lucasfilm registered "droid" as a trademark in 1977.
The term "Droid" has been used by Verizon Wireless under licence from Lucasfilm, for their line of smartphones based on the Android operating system.
Motorola's late-2009 Google Android-based cell phone is called the Droid.
This line of phone has been expanded to include other Android-based phones released under Verizon, including the HTC Droid Eris, the HTC Droid Incredible, Motorola Droid X, Motorola Droid 2, and Motorola Droid Pro.
The term was also used for the Lucasfilm projects
EditDroid, a non-linear editing system, and SoundDroid, an early digital audio workstation.

The name "Omnidroid" was used with permission of Lucasfilm for the 2004 Pixar movie, The Incredibles.

==
Fictional types of droids ==
The franchise, which began with the 1977 film Star Wars, features a variety of droids designed to perform specific functions.

According to background material, most droids lack true sentience and are given processing abilities sufficient only to carry out their assigned function.

However, over time droids may develop sentience on their own as they accumulate experience.

Periodic memory wipes can prevent this from happening, but those who manage to escape this fate will begin to develop their own personalities.
Within the Star Wars universe, a class system is used to categorize different droids depending on their skill-set: first class droids (physical, mathematical and medical sciences), second class droids (engineering and technical sciences), third class droids (social sciences and service functions), fourth class droids (security and military functions), and fifth class droids (menial labor and other non-intelligence functions).

===
Protocol droid ===
A protocol droid specializes in translation, etiquette and cultural customs, and is typically humanoid in appearance.

Protocol droids are used to aid in communications during diplomatic or business negotiations and often function as personal assistants to their owners.

Protocol droids are also used for military service, whether as administrators, couriers or spies.

However, they do have a tendency to be eccentric and fussy.
The most notable example is C-3PO, introduced in Star Wars and featured in all sequels and prequels.
4-LOM is a protocol droid turned bounty hunter who responds to Darth Vader's call to capture the Millennium Falcon in The Empire Strikes Back (1980).
TC-14 is a droid with feminine programming that appears in Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace (1999), and ME-8D9 is an "ancient protocol droid of unknown manufacture" that resides and works as a translator at Maz Kanata's castle on Takodana in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015).
===
Astromech droid ===
An astromech droid is one of a series of "versatile utility robots generally used for the maintenance and repair of starships and related technology".
These small droids usually possess "a variety of tool-tipped appendages that are stowed in recessed compartments".

On certain spacecraft such as X-wing starfighters, astromech droids also double as the ship's navigational system.

In addition to assisting with piloting and maintenance, astromech droids work in conjunction with the ship's hyperdrive to plot a safe course when traveling at faster-than-light speeds.
R2-D2 is an astromech droid introduced in 1977's Star Wars and featured in all subsequent films.
The malfunctioning droid R5-D4 also makes a brief appearance in Star Wars.
U9-C4 is a timid droid sent on a mission with D-Squad, an all-droid special unit in Star Wars: The Clone Wars, C1-10P (nicknamed "Chopper") is an oft-repaired, "outmoded" astromech who is one of the main characters of Star Wars Rebels, and BB-8 is the astromech droid of X-wing fighter pilot Poe Dameron in The Force Awakens.

===
Battle droid ===
A battle droid is a class of military robot used as an easily controlled alternative to human soldiers, most notably seen in the Star Wars prequel trilogy of films and the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars TV series, in which 'B1' and 'B2' models are frequent antagonists.
Due to their ubiquity, the terms 'B1' and 'battle droid' are used interchangeably; 'B2' models are also referred to as 'super' battle droids.
These droids are mainly used as the primary troops of the Confederacy of Independent Systems or Separatist Alliance, acting as the counterpart to the clone troopers of the Galactic Republic during the Clone Wars.

The tall, thin B1 model resembles the Geonosian species, whose Baktoid Armor Workshop designed and built the droids for the Trade Federation and later the Separatists.

Standing 1.93 m (6 ft 4 in)
tall, B1 battle droids were given a humanoid appearance so they could operate existing machinery and weaponry, and are meant to be cheaply mass-produced in large numbers.

During the Battle of Naboo, battle droids were controlled from a central command computer as a cost-saving measure.

By the time of the Clone Wars, this drawback was rectified by giving them the capacity for limited independent thought.

The B2 super battle droid, introduced in the Battle of Geonosis, was designed by the Techno Union and manufactured by Baktoid as an improvement of the original B1 model.

Heavily armored and capable of limited independent thought, it features an integrated dual laser cannon in its right arm.
B1 battle droids have been criticized for being ineffective and boring opponents in the Star Wars films, easily destroyed and devoid of any personality.

However, Rafael Motamayor of SyFy Wire argues that the 2008 Star Wars: The Clone Wars television series rehabilitated their image by giving them distinct personalities.

With the in-universe explanation that battle droids were upgraded to have independent thought, battle droids in the series are shown with self-awareness of their cannon fodder nature.

This is often used as comic relief as battle droids comment on their tragic situation and even question orders that would get themselves or other battle droids killed.
Beyond the B1 and B2 models, multiple other types of specialized battle droids have been featured in the Star Wars fictional universe.

The droideka is a three-legged heavy infantry unit designed by the Colicoids, a bloodthirsty insect-like species which it resembles.

It is equipped with twin blasters and a deflector shield generator and can transform into its wheel form, allowing the droideka to roll towards the enemy at speeds of up to 75 km/h (47 mph).

Commando droids are superior versions of the B1 battle droid, built sturdier with armor to withstand blaster fire and more advanced combat programming and battlefield awareness.

The T-series tactical droids serve as advisors to Separatist commanders or command groups of other battle droids, while super tactical droids serve as generals of droid armies and fleets.

Droid vehicles and spacecraft include Vulture droids, Dwarf spider droids and Hailfire droids.

After the Clone Wars, the Imperial Senate banned the manufacture of battle droids, but with loopholes for the building of "security" droids.

This includes the Imperial military's KX-series of which K-2SO is an example.

===
Probe droid ===
Probe droids first appear in The Empire Strikes Back as the Empire deploys thousands of them to locate the hidden Rebel base.

They are described as traveling via hyperdrive-equipped pods to almost anywhere in the galaxy in order to search for their target.

Also called probots, they are 2 m (6 ft 7 in) in height, floating above the ground on repulsorlifts and propelled by silenced thrusters.

Probots are equipped with a variety of sensing equipment, including motion detectors and ultraviolet sensors, a blaster for self-defense, and a HoloNet transceiver to transmit any discoveries to Imperial forces.
During the production of The Empire Strikes Back, Joe Johnston drew storyboard panels influenced by Dan O'Bannon and Moebius's short comic "The Long Tomorrow" (1975), one of which repurposes a pose Johnston admitted he borrowed from said work.
The same panel of the comic features a robot design by Moebius, which may have been the basis of the probe droid (or "probot") design that concept designers Johnston and Ralph McQuarrie created for the film.

===
Other droids ===
Labor droids are used for a variety of tasks, from the very simple such as lifting heavy objects to the complex such as repairing machinery or administrating entire facilities, though their programming is very task-specific.

Examples include mining droids which extract valuable resources, often from hazardous environments, and power droids, mobile fusion reactors which recharge ships, machines and other droids.

Interrogation droids utilize a variety of devices, chemicals and techniques to exploit a prisoner's weaknesses in order to extract information from them.

Assassin droids such as the IG-series act with ruthless efficiency to hunt down their targets
; while some serve other masters, others may operate independently.

Medical droids on the other hand work tirelessly to heal people who have been harmed, whether as medical assistants, midwives or doctors.

Many possess an encyclopedic knowledge of different species' physiologies so that patients can be properly diagnosed and treated.

==
List of droid characters ==
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Astromech droid in the StarWars.com
Databank
Protocol droid in the StarWars.com Databank
Astromech droid on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
This is a list of Star Wars cast members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the film series.
The list is sorted by film and character, as some of the characters were portrayed by multiple actors.

As the franchise is composed of multiple films (including spin-offs and anthologies) there are multiple lead actors.
In the primary series, dubbed the "Skywalker saga", Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher starred as Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia respectively in the original films Star Wars (1977)
, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983) and reprised the roles in the sequel trilogy films
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017) and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
James Earl Jones, David Prowse and Sebastian Shaw collectively portrayed Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader, and Alec Guinness portrayed Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original films.
Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen portray a younger version of Anakin in the first and next two installments of the prequels and Ewan McGregor stars in all three, Star Wars:
Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999),
Star Wars:
Episode II - Attack of the Clones (2002) and Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith (2005) as a younger Obi-Wan Kenobi, being top billed in the later two films.
Daisy Ridley plays Rey and
Adam Driver plays Kylo Ren in the sequel films (2015—19).

Also starring in the franchise include, Felicity Jones who plays Jyn Erso in Rogue One (2016) and Alden Ehrenheich as Han Solo in Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018).
Solo served as a lead and supporting character in the original (1977—83) and sequel (
2015—19) films respectively, played by Harrison Ford.

Also recurring throughout the franchise include, Frank Oz, Samuel L. Jackson, Jimmy Smits, Natalie Portman, Pernilla August, Liam Neeson, Christopher Lee, Billy Dee Williams, Joel Edgerton, Peter Mayhew, Joonas Suotamo, Emilia Clarke, Ray Park, Andy Serkis, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, Warwick Davis, Oscar Isaac, Kelly Marie Tran, John Boyega, Gwendoline Christie, Domnhall Gleeson, Temuera Morrison, Jeremy Bulloch, Matthew Wood and Ian McDiarmid.

With the release of Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker in 2019, Daniels is credited with the most acting appearances as the same character, having played C-3PO in all nine films of the Skywalker Saga, as well as the anthology film Rogue One, The Clone Wars film and TV series in 2008 and 2003, and a guest appearance in the first season of Rebels.
He also appeared in Solo, but as a different character named "Tak", as well as a character named "Dannl Faytonni" in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, the latter being alongside C-3PO.

Indicators only apply for characters portrayed within multiple categories.
All characters without indicators were introduced within the category they are listed on.
The cast is divided in six categories: main saga (M), anthology series (A), animated series and Star Wars: The Clone Wars film (S), books (B), comic books (C), and the non-canonical Legends series (L).

List indicators:
^M  denotes the character was introduced within the main saga.

^A
denotes the character was introduced within the anthology series.

^S
denotes the character was introduced within an animated series or The Clone Wars film.

^LS
denotes the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends animated series of film before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^B
denotes the character was introduced within a novel.

^LB
denotes the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends novel before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^C
denotes the character was introduced within a comic book or graphic novel.

^LC
denotes
the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends comic book or graphic novel before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^+
denotes the character introduced within the current category, but also has an extended plot-line within another category.
(
Example: ^+A  would denote the character was introduced within the current category but has an extended plot-line in the anthology series, alternatively ^+S  would denote an extended plot-line in the animated series, and ^+AS  would denote extended plot-lines on both categories.)
==
The Skywalker saga ==


==
Anthology series ==
A series of stand-alone films was announced in 2013:
Rogue One was released in 2016, Solo was released in 2018, and another film is planned with an unknown title or release.
The films do contain some characters and cast from the main series, along with new characters.

==
Animated series and Star Wars: The Clone Wars film ==
In 2008, an animated film entitled Star Wars: The Clone Wars was released.
It was followed by a television series of the same name within the same year, three other series entitled Star Wars Rebels, Star Wars Forces of Destiny and Star Wars Resistance premiered soon after.

==
Legends films and television series ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, the Star Wars Holiday Special and Ewok prequel films: Caravan of Courage and The Battle for Endor, as well as most comics and books produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars, were re-branded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Despite the decanonization, the television films do retain many major cast members from the original trilogy reprising their roles; the Holiday Special featured most of the cast from the original film, while the Ewok prequel films featured Warwick Davis reprising his role as Wicket, who originated in Return of the Jedi.

== Notes ==
a The Clone Wars was Saw Gerrera's first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first film appearance in Rogue One, he is portrayed by Forest Whitaker.

b
The Holiday Special was Boba Fett's first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first canon appearance in TESB, he is portrayed by Jeremy Bulloch.

c Kevin Pollack, Ken Grantham, Mark Dodson and Rick Cimino are credited as providing Ewok voices for The Battle for Endor, although which Ewok they voice is not stated.

d Clone Wars was General Grievous' first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first canon appearance in ROTS, he is voiced by Matthew Wood.

e Carrie Fisher appears in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker from footage originally shot for Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, but cut from the film.
The previously unseen footage was repurposed to fit the narrative for the franchise's ninth installment.
Additional material for Fisher's character is provided by Billie Lourd via motion capture.

f
Ewan McGregor's voice can be heard saying the newly recorded dialogue "These are your first steps" while archive recordings of Alec Guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "Rey", both occurring during a flashback caused by Rey's touching of Anakin Skywalker's lightsaber.

g Ewan McGregor's voice can be heard saying the newly recorded dialogue "These are your final steps, Rey, rise and take them" while archive recordings of Alec Guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "Rey", both occurring when Rey says "Be with me", and voices of past Jedi are heard.

h
In the original release of the film, Yoda is portrayed via puppeteery.
In the 2011 Blu-ray re-release, he is played via computer-generated imagery.

==
References ==
The Star Wars Actors Database
Over 1000 Star Wars actors listed with biographies, photos, in-depth credit listings and more.
==
External links ==
Star Wars Episode
I: The Phantom Menace
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope
Star Wars
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi
Star Wars Episode VII:
The Force Awakens
Star Wars Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi
Star Wars Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is an American 3D CGI animated television series created by Lucasfilm Animation, Lucasfilm Animation Singapore, and CGCG Inc.
On August 15, 2008, the debut film was released in theaters; it served as the introduction of the series.
The series made its debut on the American Cartoon Network on October 3, 2008.
It is set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy during the three-year interim between Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (the same time period as the previous 2003 Clone Wars series).
Each episode has a running time of 22 minutes, filling a half-hour time slot.
Star Wars creator George Lucas originally claimed that at least 100 episodes would be produced.
During the course of the series, 133 episodes of Star Wars: The Clone Wars were released over seven seasons, between October 3, 2008, and May 4, 2020.

On March 11, 2013, Lucasfilm announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down", effectively canceling the series as Lucasfilm ended its contract with Cartoon Network following its acquisition by Disney.
The unreleased episodes that had already been produced were referred to at the time as "bonus content".
On January 16, 2014, the German television network Super RTL announced their plans to air these episodes as a sixth season, which consisted of 13 episodes.
Season 6, along with the other seasons and the feature film, were made available on Netflix on March 7, 2014.In July 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes on Disney+.
The new episodes served as the series' final season, which premiered on February 21, 2020 and concluded the series on May 4, 2020.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Film (2008) ===
As a lead-in to the TV series of the same name, the film was released theatrically on August 15, 2008, and was distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures.
Though critical reception was negative, the film was a box-office success and grossed $68.3 million worldwide against an $8.5 million budget.

===
Season 1 (2008–09) ===
The premiere episodes of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars aired on October 3, 2008, and set a new record with Cartoon Network as their most-watched series premiere, attracting 3.992 million total viewers.
The season finale, "Hostage Crisis", was broadcast on March 20, 2009, and the original broadcast received 3.297 million viewers.
Season 1 depicted the attempts of the Republic and the Separatists to gain the allegiance of many planets and moons.

===
Season 2:
Rise of the Bounty Hunters (2009–10) ===
The season two premiere, "Holocron Heist", was broadcast on October 2, 2009 and attracted 2.581 million viewers.
Episode 15 was first released in Canada.
Episodes 16–21 were released in the UK before airing in the US.
In season 2, the Sith resort to hiring bounty hunters and mercenaries to steal objects and intel or to assassinate targets for them.
Meanwhile, the Jedi lead the Republic forces in an assault on the primary battle droid manufacturing facility.

The one-hour season finale combined of "R2 Come Home" and "Lethal Trackdown" was broadcast on April 30, 2010 and the original broadcast received 2.756 million viewers.

===
Season 3
: Secrets Revealed (2010–11) ===
The season three premiere, consisting of "Clone Cadets" and "ARC Troopers," was broadcast on September 17, 2010, attracting 2.42 million viewers.
These episodes, and certain others in this season, cover events from previous seasons.
Episodes 21 and 22 were released in the UK before airing in the US.
The season finale, consisting of "Padawan Lost" and "Wookiee Hunt", was broadcast on April 1, 2011, attracting 2.31 million viewers.

=== Season 4:
Battle Lines (2011–12) ===
The season four premiere, consisting of "Water War" and "Gungan Attack", was broadcast on September 16, 2011, and attracted 1.93 million viewers, the lowest premiere viewing of all seasons.
The season finale, "Revenge" was broadcast on March 16, 2012, attracting 2.03 million viewers.

===
Season 5 (2012–13) ===
The season five premiere, "Revival", was broadcast on September 29, 2012, and attracted 1.94 million viewers.
Season five consisted of 20 episodes instead of the normal 22 episode count.
The season five finale, "The Wrong Jedi", was broadcast on March 2, 2013, and attracted 2.18 million viewers.
Unlike the first four seasons, the episodes of the fifth season were released to DVD and Blu-ray in chronological order as opposed to broadcast order.

===
Season 6:
The Lost Missions (2014) ===
The sixth season was released in its entirety on March 7, 2014 on Netflix.
The season had already premiered in Germany on February 15, 2014 on Super RTL.
===
Season 7:
The Final Season (2020) ===
On July 19, 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes to be released on Disney+
during the service's first year.
The seventh and final season premiered on February 21, 2020.
===
Chronological order ===
While the series is designed to be an anthology of both standalone episodes and small story arcs, various events throughout inform stories, characters, and relationships to create a recognizably continuous narrative.
On March 17, 2014, in recognition of the release of the complete series on Netflix, StarWars.com released the official chronological episode order for the first six seasons; this was later updated to include links to the episodes on Disney+.
Regarding the seventh and final season, StarWars.com revealed that episodes five through eight are set before the season premiere "The Bad Batch".

==
The Clone Wars Legacy ==
At the time of cancellation in March 2013, there were still many episodes in development.
Thirteen of these episodes were finished to become part of Season 6:
The Lost Missions
but there were still additional arcs that were never released.
In September 2014, Lucasfilm released details of multiple story arcs from the unfinished episodes.
The Bad Batch was eventually completed and aired as the first arc of season 7.
===
Print ===


====
Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir ====
A four-episode arc continued the story of Darth Maul following the events of the season 5 episode "The Lawless".
The four episodes were titled: "The Enemy of My Enemy", "A Tale of Two Apprentices", "Proxy War", and "Showdown on Dathomir" (original production codes: 6.21–6.24).
According to Dave Filoni, the four scripts "came out of one of our story conferences with George Lucas".
The scripts and designs for the arc were adapted into a four-issue comic book titled Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir, released in August 2014 by the publisher Dark Horse Comics.
The comic was the last Star Wars comic published by Dark Horse before Lucasfilm transferred the license to Marvel Comics in 2014 and was collected into a trade paperback by Marvel in 2018.The plot follows Darth Maul, who has been captured by Darth Sidious.
He is tortured by Count Dooku for information about the Shadow Collective and the allies Maul has made.
Maul escapes and heads to Zanbar to command the Death Watch army, but is followed by General Grievous and his droids.
They battle Maul and the Mandalorians, who are soon overwhelmed by the droids.
Maul flees and confers with Mother Talzin, who is revealed to be his biological mother, and plots to draw out Sidious by capturing Dooku and Grievous.
The scheme works, and Talzin is able to restore herself to her physical form, but sacrifices herself to save Maul and is killed by Grievous.
Although Maul escapes with a company of loyal Mandalorians, the Shadow Collective has fallen apart due to the conflict with Sidious, as the Hutts, Pykes, and Black Sun have all abandoned Maul.

====
Dark Disciple ====
An eight-episode arc with Asajj Ventress and Jedi Quinlan Vos was adapted into a novel by Christie Golden titled Dark Disciple, released on July 7, 2015.
The eight episodes were titled: "Lethal Alliance", "The Mission", "Conspirators", "Dark Disciple", "Saving Vos, Part I", "Saving Vos, Part II", "Traitor", and "The Path" (original production codes: 6.13–6.16 and 7.05–7.08).
The story follows Vos partnering up with Ventress, hoping to execute Count Dooku.
Eric Goldman of IGN gave the book an 8 out of 10, saying it was great.

===
Story reels ===


====
Crystal Crisis on Utapau ===
=
In September 2014, four unfinished episodes were released in completed story reel format, titled: "
A Death on Utapau," "In Search of the Crystal," "Crystal Crisis,” and "The Big Bang" (original production codes: 6.01–6.04).
The arc takes place on Utapau with Obi-Wan and Anakin investigating an arms deal involving the Separatists and a kyber crystal.
The arc also deals with Anakin's feelings after Ahsoka left the Jedi Order.
It was included in the season 6 Blu-ray.

====
The Bad Batch ====
The story reels for this four-episode arc were screened on April 17, 2015, at Star Wars Celebration Anaheim, and were released on the official Star Wars website on April 29, 2015.
Scripted by Brent Friedman, the four episodes were later completed and aired as the first arc of season 7 (with some changes from the original story reels).
On July 13, 2020, a spin-off sequel series titled Star Wars: The Bad Batch was announced; it will follow the titular group of clones working as mercenaries in the immediate aftermath of the Clone Wars.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars:
Clone Wars episodes
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (film)


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
List of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars   episodes at TV.com
Skymovies.com
Episode Guide
The Clone Wars section on StarWars.com
CartoonNetwork.com
Schedule
Chronological order on StarWars.com
The Clone Wars are a series of fictional conflicts in the Star Wars franchise by George Lucas.
Though mentioned briefly in the first Star Wars film (A New Hope, 1977), the war itself was not depicted until Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005).
The Clone Wars are also the setting for three eponymous projects:
a 2D animated series (2003–2005), a CGI film (2008), and a 3D CGI series (2008–2014, 2020).
They have featured in numerous Star Wars books and games.

Within the Star Wars narrative, the Clone Wars involve a three-year war fought to prevent thousands of planetary systems from seceding from the Galactic Republic and forming the "Confederacy of Independent Systems", often referred to as "the Separatists".
The Republic uses an army of clone troopers, the namesake of the conflict, led by the Jedi Order against the Separatist battle droid army.
The conflict was manufactured as a scheme for the Republic's Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, secretly an evil Sith lord, who was secretly manipulating the war to gain power and ultimately to convert the democratic Galactic Republic into the autocratic Galactic Empire, which was controlled through means of a military–industrial complex and featured in the original trilogy.

Lucas used the Clone Wars narrative to answer questions about the original trilogy, such as how the Empire originated and how Anakin Skywalker became Darth Vader.
The political and military events of the Clone Wars draw inspiration from real-world conflicts and historical events, such as the French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars, World War II and the American Civil War.

==
Concept and development ==
The first reference to the Clone Wars is in Star Wars creator George Lucas' third draft of the first film, which mentions the grizzled cyborg General Kenobi's "diary of the Clone Wars".
The wars were mentioned twice briefly in the final version of the film, referring to Obi-Wan Kenobi as a general who served Leia Organa's father during the conflict.
In drafting The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Lucas considered introducing a clone character who had been involved with the Clone Wars.
Leigh Brackett's first draft of the film initially developed Lando Calrissian as a clone from a planet of clones involved in the Clone Wars mentioned in A New Hope and were nearly made extinct by the war.
Boba Fett was also considered as from a group of shocktroopers nearly wiped out by Jedi during the Clone Wars.
However, these concepts were not included in the final version of the film.
Lucas was more guarded about the details of the Clone Wars than any other element of Star Wars, even making them off-limits to licensed products and books.
Lucas has noted that Palpatine's rise to power is similar to that of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany; as Chancellor of Germany, the latter was granted "emergency powers", as is Palpatine.
Lucas has also said that one of the primary influences for the political backdrop behind the Clone Wars, and all of Star Wars, was the Vietnam War and Watergate scandal era, when leaders embraced corruption for what they thought was the best course of action.
In 2002, Lucas said:

All democracies turn into dictatorships—but not by coup.
The people give their democracy to a dictator, whether it's Julius Caesar or Napoleon or Adolf Hitler.
Ultimately, the general population goes along with the idea.
What kinds of things push people and institutions in this direction?
That's the issue I've been exploring: how did the Republic turn into the Empire?
...
How does a good person go bad, and how does a democracy become a dictatorship?

The clone forces shown at the conclusion of Attack of the Clones comprised the largest digital army created for a film at that point.
Lucas proposed to concept artists that Revenge of the Sith would open with a montage of seven battles on seven planets.
Lucas then radically re-organized the plot; instead of opening the film with various Clone Wars battles, Lucas decided instead to focus on Anakin Skywalker.
The absence of the "seven battles on seven planets" in part led to Lucas's decision to launch the CGI-animated Clone Wars television series; Lucas said the cartoon could "do better" at depicting the conflict.

== Depiction ==
The Clone Wars was first depicted in Attack of the Clones, the release of which brought an end to Lucas's embargo on licensed material set during the era.
Numerous novels, comic books, and video games exploring the conflict have been sanctioned by Lucas Licensing.
===
Film ===
Attack of the Clones, set at the beginning of the wars, opens with the Galactic Republic's rising concern about the secession of thousands of star systems to the Confederacy of Independent Systems, which is publicly led by Count Dooku.
Chancellor Palpatine manipulates Jar Jar Binks and the rest of the Galactic Senate into granting him emergency powers.
Investigating two attempted assassinations of Senator Padmé Amidala, Obi-Wan Kenobi discovers Dooku used the identity of a dead Jedi master to secretly arrange the creation of a massive clone army on the Republic's behalf.
Yoda leads the clone army to rescue Obi-Wan, Padmé, and Anakin Skywalker from the Separatists on Geonosis, and the first battle of the war ensues.
At the battle's conclusion, Yoda declares: "Begun, the Clone War has."
In the final scene of the movie, Anakin and Padmé get married in secret, in violation of Anakin's Jedi vows.

Revenge of the Sith shows the waning days of the three-year Clone Wars, in which clone soldiers and their Jedi generals have fought against the Separatist droid army.
After killing Dooku and rescuing Palpatine from the Separatists during their assault on Coruscant, Anakin learns Padmé is pregnant.
He becomes troubled by visions of her death in childbirth, and Palpatine lures Anakin to the dark side of the Force by promising to teach him how to prevent her premature demise.
Meanwhile, Yoda is dispatched to Kashyyyk to stave off a Separatist invasion, and Obi-Wan Kenobi is dispatched to Utapau where he kills General Grievous.
Anakin discovers Palpatine is the elusive Sith Lord Darth Sidious, but he defends him against Mace Windu because he needs Palpatine's knowledge to save Padmé.
After Palpatine murders Windu, he dubs Anakin his new apprentice Darth Vader.
Palpatine orders the clone troopers to execute Order 66, and clones kill their Jedi generals across the galaxy.
Palpatine then dispatches Vader to kill the Separatist leaders on Mustafar and to issue a "shutdown command" to their droid army.
With their demise, Palpatine declares an end to the Clone Wars and the Republic's reformation into the Galactic Empire.

===
Animation ===
The 2D-animated Clone Wars series (2003–2005) depicts several Clone Wars battles and was meant to generate interest in Revenge of the Sith.
It also depicts the prelude to the opening battle of Revenge of the Sith and Palpatine's capture by General Grievous.
It was released on home video in two volumes.

Several years later, Lucas chose to reboot the series as a 3D CGI series developed by Dave Filoni.
After several years of production on the new television series, Lucas decided to spin off the first four episodes as a standalone film.
The film, released in 2008, introduces Ahsoka Tano as Anakin's apprentice and depicts the Republic and the Separatists battling and attempting to gain permission to travel through Jabba the Hutt's territory.

The television series that followed (2008–2014, 2020) is likewise set against the backdrop of the Clone Wars, with the series finale taking place at the same time as the climax of Revenge of the Sith.
The show offers additional details about the clone army's creation, establishes each of the clones as distinct characters, depicts numerous confrontations and developments from the conflict, and portrays the interaction between the clone troopers and their Jedi commanders.
For example, the series reveals that each clone has an "inhibitor chip" in his body that makes most of them obey Order 66.

===
Novels ===
The 2008 novelization of The Clone Wars by Karen Traviss begins a series of five novels by Traviss and Karen Miller published by Del Rey Books between 2008 and 2010.
The Clone Wars: Wild Space (2008) was written by Miller and focuses on Obi-Wan and Bail Organa.
Traviss returned to write The Clone Wars: No Prisoners (2009), in which Ahsoka is temporarily assigned to Captain Rex.
Finally, Miller wrote the two-part Clone Wars Gambit (2010), subtitled Stealth and Siege, which deals with a bioweapon threat by Neimoidian general Lok Durd.
Dark Disciple (2015) novelizes a story arc about Asajj Ventress and Quinlan Vos from eight unfinished episodes of The Clone Wars.
Catalyst:
A Rogue One Novel (2016) is set during the Clone Wars and the subsequent couple of years.
Thrawn: Alliances (2018) features flashbacks to the last year of the war featuring Anakin, Padmé, and Thrawn.

===
Comics ===
Dark Horse Comics published various comics set during the era, many of which were collected in a series of trade paperbacks over nine volumes.
Dark Horse also published a ten-volume graphic novella series titled Clone Wars – Adventures (2004–07), utilizing the style of the 2D animated series and depicting original stories set during the era.
A series of comics tying into the 3D animated series was released from 2008 to 2010, collected in three volumes, and was supplemented by an 11-volume series of graphic novellas released between 2008 and 2013.

Marvel's comic series Kanan (sometimes subtitled The Last Padawan) depicts the Star Wars Rebels character Kanan Jarrus
as Jedi Padawan Caleb Dume during the conflict.

===
Video games ===
LucasArts also produced video games like Republic Commando and The Clone Wars that depict the Clone Wars.

==
Analysis ==
Comparisons have been made between the political aspects of the Clone Wars and the events leading up to World War II.
Radio host Clyde Lewis' article on historical similarities in Star Wars claims that Palpatine's tactics parallel those of Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany; both leaders used wars and scapegoats to manipulate society's emotional state, thus providing the leadership with support and power.
Another writer compares the Clone Wars with World War II in general, basing his argument on the fact that Lucas was a baby boomer, and the dark times featured in the original trilogy rival the dark, uncertain Cold War.
Referring to Lucas's statements that the conflict in Star Wars was inspired by the cultural backdrop of the Vietnam War, journalist Chris Taylor said the Clone Wars are a parallel to World War II.
Anne Lancashire from the University of Toronto also points out some similar nomenclature between the Clone Wars and the American Civil War.
Several publications compared the political context of the Clone Wars to the Iraq War.
In claiming that the Star Wars galaxy under the deceitful Palpatine parallels the modern issues of the United States, an editorial on Antiwar.com states that Star Wars "establishes first the generally agreeable premise that it's right to overthrow oppressive government, before bringing into focus something more discomforting – that the corrupt tyranny referred to is our own".
Additionally, an article from Wiretap claims that "like Palpatine, the Bush administration has been able to feed on people's fears to gain more power".
Lucas stated that the Iraq war "didn't exist" when he developed the Clone Wars, but he did see parallels between the Vietnam War that inspired Star Wars and the war in Iraq.
Star Wars producer Rick McCallum corroborated that the Clone Wars was developed before the Iraq War, adding that Lucas "is a product of Vietnam".

==
Impact and critical response ==
The author of How Star Wars Conquered the Universe, Chris Taylor, calls the Clone Wars "a major part of Star Wars lore".
In its attempt to keep its Star Wars line of toys active after Return of the Jedi (1983), Kenner devised a storyline that would involve the return of an exiled "genetic terrorist" and his Clone Warriors.
Timothy Zahn said the clones' unexpected appearance fighting for "the good guys" in Attack of the Clones—despite many years of fan speculation that the clones were an invading force—was "wonderfully blindsid[ing]".
After seeing the CGI Clone Wars television show, Zahn was grateful that Lucasfilm rejected his initial Heir to the Empire draft, which involved an insane clone of Obi-Wan created during the conflict.

==
See also ==
List of Star Wars Clone Wars characters


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations
===
Works cited ===


==
Further reading ==
Sword Fighting in the Star Wars Universe:
Historical Origins, Style and Philosophy by Nick Jamilla (McFarland & Company, 2008)
Star Wars and History by Nancy Reagin & Janice Liedl
(John Wiley & Sons, 2012)
The Science Fiction Reboot: Canon, Innovation and Fandom in Refashioned Franchises by Heather Urbanski (McFarland & Company, 2013)
Star wars: the essential chronology by Kevin J. Anderson & Daniel Wallace (Ballantine Books, 2000)
Culture, identities, and technology in the Star wars films: essays on the two trilogies by Carl Silvio & Tony M. Vinci (McFarland & Company, 2007)
The Star Wars Heresies by Paul F. McDonald (McFarland & Company, 2013)


==
External links ==
Clone Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Star Wars sequel trilogy is the third trilogy of the main Star Wars franchise, an American space opera created by George Lucas.
It is produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures.
The trilogy consists of episodes VII through IX, chronologically following the prequel trilogy (Episodes I–III; 1999–2005) and the original trilogy (Episodes IV–VI; 1977–1983), serving as the final act of the "Skywalker saga".
Lucas had planned a sequel trilogy as early as 1976, but canceled it by 1981.
He ended up producing only the first six episodes and for a time described these as comprising the complete story.
The sequel trilogy concept was revived when The Walt Disney Company entered negotiations to acquire Lucasfilm in mid-2011.
Lucas produced new story treatments, but according to him these were largely discarded.
Both the acquisition and plans to produce the trilogy were announced in late 2012.

The first installment, The Force Awakens, was released on December 18, 2015.
It was directed by J. J. Abrams who co-wrote the screenplay with Lawrence Kasdan and Michael Arndt.
Original trilogy cast members including Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill, and Carrie Fisher reprised their roles, co-starring alongside franchise newcomers Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Adam Driver, and Oscar Isaac.
The trilogy's second installment, The Last Jedi, was released on December 15, 2017, with Rian Johnson as screenwriter and director, and most of the cast returning.
The final installment, The Rise of Skywalker, was released on December 20, 2019.
It was directed by Abrams, who co-wrote the screenplay with Chris Terrio.

The trilogy follows a 19-year-old girl named Rey, and the plight of the Resistance against the First Order, which has risen from the fallen Galactic Empire.
Rey learns the ways of the Force under Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa while searching for her parents (who mysteriously abandoned her as a child), and confronts Kylo Ren—the son of Leia and Han Solo, nephew of Luke, and grandson of Anakin Skywalker—who has fallen to the dark side.
The first two received positive reviews from critics, while the third received mixed reviews.
The trilogy grossed over $4.4 billion at the box office worldwide with each film surpassing a billion dollars worldwide.

==
Background ==


===
Early development ===
According to Mark Hamill, who plays Luke Skywalker, Star Wars creator George Lucas told him in 1976 that he planned three or four Star Wars trilogies.
Lucas suggested that Hamill could have a cameo role in Episode IX, which he imagined filming by 2011.
A Time magazine story in March 1978, quoting Lucas, stated there would be ten Star Wars films after The Empire Strikes Back.
Gary Kurtz, the producer of the first two films, was aware of proposed story elements for Episode VII to Episode IX before 1980.
At the time of the release of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Lucas said there were seven further Star Wars films he wanted to make.
He said he had "twelve-page outlines" for those films.
In an interview with Jim Steranko in Prevue magazine published in late 1980, Lucas described how the expansive scope of Star Wars had started with an overlong screenplay:
So, I took the screenplay and divided it into three stories, and rewrote the first one. ...
Then, I had the other two films, which were essentially split into three parts each, two trilogies.
When the smoke cleared, I said, 'This is really great.
I'll do another trilogy that takes place after this.'
I had three trilogies of nine films, and then another couple of odd films.
...
It's a nine-part saga that has a beginning, a middle and an end.
It progresses over a period of about fifty or sixty years with about twenty years between trilogies, each trilogy taking about six or seven years.

By the time of Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back's release, Lucas had written story treatments for all nine Star Wars episodes.
In 1999, Kurtz revealed a brief outline of these treatments:

Episode I would have explored the methodology of the Jedi.

Episode II would have developed the backstory of Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Episode III would explain the rise of Darth Vader.

Episode IV had already seen Luke decide to become a Jedi and
Obi-Wan's final confrontation with Vader.

Episode V was filmed essentially as written.

Episode VI was to feature Leia as an isolated monarch, Han's death, and Luke showing down with Vader before exiling himself.
Luke and Leia were not related.

Episode VII was to be the first part of a trilogy continuing the story of Luke as a Jedi.

Episode VIII would have featured Luke's sister (unique from Leia).

Episode IX would introduce the Emperor and depict Luke's ultimate battle with him.
In late 1980, Lucas stated that he had "titles and ten-page story outlines for each of" the nine episodes.
In an interview the same magazine, Gary Kurtz explained that the total number of films or their content might change as they were produced.
Lucas similarly stated in an interview with Starlog magazine in September 1981 that he had the nine-film series plotted, but:

... it's a long way from the plot to the script.
I've just gone through that with Return of the Jedi, and what seems like a great idea when it's described in three sentences
doesn't hold together when you try to make five or six scenes out of it.
So plots change a lot when they start getting into script form.

As part of his biographical research on George Lucas in the early 1980s, Lucas allowed author Dale Pollock to read the plot outlines of a 12-film saga on the condition of signing a confidentiality agreement.
Pollock said these sequel trilogy drafts would "involve Luke Skywalker in his 30s and 40s" and that they would be "The three most exciting stories ...
They had propulsive action, really interesting new worlds, new characters.
"
Lucas's plans were drastically changed after The Empire Strikes Back was released, owing to the stress of producing the first three films as well as pressure from his wife to step back from this kind of filmmaking.
By 1981, Lucas had decided to make only one Star Wars trilogy.

===
Cancellation period ===
According to Gary Kurtz, details of elements from the discarded sequel trilogy which were incorporated into Return of the Jedi include:
Luke Skywalker becomes a full-fledged Jedi knight.

Luke's sister, who was originally meant to be a new character, was revealed to be Leia.

The Emperor would first appear and Luke would confront him.
Through the 1980s, Lucas variously hinted at plot elements from his abandoned sequel trilogy, which he said would have revolved around moral and philosophical problems, including distinguishing right from wrong, justice, confrontation, and passing on what you have learned.
Ideas which seem to have been used in Disney's sequel trilogy include:
Episode VII would begin 20–40 years after the end of Return of the Jedi (Lucas in 1980 and 1982).

R2-D2 and C-3PO would be the only characters to appear in all nine films (per Lucas in 1980, 1981, and 1983).

The key actors, Hamill as Luke Skywalker, Ford as Han Solo, and Fisher as Princess Leia, would appear in their 60s or 70s
(Lucas in 1983).

Lucas stated in 1980 that "what happens to Luke ... is much more ethereal.
I have a tiny notebook full of notes on that."
Hamill said in 1983 that if his character were to return again, it would be "on another plane of existence, or not the same character.
"Ideas
that were apparently not retained in Disney's sequel trilogy
include:
The trilogy would deal with the rebuilding of the Republic (Lucas in 1980).

Luke would have a romantic relationship with a female partner (Lucas in 1988).Timothy Zahn, who wrote the Legends non-canonical Thrawn trilogy of novels, was interviewed about the sequel trilogy after its development by Disney was announced in 2012.

He confirmed that it was never meant to be based on his Thrawn trilogy nor the rest of the Expanded Universe, and said that he had been briefed years before on Lucas's plans for the sequels:
The original idea as I understood it—and Lucas changes his mind off and on, so it may not be what he's thinking right now—but it was going to be three generations.
You'd have the original trilogy, then go back to Luke's father and find out what happened to him, and if there was another seventh, eighth, or ninth film, it would be Luke's children.

In 1992, Lucas announced his intentions to produce a prequel trilogy.
When asked, he would frequently repeat that he had no plans to make the sequel trilogy and that he would not allow other directors to make it.
At a press conference for the 1997 Special Edition of the original trilogy, Lucas stated, "I don't have scripts [for the sequel trilogy].
The only notion on that was, wouldn't it be fun to get all the actors to come back when they're 60 or 70 years old and make three more about them as old people."
Also in 1997, he said: "The whole story has six episodes....
If I ever went beyond that, it would be something that was made up.
I really don't have any notion other than, 'Gee, it would be interesting to do Luke Skywalker later on.'
It wouldn't be part of the main story, but a sequel to this thing."
He further stated, "When you see it in six parts, you'll understand.
It really ends at part six.
"On
the possibility of someone else making Star Wars films, Lucas said, "Probably not, it's my thing.
"
In August 1999, at a press conference to discuss The Phantom Menace, Lucas described the "nine-year commitment" required to make a Star Wars trilogy.
In 2002, he said: "Basically what I said as a joke was, 'Maybe when Harrison and Carrie are in their 70s, we'll come back and do another version.'
The thing I didn't realize then, and that I do realize now very clearly, is that not only would they be in their 70s, but I would be in my 70s too."
He reiterated, "Ultimately, the saga will be six films, a 12-hour story.
Then people can watch all six films together as they were intended to be seen.
"In 2007
, Lucas described making the films at that age as "an idea that seemed amusing at the time, but doesn't seem realistic now", and suggested that "off-the-cuff" comments he had made in earlier years had been misconstrued as absolute statements.
In 2008, after all six films had been released, Lucas said: "The movies were the story of Anakin Skywalker and Luke Skywalker, and when Luke saves the galaxy and redeems his father, that's where that story ends.
"
In another 2008 interview, Lucas ruled out anybody else making Star Wars films, and added that the Expanded Universe did not line up with his vision.
Asked if he wanted new Star Wars films to be made after his death, he said: "I've left pretty explicit instructions for there not to be any more features.
There will definitely be no Episodes VII–IX.
That's because there isn't any story. ...
The Star Wars story is really the tragedy of Darth Vader.
That is the story."

===
Renewed development ===
In May 2011, Lucas was in Orlando, Florida, to celebrate the opening of Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue at Walt Disney World.
He was invited to breakfast by Disney CEO Bob Iger, who asked Lucas if he would be willing to sell his company to Disney.
Lucas had begun to consider retiring, but was not ready to do so at that time.
Lucas considered directing Episode VII for a May 2015 release and then selling his company, but decided to leave the franchise in the hands of other filmmakers, announcing in January 2012 that he would step away from making blockbuster films.
In early 2012, after being disappointed by the weak performance of Red Tails, Lucas announced to The New York Times that he was planning to retire.
While he was in New York, he asked Kathleen Kennedy to lunch.
He asked if she would be a co-chair at Lucasfilm with him, with the intention of transferring leadership entirely to her after about a year.
She began working for him on June 1, 2012; Lucas soon proposed that they work together on the sequel trilogy.
They brought in Michael Arndt to write a draft of Episode VII based on Lucas's synopsis.
Star Wars screenwriting veteran Lawrence Kasdan was hired to support Arndt.
After making an appearance at Star Wars Celebration VI in late August, Lucas took Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher to lunch and asked if they would be willing to reprise their roles for the new films.
They agreed, as did Harrison Ford after being promised that Han Solo would be given meaningful closure.
Details of his sequel trilogy treatments included the conclusion of the Skywalker family's story, with its third generation being portrayed in their twenties.
Lucas hoped to explain concepts he had imagined when he originally drafted his saga in the 1970s.
Most specifically he revealed the "symbiotic relationships" between the Jedi, the Force, midi-chlorians (microscopic lifeforms, first mentioned onscreen in 1999's The Phantom Menace), and the Whills (all-powerful creatures first mentioned in the title of the original outline of Star Wars, Journal of the Whills):
[The next three Star Wars films] were going to get into a microbiotic world.
But there's this world of creatures that operate differently than we do.
I call them the Whills.
And the Whills are the ones who actually control the universe.
They feed off the Force.
Back in the day, I used to say ultimately what this means is we were just cars, vehicles, for the Whills to travel around in.
We're vessels for them.
And the conduit is the midi-chlorians.
The midi-chlorians are the ones that communicate with the Whills.
The Whills, in a general sense, they are the Force. ...
But it's about symbiotic relationships.
I think, personally, one of the core values we should have in the world, and kids should be taught, is ecology, to understand that we all are connected.
(
Lucas, 2018)
By June 2012, Lucas had agreed to sell his company, provided that Kennedy would replace him as president of Lucasfilm.
Iger agreed, while insisting that Disney would have final say over future movies.
Lucas's final stipulations before the sale in late 2012 were that his story treatments would be used and that the number of Disney employees who could read them would be limited.
Lucas gave Kennedy the final draft of his story treatments during the October 2012 sale.
The same month, the Disney sale and production of the sequel trilogy, as well as a 2015 release date for a new film, were announced to the public.
Lucas stated, "I always said I wasn't going to do any more, and that's true, because I'm not going to do any more.
But that doesn't mean I'm unwilling to turn it over to Kathy to do more.
"
Both plot outlines, the one written in the 1980s and the one written in the early 2010s, were given to Iger around the time that Disney acquired Lucasfilm.

In January 2013, Lucas held the first story briefing about the as-yet untitled Episode VII at Skywalker Ranch.
Related concepts stemming from these early briefings include the following story elements:
A 14-year-old female Jedi Padawan named Taryn.
Lucas also considered Thea and Winkie as potential names for the character.
The female Padawan was retained as the 19-year-old Rey.

Another teenager named Skylar who befriends the protagonist and carries a blaster.
He ultimately became the stormtrooper character, Finn.
In at least one conception, Skylar was the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa, and ultimately fell to the Dark Side of the Force (these plot developments were retained for the backstory of Ben Solo/Kylo Ren in the final iteration).
However, in some drafts, this character was not anyone's son, and in others it was not decided whose son he was.

The older Luke Skywalker would have exiled himself to a remote planet where the first Jedi temple was located.
Luke would have started off reluctant to train the female Padawan, but eventually have a change of heart and agree to train her.
Lucas planned for Luke to die in Episode VIII.
Conversely, in 2018, Hamill said that Lucas' original vision for the ending of Episode IX was to have Luke die then instead of making a simple cameo, leaving his sister Leia as a Jedi.
Luke was going to appear with dialogue in the first film.

One of the antagonists would be a character named Darth Talon (later revealed to be the female Sith lord from the Star Wars: Legacy comic book series), who served a powerful master (codenamed "Uber" by the production team) and was responsible (in some versions of the story) for turning the son of Han and Leia to the Dark Side of the Force.
Talon's role in the story was eventually subsumed into the role of Kylo Ren, and "Uber" became Supreme Leader Snoke.

Darth Vader's castle, which Lucas had been developing since the preproduction phase of The Empire Strikes Back, would have been involved.
In an interview published in 2020, Lucas says he decided not to work on the trilogy because he was "about to have a daughter" at the time and decided to "enjoy life for a while."
He also detailed more of his story treatments:
The trilogy would start a few years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
According to Lucas, "we establish pretty quickly that there's this underworld, there are these offshoot stormtroopers who started their own planets, and that Luke is trying to restart the Jedi."

Darth Maul would return with robotic legs (as had been established in Star Wars: The Clone Wars) and train the female Darth Talon as his apprentice.
According to Lucas, "She was the new Darth Vader and most of the action was with her.
So these were the two main villains of the trilogy.
"
Maul would become "the godfather of crime in the universe because, as the Empire falls, he takes over."

Leia is trying to rebuild the Republic and "get it under control from the gangsters."
Lucas stated that "That was the main story."

Luke "puts the word out, so out of 100,000 Jedi, maybe 50 or 100 are left.
The Jedi have to grow again from scratch, so Luke has to find two- and three-year-olds, and train them.
It'll be 20 years before you have a new generation of Jedi.
By the end of the trilogy, Luke would have rebuilt much of the Jedi, and we would have the renewal of the New Republic, with Leia, Senator Organa, becoming the Supreme Chancellor in charge of everything.
So she ended up being the Chosen One.
"In 2015
, Lucas revealed (to his disappointment) that his outlines had been discarded in order to "make something for the fans".
Episode VII writer and director J. J. Abrams later revealed that the same year, Disney had given him a mandate to discard Lucas's story and "start from scratch".
Episode VII:
The Force Awakens was written by Lucasfilm veteran Lawrence Kasdan, along with J. J. Abrams and Michael Arndt.

Bob Iger's memoirs, published in 2019, recount that Lucas was upset after hearing the plot of The Force Awakens in meetings, specifically about elements that were derivative of the original 1977 film.
Lucas felt betrayed by Iger and Abrams because they discarded some of his sequel trilogy ideas.
As announced by Lucasfilm, the sequel trilogy meant the end of most of the existing Expanded Universe, so as to give "maximum creative freedom to the filmmakers and also preserve an element of surprise and discovery for the audience".
Only Episodes I–VI would remain canon to the franchise, along with The Clone Wars animated film and series.
Most everything produced after the 2014 announcement would also be considered canon.

==
Films ==
Unlike the previous two trilogies, whose films were released approximately three years apart ahead of Memorial Day weekend, the sequel films were released two years apart from each other in December.
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015, and introduces the 19-year-old orphan, Rey, who is drawn into the conflict between the Resistance and the First Order, a ruthless military faction commanded by Kylo Ren—the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo.
In The Last Jedi, released on December 15, 2017, Rey is trained by Luke Skywalker, the last living Jedi, while again facing Ren and the First Order.
The Rise of Skywalker was released on December 20, 2019, and features the conclusion of the age-old conflict between the Jedi and Sith, with Rey confronting the resurrected Emperor Palpatine.

===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens ===
About 30 years after the destruction of the second Death Star, Luke Skywalker has vanished.
The remnants of the Empire have become the First Order, which seeks to destroy Luke and the New Republic.
The First Order is opposed by the Resistance, led by General Leia Organa.
On the planet Jakku, Resistance pilot Poe Dameron obtains a map to Luke's location, but he is captured by First Order commander Kylo Ren—the son of Leia and Han Solo.
Poe's droid BB-8 escapes with the map and encounters a scavenger named Rey.
Rey and BB-8 team up with a defecting stormtrooper, Finn, along with Han Solo and Chewbacca, to deliver the map to the Resistance.
Episode VII began pre-production on October 30, 2012.
The screenplay for the film was originally set to be written by Michael Arndt, but time management and creative differences contributed to his departure from the project.
On January 25, 2013, J. J. Abrams was officially announced as Episode VII's director and producer, along with producer Bryan Burk and Bad Robot Productions.
John Williams was hired to compose the music for the entire sequel trilogy.
In October, it was announced that writing duties would be taken over by Abrams and Lawrence Kasdan, co-writer of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
George Lucas was set to provide Abrams with advice as a creative consultant; however, Lucas had no involvement, with his representative stating that he "ideally would love not to see any footage until he walks into the theater next December.
He has never been able to be surprised by a Star Wars film before
and he said he was looking forward to it.
"
Production began in April 2014; it was released on December 18, 2015.
In the US, the film received a PG-13 rating "for sci-fi action violence" and an M Rating In Australia, the second Star Wars film to receive that classification after Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
The film broke opening weekend box office records in North America with $248 million ($39 million more than previous record holder Jurassic World) and totals of $529 million worldwide, the largest opening ever.
The film set another new record by becoming the first movie to break the $1 billion mark in box office sales in just 12 days.
It is currently the highest-grossing film of all time in North America and the third highest-grossing film worldwide, unadjusted for inflation.

===
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi ===
After finding Luke Skywalker in self-imposed exile, Rey attempts to convince him to teach her the ways of the Force.
She also seeks answers about her past and the conflict between Luke and his nephew Ben Solo (now Kylo Ren).
Unbeknownst to Luke, Rey starts using the Force to communicate with Kylo.
Meanwhile, Leia leads the Resistance as they are pursued by the First Order, led by Supreme Leader Snoke.
Rey leaves Luke in an attempt to redeem Kylo and achieve peace.
After Kylo kills Snoke, Rey is forced to choose between ruling the galaxy with him, or helping the outnumbered Resistance survive.
On November 20, 2012, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg would write and produce Episodes VIII and IX, but were later confirmed to be writing standalone films.
On June 20, 2014, Looper director Rian Johnson was announced as writer and director of Episode VIII; he confirmed in August that he would direct.
On March 12, 2015, Lucasfilm announced that Johnson would direct Episode VIII with Ram Bergman as producer.
In March 2015, Oscar Isaac confirmed he would reprise his role as Poe Dameron in Episode VIII.
In July, it was reported that Benicio del Toro was being considered for a villain; he later confirmed that he had been cast.
In September, it was reported that Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Tatiana Maslany, Gina Rodriguez, Olivia Cooke, and Bel Powley were on the shortlist for two separate parts.
Jimmy Vee was cast as R2-D2, succeeding Kenny Baker, who would die the next year.
Some pre-production filming took place in September 2015 on the island of Skellig Michael, Ireland to take advantage of better weather conditions.
Abrams revealed that the film's script was completed in a November 2015 interview with Wired.
In December, Hamill, Isaac, Christie, and Boyega were confirmed to reprise their roles as Luke Skywalker, Poe Dameron, Captain Phasma, and Finn, respectively.
Kennedy announced at the December 17 London premiere of The Force Awakens that most of its cast would return for Episode VIII.On January 20, 2016
, Lucasfilm and Disney announced that the release of the film would be delayed from May to December 2017.
Three days later, the release date of December 15, 2017 was confirmed, as well as the title
Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Principal photography began in February 2016; additional filming took place in Dubrovnik from March 9 to March 16, as well as in Ireland in
May. Principal photography wrapped in July 2016.
Carrie Fisher died on December 27, 2016, but had completed filming her role as Leia.
Much of the filming took place at Pinewood Studios near London.
Kathleen Kennedy and Ram Bergman were the producers and J. J. Abrams executive produced.

===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker ===
The Rise of Skywalker is the final film of the Skywalker saga, featuring a climactic clash between the Resistance and the First Order, and the Jedi and the Sith.
The film is set a year following The Last Jedi and depicts the return of Palpatine, who has been secretly controlling the First Order from the Sith planet Exegol.
Palpatine orders Kylo Ren to find and kill Rey, who is revealed to be Palpatine's granddaughter.
Palpatine unveils an armada of Star Destroyers to reclaim the galaxy.
Rey and the Resistance learn of Palpatine's return and embark on a quest to find him.
They eventually locate Exegol; Rey confronts Palpatine, while the Resistance attack Palpatine's fleet.
In June 2014, Johnson was announced as writing a story treatment for Episode IX, but later stated he had not been involved with writing the film.
In August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was announced as the director of Episode IX, and he, with Derek Connolly, began writing a script.
In February 2016, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed that pre-production of Episode IX had begun.
Following the death of Carrie Fisher in late December 2016, media outlets speculated on whether her role would be recast for Episode IX and whether the absence of her character would affect the film's plot.
A few weeks later, Lucasfilm stated that they would not digitally recreate Fisher's performance for the film.
In April 2017, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not be in Episode IX, but it was later announced that Fisher would in fact appear using unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.
In August, it was reported that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.

In September 2017, Lucasfilm announced that Trevorrow had stepped down as director, and a week later, it was announced that J. J. Abrams would return to direct Episode IX.
He co-wrote the script with Chris Terrio, in addition to producing the film through Bad Robot Productions with Kennedy and Michelle Rejwan.
Disney had originally scheduled the film's release for December 2019, in keeping with the previous two sequel trilogy films, but then moved it up to May 24, a time of the year more common to the first six Star Wars episodes.
However, after Abrams' return, its release date was moved back to December.
On January 10, 2018, it was reported that John Williams will return to compose and conduct the music for Episode IX.
The next month, Williams announced that it would be the last Star Wars film music he would compose.
On July 6, 2018, it was reported that Keri Russell was in early talks for a role in Episode IX.
On July 9, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Billy Dee Williams was confirmed to reprise the role of Lando Calrissian.
On July 27, the official casting announcement was made, including the return of Daisy Ridley, Adam Driver, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Kelly Marie Tran, Joonas Suotamo, Billie Lourd, Mark Hamill, and Anthony Daniels, with Naomi Ackie and Richard E. Grant joining the cast.
The same announcement confirmed Williams' return and that Carrie Fisher would posthumously portray Leia Organa using unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.
Lucasfilm also initially had plans to include unseen footage of Fisher from The Last Jedi, but it was ultimately not used in the film.
It was announced later the same day that Russell had joined the cast.
It was reported that the character Yoda would also return.
On April 12th, at the 2019 Star Wars Celebration, the title for Episode IX was confirmed to be The Rise of Skywalker.
Principal photography began on August 1, 2018 and wrapped on February 15, 2019.
The Rise of Skywalker was released in the United States on December 20, 2019.

==
Themes ==
According to J. J. Abrams and Chris Terrio, the trilogy's core theme is about learning from the previous generation, akin to the Americans in the War of 1812, who preserved what was fought for in the American Revolutionary War.
On the inspiration for the First Order formed "from the ashes of the Empire", Abrams spoke of conversations the writers had about how the Nazis could have escaped to Argentina after World War II and "started working together again.
"Polygon
considers that The Last Jedi's portrayal of Luke Skywalker as a pacifist Jedi master reflects the Jedi's beliefs as being inspired by the Buddhist religion due to the character's inner conflict towards using a lightsaber and seeing it as a weapon of destruction.
The Last Jedi features scenes recalling Akira Kurosawa's Rashomon (1950), utilizing the Rashomon effect when Luke tells Rey that he considered murdering his nephew, Ben Solo, due to sensing his inevitable fall to the dark side.
Later, Kylo recounts his perspective, which prompts Luke to tell a third, combined perspective of the event.
According to Adam Driver, Kylo Ren is "morally justified in doing what he thinks is right".
The Rise of Skywalker depicts Kylo Ren having his helmet repaired following its destruction in The Last Jedi.
Abrams compared the fractured mask to Kintsugi, a Japanese ceramic art of repairing broken pottery which accentuates the breakage.
While the helmet obscures his vulnerabilities in The Force Awakens, its fractured form in The Rise of Skywalker instead communicates the fractured nature of his character.
Kylo overcomes and kills his father in The Force Awakens before reconciling with his memory of him in The Rise of Skywalker; according to Terrio, this reconciliation represents the "Atonement with the Father" stage of the hero's journey, which the Star Wars films are heavily patterned on.
Rey's journey mirrors that of Anakin and Luke in the prequel and original trilogies.
The final scene of The Last Jedi depicts servant children playing with a toy of Luke, with one boy using the Force to grab a broom.
According to Inverse, this symbolizes that "the Force can be found in people with humble beginnings."
A writer for the same website interprets the end of The Rise of Skywalker as seeing Rey "bury the past" and rejecting "any power her grandfather held over her" in a completion of the hero's journey.

== Reception ==
The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi received a positive reception from critics, while The Rise of Skywalker received mixed reviews.
Fan criticism has surrounded aspects of The Force Awakens being too similar to previous films in the franchise, and The Last Jedi for subverting conventions of the franchise without a compelling reason.
Critical opinions of The Rise of Skywalker have been polarizing; while some praised its celebration of the entire saga, its tribute to Carrie Fisher, and return of many longtime characters from the original trilogy, many were divided on the film's perceived retconning of The Last Jedi, as well as its heavy fan service.
Some critics and fans have alleged that Lucasfilm lacked sufficient planning for the trilogy's overarching story, feeling that the films appear inconsistent and contradictory as a result of the supposedly opposing visions of directors J. J. Abrams and Rian Johnson.
Said criticism has been directed at the consensus that Johnson had essentially been given a blank slate for The Last Jedi with no clear guidelines or direction from Lucasfilm, and in doing so either controversially handled or ignored many of Abrams' decisions for The Force Awakens.
For The Rise of Skywalker, Abrams allegedly chose to further deviate from plot points raised in The Last Jedi, while attempting to introduce his own that were never mentioned or alluded to during the previous two films.
Some critics felt many of the narrative choices for The Rise of Skywalker had been raised in an effort to appease dissatisfied fans.
Others disagreed with the decision not to use a "showrunner" to helm the sequel trilogy, akin to other individuals in projects undertaken by Disney, while Insider acknowledged Lucasfilm's strict creative control over the franchise, highlighting how a number of film directors had been hired and later forced to leave their projects.
Some reports indicate that, contrary to popular belief, some plot points across the trilogy were planned in advance.
The idea of Luke Skywalker living on an island following his failure to stop the murder of his Jedi students and then training an apprentice who would help him overcome his self-doubt was first pitched by George Lucas in 2013 during creative meetings between himself and Lucasfilm as part of story discussions for Episode VII
(these ideas would later be used in The Last Jedi).
Several plot points of The Rise of Skywalker were pitched in an early 2014 story meeting between Lucasfilm executives (including Dave Filoni, Pablo Hidalgo, Doug Chiang, John Knoll, and Kiri Hart) after the plot of The Force Awakens had been finalized, including the notion of Leia as a mentor figure to Rey, Leia breaking through to her son Ben Solo
(Kylo Ren), and the notion of Rey as “the Skywalker” of the trilogy by metaphor rather than blood connection.
The return of Emperor Palpatine in Episode IX was planned as far back as the earliest development phase of the trilogy.
Similarly, Abrams hinted that Palpatine being Rey's grandfather was an early idea he and Lawrence Kasdan had while working on The Force Awakens, although Daisy Ridley later claimed that ideas for Rey's lineage changed throughout filming of The Rise of Skywalker.

===
From Star Wars filmmakers ===
George Lucas agreed with critics who considered The Force Awakens too derivative of the original trilogy.
In an interview with Charlie Rose, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a divorce, and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens.
Lucas described the previous six Star Wars films as his "children" and defended his vision for them, while criticizing The Force Awakens for having a "retro feel", saying: "I worked very hard to make them completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships ... to make it new."
Lucas also likened Disney to "white slavers", which drew some criticism.
He subsequently apologized for this remark.
In 2016, the Disney-produced Star Wars anthology film Rogue One was released, and it was reported that Lucas liked it more than The Force Awakens.
In 2017, Lucas described the sequel The Last Jedi as "beautifully made".
In a 2019 memoir, Disney president Bob Iger wrote that Lucas felt "betrayed" after learning that Abrams, Kennedy, and Iger were not using his ideas for the sequel trilogy.
In 2016, responding to complaints that The Force Awakens was too derivative of previous films, Abrams said, "What was important for me was introducing brand new characters using relationships that were embracing the history that we know to tell a story that is new – to go backwards to go forwards".
Abrams apologized for how he handled Chewbacca and Leia's meeting after Han Solo's death, noting that Han Solo's best friend and widow ignore each other, with Leia instead hugging Rey (whom Leia is meeting for the first time).
Johnson's sequel included Leia hugging Chewbacca at the end of The Last Jedi as a way to apologize for the previous film oversight.
Johnson's initial response to the script of The Force Awakens included the suggestion of minor adjustments to the ending.
According to Abrams, these improved the movie and made it line up more with The Last Jedi.
Abrams intended for BB-8 to help Rey search for Luke, which Johnson changed to R2-D2 (due to being Luke's droid, as well as BB-8 belonging to Poe and not knowing Luke).
Additionally, Abrams' ending featured Rey finding Luke lifting rocks with the Force, which was changed due to Johnson's plot of Luke having disconnected himself from the Force.
Johnson stated he saw the Mortis Trilogy of episodes of The Clone Wars, due to a recommendation from the animator of the series Dave Filoni, and that it influenced his portrayal of the Force in his film.
He also stated that he considered including Lando in the film, possibly giving him the role of new character DJ, but didn't because it would had meant Lando betraying the characters without redemption.
In 2019, Abrams said that he liked Snoke's death in the sequel.
He also said that the boldness of The Last Jedi inspired him to be more original on The Rise of Skywalker and that its plot did not derail his plans for the film, adding that in response to criticisms of The Force Awakens, Johnson advised him "not to just do something that you've seen before."
Abrams also affirmed his dedication not to retroactively release alternate versions of the films, saying, "I feel like [when] you're done with a thing, ... that's what it is."
===
Critical response ===


===
Academy Awards ===


===
Box office performance ===
Unlike the previous trilogies, the sequel trilogy experienced diminishing box office returns with each succeeding film.
Nevertheless, it is the highest-grossing trilogy overall, with The Force Awakens ranking as the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time.

==
Tie-in novels and comics ==


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Duncan, Paul (2020).
The Star Wars Archives.
1999-2005.
TASCHEN.
ISBN 978-3-8365-6344-4.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2020).
Star Wars:
Fascinating Facts.
Portable Press.
ISBN 9781684128952.

Jones, Brian Jay (2016).
George Lucas:
A Life.
New York City:
Little, Brown and Company.
ISBN 978-0316257442.

Kaminski, Michael (2008)
[2007].
The Secret History of Star Wars.
Legacy Books Press.
ISBN 978-0-9784652-3-0.

Szostak, Phil (2015).
The Art of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419717802.

Szostak, Phil (2017).
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419727054.

Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

==
External links ==
Star Wars official site
Sequel trilogy on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Ewoks (also known as Star Wars: Ewoks) is a 1985–86 American/Canadian/Taiwanese animated television series featuring the Ewok characters introduced in Star Wars: Episode VI –
Return of the Jedi and further explored in Caravan of Courage:
An Ewok Adventure and its sequel Ewoks: The Battle for Endor.
The series was produced by Nelvana on behalf of Lucasfilm and broadcast on ABC, originally with its sister series Droids (as part of The Ewoks and Droids Adventure Hour), and then by itself, as The All-New Ewoks.

==
Premise ==
The series focuses on the adventures of Wicket W. Warrick and his friends on the forest moon of Endor before the events of the original Star Wars film and Caravan of Courage.
Unlike the Ewok films, the characters speak English instead of their native language (though Ewokese phrases and songs are occasionally used).
The primary recurring villains are Morag the Tulgah Witch, who had a personal grudge against the tribe's shaman, Master Logray, and the Duloks, a rival species that is related to the Ewoks.
The penultimate episode, "Battle for the Sunstar", which was reaired as the series finale, shows the Ewok heroes leaving the forest moon's surface when they go aboard an Imperial Star Destroyer that has traveled to their system.
An Imperial scientist attempts to destroy the Emperor, whose shuttle makes an appearance.
The episode has been noted as forming a link with Return of the Jedi, which features the Empire using Endor as its base of operations for the second Death Star.

== Cast and characters ==


===
The Ewok tribe ===
Warrick family
Wicket Wysteri Warrick (voiced by Jim Henshaw then Denny Delk) – The youngest brother of the Warrick Family.
He is headstrong and determined and often takes the initiative.
Wicket really wants to be a great warrior, which often gets him into trouble.
Has dark brown fur and wears an orange hood, but wears a green hood in season two.

Widdle "Willy" Warrick (voiced by John Stocker) – The middle brother of the Warrick Family.
Originally called Widdle.
He is clumsy, gluttonous and overweight, but exceedingly nice.

Weechee Warrick (voiced by Greg Swanson) –
The eldest brother and the strongest of the Warrick Family.

Winda Warrick – The youngest child of the Warrick Family.

Deej Warrick (voiced by Richard Donat) –
Father to Wicket, Weechee, Willy and Winda and his wife is Shodu.
A very respected warrior of the Ewok tribe.
Has dark grey fur and wears a purple hood.

Shodu Warrick (voiced by Nonnie Griffin then Esther Scott) – Deej's wife and mother to Wicket, Weechee, Willy and Winda.

Erpham Warrick (voiced by Anthony Parr) –
Wicket's great grandfather, once a great warrior for the Ewok tribe and is still looked up to by young Ewoks.
Not much is known about Erpham, as he died years ago, but he makes a brief appearance as a ghost when Wicket tries to repair his old battle wagon and instructs him.
He was a golden-colored Ewok with a green hood.
Kintaka family
Princess Kneesaa
a Jari Kintaka (voiced by Cree Summer then Jeanne Reynolds) – Younger daughter of Chief Chirpa and Ra-Lee.
Often the voice of reason and wisdom to her friends, but usually ends up in just as much trouble.
She seems smitten with Wicket.
Has white and grey fur and wears a pink hood with a blue gem dangling near her forehead.

Asha (voiced by Tabitha St. Germain) – Older daughter of Chief Chirpa and Ra-Lee.
Went missing during Ra-Lee's death and eventually was reunited with the Ewoks.

Chief Chirpa (voiced by George Buza then Rick Cimino) –
Widowed father to Kneesaa and Asha.
He gives order to the warriors when they are fighting against the Duloks.

Paploo (voiced by Paul Chato) – Kneesaa's cousin, Great Chief Chirpa's nephew and son to Bozzie.
He is close friends with Wicket and Teebo.
He sometimes joins in when the young Ewoks go on their adventures.
He is older, but often acts with less maturity than the younger Ewoks.
Has grey fur, with a white face and wears an orange hood with a feather.

Bozzie (voice by Pam Hyatt) – Chief Chirpa's sister / sister-in-law and mother to Paploo.
She can be very bossy and domineering towards the young Ewoks.
Teebo's family

Teebo (voiced by Eric Peterson then James Cranna) –
Wicket's best friend and the older child of Warok and Batcheela.
Fascinated by tales of sorcery and magic becomes his Master Logray's Apprentice.
He is a bit of a dreamer, and sometimes a little clumsy.
Teebo often lacks discipline, but this is something he learns to master over time from Logray, and eventually becomes a respectful young Ewok.
Has ochre fur
and he wears a tan, baggy hood with a feather.

Malani (voiced by Alyson Court) –
The younger child of Warok and Batcheela.
She is a close friends with Wiley, Nippet and Winda.
She has a crush on Wicket and desperately tries to impress him.
Has beige fur and wears a blue hood with a flower in it.
Latara's family

Latara
(voiced by Taborah Johnson then Sue Murphy)
– Has dark grey fur and wears a yellow hat with a pink feather in it in season one; in season two her fur is light brown and cream, and her hat is heather with a greenish-blue feather.
Kneesaa is her best friend.
She dreams of being a great musician with her flute, though her main job appears to be looking after her younger siblings.
She has a huge crush on Teebo, though he rarely notices it.
In the second season, it is the other way round.

Nippet and Wiley (voiced by Leanne Coppen and Michael Fantini, respectively) –
Latara's younger siblings.
At times, Latara has to stay home to watch over them.

Zephee – The mother of Latara, Nippet and Wiley.
She was seen in three episodes:
"The Haunted Village", "The Travelling Jindas" and "The Curse of the Jindas".

Lumat – The father of Latara, Nippet and Wiley.
He was seen in two episodes: "
The Travelling Jindas" and "The Curse of the Jindas".
Various

Master Logray (voiced by Doug Chamberlain) – The Ewoks' shaman, and often the dispenser of wisdom and knowledge about the world of Endor.
===
Others ===
King Gorneesh (voiced by Dan Hennessey) –
A leader of the Duloks
Queen Urga (voiced by Melleny Brown) – King Gorneesh's wife and the only female Dulok in the series
Umwak (voiced by Don Francks) –
Gorneesh's right-hand man, a Dulok shaman
Morag
(voiced by Jackie Burroughs) –
The Tulgah witch and evil magic counterpart of Logray
The Phlogs – A race of giants who live on Endor (though they originated offworld)
Baga – A young gentle bordok and Wicket's personal pet
The Hanadak – A purple monster which lives in the forest
The Jindas – A race of canid aliens who live on Endor, and are cursed to an eternal nomadic lifestyle by the Rock Wizard.
The Ewoks free them from their curse.
Notable Jindas include their leader, Bondo, and magician Trebla.

The Raich – A tree demon that eats animals and was imprisoned by brave Ewok warriors with a magical hat, made by the Gonster, which was placed on its head, turning it into a tree.
He is revived when Wicket takes the hat, but eventually defeated again.

The Gonster – A two-headed magician whom Ewoks seek out for spells, potions and traps to defeat monsters.
His two heads constantly argue.

The Leaf Queen – A plantlike deity or spirit who dwells on Endor and is entrusted to the care of all its plants.
Although kindly, she can be roused to great anger if her plants are harmed.

Dr. Raygar –
An Imperial scientist who wants to steal the Sunstar and use it to overthrow the Emperor.
After Kazz eventually learns of his treachery, he is arrested for treason.

Admiral Kazz –
An Imperial officer tasked with assisting Raygar, who does not know his true intentions.
Kazz thinks the Sunstar is a myth and considers the Ewoks not worth bothering over.

PD-28 –
An Imperial droid assisting Raygar and Kazz.
He eventually tires of working for the abusive Raygar and becomes friends with the Ewoks.

==
Production ==
The series is a follow-up (later stated to be a prequel) to the two Ewok films: Caravan of Courage (1984) and The Battle for Endor (1985), which were themselves spin-offs (and prequels) of Return of the Jedi.
The first season of the series was somewhat sophisticated, but in the second, the writing and visual style were both simplified.

==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (1985) ===
The theme song for the first season was written and performed by Taj and Inshirah Mahal.

===
Season 2 (1986) ===
With this season, advertised as The All-New Ewoks, episodes are now shorted the 11-minute format meaning two segments per half-hour (with the exceptions of "The Raich", "Night of the Stranger", "The Season Scepter" and "Battle for the Sunstar").
This season introduced a new theme song, "Friends Together, Friends Forever", written and performed by Patrick Gleeson.

== Broadcast ==
Ewoks was broadcast on ABC, originally with its sister series Droids (as part of The Ewoks and Droids Adventure Hour), and then by itself, as The All-New Ewoks.
The series ran for two seasons of 13 half-hour episodes between 1985 and 1986 and was later shown in reruns on Sci-Fi Channel's Cartoon Quest.

==
Home media ==
Almost all of the episodes (except for "The Three Lessons"  and "Prow Beaten / Baga's Rival") were released on VHS in the 1980s and 1990s, most notably the UK PAL releases over six cassettes (Ewoks 1–6), which had the opening sequences and credits edited out.
On April 2, 2021, the entire series was released on Disney+.During the making of the Star Wars prequel trilogy, its producer, Rick McCallum, oversaw two direct-to-video compilation films, each compiled from four episodes of the series.
The first, The Haunted Village, was released on VHS in 1996.
The second, Tales from the Endor Woods, was released in 2004 on a DVD titled Star Wars: Animated Adventures – Ewoks (which also features The Haunted Village).
The newer film includes narration from "Adult Wicket" (voiced by Alex Lindsay).

== Reception ==
According to David Perlmutter, Ewoks was "unremarkable both technically and creatively.
"Some
controversy has resulted from the Ewoks' apparent mastery of English while appearing not to speak the language in the Ewok films or Return of the Jedi (which are set some years later).

==
Legacy ==
Elements from the series are featured in Star Wars reference media, such as A Guide to the Star Wars Universe.
A Dulok was shown on Coruscant in Chapter 21 of the 2D animated Clone Wars (2003).
Ewoks was excluded from canon status in 2014, but some elements appear in the canon Ultimate Star Wars (2015) and later reference books, and the canon web series  Star Wars Forces of Destiny (2018).

==
Merchandising and media ==


===
Action figures ===
In 1985, Kenner Products produced a series of action figures based on the series.
A second wave of figures were prototyped but ultimately cancelled due to poor sales of the initial wave.
Several previously released Ewok themed vehicles, play sets, and accessories were advertised on the card backs of the figures but were curiously never offered in Ewoks Cartoon branded packaging.

===
Comics ===
In 1985, Star Comics, an imprint of Marvel, published a bi-monthly Ewoks comic based on the animated series.
It ran for two years, with a total of 14 issues.
Like the TV series, it was aimed towards a younger audience and produced parallel to a comic spun off from Droids.
Issue #10 of Ewoks continued the "Lost in Time" crossover story from Droids #4.
Additionally, Spanish comics publisher Editorial Gepsa produced two-page Ewoks comics as part of an anthology series.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Sansweet, Stephen J. (1998).
Star Wars Encyclopedia (1st ed.).
New York:
Ballantine.
ISBN 0-345-40227-8.
OCLC 36960986.

==
Further reading ==
Star Wars Insider #27


==
External links ==
Ewoks at IMDb
Ewoks at TV.com
Ewoks at The Big Cartoon DataBase
An informative fan site
An article from the Star Wars Insider on the series
A history of home video releases of Ewoks
Ewoks on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Oni (鬼 (おに)) is a kind of yōkai, demon, ogre, or troll in Japanese folklore.
They are typically portrayed as hulking figures with one or more horns growing out of their heads.
Stereotypically, they are conceived of as red, blue or white-colored, wearing loincloths of tiger pelt, and carrying iron kanabō clubs.
This is a symbol of the dark side.

They are popular characters in Japanese art, literature, and theatre, and appear as stock villains in the well-known fairytales of Momotarō (Peach Boy), Issun-bōshi, and Kobutori Jīsan.

== Description ==
Depictions of yokai oni vary widely but usually portray them as hideous, gigantic ogre-like creatures with a single horn or multiple horns emerging from their heads, with sharp claws and wild hair.
They are often depicted wearing tiger-skin loincloths and carrying iron clubs called kanabō (金棒).
This image leads to the expression "oni with an iron club" (鬼に金棒, oni-ni-kanabō), that is, to be invincible or undefeatable.
Their skin may be any number of colors, but red, blue, and green are particularly common.
They may sometimes also be depicted as black-skinned, or yellow-skinned.
They may occasionally be depicted with a third eye on their forehead, or extra fingers and toes.

==
Origins ==
An old etymology for "oni" is that the word derives from on, the on'yomi reading of a character (隠) meaning "to hide or conceal", due to oni having the tendency of "hiding behind things, not wishing to appear".
This explanation is found in the 10th century dictionary Wamyōshō, which reveals that the oni at the time had a different meaning, defined as "a soul/spirit of the dead".
The character for oni, 鬼 (pinyin: guǐ; Jyutping: gwai2) in Chinese also means a dead or ancestral spirit, and not necessarily an evil specter.
Accordingly, Chinese (Taoist) origins for the concept of oni has been proposed.
Particularly powerful oni may be described as kishin or kijin (literally "oni god"; the "ki" is an alternate character reading of "oni"), a term used in Japanese Buddhism to refer to Wrathful Deities.

The oni was syncretized with Hindu-Buddhist creatures such as the man-devouring yaksha and the rakshasa, and became the oni who tormented sinners as wardens of Hell (Jigoku), administering sentences passed down by Hell's magistrate, King Yama (Enma Daiō).
The hungry ghosts called gaki (餓鬼) has also been sometimes considered a type of oni
(the Kanji for "ki" 鬼 is also read "oni").
Accordingly, a wicked soul beyond rehabilitation transforms into an oni after death.
Only the very worst people turn into oni while alive, and these are the oni causing troubles among humans as presented in folk tales.
Some scholars have even argued that the oni was entirely a concept of Buddhist mythology.

==
Demon gate ==
According to Chinese Taoism and esoteric Onmyōdō, the ways of yin and yang, the northeasterly direction is termed the kimon (鬼門, "demon gate") and considered an unlucky direction through which evil spirits passed.
Based on the assignment of the twelve zodiac animals to the cardinal directions, the kimon was also known as the ushitora (丑寅), or "Ox Tiger" direction.
One hypothesis is that the oni's bovine horns and tiger-skin loincloth developed as a visual depiction of this term.
Temples are often built facing that direction,
for example, Enryaku-ji was deliberately built on  Mount Hiei which was in the kimon (northeasterly) direction from Kyoto in order to guard the capital, and similarly Kan'ei-ji was built towards that direction from Edo Castle.
However, skeptics doubt this could have been the initial design of Enryaku-ji temple, since the temple was founded in 788, six years before Kyoto even existed as a capital, and if the ruling class were so feng shui-minded, the subsequent northeasterly move of the capital from Nagaoka-kyō to Kyoto would have certainly been taboo.
Japanese buildings may sometimes have L-shaped indentations at the northeast to ward against oni.
For example, the walls surrounding the Kyoto Imperial Palace have notched corners in that direction.

==
Traditional culture ==
The traditional bean-throwing custom to drive out oni is practiced during Setsubun festival in February.
It involves people casting roasted soybeans indoors or out of their homes and shouting "Oni wa soto!
Fuku wa uchi!"
("
鬼は外！福は内！", "
Oni go out!
Blessings come in!").
This custom has grown from the medieval ritual of tsuina (追儺, Chinese: nuo 儺) or oni-yarai, a year-end rite to drive away oni (ghosts).Regionally around Tottori Prefecture during this season, a charm made of holly leaves and dried sardine heads are used as guard against oni.
There is also a well-known game in Japan called oni gokko (鬼ごっこ), which is the same as the game of tag that children in the Western world play.
The player who is "it" is instead called the "oni".
Oni are featured in Japanese children's stories such as Momotarō (Peach Boy), Issun-bōshi, and Kobutori Jīsan.

==
Modern times ==
In more recent times, oni have lost some of their original wickedness and sometimes take on a more protective function.
Men in oni costumes often lead Japanese parades to dispel any bad luck, for example.

Japanese buildings sometimes include oni-faced roof tiles called onigawara (鬼瓦), which are thought to ward away bad luck, much like gargoyles in Western tradition.
Many Japanese idioms and proverbs also make reference to oni.
For example, the expression "Oya ni ninu
ko wa oni no ko" (親に似ぬ子は鬼の子)
(Translation: "
A child that does not resemble its parents is the child of an oni.")
may be used by a parent to chastise a misbehaving child.

==
Gallery ==
==
In popular culture ==
The game series Touhou Project has several characters based on Oni.

Hyakujuu Sentai Gaoranger (and its American counterpart), Ogre Tribe Org is the main antagonist to fight the Gaorangers and Power Animals.

The Pokémon Electabuzz is based on the oni.

The Unicode Emoji character U+1F479 (👹) represents an oni, under the name "Japanese Ogre".

In the TV show LEGO Ninjago:
Masters of Spinjitzu, Oni appear as a primordial force of destruction, and are the main villains of the show's tenth season, March of the Oni.

The popular manga and anime Kimetsu
no Yaiba or Demon Slayer features oni as the antagonists.
The oni are depicted similar to vampires, feeding on blood and being weak to sunlight.
In the English release, they are referred to as demons instead of oni.

== See also ==


==
References ==
Citations
Bibliography


==
External links ==
The Galactic Republic, often referred to as simply the Republic, is an interstellar state depicted in the fictional Star Wars universe, where it existed prior to the establishment of the Galactic Empire.
The Republic is most prominently portrayed in the prequel trilogy of films in the Star Wars franchise.
In the original trilogy, set later in time, it is referred to as the Old Republic.

The Republic is portrayed as a democratic constitutional republic that sustained itself peacefully for over twenty-five thousand years, but was tied up in layers of bureaucracy.
It was mainly overseen by the Senate, a body in the Legislative Branch of the Republic government.
It was protected by the Jedi Order, the guardians of peace and justice throughout the Star Wars galaxy.
After the end of the Galactic Empire, the New Republic was founded.
It was enforced by the original Rebellion, eventually known as the New Republic Military.
The consolidation of the New Republic is depicted in The Mandalorian as it sought to wipe out remnants of the Imperial forces, and was eventually destroyed by the First Order, under Supreme Leader Snoke's direction, in Star Wars: The Force Awakens.

==
Fictional history (canon) ==


===
Fictional timeline (canon) ===
All Star Wars chronology takes the destruction of the first Death Star during the Battle of Yavin, portrayed in the first film Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977), as the basis of counting standard years.
The conventional calendar era notation is "BBY" ("Before the Battle of Yavin") and "ABY" ("After the Battle of Yavin").
Alternatively, newer literature may use the notation "BSW4" ("Before Star Wars Episode 4") and "ASW4" ("After Star Wars Episode 4").

===
Background ===
Little is said to be known of the earliest history of the Star Wars galaxy before the Republic, but several species that evolved in the Core Worlds, including humans, later came to dominate the galaxy.
It is hypothesised that humans originally came from Coruscant, later settled other Core Worlds such as Alderaan, and went on to colonise other planets from there.
Smith (1996) claimed that '[i]t is unknown whether hyperdrive was invented by the humans of the Core Worlds or introduced by alien traders from far off in the Unknown Regions', but there is agreement that the introduction of hyperspace travel predated the Republic, and allowed the formation of a 'galactic civilisation' and central governments over multiple planetary systems, and thus the rise of the Republic.

===
Old Republic ===
According to the large body of films and other fiction that belong to the Star Wars franchise, the Old Republic was formed 25,000 years before the events of Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977) when the first "Galactic Constitution" was signed on Coruscant, after hyperdrive connected many worlds in the Core and enabled the establishment of an interstellar central government.
Coruscant became the capital planet of the Old Republic, the Galactic Empire, and the New Republic, and the entire surface evolved into one big city, with skyscrapers reaching more than 5,000 levels.
The Republic was made up of several hundred thousands of worlds, and each planet or system had representation in the Republic Senate, which comprised most of the Republic Legislative Branch and the government itself.
It started off merely as an economic and protective alliance, mainly among the Core worlds.
It eventually expanded to the Colonies and other outlying worlds and regions, becoming a superpower rather than an alliance, and it became the central government for the galaxy.
The Core Worlds such as Coruscant and Alderaan were notable for their prosperity, which was later matched by the Colonies, while the Inner Rim and Expansion Region were a bit less secure and wealthy; the Mid Rim was an unsafe region that saw much of the fighting Galactic Civil War on planets such as Naboo and Kashyyyk, as it was far from the Republic's military concentrated in the Core.
The Outer Rim was the most unsafe place in the galaxy, where neither the Republic nor the Empire ever gained much de facto hold, leading to lawlessness, widespread violence and crime syndicates; many key battles of the Clone Wars took place here.
A large part of the Outer Rim including Tatooine was traditionally ruled by the Hutts and therefore called the Hutt Space.
As the Republic expanded, it came into contact with the slave empire of Zygerria.
Because slavery was disallowed in the Republic, it disliked the Zygerria Empire, as slavery was central to the Empire's political and economic system; conversely, the Empire refused to become part of the Republic.
The Republic and Jedi declared war on the Empire and won.
The Empire was reduced to a small harmless alliance on Zygerria.

===
Sith Empire and reforms ===
The Sith (which formed in the Republic's early years) return to their original strength and invaded Malachor.
The first Sith War began, which lead to the demise of the first Republic.
The power of the new Sith Empire increased as the Republic's decreased.
The Republic and Jedi forces failed to keep the Empire's Forces out of Republic Space.
Soon, the Sith became a second superpower.
Around this time, an ancestor of Pre Vizsla stole the Darksaber from the Jedi Temple.
Around 1000 years prior to Star Wars, the Dark Age began and the Old Republic was brought to the brink of collapse, but with Liberation of Coruscant, Sith Empire collapsed first.
After the Sith Empire was defeated in c. 1032
BBY, the Republic (now known as the Galactic Republic) reformed and became a democracy.
It demilitarised at the Ruusan Reformation, shortly after the Seventh Battle of Ruusan.

===
High Republic ===
The multimedia project
Star Wars:
The High Republic depicts the galaxy 200 years before The Phantom Menace.
The Republic put a strong magnetic field on its neighbouring worlds rather than conquering them by force.
This meant the Republic expanded slowly.
The Republic finally took control of the Mid Rim.

Power blocs formed out of the Republic, but the Jedi kept order.
The Republic became peaceful but corrupt, and a Core-Rim distrust formed.
After Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum came to power, a standoff between the Trade Federation and the Republic lead to the Invasion of Naboo (32 BBY), depicted in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
===
Separatist Crisis ===
Several trade organizations represented in the Senate, such as the Trade Federation and Commerce Guild, kept armies of droids to protect their profits and occasionally took advantage of this, such as when the Trade Federation invaded and occupied Naboo.
Individual sectors also maintained their own security forces, such as Naboo Security Force or the CorSec from Corellia, and these were sometimes used to combat small threats.
However, there was no centralized and official military of the Republic.
The Trade Federation and other cartels within the Republic desired that the Republic government lack significant central military power so that it could not enforce any legal regulations on their business.
Dissatisfied with several problems in the Republic, such as ineffectual government, heavy taxes, and perceived favouritism of the Core Worlds over the Outer Rim planets, the Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) was formed in 24 BBY: several systems seceded from the Republic and formed a new state, thus triggering the Separatist Crisis.
The CIS was headed by former Jedi Master Count Dooku, who gained much popularity amongst critics of the Republic after his scathing Raxus Address outlining the problems of the Republic, leading many systems to side with him and form the Confederacy.
The Separatists became a huge threat to the Republic after some of the galaxy's megacorporations allied with the CIS, as they possessed vast resources and private armies of battle droids.
A Military Creation Act was proposed in the Republic Senate, strongly opposed by many of the Republic's pacifist leaders, such as Padmé Amidala, the Queen of Naboo, who feared the possibility of war.
But most of the Senate advocated a permanent, official, and central military to oppose the Separatist threat.
Supporters of the Act include Orn Free Taa of Ryloth and Ask Aak of Malastare.
However, a Clone Army had already been created in secret on the planet Kamino on the edge of the galaxy ten years earlier, commissioned without authorisation by Master Sifo-Dyas, a former Jedi perceiving chaos in the galaxy.
When it became clear the Confederacy had no intention of negotiating, the Republic quickly accepted the Army made for them, and it was dubbed the Grand Army of the Republic.

===
Clone Wars ===
Despite the high quality of its armaments and cloned troops, the Republic's war effort was initially hindered because most of the major industrial companies in the Galaxy had, under the aegis of the Techno Union, sided with the Confederacy.
Eventually, though, the Republic became a humongous superpower not only economically but also militarily.
The rapid militarization of the Republic during the Clone Wars, overseen by Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, had far-reaching effects.
The Confederacy won most battles in the first year of the Clone Wars.
During the second and middle year of the Clone Wars however, the Republic defended itself from Confederate attacks and retaliated with its own assaults, many of which were successful.
During the third and final year of the Clone Wars, the Republic won many offensive battles in the Mid Rim and pushed the Confederate forces back to the Outer Rim with its "Outer Rim Sieges" campaign.

===
Fall of the Republic ===
During the Clone Wars, the Senate increasingly grants enormous amounts of power to Palpatine, who is the Commander-in-Chief.
Such actions are justified in the name of security and are considered a perfectly reasonable way to increase the wartime government's efficiency.
Eventually, Palpatine gains enough political power that he and his office are equal to the Senate.
Tension between Palpatine and the Jedi grow as the war progresses.
Many members of the Jedi Council remain skeptical of Palpatine's growing power.
In time, the Jedi believe that Palpatine will not surrender his emergency powers and his long overdue position by the end of the war.
This suspicion is also shared by some senators, including Padmé Amidala of Naboo, Bail Organa of Alderaan, and Mon Mothma of Chandrila.
After the death of Separatist leaders Count Dooku, who was the Head of State, and General Grievous, who was the Commander of the Separatist Army, and the discovery that Palpatine is actually Darth Sidious, the Sith Lord behind the war, the Jedi activate their contingency plans.

=== Order 66 ===
The Sith are the ancient enemy of the Jedi and were thought to have been destroyed many years ago.
A small group of experienced Jedi led by Mace Windu fail to arrest Palpatine for treason when Anakin Skywalker pledges himself to the dark side.
Shortly afterwards, Palpatine secretly orders the clones to exterminate the Jedi Order.
Because of control chips implanted inside the clones' heads, the clones are forced to slaughter the Jedi leaders in what would later become known as the Jedi Purge.
The Jedi padawans remaining on Coruscant are eliminated by Darth Vader, formerly known as Anakin Skywalker, and his personal legion.
The clones, at the same time, start a war against the Confederacy and the droids.

===
Galactic Empire versus Rebel Alliance ===
Before the conclusion of the Clone Wars, Palpatine addressed the Senate.
He related the story of an unsuccessful "assassination attempt" on his life by the Jedi.
Claiming that it was a "rebellion" and that their next move would be to kill all the Senators, he declared the Jedi Order to be enemies of the Republic.
Palpatine announced that the Galactic Republic should be reorganized into the Galactic Empire, and he would be the emperor for life.
Deluded by Palpatine's charisma and skill (and perhaps also by his considerable dark side power), the majority of the Senate cheered him on loudly in approval.

The official continuation of the Galactic Republic was the Galactic Empire, which was fueled by cruelty and fear.
As the Clone Wars entered their final year, Palpatine's once near-unanimous support had begun to falter.
As depicted in the Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith novelization and deleted scenes from the film itself, a bloc of senators began to emerge, even before the Clone Wars end, who opposed Palpatine's authoritarian rule and resented his treatment of the Jedi and other opponents.
This bloc, originally led by influential politicians such as Bail Organa, Mon Mothma, and later by Bail's adopted daughter Princess Leia Organa, eventually became the political voice of the emerging Rebel Alliance.
===
New Republic ===
The New Republic was a restoration of the Galactic Republic after Palpatine's Galactic Empire was crushed following Palpatine's death and the destruction of the second Death Star in the Battle of Endor in 4 ABY.
This New Republic is first portrayed onscreen in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015), where it is depicted as the ruling government of the galaxy and primary target of the First Order, a military power that sought to restore the Galactic Empire.
30 years after the events portrayed in Return of the Jedi (1983), the New Republic effectively collapsed when the First Order's Starkiller Base destroyed Hosnian Prime and the New Republic fleet and senate with its superlaser.

LegendsThe New Republic debuted in the 1991 Star Wars Legends novel, Heir to the Empire, by author Timothy Zahn.

==
Institutions ==


===
Senate, Chancellor and Jedi Order ===
The Republic begins as a mutual protection and economic alliance among a number of planets in the Core.
Each member world or system chooses a Senator to represent them in the Galactic Senate, the main body of the legislative branch of the government.
Senators are ambassadors of their homeworlds or systems.
Member worlds and systems maintain their governments and societies as long as it does not defy any central and core Republican laws.
There are a wide variety of different local governments along the political spectrum: from monarchies to republics to hive-like communes.
When the Republic's power and influence expand, many new areas of the galaxy are incorporated into the Republic.
The Core and Colonies are the base of the Galactic Republic.
A reorganization of senatorial representation occurs 1,000 years prior to Star Wars during the Ruusan Reformation.
The most common organization for these new territories is to group regions into Sectors of about 50 inhabited worlds.
Each sector is represented by a Senatorial Delegation.
When the number of sectors becomes too large, sectors are organized into roughly a thousand regions, each represented by one delegation to the Senate.
The Senate serves as the unicameral main body of the legislative branch, but has immense power over the entire Galactic Republic.
The capital of the Republic, which contains the most political power and wealth, is Coruscant.
Inside the Senate Building, there is an area in which the Senate debates, casts votes, and makes or passes bills.
It contains 1,024 floating platforms, each of which contain a senator and his or her aides.
Each platform in the senate represents a "sector" of the galaxy.
A few platforms represent individual worlds of high importance, or worlds bringing special pleas to the Senate.
Some represent special interest groups such as the Trade Federation, and other companies, corporations, and industries.
Each senatorial delegation has one vote.
The members of the Senate elect a Supreme Chancellor from among their ranks who serves as the Senate's presiding officer and as the Republic's de facto leader.
The Chancellor is assisted by the Vice Chair, who is presumably elected in the same manner as the Chancellor; the same Vice Chair is present throughout the entire prequel trilogy.
The Senate follows pseudo-parliamentary rules.
Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum was forced out of office by the Senate in a motion of no confidence, introduced by Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo, for example.
Senators receive one vote in all matters, procedural and substantive.
The Chancellor is elected from within the Senate for a set term.
The Senate gives the Chancellor emergency powers in times of crisis and removes him from office when necessary.
The assembly is in turn divided into individual committees, each specializing in specific fields of government administration, and which were responsible for creating legislation to be reviewed by the full assembly.
The Senate has some form of judicial power as well, although the Republic has a judicial branch, in which the Supreme Court was the main body.
The main functions of the Senate are to mediate disputes between members, provide for the common defense, create and pass laws into effect that would benefit most of the Republic, and regulate inter-system trade.
The Jedi Order, although technically not officially part of the Republic, are considered the defenders of the general Republic.
The Republic often orders the Jedi to specific areas that require assistance.
In this way, they are eventually the unofficial police force of the Republic.
They become representatives of the Senate as well, to some extent.
Despite the seemingly organized structure of the Republic, the waning years of the Republic are a time of corruption and great social injustice.
The Senate becomes divided between those who genuinely wish to uphold the values and ideals of the Republic and those who wish to further their own goals.
Following a series of weak and ineffectual Chancellors, there is a crisis involving the invasion of Naboo by the Trade Federation over a tariff passed by the Senate.
After Senator Palpatine of Naboo becomes Chancellor, he increases the power of the office, from acting as commander-in-chief of the Grand Army of the Republic, or the Republic Military, to the institution of his personal bodyguard organization, the Red Guard.
The Office of the Supreme Chancellor is given power equaling that of the Senate.
The Galactic Senate also meets less often, as the Chancellor is voted more emergency powers to act on his own during the time of crisis.
Eventually, many Outer Rim planets and companies leave the Republic due to the amount of corruption and unfair treatment to Outer Rim worlds.
Together, they form a rebellion known as the Confederacy of Independent Systems, almost exclusively referred to in the films as the Separatists.
Some large industrial companies, including the Trade Federation, side with the Separatists, providing them with their military and its resources.

===
Galactic politicians ===
Politicians include Senators, the Supreme Chancellor, the Vice Chair of the Senate, the Administrative Aide, various Representatives from systems, and to an unofficial extent, the members of the Jedi Council.
Jedi Council members hold special status as they appear to have the ability to watch Senate meetings and advise such Senators on various matters.
The Jedi order protects these people.

===
Military ===
While the Republic had an Army and Navy for thousands of years, after the Rusaan Reformations, the Republic does not maintain a military except for a small force known as the Judicial Forces.

=== Palpatine and the Jedi ===
The Jedi with the most authority served on the Jedi High Council, among whom Yoda and Mace Windu act as de facto leaders at the height of the Republic.
Although the Senate holds some degree of political authority over the Jedi, very little pressure was ever put on the Council before Palpatine took office and demanded that Anakin Skywalker become a member of the Council in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith, despite the misgivings of the Jedi.
While the Council allowed Anakin to sit among them, they did not grant him the status of Jedi Master.

== Reception and analysis ==
The story of the Galactic Republic's rise, fall and resurrection have been compared to those of the real-world Roman Republic and Weimar Germany.
From the storytelling perspective, the story of its "fall and redemption" has also been compared to that of Anakin Skywalker.
Brake and Chase (2016)
compared the hypothesised colonisation of the Core Worlds by Coruscanti humans to the state of the space colonisation by humans from the Earth, which had taken its first step with NASA's Apollo program of 1961–1972, just before George Lucas invented Star Wars.
They argued that Lucas offered a solution to the Fermi paradox: indeed, most of the Star Wars galaxy was conquered/colonised and submitted to the central government of the Republic rather quickly by the expansionist humans from the Core Worlds soon after they acquired the necessary rocket technology for interstellar travel, but there are still large unchartered Unknown Regions which are simply too far from the fashionable Core Worlds to have been fully explored (as exploration of the Unknown Regions is lethally dangerous), let alone colonised.
Thus, it's possible that the Solar System is also situated "in the Milky Way's version of the Unknown Regions", and that even if there are other species in the Milky Way, which may even have established a Star Wars-like Galactic Republic or Empire, the Earth and its human civilisation have so far been in unchartered and dangerous hyperspace-travel territory (from that galactic civilisation's point of view), and humans themselves are still too technologically limited to make contact with it.

== Appearances ==
Star Wars:
The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars:
Attack of the Clones (2002)
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008 animated film)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008−2020)


===
New Republic appearances ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015)
The Mandalorian (2019–present)
Star Wars: Battlefront II
(2017)
Star Wars: Squadrons (2020)


==
References ==


==
Literature ==
Horton, Cole; Hidalgo, Pablo; Zehr, Dan (2020).
The Star Wars Book: Expand your knowledge of a galaxy far, far away.
London:
Dorling Kindersley.
p. 321.
ISBN 9780241502211.

==
External links ==
Galactic Republic in the StarWars.com Databank
Galactic Republic on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (also known as Star Wars:
Episode VII – The Force Awakens) is a 2015 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the first installment in the Star Wars
sequel trilogy, following Return of the Jedi (1983), and the seventh episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Lupita Nyong'o, Andy Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, and Max von Sydow.
Set thirty years after Return of the Jedi, The Force Awakens follows Rey, Finn, Poe Dameron, and Han Solo's search for Luke Skywalker and their fight in the Resistance, led by General Leia Organa and veterans of the Rebel Alliance, against Kylo Ren and the First Order, a successor to the Galactic Empire.

The film was announced after The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012.
The film is the first Star Wars film to not extensively involve franchise creator George Lucas, who only served as a creative consultant in the early stages of production.
The film was produced by Abrams, his longtime collaborator Bryan Burk, and Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy.
Abrams and Lawrence Kasdan, co-writer of the original trilogy films
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi, rewrote an initial script by Michael Arndt.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score.
Filming began in April 2014 in Abu Dhabi and Iceland, with principal photography also taking place in Ireland and at Pinewood Studios in England, and wrapped in November.

The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles on December 14, 2015, and was released in the United States on December 18.
The film received positive reviews for its screenplay, direction, acting performances (particularly those of Ford, Driver, Ridley, Isaac, and Boyega), musical score, visual effects, editing, and action sequences, although some critics found it too similar to A New Hope (1977).
The film marked an improvement in a reception over the previous four Star Wars films.
The film broke various box office records and became the highest-grossing installment in the franchise, the highest-grossing film in the United States and Canada, the highest-grossing film of 2015, and the third-highest-grossing film at the time of its release, with a worldwide gross of over $2 billion and a net profit of over $780 million.
Among films' box office adjusted for inflation, the film is the top-grossing sequel of all time in North America.
The film received numerous accolades, including five nominations at the 88th Academy Awards and four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards, where it won the award for Best Special Visual Effects.
Two sequels within the sequel trilogy have been released: The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

==
Plot ==
Thirty years after the Galactic Civil War, the First Order has risen from the fallen Galactic Empire and seeks to end the New Republic.
The Resistance, backed by the Republic and led by General Leia Organa, opposes the First Order.
Leia searches for her brother, Luke Skywalker, who has gone missing.

On the desert planet Jakku, Resistance pilot Poe Dameron receives a map to Luke's place from Lor San Tekka.
Stormtroopers commanded by Kylo Ren raid the village and capture Poe, while Kylo kills San Tekka.
Poe's droid, BB-8, escapes with the map and encounters a scavenger named Rey.
Kylo tortures Poe using the Force and learns of BB-8.
Stormtrooper FN-2187, disillusioned by the First Order, frees Poe, and they escape in a stolen TIE fighter.
Upon learning that FN-2187 has no other name, Poe gives him the name "Finn".
As they head to Jakku to retrieve BB-8, a First Order Star Destroyer shoots them, and they crash-land.
Finn survives and assumes that Poe died in the crash.
He encounters Rey and BB-8, but the First Order tracks them and launches an airstrike.
Rey, Finn, and BB-8 steal the Millennium Falcon and escape the planet.

The Falcon gets discovered and boarded by Han Solo and Chewbacca.
Gangs seeking to settle debts with Han attack, but the group escape in the Falcon.
At the First Order's Starkiller Base, a planet converted into a superweapon, Supreme Leader Snoke allows General Hux to use the weapon for the first time.
Snoke questions
Kylo's ability to deal with emotions on his father, Han Solo, who Kylo states means nothing to him.

Aboard the Falcon, Han determines that BB-8's map is incomplete.
He then explains that Luke attempted to rebuild the Jedi Order but exiled himself when an apprentice turned to the dark side, destroyed the temple, and slaughtered the other apprentices.
The crew travels to the planet Takodana and meets with cantina owner Maz Kanata, who offers help getting BB-8 to the Resistance.
The Force draws Rey to a secluded vault, where she finds the lightsaber once belonging to Luke and his father, Anakin Skywalker.
She experiences disturbing visions and flees into the woods, confused and terrified.
Maz gives Finn the lightsaber for safekeeping.

Starkiller Base destroys the New Republic and its fleet.
The First Order attacks Takodana in search of BB-8.
Han, Chewbacca, and Finn are saved by Resistance X-wing fighters led by Poe, who survived the crash.
Leia arrives at Takodana with C-3PO and reunites with Han.
Meanwhile, Kylo captures Rey and takes her to Starkiller Base, but she resists his mind-reading attempts.
Snoke orders Kylo to bring Rey to him.
Discovering she can use the Force, Rey escapes using a Jedi mind trick on a guard.

At the Resistance base on D'Qar, BB-8 finds R2-D2, who had been inactive since Luke's disappearance.
As Starkiller Base prepares to fire once more, the Resistance devises a plan to destroy it by attacking its thermal oscillator.
Using the Falcon, Han, Chewbacca, and Finn infiltrate the facility, find Rey, and plant explosives.
Han confronts Kylo, calling him by his birth name Ben, and implores him to abandon the dark side.
Kylo seems to consider this, but ultimately refuses and kills his father.
Devastated, Chewbacca shoots Kylo and sets off the explosives, allowing Poe to attack and destroy the base's thermal oscillator.

The injured Kylo pursues Finn and Rey into the woods.
Finn fights Kylo with the lightsaber to protect Rey before Kylo knocks him unconscious.
Rey takes the lightsaber and channels the Force to defeat Kylo in a duel; they are then separated by a fissure as the planet's surface begins to splinter.
Snoke orders Hux to evacuate and bring Kylo to him to complete his training.
Chewbacca rescues Rey and the unconscious Finn, and they escape aboard the Falcon.
As the Resistance forces flee, Starkiller Base implodes.
R2-D2 awakens and reveals the rest of the map, which Rey uses to find the oceanic planet
Ahch-To in the Falcon.

On Ahch-To, Rey finds Luke atop a cliff on a remote island.
Without a word, she presents him with his father's lightsaber.

== Cast ==
Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A rogue and a smuggler, formerly a key player in the Rebel Alliance.
Ford said, "[Han] does not aspire to the position of Obi-Wan, nor do I aspire to be some New Age Alec Guinness.
His development is consistent with the character, and there are emotional elements which have occasioned his growth.
[...]
There's a lot of the rogue still left in Solo.
Some things don't change."

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker:
The last Jedi, who has gone into hiding.
Regarding Luke, Han, and Leia, Abrams stated: "They'd be as old and as mythic as the tale of King Arthur.
They would be characters who [the new characters] may have heard of, but maybe not.
They'd be characters who they might believe existed, or just sounded like a fairy tale.
"
Hamill was initially skeptical of Luke only appearing at the end of the film and called his limited screentime "a great surprise".
Abrams added that the film's ending was intended to be "this great long drumroll up to seeing this guy".

Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa: The former princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan, now General of the Resistance, and Luke's twin sister.
After the events of Return of the Jedi, she is described as "a little more battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
Fisher described Leia as "Solitary.
Under a lot of pressure.
Committed as ever to her cause, but I would imagine feeling somewhat defeated, tired, and pissed."
Abrams said: "The stakes are pretty high in the story for her, so there's not much goofing around where Leia's concerned."

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren: A dark warrior who is strong with the Force, the leader of the Knights of Ren, and a high-ranking member of the First Order.
He is the son of Han and Leia, nephew of Luke, and the grandson of the deceased Darth Vader.
Driver said the team tried "not to think of him as being bad, or evil, or a villain.
Something that was more three-dimensional.
He's more dangerous and unpredictable, and morally justified in doing what he thinks is right."

Daisy Ridley as Rey: A highly Force-sensitive scavenger who was abandoned as a child on the desert planet Jakku and awaits her absent family's return.
Ridley said: "She's completely self-sufficient and does everything for herself, until she meets [Finn] and an adventure begins.
"Cailey
Fleming as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn: A reformed First Order stormtrooper.
Boyega said that he learned he obtained the part "over a nice breakfast in Mayfair" during which Abrams told him, "John, you're the new star of Star Wars."
Boyega said: "When we find Finn, he's in incredible danger.
And the way he reacts to this danger changes his life, and launches him into the Star Wars universe in a very unique way."
He said in another interview: "He's been taught about Luke Skywalker, he knows about his history.
For him it's like joining the army and then learning about one of the great enemies of your country."

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron: A Resistance X-wing fighter pilot.
Isaac said: "He's the best freaking pilot in the galaxy, [...]
He's been sent on a mission by a certain princess, and he ends up coming up across [Finn], and their fates are forever intertwined."

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata: A wise and perceptive figure operating a somewhat shady cantina on the peaceful forest planet Takodana who is acquainted with Han.
Abrams said Kanata has "lived over a thousand years.
She's had this watering hole for about a century, and it's like another bar that you'd find in a corner of the Star Wars universe."
According to Abrams, the character was based on his former high school English teacher, Rose Gilbert, who lectured at the Palisades Charter High School from 1961 to 2013.
Abrams said the team "really wanted the story to feel authentic, despite being a wild fantasy.
I mentioned Rose in an early story meeting as a sort of timeless, wise figure that I'd actually known in my life."

Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke:
The political leader of the First Order.
He is Kylo Ren's master, who seduced him to the dark side and is very powerful in the dark side of the Force.
Serkis described Snoke as "quite an enigmatic character, and strangely vulnerable at the same time as being quite powerful, [...]
He is large.
He appears tall.
And also just the facial design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics.
[...]
Without giving too much away at this point, he has a very distinctive, idiosyncratic bone and facial structure."

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux:
The commander of the First Order's Starkiller Base.
Gleeson described him as "pretty ruthless.
A strong disciplinarian would be a mild way of putting it.
[...]
He's kind of opposite Kylo Ren.
They have their own relationship, which is individual and unusual.
One of them is strong in different ways than the other.
They're both vying for power."

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A humanoid protocol droid in Organa's service.
Daniels said the actors were allowed to experiment with their performances, and that Abrams "made a field, a playpen where you were allowed to take your time and suggest things".

Max von Sydow as Lor San Tekka: A retired adventurer on Jakku, aiding the Resistance in finding Skywalker.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca:
A Wookiee and Solo's longtime companion.
Mayhew's double Joonas Suotamo portrays the character in several action scenes, and Ian Whyte performed stunts, as the 71-year-old Mayhew suffered from knee problems.
Tim Rose and Mike Quinn reprise their respective roles as Admiral Ackbar and Nien Nunb from Return of the Jedi, with Erik Bauersfeld and Kipsang Rotich returning their respective voices.
Kenny Baker, originally announced as part of the cast, was credited as "consultant" for R2-D2, with Jimmy Vee performing some of the work for R2-D2.
Ewan McGregor has an uncredited vocal cameo as Obi-Wan Kenobi in Rey's vision sequence, while archival audio of Frank Oz and Alec Guinness as Yoda and Kenobi, respectively, are also used in the same scene; Oz recorded new dialogue for the film, but it was replaced with preexisting audio from The Empire Strikes Back.
Gwendoline Christie portrays Captain Phasma, the commander of the First Order's legions of stormtroopers.
Dave Chapman and Brian Herring served as puppeteers for BB-8, with Bill Hader and Ben Schwartz credited as "Vocal Consultants".
Ken Leung appears as Statura, an admiral in the Resistance.
Simon Pegg appears as Unkar Plutt, the Junk parts dealer on Jakku.
Greg Grunberg plays Temmin "Snap" Wexley, an X-wing pilot.
Kiran Shah plays Teedo, a scavenger on Jakku who rides a semi-mechanical Luggabeast.
Jessica Henwick appears as Jess "Testor" Pava or Jess Testor, an X-wing pilot.
Brian Vernel appears as Bala-Tik, the leader of the Guavian Death Gang.
Yayan Ruhian and Iko Uwais appear as Tasu Leech and Razoo Qin-Fee, members of the Kanjiklub Gang, a criminal organization.
Warwick Davis appears as Wollivan, a tavern-dweller in Maz Kanata's castle.
Anna Brewster appears as Bazine Netal, a First Order spy, also at Maz Kanata's castle.
Hannah John-Kamen appears as a First Order officer.
Thomas Brodie-Sangster and Kate Fleetwood play First Order Petty Officers, Thanisson and Unamo, respectively.
Billie Lourd, daughter of Carrie Fisher, appears as Connix, a lieutenant in the Resistance.
Members of the Resistance include Emun Elliott as Brance and Maisie Richardson-Sellers as Korr Sella while Harriet Walter appears as Kalonia, the doctor who tends to Chewbacca.
Mark Stanley appears as a Knight of Ren.
Sebastian Armesto portrays Lieutenant Mitaka and Pip Torrens portrays Colonel Kaplan, both serving the First Order.
Daniel Craig, Michael Giacchino, and Nigel Godrich cameo as stormtroopers.
Abrams' assistant, Morgan Dameron, appears as a Resistance officer, while his father, Gerald W. Abrams, appears as Captain Cypress.
The film's dialect coach, Andrew Jack, appears as Major Ematt of the Resistance.
Additionally, Crystal Clarke, Pip Andersen, Christina Chong, Miltos Yerolemou, Amybeth Hargreaves, Leanne Best, Judah Friedlander, and Kevin Smith appear in minor roles.
Riot control stormtrooper FN-2199, who calls Finn a traitor during the battle on Takodana, was portrayed by stunt performer Liang Yang and voiced by sound editor David Acord.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Star Wars creator George Lucas discussed ideas for a sequel trilogy several times after the conclusion of the original trilogy, but denied any intent to make it.
In October 2012, he sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Speaking alongside Lucasfilm's new president, Kathleen Kennedy, Lucas said: "I always said I wasn't going to do any more
and that's true, because I'm not going to do any more, but that doesn't mean I'm unwilling to turn it over to Kathy to do more.
"As
creative consultant on the film, Lucas attended early story meetings and advised on the details of the Star Wars universe.
Among the materials he turned over to the production team were his rough story treatments for Episodes VII–IX, which Lucas requested be read only by Kennedy, Bob Iger, Alan F. Horn, and Kevin A. Mayer.
Lucas later said Disney had discarded his story ideas and that he had no further involvement with the film.
Lucas' son Jett told The Guardian that his father was "very torn" about having sold the rights to the franchise and that his father was "there to guide" but that "he wants to let it go and become its new generation".

The Force Awakens' first screenplay was written by Michael Arndt.
Early drafts had Luke Skywalker appear midway through the film, but Arndt found that "every time Luke came in and entered the movie, he just took it over.
Suddenly you didn't care about your main character anymore.
"
The writers decided to use Luke as the film's MacGuffin and, as something that the protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the final scene.
Arndt also developed some backstory elements for the returning characters from the original trilogy, such as how Leia was instrumental in rebuilding the Republic after the fall of the Empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that her biological father was Darth Vader (this would go on to become a central plot point in the canonical novel Star Wars:
Bloodline).Several directors were considered, including David Fincher, Brad Bird, Jon Favreau, and Guillermo del Toro; after a suggestion by Steven Spielberg to Kennedy, J. J. Abrams was named director in January 2013, with Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg as project consultants.
Arndt worked on the script for eight months, but said he needed 18 more, which was more time than Disney or Abrams could give him.
The production announced Arndt's exit from the project on October 24, 2013, and Kasdan and Abrams took over script duties.
Abrams expressed relief that the release date was announced for December 2015 instead of a previously discussed summer release.
He and Kasdan planned the story while walking in Santa Monica, New York City, Paris, and London.
The first draft was completed in six weeks.
Abrams said the key to the film was [returned] to the roots of the first Star Wars films and be based more on emotion than explanation.
In January 2014, Abrams confirmed that the script was complete.
In April 2014, Lucasfilm clarified that Episodes VII–IX would not feature storylines from the Star Wars expanded universe, though other elements could be included, as with the TV series Star Wars Rebels.
Abrams stated that he purposely withheld some plot elements from The Force Awakens, such as Rey and Finn's last names and backgrounds.
Kennedy admitted that "we haven't mapped out every single detail [of the sequel trilogy] yet", but said that Abrams was collaborating with The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson, and that Johnson would work with The Rise of Skywalker's then-director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition and that "everybody's got a say in how we move forward with this".
Daisy Ridley later recounted that J. J. Abrams had written drafts for episodes 8 and 9.A fictional language was developed for use in the film by YouTube star Sara Forsberg, who created the viral video series "What Languages Sound Like To Foreigners"; Forsberg developed the language by studying various languages, such as Hindi and Gujarati.
In November 2015, Lucas recorded an hour-long interview with CBS News reporter Charlie Rose in which he said Disney had not been "keen" to involve him and conceded: "If I get in there, I'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what I want them to do, and I don't have the control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up.
"
He also said, "They wanted to do a retro movie.
I don't like that.
Every movie, I worked very hard to make them different
[...] I made them completely different—different planets, different spaceships to make it new.
"
In early December 2015, Kathleen Kennedy told The Hollywood Reporter that Lucas had seen the movie and "liked it".
In the same month, at the Kennedy Center Honors, Lucas stated, "I think the fans are going to love it
, It's very much the kind of movie they've been looking for."
Abrams felt that, as the first in a new trilogy, the film "needed to take a couple of steps backwards into very familiar terrain" and use plot elements from previous Star Wars films.

=== Pre-production ===
In May 2013, it was confirmed that The Force Awakens would be filmed in the United Kingdom.
Representatives from Lucasfilm met with Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne to agree to produce The Force Awakens in the UK.
Osborne committed £25 million of public money towards the film, claiming it was a boost for British culture and its film industry.
According to production company account filings in the United Kingdom, The Force Awakens ultimately received a total of £31.6 million ($47.4 million) from the government.
Beginning in September 2013, production spaces at the Bad Robot facility were converted for shooting of The Force Awakens for the benefit of shooting a minor portion of the film in the United States.
The film's costume designer was Michael Kaplan, who had previously worked with Abrams on the films Star Trek (2009) and Star Trek Into Darkness (2013).
Film editors Mary Jo Markey and Maryann Brandon, long-term collaborators with Abrams, were also signed.
In August 2013, it was announced that cinematographer Daniel Mindel would be shooting the film on 35 mm film (specifically Kodak 5219).
In October 2013, other crew members were confirmed, including sound designer Ben Burtt, director of photography Mindel, production designers Rick Carter and Darren Gilford, costume designer Michael Kaplan, special effects supervisor Chris Corbould, re-recording mixer Gary Rydstrom, supervising sound editor Matthew Wood, visual effects supervisors Roger Guyett, and executive producer Jason McGatlin.
===
Casting ===
Open auditions were held in the United Kingdom and the United States in November 2013 for the roles of Rachel and Thomas.
Casting began in earnest in January 2014, because of changes to the script by Kasdan and Abrams.
Screen tests with actors continued until at least three weeks before the official announcement in April 2014, with final casting decisions made only a few weeks earlier.
Actors testing had strict nondisclosure agreements, preventing them, their agents or their publicists from commenting on their involvement.
Though Lucas intimated that previous cast members Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, and Mark Hamill would return for the new film as early as March 2013, their casting was not confirmed until over a year later.
Saoirse Ronan, Michael B. Jordan, Lupita Nyong'o and Frida Gustavsson, auditioned for new characters; industry publications reported Jesse Plemons was considered, possibly for Luke Skywalker's son;
Adam Driver for an unnamed villain; and Maisie Richardson-Sellers for an unknown character.
Daisy Ridley was cast by February 2014, and by the end of that month a deal had been worked out with Driver, who was able to work around his Girls schedule.
Talks with Andy Serkis and Oscar Isaac began by March and continued into April.
That same month, John Boyega began talks after dropping out of a Jesse Owens biopic.
Denis Lawson, who played Wedge Antilles in the original trilogy, declined to reprise his role, saying it would have "bored" him.
In April, the cast was announced with a photo of the first table read of the script at Pinewood Studios near London, picturing director Abrams with Ford, Ridley, Fisher, Peter Mayhew, producer Bryan Burk, Lucasfilm president and producer Kathleen Kennedy, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Hamill, Serkis, Isaac, Boyega, Driver, and writer Lawrence Kasdan.
In June, cast additions Lupita Nyong'o and Gwendoline Christie were announced.
To prepare for his role, Hamill was assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist at the request of the producers, who wanted him to resemble an older Luke.
Fisher was also assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist.
Abrams initially considered using Daniels only in a voice role for C-3PO, but Daniels opted to reprise the role physically as well; the production team built a new C-3PO costume to accommodate him.
A flashback scene was cut from Rey's vision (following her discovery of Luke's lightsaber), which would have featured Robert Boulter standing in for Luke as he appeared in his duel with Vader in The Empire Strikes Back.
In May, Abrams announced a donation contest for UNICEF from the Star Wars set in Abu Dhabi; the winner was allowed to visit the set, meet members of the cast and appear in the film.
In October, Warwick Davis, who played Wicket in Return of the Jedi, as well as Wald and Weazle in The Phantom Menace (1999), announced that he would appear in The Force Awakens, but did not reveal his role.
In November, Debbie Reynolds confirmed that her granddaughter (Fisher's daughter), Billie Lourd, was in the film.

===
Filming ===
In February 2014, Abrams said filming would begin in May and last about three months.
The official announcement came in March, when Disney and Lucasfilm announced that principal photography would commence in May and be based at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.
That month, it was revealed that pre-production filming would take place in Iceland prior to the start of official filming in May, consisting of landscape shots that would be used for scenery in the film.
In April, Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn confirmed that filming had begun, filming in secret in the United Arab Emirates around Liwa Oasis, part of the emirate of Abu Dhabi, by a second unit.
Later that month, it was revealed that in addition to 35 mm film, segments of the film were being shot in the 65 mm IMAX format.
In July, Bad Robot reported via Twitter that the film would be at least partially shot on IMAX cameras.
Principal photography began in Abu Dhabi on May 16, 2014.
Abrams and the cast members went to Abu Dhabi in early-May, where large sets were built on location—including a shuttle-like spacecraft, a large tower, and a big market—and where explosives were used to create a "blast crater".
Cast members were spotted practicing driving vehicles that would be used during filming.
Production moved to Pinewood Studios in June.

That same month, Harrison Ford fractured his leg while filming at Pinewood after a hydraulic door on the Millennium Falcon set fell on him, and was taken to a hospital.
According to Abrams, Ford's ankle "went to a 90-degree angle".
Production was suspended for two weeks because of Ford's injury.
Ford's son Ben said the ankle would likely need a plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the crew needing to shoot Ford from the waist up for a short time until he recovered.
A month later, Jake Steinfeld, Ford's personal trainer, said Ford was recovering rapidly.
Abrams also suffered a fractured vertebra in his back when he was trying to help lift the door after Ford's accident, but he kept this to himself for over a month.
In February 2016, it was reported that the Health and Safety Executive brought four criminal charges against Disney subsidiary Foodles Production (UK), Ltd. for alleged health and safety breaches relating to Ford's accident.
Foodles Production (UK) Ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in October 2016 for two health and safety breaches, after admitting the counts at an earlier hearing.
In July 2014, filming took place over three days at Skellig Michael, an island off the coast of County Kerry, Ireland, with a cast including Mark Hamill and Daisy Ridley.
Landscape shots for the planet
Takodana were shot in July in the Lake District in the northwest of England.
Production was halted for two weeks in early August 2014
so Abrams could rework shooting in Ford's absence and resumed with a fully healed Ford in mid-August.
In September, the former RAF Greenham Common military base in Berkshire was used and featured set constructions of several spaceships.
Puzzlewood in the Forest of Dean Gloucestershire England was used for some scenes.
Principal photography ended on November 3, 2014.

===
Post-production ===
Kathleen Kennedy said The Force Awakens would use real locations and models over computer-generated imagery.
Rian Johnson, director of The Last Jedi, reiterated that Abrams would use little CGI and more practical, traditional special effects, saying: "I think people are coming back around to [practical effects].
It feels like there is sort of that gravity pulling us back toward it.
I think that more and more people are hitting kind of a critical mass in terms of the CG-driven action scene lending itself to a very specific type of action scene, where physics go out the window and it becomes so big so quick."
Abrams' intention in prioritizing practical special effects was to recreate the visual realism and authenticity of the original Star Wars.
To that end, the droid BB-8 was a physical prop developed by Disney Research, created by special effects artist Neal Scanlan and operated live on set with the actors.
In February 2014, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) announced plans to open a facility in London, citing Disney's Star Wars films as a catalyst for the expansion.
ILM's Vancouver branch also worked on the special effects for the film.
Abrams supervised post-production and editing of the film at Bad Robot Productions' headquarters in Santa Monica.
In August 2015, he gave the film's estimated running time as 124 minutes.
Abrams made changes to the film's plot in the editing process to simplify the film, by removing some sequences shown in trailers: "At one point, Maz used to continue along with the characters back to the Resistance base, but we realised that she really had nothing to do there of value [...]
So we ended up leaving those things out.
"On
November 6, 2014, the film's title was announced as Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In December 2015, Pablo Hidalgo, the creative executive at the Lucasfilm Story Group which handles all the canonical continuity for the Star Wars universe, revealed that the working title for the film was Shadow of the Empire "for the longest time".

===
Music ===
In July 2013, John Williams was confirmed to return to compose the sequel trilogy, beginning with The Force Awakens.
He began working on the film in December 2014, and by June 2015 had been through most of the film reels, working on a daily basis.
In May 2015, Williams said he would return to themes from the previous films, such as those for Luke, Leia, and Han, in ways that "there are a few that I think are important and will seem very much a part of the fabric of the piece in a positive and constructive way."
He said that working with Abrams was similar to the process he went through with Lucas in the earlier films.
Recording sessions for The Force Awakens began in June 2015 at the Sony Pictures Studios' Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage in Culver City, with William Ross conducting most of the music.
The first day of recording was June 1, 2015.
Williams attended the sessions and conducted the remainder of the recordings in Los Angeles.
The score was recorded in 12 sessions within a five-month period between June and mid-November.
The 90-piece orchestra recorded 175 minutes of music; however, Abrams reedited the film, which discarded, modified, or rerecorded the score's part for nearly an hour.
Williams' theme for Snoke was recorded by a 24-voice men's chorus.
Gustavo Dudamel conducted the opening and end title music for the film at Williams' behest.
Recording of the score was completed on November 14, 2015.
The film's soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on December 18, 2015.
Williams' score is more than two hours long.
Lin-Manuel Miranda and Abrams contributed music to the film's cantina scene.
Abrams met Miranda at a performance of his Broadway musical Hamilton, where Miranda jokingly offered to compose cantina music, should it be needed.
Unknown to Miranda, Williams had previously told Abrams that he did not want to compose the music for that scene, wanting to focus on the orchestral score.
Abrams then contacted Miranda, and the two collaborated on the music for the scene over a period of two months.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Disney backed The Force Awakens with extensive marketing campaigns.
On November 28, 2014, Lucasfilm released an 88-second teaser trailer.
It was screened in selected cinemas across the United States and Canada and in theaters worldwide in December 2014.
It was also released on YouTube and the iTunes Store, generating 58.2 million views on YouTube in its first week.
Critics compared the brief footage favorably to the production values of the original trilogy.
The Hollywood Reporter called the trailer "perfectly potent nostalgia", praising its mix of old and new.
Empire was impressed by the continuity with the first films—"the feel of classic Star Wars"—but noted the absence of Hamill, Ford, and Fisher and speculated about the significance of the new characters.
The Guardian wrote that the use of the Star Wars fanfare by John Williams reinforced brand loyalty among fans.

On December 11, 2014, Abrams and Kennedy released a series of eight mock Topps trading cards revealing the names of several characters.
On April 16, 2015, a second teaser trailer, this one lasting two minutes, was shown at the opening panel at the Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim, California.
Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said the reaction to the trailer was "staggering [...]
the entire room of almost eight thousand people just leapt to their feet and roared,
I mean I can't think of anything I've ever been to—other than a rock concert—
that felt quite like that".
The trailer was viewed over 88 million times within the first 24 hours of release.
The trailer shows many of the new characters and the first footage of Chewbacca and Han Solo.
The Huffington Post's Graham Milne wrote that the trailer "was an affirmation of something that we'd long been told was never going to happen.
This was a gift.
This was faith rewarded.
About damn time.
"Vanity
Fair was the first magazine to release an exclusive cover issue devoted to The Force Awakens.
The magazine, released on May 7, 2015, featured exclusive interviews and photos of the cast photographed by Annie Leibovitz.
At the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International, in addition to a panel with many of the actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the film demonstrated the film's use of practical sets and effects.
It was positively received, with Nigel M. Smith of The Guardian writing: "
The featurette's angle is a strong one and connects with fans of the original trilogy in an incredibly poignant way.
It also does a sly job of teasing Fisher's new look as Leia and Simon Pegg's mysterious involvement as a rumored alien in the movie, without actually showing the actors in action.
"
Smith compared the marketing strategy for the film to that of a previous Abrams film, Super 8, saying "the promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away.
"Walt
Disney Studios and Lucasfilm presented a look at The Force Awakens at Disney's D23 Expo in August 2015.
Drew Struzan—who designed the poster artwork for the previous Star Wars films—produced a commemorative poster given to the event's attendees.
In October 2015, Lucasfilm unveiled the theatrical release poster and a third trailer.
The poster omitted Luke Skywalker and revealed a Death Star-like "orb".
The trailer debuted during the halftime break of Monday Night Football, before being released online.
The reaction to the trailer by fans on social media was "frenzied", with Lizo Mzimba of the BBC writing that "perhaps the most significant thing about the final trailer before the film's release is how little of the story it reveals."
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph felt the trailer was "a perfect blend of old and new, in keeping with the old-fashioned Star Wars aesthetic".
The trailer received 128 million views in 24 hours.
16 million of the views came from its airing on Monday Night Football.
At the end of October, Air France announced a "Flight and Cinema" package, providing customers who book select flights to Paris transportation to a theater to see the film, since France was one of the first countries to release the film.
On November 23, a partnership with Google was announced, in which Google users could choose to affiliate themselves with either the Dark or Light Side, which would change the appearance of their Google websites.
Additionally, Disney teamed up with Verizon to create a virtual-reality experience for Google Cardboard.
On December 17, 2015, select theaters across the United States and Canada aired a Star Wars marathon, airing the six previous Star Wars episode films in 2D, followed by The Force Awakens in 3D.
Attendees received a special lanyard featuring exclusive marathon art.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
Disney Publishing Worldwide and Lucasfilm announced a series of at least 20 books and comics, "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens", which were released by multiple publishers starting in late 2015, prior to the film's premiere.
The series includes books by Del Rey and Disney-Lucasfilm publishers and comic books from Marvel Comics.
All titles under the program are canonical to the Star Wars universe.
Alan Dean Foster wrote a novelization of The Force Awakens which was released in e-book form on December 18.
In an effort to avoid revealing plot details before the film's release, the print release of the novelization was delayed until January 2016.
Marvel Comics published a six-issue comic book adaptation of The Force Awakens between June and November 2016.Disney Consumer Products and Lucasfilm announced that September 4, 2015 would be deemed "Force Friday" and would be the official launch of all the merchandise for The Force Awakens.
Beginning at 12:01 am, fans could buy toys, books, clothing and various other products at Disney Stores and other retailers throughout the world.
Disney and Maker Studios hosted an 18-hour live-streaming presentation on YouTube, showcasing multiple merchandise products beginning on September 3, 2015.
Among these products were a remote-controlled BB-8 developed by Sphero.
Sphero had participated in a Disney-run startup accelerator in July 2014, where they were invited into a private meeting with Disney CEO Bob Iger, in which they were shown on-set photos and imagery of BB-8 before its public unveiling.
Many retailers, such as Toys "R" Us, were unable to meet demand for Star Wars products due to the event.

===
Video games ===
The Force Awakens is the first Star Wars film to not have a direct tie-in game to accompany it.
Instead, select characters, scenes and/or locations from the film became part of other Star Wars video games:
Characters from the film were added to an update to the mobile game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, available for iOS and Android and released by Electronic Arts;
free downloadable content for Electronic Arts' Star Wars Battlefront reboot allowed players to battle on the planet Jakku; an update to the mobile game Star Wars Commander, released by Disney Mobile for iOS, Android and the Windows Store, allowed players to battle on the planet
Takodana during the Galactic Civil War era; and a condensed version of the film's plot becomes an add-on "playset" in the toys-to-life game Disney Infinity 3.0, with Finn, Rey, Poe Dameron, and Kylo Ren as playable characters.
Eventually, the film got a full Lego video game adaptation, titled Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, which was released by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Wii U, Xbox 360, and Xbox One on June 28, 2016.
==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles at the TCL Chinese Theatre, El Capitan Theatre, and Dolby Theatre on December 14, 2015.
A white tent stretched along Hollywood Boulevard from Orange Drive to Highland Avenue, covering the "massive" premiere event that hosted more than five thousand guests.
The film was released in 12 countries, including European nations (such as Italy and France), the Philippines, and Thailand on December 16; 32 countries including the United Kingdom, Mexico, and additional European, Asian, African, South American, and Oceania countries on December 17; and in the United States and Canada, Japan, Spain, and Venezuela on December 18, in 3D and IMAX 3D.
It was released in India on December 25 and in China on January 9
, 2016.In the United States and Canada, it had the widest release of December across 4,134 theaters, of which 3,300 were 3D locations, a record 392 IMAX screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451 premium large format screens, 146 D-Box locations, as well as releasing in the Dolby Vision format (high-dynamic range, Rec.
2020 color) in Dolby Cinema.
Worldwide, it was released across 940 IMAX theaters, a new record.
On December 18, 2015, the film began playing on every IMAX screen in the United States and Canada for four straight weeks up to January 14, 2016.
This made it the first film since Warner Bros.' The Hobbit trilogy to receive such a release.
The film finally shed some of its IMAX screens with the release of The Revenant (2015) and The Finest Hours (2016) in mid-January 2016.Advance ticket sales for the film began on October 19, 2015, and were in strong demand, resulting in online movie ticket sites crashing.
Vue Cinemas, the United Kingdom's third-largest theater chain, sold 45,000 tickets in 24 hours, 10,000 of which were sold in 90 minutes, a record for the theater.
In the United States, the film pre-sold a record-breaking $6.5 million worth of IMAX ticket sales on a single day.
IMAX has never previously registered more than $1 million in pre-sales on a single day.
In total, it sold over $50 million in pre-sales, breaking the record.
This number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance ticket sales by December 14.
However, not all tickets that were pre-sold were for the film's opening weekend, with
Fandango President Paul Yanover saying "people have set aside tickets for screenings in January, weeks after the big opening [...]
We have people buying Star Wars [The Force Awakens] into 2016.
It's not just an opening-weekend phenomenon.
"
Similarly, the film broke pre-sales records in the UK, Canada, and Germany.
The Force Awakens is the first live-action Star Wars film not to be released theatrically by 20th Century Fox; accordingly the film is not introduced with either that company's logo, or its signature fanfare composed by Alfred Newman.
Instead, the film is the first in the series to be distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, and the film is presented with only Lucasfilm's production logo shown silently before the main titles.
Disney chairman Bob Iger explained that the decision not to place Disney branding on the film was "for the fans".
===
Home media ===
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars:
The Force Awakens via download and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 1, 2016, with a Blu-ray and DVD release on April 5.
The home media release contains additional footage, with eight bonus features.
A Blu-ray 3D "collector's edition" of the film was released on November 15, including all the features of the original home releases, as well as several new bonus features, including new deleted scenes and audio commentary by director J. J. Abrams.
The package includes a Blu-ray 3D, regular Blu-ray, DVD, and digital copy of the film, as well as an additional Blu-ray disc for the bonus features.
The 4K version of the film was later re-released in "The Skywalker Saga" 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens grossed $936.7 million in the United States and Canada, and $1.132 billion in other countries for a worldwide total of $2.068 billion.
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold close to 110 million tickets in the United States and Canada.
The Force Awakens earned 8.6% of the total 2015 releases in the United States and Canada, second only to the 8.8% of the box office earned by Titanic in 1997.
It was the 24th film in cinematic history to gross $1 billion worldwide, standing as the fastest film to surpass the mark at the time, doing so in 12 days.
It was also the third film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its 53rd day of release.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $780.1 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film, making it the most profitable film of 2015.

====
Commercial analysis ====
With a production budget of $259–306 million, plus $175 million for marketing, printing and advertising costs, The Force Awakens was predicted to be a major box office success.
The cost of the film was subsidized by £31.6 million (US$47 million) from the UK film incentive program.
Total costs, after accounting for profit participations, production and distribution of home videos, as well as other ancillary mediums, is expected to run $423 million.
Reports in April 2015 from The Hollywood Reporter and Amboee Brand Intelligence predicted the film would earn up to $540 million worldwide for its opening, breaking the record for the biggest worldwide opening, as well as breaking the record for the biggest U.S. opening.
They believed that The Force Awakens would have the widest release ever, across 4,500 theaters in the United States and Canada.
Instead, it received a total of 4,134 theaters, and had the widest December opening.
Box office analyst Phil Contrino likened the film to Avatar (2009), which opened to $77 million in the United States and Canada and went on to earn $2.8 billion worldwide, saying The Force Awakens would earn $1 billion "without blinking" and could gross $2 billion.
In August 2015, Deadline Hollywood predicted an opening weekend of $615 million worldwide could be possible, including a $300 million opening in the United States and Canada.
Months prior to the film's release, box office analysts reported opening weekend projections were at $175–250 million.
Analysts said that the box office receipts of the film, when compared to predecessors, must be adjusted for inflation, and that the first Star Wars film made more when this adjustment is made.
It has further been observed that each of the first three films in the series was more profitable in calculating revenue against production costs.
Box office analyst Paul Dergarabedian said that while Avatar and The Force Awakens were both released on the same date of December 18, higher ticket prices in 2015 and IMAX screenings could push Star Wars "into the box office stratosphere".
By January 13, analysts concluded that it was unlikely that The Force Awakens would surpass Avatar's global gross.
While The Force Awakens was very successful in the United States and Canada, the same success was not witnessed in many overseas individual markets such as Germany, India, Latin America, and parts of Asia.
One cited reason for this is that overseas audiences do not have the same nostalgia or affinity for the film as those in the U.S.
The Star Wars franchise has traditionally lacked resonance with filmgoers in China, and marketing for The Force Awakens heavily focused on appealing to that market.
Nancy Tartaglione of Deadline Hollywood argued that, if accounting for its 40/60 domestic to international split, The Force Awakens did well overseas.
Avatar did well internationally because of its novelty, the marketing campaign advertising it as showcasing the newest 3D technology that can only be fully appreciated in the theaters, and because of its extended time in overseas theaters.
While The Force Awakens had appeal with its special effects, analysts felt that it lacked the novelty factor; they also cited that its gross was stilted due to markets making way for new films sooner than was previously done, and for films not playing in overseas theaters as long as they did back when Avatar was released.
Dergarabedian stated, "No matter what, [The Force Awakens] is an absolute, all-out blockbuster without peer in terms of the sheer speed at which it has crossed all of these major box-office milestones."
Moreover, Mike Fleming of Deadline Hollywood argued that the movie was the "most valuable movie" of the year, with "the net profit to Disney was an astounding $780.11M, and the Cash on Cash Return was twice that of any other film [released in 2016], at 2.00".
====
United States and Canada ====
In the United States and Canada, The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015.
It made a record-breaking $57 million from Thursday night previews, of which IMAX screenings generated a record-breaking $5.7 million from 391 screens.
On its opening day, the film grossed $119.1 million, marking the biggest single- and opening-day record and the first time a film has earned more than $100 million in a single day.
Without Thursday-night grosses, the film earned the second-largest opening-day gross and a record of $247.9 million for its opening weekend.
The debut was 19% bigger than the previous record holders
The Avengers (2012) ($207 million) and Jurassic World (2015) ($208 million).
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391 IMAX theaters, which nearly amounts to the $252.5 million total earned by Return of the Jedi—the second-lowest-grossing film in the series—in its original run.
2D screenings accounted for 53% of the total opening gross while 3D accounted for 47%.
RealD 3D comprised $78 million of the opening gross, setting a new record.
Revenues in the film's second weekend decreased by only 39.8% in the United States and Canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first place at the box office and recording the biggest second weekend of all time.
On January 2, after just 16 days of release, it became the second film (following Avatar) to gross over $700 million in the United States and Canada, and on January 6 became the highest-grossing film of all time domestically, doing so in 20 days.
On January 9, it became the first film in cinematic history to cross $800 million domestically unadjusted for inflation.
On February 5, The Force Awakens became the first film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the United States and Canada.
The film fell outside of the top ten for the first time in its eleventh weekend during the weekend February 26–28, 2016, and did not achieve $1 million in ticket sales for the first time in its fourteenth weekend.

====
Other territories ====
Internationally, the film was released in over 30,000 screens.
It opened on December 16, 2015, in 12 international markets and earned $14.1 million on its opening day, debuting at first place in all of them.
It expanded in an additional 42 countries on December 17, generating $58.6 million for a two-day international total of $72.7 million, reaching first place in all 44 markets.
It grossed a total of $129.5 million in three days after adding $56.8 million on its third day, and set a new midnight record in the United Kingdom with $3.6 million.
It broke opening-day records in the United Kingdom ($14.4 million), Germany ($7.1 million), Australia ($6.8 million), Sweden ($1.7 million), Norway ($1.1 million), and in 12 other countries.
Other markets which generated large opening days were Spain ($3.5 million) and Japan ($3 million).
After the five days, The Force Awakens had a total international opening gross of $281 million from 30,000 screens, a new record for December opening and the third-biggest international opening of all time.
International markets generating opening-weekend tallies of at least $10 million were the United Kingdom ($50.6 million), Germany ($27.5 million), France ($22.5 million), Australia ($19.6 million), Japan ($13.4 million), and Russia ($12.3 million).
The film had the biggest opening of all time in 18 countries including the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia, Russia, and Sweden.
After five days, the film had a total worldwide opening record of $529 million from 74 territories, which was the biggest worldwide opening at that time, making it only the second time in cinematic history—after Jurassic World—that a film had opened to more than $500 million globally.
This included an IMAX opening record of $48 million.
Revenues from IMAX dipped slightly, generating $19 million in its second weekend, for a record total of over $70 million in 11 days.
IMAX generated $17.9 million from 276 IMAX theaters.
The film had a steeper decline in its second weekend, falling 51% to $136.9 million.
Of the notable major markets, the film had an unsuccessful opening in India where it opened third against two local blockbusters with a mere $1.51 million.
As of February 21, the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($180.7 million), China ($124.5 million), Germany ($109.7 million), Japan ($92.6 million), and France ($88.2 million).
On January 17, 2016, it passed the $1 billion mark overseas becoming the first film of Disney, the third film of 2015 and the fifth film overall to achieve this feat.
It topped the international box office chart for five consecutive weekends, becoming the first film since Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015) to have five straight wins, before being dethroned by The Revenant in its sixth weekend.
In Japan, it topped the box office for six straight weekends.

===
Critical response ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics.
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 92% of 439 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.20/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Packed with action and populated by both familiar faces and fresh blood
, The Force Awakens successfully recalls the series' former glory while injecting it with renewed energy."
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 55 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 80 out of 100, The Force Awakens received "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale; women, and people under the ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "A+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "A" or a "B".
Audiences polled by PostTrak gave the film an 88% "definite recommend" while 96% said it met or exceeded their expectations.
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph said the film "sets out to shake Star Wars from its slumber, and reconnect the series with its much-pined-for past", and "it achieves this both immediately and joyously
is perhaps the single greatest relief of the movie-going year."
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian said that it was "both a narrative progression from the earlier three films and a shrewdly affectionate next-gen reboot", and it was "ridiculous and melodramatic and sentimental, but exciting and brimming with energy and its own kind of generosity.
"
Variety's Justin Chang wrote that the film has "sufficient style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times described it as "a beautiful, thrilling, joyous, surprising, and heart-thumping adventure".
Ann Hornaday, writing for The Washington Post, thought the film had "enough novelty to create yet another cohort of die-hard fans", and the film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."
The Charlotte Observer's Lawrence Toppman said Abrams had "pulled off a delicate balancing act, paying clever homage to the past."
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film his highest rating and called it "the best Star Wars sequel yet and one of the best films of 2015".
Frank Pallotta, reviewing the film for CNN Business, found it was the best Star Wars film since the original trilogy and that it "is bound to be a film experience long remembered by fans and non-fans
alike".
Certain critics found The Force Awakens derivative of the original Star Wars trilogy, some expressing their opinion that the film was essentially a remake of A New Hope.
Tom Long of The Detroit News wrote that though some may find the film too similar to the original Star Wars, it leaves "the ungainly and unneeded clumsiness of the subsequent prequels far behind", with "the energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".
The Tribune-Star called it "basically the same" as the original film but "isn't that what we all wanted anyway?"
Stephanie Zacharek of Time wrote that Abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those nebulous wonders we didn't know we wanted".
Reviewing for Forbes, Scott Mendelson cited the film's "top-tier production values and a strong sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an exercise in fan service [that] it is only due to the charisma and talent of our newbies and J. J. Abrams' undeniable skill as a visual storyteller that the Mad Libs narrative doesn't outright destroy the picture".
Brian Merchant of Motherboard said that the film "is supposed to be all about exploring the unexplored, not rehashing the well-trod", and is "one of the most unabashedly creative enterprises of the 20th century has been rendered another largely enjoyable."
RogerEbert.com's Gerardo Valero went as far as to accuse the film of plagiarizing A New Hope and resorting to nostalgia.
He felt that it "didn't [justify] a return to the universe" from not having an original story of its own to tell in the plot, characters, and musical score, negatively comparing it to George Lucas' prequel trilogy, and that some of its climactic moments felt unearned.
In an interview with journalist Charlie Rose that aired on December 24, 2015, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a "divorce" and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens.
Lucas described the previous Star Wars films as his "children" and criticized the "retro feel" of The Force Awakens, saying: "I worked very hard to make [my films] completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships—you know, to make it new."
Lucas also likened Disney to "white slavers", which drew some criticism; he subsequently apologized.
In a 2019 memoir, Disney chairman Bob Iger said that George Lucas "couldn't even hide his disappointment" towards J. J. Abrams' interpretation.
According to Iger, Lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the film, and that "there weren't enough visual or technical leaps forward".
Lucas preferred Rian Johnson's sequel The Last Jedi and the anthology film Rogue One (2016).
===
Accolades ===
Several awards held their nominations before the December release of The Force Awakens, making the film ineligible for the 73rd Golden Globe Awards and some other awards ceremonies.
However, the film was added to the 21st Critics' Choice Awards' slate of best picture nominees after a special vote by the board of directors, and the announcement of the 2015 American Film Institute Awards was delayed until after the release of The Force Awakens, where it was named one of Top Ten Films of the year.
The film received five Academy Award nominations at the 88th Academy Awards, including Best Original Score, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, Best Film Editing, and Best Visual Effects.
The film garnered four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards for Best Original Music, Best Sound, and Best Production Design, including two wins, one for Best Special Visual Effects and a BAFTA Rising Star Award for John Boyega.
It was nominated for Best Picture at the 2016 Critics' Choice Awards.
The film received seven Visual Effects Society Awards nominations, winning four, including Outstanding Visual Effects in an Effects Driven Feature Motion Picture.
It received the most nominations at the 21st Empire Awards, including Best Film, Best Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film, Best Director for J. J. Abrams, Best Male Newcomer for John Boyega, and Best Female Newcomer for Daisy Ridley.
The Force Awakens received 13 nominations at the 42nd Saturn Awards, where it won in eight categories, including Best Science Fiction Film, Best Writing, Best Actor for Harrison Ford, Best Supporting Actor for Adam Driver, Best Music, Best Special Effects, Best Editing, and Best Make-Up.
Daisy Ridley and John Boyega each received several nominations and accolades for their performances.
They were nominated as Best Newcomers at various critics circle and associations, including the Alliance of Women Film Journalists, and the Florida Film Critics Circle, The Force Awakens received 11 nominations at the MTV Movie Awards, including Movie of the Year, Best Female Performance for Ridley, Best Breakthrough Performance for Boyega, and Best Virtual Performance for Lupita Nyong'o and Andy Serkis.
==
Sequels ==


===
The Last Jedi ===
Rian Johnson confirmed in August 2014 that he would write and direct The Last Jedi, which was released on December 15, 2017.
Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Gwendoline Christie, Jimmy Vee, and Joonas Suotamo reprised their roles in the film, and are joined by Kelly Marie Tran, Laura Dern, and Benicio del Toro.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
The Rise of Skywalker was released on December 20, 2019.
J. J. Abrams directed the film and co-wrote it with Chris Terrio.
Hamill, Fisher, Driver, Ridley, Boyega, Isaac, Daniels, Nyong'o, Suotamo, and Tran reprised their roles in the film, and are joined by Naomi Ackie, Keri Russell, and Richard E. Grant.
Billy Dee Williams returns from the original trilogy as Lando Calrissian and Ian McDiarmid returns from original and prequel trilogies as Palpatine.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

==
Further reading ==
Hidalgo, Pablo (2015).
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary.
New York: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-3816-4.
==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at Disney A to Z
General Armitage Hux is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
First introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens, he is portrayed by Irish actor Domhnall Gleeson.
He is an unpleasant military commander in a power struggle with Kylo Ren for the First Order leadership, and being exceeded only by Supreme Leader Snoke.
The character first featured in The Force Awakens media and merchandising, and returned in the film's sequels, The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
Gleeson's performance has received generally positive reception from critics and fans, while the reaction to the character and his shifting roles throughout the trilogy has been more mixed.
==
Character ==
Hux was born on Arkanis and was rumored to have been sired from an affair between his father, Commandant Brendol Hux of the Arkanis Academy, and a kitchen worker.
Hux and his father are rescued from the Academy when it is about to fall to the New Republic near the end of the Galactic Civil War.
When the war ends with the Battle of Jakku and the signing of the Galactic Concordance, the young Hux and his father are part of the Imperial Navy forces who retreat into the Unknown Regions.
These forces later emerge as the First Order.
The Republic believes that the First Order is just an unimportant band of Imperial holdouts, but Hux's training methods forge a formidable military that effectively overthrows the Republic and turns the galaxy into a dictatorship even more brutal than the Galactic Empire of the original Star Wars trilogy.
He serves as the right hand of the First Order's Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), second in authority only to Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), with whom he has a fierce rivalry.
He is dedicated to destroying the Resistance, an army that grew out of the Rebel Alliance and is led by General Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher).
Hux believes that the Republic is a threat to galactic stability, and that it is his destiny to rule the galaxy.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
Hux first appears in The Force Awakens as a high-ranking general in the First Order.
Hux is part of a mission to Jakku to recover a map to Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), the last Jedi.
After the battle, he learns from Captain Phasma of the desertion of a former stormtrooper, Finn (John Boyega).
To destroy the Resistance, Snoke allows Hux to use the Starkiller superweapon against the Republic's capital world of Hosnian Prime, destroying the planet and killing billions of people.
The Resistance is left without military support from the Republic, so Hux soon turns the Starkiller weapon towards the Resistance base on D'Qar.
Before he can destroy the planet, however, an attack squadron led by Resistance Commander Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), with ground support from Han Solo (Harrison Ford), Finn, and the Jakku scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley), destroys Starkiller Base, forcing Hux, some of his troops, and a defeated Ren to flee the planet.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Hux appears in The Last Jedi as the primary general reporting directly to Supreme Leader Snoke.
He attempts to respond to a transmission from Dameron, who mocks him by asking for a General "Hugs" and describing his complexion as "pasty".
Hux then leads the subsequent battle, during which both sides sustain heavy losses.
He also oversees the bombardment of the remaining three ships of the Resistance, then on the lifeboats, and, along with Phasma, helps arrange the execution of Finn and Rose.
Later, he discovers Snoke dead and Ren unconscious in the throne room of the Supremacy, so he attempts to kill his rival but stops when Ren wakes up.
He initially protests Ren's claim to be the new Supreme Leader, but is swiftly persuaded otherwise when Ren uses the Force to choke him, proclaiming "Long live the Supreme Leader."
At the end of the film, he accompanies Ren to the planet Crait in their attempt to finish off the Resistance.
When Ren orders his men to fire on Luke, Hux gives the order to stop it soon after.
After Ren wants to kill Luke himself, Hux admonishes him to focus on the escaping Resistance members; Ren silences him by using the Force to slam him into a wall, knocking him out.
Hux is seen again when Ren and his troops invade the Resistance base and find it empty, giving Ren a sinister glare from behind.
====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
By the time of Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker, Hux has become embittered and jealous because of the lack of respect he receives and his rivalry with Allegiant General Pryde (Richard E. Grant), who constantly undermines Hux while vying for his job.
Hux is later revealed to have been a spy supplying information to the Resistance in order to undermine Ren in the hopes of taking his place as Supreme Leader (or at least seeing Ren falling along with the First Order if necessary); he tells Finn, "I don't care if you win.
I need Kylo Ren to lose."
Hux helps Finn, Poe and Chewbacca
escape Ren's Resurgent-class Star Destroyer
Steadfast and has Finn shoot him in the leg so he can feign an effort to stop them.
However, he is shot in the chest with a blaster by Pryde after the latter realizes Hux's treason through his cover story.
Hux’s decision to allow the rebels to escape is a major catalyst for the Resistance's victory in the Battle of Exegol.

A scene deleted from the film featured Hux and Pryde in the opening action sequence with Kylo Ren.
===
Other media ===
Hux appears via hologram in the first season finale of the animated series Star Wars:
Resistance.
The episode takes place at the same time as The Force Awakens and depicts First Order troops watching a transmission of Hux give his speech and the subsequent firing of Starkiller Base.
He appears, in person, in the eleventh episode "Station to Station" of the second season and in hologram in the finale of season two, "The Escape", along with Kylo Ren.

Hux appears in two theme park attractions, Star Tours – The Adventures Continue and Star Wars:
Rise of the Resistance with Gleeson reprising the role in each.
Some details about the backstory of Hux and his father Brendol appear in the 2016 novel Star Wars:
Aftermath:
Life Debt by Chuck Wendig.
Hux and Brendol are also characters in the 2017 novel Star Wars: Phasma by Delilah S. Dawson.
Hux also is a playable Dark Side squad leader in an update to the mobile MOBA Star Wars: Force Arena, released in late 2017.

== Reception ==
In his review of The Force Awakens, Henry Barnes of The Guardian wrote that Gleeson's "screechy pseudo-Nazi role" as General Hux is "not as colourful or as nuanced" as Adam Driver's part as Kylo Ren, "but – given he's a functionary – Gleeson certainly makes an impression."
Reviewing Hux and his role in the film, David Rutz of The Washington Free Beacon wrote that while Hux is portrayed as a villain, he is shown to be a capable general and "a committed soldier to his cause with laser-like focus on achieving the First Order's ends."
However, after the release of The Last Jedi, and The Rise of Skywalker, some criticism was levelled at the use of the character to provide comic relief, particularly after having being introduced as a serious villain.
The character's story arc was also discussed.
The revelation that he was a Resistance spy and his subsequent "unceremonious" death was subject to some criticism.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
General Hux in the StarWars.com Databank
General Hux on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
General Hux on IMDb
Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga is an upcoming Lego-themed action-adventure game scheduled to be released for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X/S.
It will be the sixth entry in TT Games' Lego Star Wars series of video games and the successor to Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
The game will adapt all nine entries in the Skywalker saga series of films.

==
Gameplay ==
Unlike most Lego video games in which players had to advance through the story in a linear order, players can choose to start the game from any of the nine Skywalker saga episodes and complete them in any order they wish.
Each episode will have five story missions, making a total of 45 levels, contrasting from six levels per episode in previous games.
Combat has been revamped from previous titles, such as lightsaber wielders now using a variety of combos with light attacks, heavy attacks, and Force moves, and blaster characters having an over-the-shoulder camera (angle featured in many third-person shooter games).
The game features 300 playable characters.
Much like its predecessor, Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, the game's hub will not be a single area, such as the Mos Eisley Cantina in Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, but a wide range of fully explorable planets filled with many iconic Star Wars landmarks.
Planets and moons confirmed by the developers so far to be explorable in the hub  include Naboo, Tatooine, Coruscant, Kamino, Geonosis, Kashyyyk, Utapau, Mustafar, Yavin 4, Hoth, Dagobah, Bespin, Endor, Jakku, Takodana, D'Qar, Starkiller Base, Ahch-To, Cantonica, Crait, Ajan Kloss, Pasaana, Kijimi, Kef Bir, and Exegol.
Many ships will have freely explorable areas in the hub as well, such as Star Destroyers and the Death Star.
Random encounters will also happen in the game's hub.
For example, an Imperial Star Destroyer could suddenly jump out of hyperspace and send a fleet of TIE Fighters after the player.
Players can choose to engage in dogfights with them or continue onward to progress the story.

==
Development and marketing ==
Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga was first teased to be in development by Lucasfilm sound editor Matthew Wood at Star Wars Celebration Chicago.
An announcement trailer premiered at E3 2019 during Microsoft's press conference.
A second trailer showing one scene from all nine movies was released on 20 December to coincide with the release of The Rise of Skywalker.
The official artwork was revealed on 4 May 2020.Disney and Lucasfilm had not shared significant details of The Rise of Skywalker with the game team before the film's release.
In the meantime, TT Games worked on other aspects of the game until Lucasfilm shared more details.
The game is developed in Traveller's Tales' new engine, NTT (pronounced Entity).

===
Audio ===
Like Lego Star Wars
: The Force Awakens, Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga will use original voice acting, with the first actor of the game being Billy Dee Williams voicing Lando Calrissian.

==
Release ==
On 7 May 2020, the release date was mentioned as 20 October 2020 through the Star Wars YouTube channel.
On the same day, the original video was made private and a new video, in which the release date was cut out, was uploaded.
This date was not otherwise confirmed.
On 26 August 2020, the Lego website displayed the release date as being 2021, but the website was taken down.
It has since been updated to remove any suggestion of a release year.
The following day at the 2020 Gamescom Opening Night Live, it was announced that the game would release in Q1/Q2 2021 under the description of "Spring 2021" with additional versions on the PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S.
On 2 April 2021, it was announced that the game had been delayed, with no further release window specified.
The game will be available in a Standard Edition and a Deluxe Edition.
The Deluxe Edition includes the Character Collection bundle, which collects six character packs based around characters from outside of the Skywalker Saga, which consists of packs from The Mandalorian, Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story, Solo:
A Star Wars Story, the forthcoming series Star Wars:
The Bad Batch and a pack containing Classic Characters.
The retail Deluxe Edition will come with an exclusive Luke Skywalker with blue milk minifigure, and different box art showcasing Darth Vader, with his mask being removable by lifting up the included slipcase.
Physical Deluxe editions will be released for Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5 and an Xbox version which can function as both the Xbox One and Xbox Series X/S versions depending on which console it is played on.
A steelbook resembling Han Solo in carbonite is included with pre-orders of any edition from Best Buy or Best Buy Canada or pre-orders of the Deluxe Edition bundle from Game.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D CGI animated television series produced by Lucasfilm Animation.
The series follows a motley group of rebels conducting covert operations to thwart the sinister Galactic Empire.

==
Overview ==
General Grievous is a fictional character and a major antagonist in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
He was introduced as a supporting villain in the 2003 animated series Star Wars:
Clone Wars, voiced by John DiMaggio in the second season and Richard McGonagle in the third season, before making his live-action debut in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), where he was created using computer-generated imagery and voiced by Matthew Wood.
Wood reprised his role in the 2008 canonical animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, where Grievous is one of the main antagonists.

Grievous, a brilliant military strategist, served as the Supreme Commander of the Confederacy of Independent Systems' droid armies during the Clone Wars.
While not Force-sensitive, he trained in all lightsaber combat forms under Count Dooku to rival the Jedi of the Galactic Republic.
Throughout the Clone Wars, Grievous murdered numerous Jedi and collected their lightsabers as trophies, earning a reputation as the most feared Jedi hunter in the galaxy of his era.
He developed a rivalry with Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi, with whom he clashed numerous times during the war, and who eventually killed Grievous after he assumed command of the Separatist Alliance following Dooku's death in Revenge of the Sith.

Aside from the films and animated series, the character appears in various canon and non-canon Star Wars media, such as books, comics, and video games, many of which explore his backstory.
Within Star Wars Legends material, Grievous was born Qymaen jai Sheelal and was a Kaleesh warlord who developed a personal vendetta against the Republic and the Jedi.
After suffering near-fatal injuries in a ship crash, he was rescued by Count Dooku (who was secretly responsible for the crash) and rebuilt as a cyborg.
The character's backstory was retconned in The Clone Wars animated series, in which it is implied that Grievous willingly replaced parts of his body with cybernetic augmentations, in an effort to "upgrade" himself.
However, several elements of Grievous's backstory from Legends were later reintroduced in the current Star Wars canon through various books.

Since his introduction, Grievous has become a widely recognized figure in popular culture, and one of the most popular Star Wars characters of all time, gaining a cult status.

==
Concept and creation ==
General Grievous was developed for Revenge of the Sith as a powerful new villain on the side of the Separatists.
The initial instructions that director George Lucas gave the Art Department were very open-ended: "a droid general".
From that vague direction, the artists developed a lot of explorations, some purely mechanical, some not, for Grievous's look.
He was also created as a villain foreshadowing Anakin Skywalker's transformation into Darth Vader: the heavy breathing, the cyborg body and his seduction into an evil faction.

The initial design sketch for Grievous was refined and made into a 1-foot (30 cm)-tall maquette sculpture.
That was further refined when it was made into a realistic computer-generated model by Industrial Light & Magic.
At the time, this was one of the most complicated models ever created by ILM, with many parts of differing physical qualities.
Grievous is completely computer-generated imagery in the movie.
On set, Duncan Young read the lines off-screen while Kyle Rowling wore a bluescreen or a greenscreen suit to act out the fights with Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Also notable are the numerous contradictions between the expanded universe and both TV series.
Grievous is depicted as having four fingers per arm in the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars series whereas Star Wars: Clone Wars has the general depicted as having five.
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith and most other comics depicted him as having six fingers per arm.
The original Clone Wars incarnation was fast, acrobatic and powerful but not as often in command when compared to the more recent The Clone Wars incarnation of the character.
Furthermore, his asthmatic cough and hunchbacked stance are already present, despite having not gained them prior to his confrontation with Mace Windu.
The general's back story has also been changed: supervising director Dave Filoni stated that Grievous opted for surgery in order to gain abilities that would allow him to rival a Jedi.
This is reinforced by season one's tenth episode "Lair of Grievous" which suggested the general's transformation into a cyborg was a gradual process.

Comparisons have been drawn between the character's appearance and Jacob Epstein's sculpture Rock Drill.
===
Portrayal ===
Sound editor Matthew Wood submitted a voice audition for the character as Alan Smithee.
Lucas liked this audition the most, and since he had bronchitis at the time, he instructed Wood to give the character an asthmatic cough.
This was intended to emphasize the character's organic nature as well as the flaws of having cyborg prosthetics.
Some of the audio effects for the coughing in Revenge of the Sith were taken from Lucas while he had bronchitis.
Grievous appeared in the micro-series Star Wars:
Clone Wars before many of his personality traits had been finalized.
To reconcile the differences between the two presentations, Mace Windu uses the Force to crush Grievous's chest panel towards the end of the show's third season.
However, Grievous has the cough for the entirety of his appearance in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, making his micro-series backstory non-canon.

General Grievous has been voiced by four actors.
For the Season Two finale of the Clone Wars animated micro-series, the character was voiced by John DiMaggio, who gave him a tinny voice—not knowing what the character would sound like in Revenge of the Sith.
Richard McGonagle voiced the character for Clone Wars Season Three.
The character was voiced by Matthew Wood in the feature film Revenge of the Sith, the animated series The Clone Wars, and most video game appearances.
David W. Collins voiced the character (albeit uncredited) in Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron and Battlefront: Elite Squadron.

Gary Oldman (a friend of producer Rick McCallum) agreed to submit a voice audition but his involvement never went beyond that.
Several months later, actor John Rhys-Davies was widely reported to be the character's voice but this was revealed to be a prank.
DiMaggio was considered for the role for Grievous after he had previously voiced him in the 2003 Clone Wars animated series, but was later dropped.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
Revenge of the Sith ====
In Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, General Grievous holds Supreme Chancellor Palpatine hostage aboard his flagship, the Invisible Hand.
The Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker launch a rescue operation, and the latter kills Separatist leader Count Dooku.
Grievous traps
the fleeing Jedi and the Chancellor in a ray shield, and
has them brought along with R2-D2 to the ship's bridge.
He confiscates Obi-Wan and Anakin's lightsabers, cackling that he will add them to his vast collection.
When R2-D2 creates a distraction, Obi-Wan and Anakin use the Force to retrieve their lightsabers and free themselves.
A short battle ensues with the Jedi overcoming Grievous's MagnaGuards and Battle droids before turning their attention to the General himself.
Grievous escapes by using the electrostaff of a fallen MagnaGuard to shatter the bridge's glass and create a vacuum that pulls everything out towards space.
He subsequently fires a grappling hook to secure himself to the ship and scales its exterior en route to an escape pod.
Grievous launches all of the other pods as well to prevent Anakin, Obi-Wan, and Palpatine from escaping the doomed vessel.
However, Anakin manages to take control of the ship and crash land it safely.

Now taking Dooku's place as both the political and military leader of the Separatists, Grievous heads to the planet of Utapau, where the council members of the Confederacy of Independent Systems are hiding; the Separatists have taken the residents of Utapau hostage.
He receives a message from Dooku's master Darth Sidious – who, unbeknownst to Grievous, is Palpatine's Sith alter ego – telling him to move the council members to the volcanic planet Mustafar.
Sidious also tells Grievous that the war will soon come to an end and when Grievous objects about the loss of Dooku, Sidious replied that his death was a necessary loss and that he'll soon have a new apprentice who is "far younger and more powerful".

With Dooku dead, the hunt for Grievous becomes a priority for the Republic, and would also be a litmus test into whether Palpatine would give up his executive war powers granted to him by the Galactic Senate for the war.
Obi-Wan Kenobi later tracks Grievous to Utapau.
When Obi-Wan destroys his MagnaGuards, Grievous duels the Jedi in single combat, splitting each of his mechanical arms in half to simultaneously use four lightsabers.
The Republic's clone troopers then arrive to engage Grievous's Droid Army.
Obi-Wan disarms Grievous with the Force and pursues him when the general retreats on his wheelbike, fleeing to the hangar where his starfighter is located.
The two engage in hand-to-hand combat, where Obi-Wan manages to rip open Grievous's chest plates, revealing the parts where his organs are located.
Enraged, Grievous throws Obi-Wan off the platform, easily overpowering him.
Using the Force, Obi-Wan manipulates his position and catches hold of his edge.
As Grievous charges at him with his electrostaff, Obi-Wan uses the Force to summon the general's blaster.
Before Grievous can deliver the final blow, Obi-Wan shoots him in his organs underneath his exoskeleton, which then catches fire, killing the cyborg general.

===
Television series ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Grievous is one of the main antagonists of the 2008 computer-animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
In the first season, he is shown to be commanding the Separatist warship Malevolence armed with a pair of heavy ion cannons.
He also clashes with Obi-Wan Kenobi aboard the Malevolence for the first time when he chases him aboard the warship's railway system.
During the ensuing lightsaber duel, Grievous nearly gets the better of Obi-Wan, but the Jedi Master escapes at the last moment.
Meanwhile, Anakin secretly sabotages the Malevolence's navigation computer, sending it crashing into a nearby moon.
However, Grievous escapes on his starfighter and continues his campaign against the Republic.
A few episodes later, Grievous discovers Anakin and Padawan Ahsoka Tano infiltrating his secret listening post and seeks out to search for them.
He then engages Ahsoka and her squad of clone troopers, defeating all the troopers and then engaging in a cat and mouse game with the Padawan.
However, Anakin and Ahsoka still manage to destroy his listening post.
Aware of Grievous's recent string of failures, Count Dooku arranges a test for his cyborg henchman – in the form of Jedi Master Kit Fisto and Jedi Knight Nahdar Vebb.
In Grievous's personal castle on the third moon of Vassek, the two Jedi and a squad of clone troopers ambush Grievous and cut off his legs.
Once repaired, Grievous duels and kills Vebb.
On the outskirts of Grievous's castle, the general climbs up from the ledge and unleashes four lightsabers on Fisto.
Using the fog to his advantage, Fisto successfully cuts off one of Grievous's hands and reclaims Vebb's lightsaber.
Armed with two lightsabers, Fisto gains the upper hand over Grievous to which the general calls in his Magnaguards and Fisto flees.
Grievous reports to Dooku, who says that there is room for improvement.

During the second season, Grievous boards a Republic Cruiser with Jedi Master Eeth Koth on board.
Grievous duels Koth and takes him prisoner.
Obi-Wan, Anakin and Jedi Master Adi Gallia attempt to rescue Koth and capture Grievous, resulting in a confrontation between Obi-Wan and Grievous over the planet Saleucami, which Grievous loses.
Though the Jedi succeed in rescuing Koth, Grievous, helped by his droids, escapes once again.

In the third season, Grievous, Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress and their armies attack the clone factories on the planet Kamino.
During the battle, Grievous clashes with Obi-Wan again.
However, their duel ends in stalemate and Grievous flees the planet with Ventress.
Later on, Grievous commands a sabotage mission using infiltrator droids on the Galactic Senate, resulting in a deregulation of the banks.

During the fourth season, Grievous suffers a humiliating defeat when he attempts to invade Naboo.
Jar Jar Binks distracts Grievous in a series of negotiations long enough for the Gungan army to shut down Grievous's invasion force.
As Grievous pursues Jar Jar, he slaughters many Gungan soldiers.
At that moment, General Tarpals intervenes and engages Grievous in a duel.
Although he is mortally wounded by the cyborg, Tarpals impales Grievous through his chest which allows the Gungan Army to bombard the wounded general with energized projectiles and capture him.
However, he is freed in a prisoner exchange with Anakin between Dooku and Padmé Amidala.
Later, Grievous attacks Gallia's ship, engaging her in a lightsaber duel down a narrow hallway.
The duel ends when Grievous kicks Gallia in the chest, sending her flying across the hallway.
Grievous then captures Gallia.
Shortly after, Gallia escapes Grievous's custody when a strike force led by Jedi Master Plo Koon boards his ship and frees the Jedi Master, prompting Grievous to flee once again.
Grievous is later sent to the planet
Dathomir under Dooku's orders to exterminate the Nightsisters.
Immediately upon landing on the planet's surface, the general begins his rampage and his droid army turns Dathomir into a battlefield.
However, Ventress turns the tide of the battle and fights her way to the general's shuttle where the cyborg emerges to confront her personally.
As they duel, Grievous grows overconfident and begins to toy with Ventress until she surprises him by chopping off one of his arms and knocking him to the ground.
Grievous then orders his troops to fire on Ventress, wounding her.
As Grievous prepares to deliver the death blow to his longtime rival, he is attacked by Nightsister zombies and is forced to fight them off while Ventress flees.
Under new orders from Dooku, Grievous turns his attention to Nightsister leader Mother Talzin and slaughters his way to her fortress where she narrowly escapes from the general's grasp by teleporting away.
Grievous is later seen on Serenno listening to Dooku's fears about Savage Opress.

In the fifth season's premiere episode, Grievous is mentioned by Hondo Ohnaka as having defeated Obi-Wan and won the battle for the system that Florrum is in.
This battle is shown in the episode "Bound for Rescue" where Grievous attacks Obi-Wan's ship; the General slaughters a squadron of clones and duels Obi-Wan.
Obi-Wan is no match for Grievous and is subsequently defeated, forcing him to abandon his ship.
Later, Grievous goes to Florrum personally and announces that the system is under his control now, and that Dooku is having him punish Hondo for holding him for ransom.
The droids destroy Hondo's stronghold and his belongings, and hold him prisoner, but Hondo is rescued when Ahsoka and a group of younglings free him and retreat off the planet.
Grievous pursues them and fights Ahsoka.
Although she has grown stronger since their last battle, Grievous still proves to be more than a match for her.
The duel ends when Hondo picks up Ahsoka in the Slave I and takes off, leaving Grievous to stew in his anger.
Grievous is mentioned in the episode "Secret Weapons", where a team of Republic droids led by Colonel Gascon is tasked with retrieving a module that will decode a transmission which Grievous made about an important Separatist attack.

Grievous was to undergo a design change in the seventh season to look more like his design in Revenge of the Sith.
Though the series was cancelled before this could happen, the unfinished animations of the Crystal Crisis arc showed this design.
In this arc, Grievous is sent by Dooku to purchase a giant kyber crystal on Utapau, and while Grievous at first obtains the crystal, it is lost when Anakin and Obi-Wan destroy it by overloading its power.
Grievous makes a brief appearance in the opening sequence of "Old Friends Not Forgotten", the first episode of the Siege of Mandalore story-arc from the seventh and final season.
As the arc takes place during the events of Revenge of the Sith, Grievous has a different design, reminiscent of his appearance in the film, and is commanding his fleet in an attack on Coruscant with the goal of capturing Chancellor Palpatine.
Grievous is mentioned in the following two episodes,
"The Phantom Apprentice" and "Shattered", when Obi-Wan states that he is going to Utapau to hunt him down, and later when Ki-Adi Mundi mentions during a meeting with the Jedi Council that Grievous has been killed (similarly to a scene from Revenge of the Sith).
===
Literature ===
Grievous appears as a major character in the four-part comic series Son of Dathomir, an unproduced story arc intended for the sixth season of The Clone Wars.
In the comic, Dooku sends Grievous to hunt down the rogue Sith Lord Darth Maul, who has become a significant threat to Sidious' plans.
Grievous is ordered to only wound Maul's forces, but not kill him; this is in order to draw out Mother Talzin, who is later revealed to be Maul's mother.
Though he thinks it foolish to keep Maul alive, Grievous does as he is told.
He takes a huge army of droids to Zanbar and attacks Maul's army of Death Watch warriors.
Despite heavy casualties, Grievous's droids ultimately win the battle.
During the battle, Grievous briefly fights Maul and wins, forcing him to flee.
Later, Grievous and Dooku are lured into a trap by Maul and his minions, and are taken prisoner in order to draw out Sidious.
However, Grievous soon escapes and rejoins Sidious, who orders Grievous to attack Dathomir again, where Maul and Talzin are planning using Dooku as a sacrifice to restore Talzin to full strength.
Sidious fights Talzin while Grievous duels Maul again.
Maul eventually overpowers Grievous and Force-pushes him through a wall.
Grievous quickly reappears, however, and after Sidious and Dooku have subdued Talzin (who has thrown Maul out of the battle to save his life),
Grievous stabs her through the chest with his lightsabers, killing her.

===
Legends ===
Grievous is featured extensively in prequel-era Expanded Universe material.
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.

====
Clone Wars ====
In the 2003 Star Wars: Clone Wars animated series, which marked the character's first ever appearance, General Grievous makes his first public appearance when he attacks several Jedi on Hypori.
After killing Master Daakman Barrek, Grievous and his droids surround Tarr Seirr, Sha'a Gi, Aayla Secura, K'Kruhk, Ki-Adi-Mundi and Shaak Ti.
After stating he would grant the Jedi a "warrior's death", Grievous battles the six Jedi all by himself, killing Seirr and Gi and injuring Secura and Ti.
K'Kruhk is also mortally wounded, and falls into a state of hibernation after Grievous strikes him down.
He manages to possess three lightsabers (one in each hand and the third using his left foot) to fight Mundi after all the other Jedi have been dispatched.
As they fight, lightsabers blazing, Clone ARC Troopers led by Captain Fordo arrive to save the surviving Jedi.
Grievous retreats, but secures his victory over the Jedi as he collects the lightsabers of the Jedi he has killed.

Three years later, Grievous searches for Chancellor Palpatine on Coruscant, attempting to capture him while he is defended by a trio of Jedi consisting of Shaak Ti, Roron Corobb and Foul Moudama.
Ti orders
Corobb and Moudama take Palpatine to a secret bunker while she holds Grievous off.
However, Grievous's Magnaguards distract Ti while Grievous reaches the hardened bunker, kills Corobb and Moudama, and captures Palpatine.
Ti learns too late that the Magnaguards were but a distraction and heads to the bunker to find her Jedi comrades dead, and Palpatine in Grievous's grasp.
Grievous defeats Ti yet again, takes her lightsaber, and restrains her with electric cables before returning to his shuttle with Palpatine in his custody.
As Grievous is about to escape, Mace Windu confronts him using the Force to crush his chest plates, severely injuring his lungs and leaving him with his distinctive asthmatic cough, though Grievous still escapes, leading to the events of Revenge of the Sith.

====
Literature ====
Grievous made his first appearance in the comics in a short story in Star Wars:
Visionaries called "The Eyes of Revolution".
This story reveals that he was once Kaleesh general Qymaen jai Sheelal, a fierce warrior engaged in a brutal war with the rival planet Huk.
Grievous has had many wives, including the human Gravlyn, and several children.
He boards a shuttle to take him to another battle, unaware that Dooku had planted an explosive device in it.
He is mortally wounded in the resulting crash, and what remains of his body is reconstructed with cybernetic limbs.
Dooku then recruits him into the Separatist Army as his second-in-command, appealing to his hatred of the Republic that ignored his home world's plight.

In the third volume of Clone Wars Adventures, it is revealed that Grievous attains his rank of Supreme Commander by dueling Dooku's underlings Ventress and Durge simultaneously.
On board the Trenchant space station, Dooku orders Ventress and Durge to search for an unknown intruder with the pair unaware of their master's intentions.
Armed with an electrostaff, Grievous appears from behind and electrocutes Durge and subsequently throws him across the hallway through a few trophies.
Ventress jumps onto a chandelier and attempts to search for Grievous, who knocks her down.
Ventress and Durge then confront Grievous face to face, with Ventress unleashing her lightsabers and Durge unleashing his full arsenal.
Grievous is able to knock Ventress away, though Durge then sends the general flying across the room into a wall with a powerful punch to the face.
Enraged, Grievous unleashes his lightsabers, swiftly defeating the pair.
In the wake of the battle, Grievous is made the Supreme Commander of the Confederacy's military.

Grievous starred in his own comic called Star Wars:
General Grievous, in which he fights Jedi Master T'chooka D'oon and his Padawan Flyn.
After Grievous kills D'oon, Kybo returns to the Jedi council with a plan to destroy Grievous once and for all.
When the council rebukes his vengeful plan, Kybo decides to take this matter into own hands with disastrous results.
Grievous also appears in the comics in Star Wars:
Obsession issue number 4, in which he is on the world of Boz Pity, where he kills two Jedi, Master Soon Bayts and Jedi Council member Adi Gallia.
Though Windu injures Grievous, Dooku is able to save the general so he may fight another day.

In the novel Labyrinth of Evil, Grievous plans an invasion of Coruscant alongside Dooku and Sidious.
He first appears in the novel watching his hated subordinate Nute Gunray flee from a pursuant Republic Strike Force.
Grievous reluctantly saves Gunray by destroying the fighters.
Grievous's invasion of the planet
Belderone would also be thwarted by Anakin and Obi-Wan due to a careless mistake on Gunray's part.
Though Gunray resorts to lies, Grievous deduces that he is lying and threatens to kill him.
Later on the bridge of the Invisible Hand, Dooku watches as Grievous spars his elite Magnaguards.
Though Grievous wins the fight, Dooku points out several flaws in the general's technique while realizing he is partly to blame for the general's inadequacies.
Grievous soon launches his invasion on the Republic capital of Coruscant in an attempt to kidnap Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, placing himself on the battlefield once again.
During the invasion, Grievous battles Mace Windu atop a maglev train while personally trying to capture Palpatine.
Though Windu overwhelms Grievous in combat, the cyborg outwits the Jedi Guard and takes Palpatine hostage, setting the stage for Revenge of the Sith.

===
Video games ===
General Grievous appears as a boss in the Revenge of the Sith video game based on the film; he is also a playable character in the game's dueling mode.
Grievous makes a brief appearance in the Legends video game
Star Wars: Republic Commando (2005), where he is encountered on Kashyyyk by Delta Squad before boarding his starship (which was seen earlier by Delta Squad leaving Geonosis) and departing to an unknown planet.
In Star Wars Galaxies (2003), following the establishment of the Galactic Empire, stormtroopers take Grievous's living head, and place it in his body, transforming him into a droid.
This war droid has a brief life in the Myyydril Caverns on Kashyyyk before being destroyed by an anonymous group of spacers.
The combatants loot the droid's remains, taking its weaponry and anything else of value.
The face mask ends up on the Invisible Market, where it is purchased for its artistic properties by a high-ranking Imperial admiral — purported to be Grand Admiral Thrawn.
Grievous appears as a boss and unlockable playable character Lego Star Wars (2005) and Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007)
; he is also playable in free play mode in Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006) by accessing a save file of the original Lego Star Wars.
In Lego Star Wars III: The Clone Wars (2011), Grievous is featured as a boss several times throughout the story mode, before becoming available as an unlockable playable character.
He is also a playable character in Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016) via downloadable content.
Grievous has been featured as a playable character in the Star Wars: Battlefront series, namely Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005), Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron (2009), and, most recently, Star Wars Battlefront II (2017).Grievous has also appeared as a playable character in Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels (2008), Angry Birds Star Wars II (2014) as an evil pig, and the mobile games Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes (2015) and Star Wars: Force Arena (2017).

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
General Grievous in the StarWars.com Databank
Grievous on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
General Greivous on IMDb
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (or simply Solo) is a 2018 American space Western film centering on the Star Wars character Han Solo, also featuring his original trilogy co-protagonists Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian.
Directed by Ron Howard, produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the second Star Wars anthology film, following Rogue One (2016).
Alden Ehrenreich stars in the title role, with Woody Harrelson, Emilia Clarke, Donald Glover, Thandiwe Newton, Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Joonas Suotamo and Paul Bettany co-starring.
The film explores the early adventures of Han Solo and Chewbacca, who join a heist within the criminal underworld 10 years prior to the events of Star Wars:
Episode IV - A
New Hope.

Star Wars creator George Lucas began developing a Han Solo prequel in 2012, and commissioned Lawrence Kasdan to write the screenplay.
After Lucas sold Lucasfilm to Disney in 2012, Kasdan was hired to write Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015), leaving his son Jonathan to complete the Solo script.
Principal photography began in January 2017 at Pinewood Studios, under the direction of Phil Lord and Christopher Miller.
Both were fired in June 2017 following "creative differences" with Lucasfilm, and Howard was hired as their replacement.
With an estimated production budget of at least $275 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

Solo released in the United States on May 25, 2018, and received generally favorable reviews from critics who praised the film's cast (particularly Ehrenreich and Glover), visuals, musical score, and action sequences, while some criticized its storyline and screenplay.
It is the first Star Wars film to be considered a box office bomb, grossing $393.2 million worldwide, making it the lowest-grossing live-action film in the franchise.
It received a nomination for Best Visual Effects at the 91st Academy Awards.

==
Plot ==
On the planet Corellia, orphans Han and Qi'ra escape a local gang.
They bribe an Imperial officer with stolen starship fuel, known as coaxium, for passage on a transport, but Qi'ra is captured before she can board.
Han vows to return for her and joins the Imperial Navy as a flight cadet, being given the surname "Solo".

Three years later, Han is serving as an infantryman on Mimban following his expulsion from the Imperial Flight Academy for insubordination.
He encounters a group of criminals posing as Imperial soldiers, led by Tobias Beckett.
Han attempts to blackmail Beckett into letting him join the gang, but Beckett has him arrested and thrown into a pit to be fed to a Wookiee prisoner named Chewbacca.
Able to understand Chewbacca's language, Han persuades him to cooperate to escape.
Beckett, aware of the usefulness of a Wookiee's strength, rescues and enlists them in the gang to steal a shipment of coaxium on Vandor-1.
The plan fails when the Cloud Riders, a band of marauders led by Enfys Nest, arrive to hijack the shipment.
The resulting chaos leads to the destruction of the coaxium and the deaths of Beckett's wife Val and another crewman, Rio.

Beckett reveals that he was ordered to steal the shipment for Dryden Vos, a high-ranking crime boss in the Crimson Dawn syndicate.
Han and Chewbacca volunteer to help him steal another shipment to repay the debt so that Vos will not kill him.
They travel to Vos's yacht where Han finds Qi'ra, who has joined Crimson Dawn as Vos's top lieutenant.
Han suggests a risky plan to steal unrefined coaxium from the mines on Kessel; Vos approves but insists that Qi'ra accompany the team.
She leads them to Lando Calrissian, a smuggler and pilot, who she hopes will lend them his ship, the Millennium Falcon.
Han challenges Lando to a game of sabacc, with the wager being Lando's ship.
Lando cheats to win but agrees to join the mission in exchange for a share of the profits.

After reaching Kessel in the Falcon and infiltrating the mine, Lando's droid co-pilot L3-37 instigates a slave revolt.
They steal the coaxium in the confusion, but L3 is fatally damaged and Lando is wounded during the escape.
With the help of L3's navigational computer, uploaded into the ship's systems, Han pilots the ship through the dangerous and uncharted Kessel Run to elude an Imperial blockade.
The Falcon, badly damaged, lands on the planet Savareen to process the coaxium.

Enfys arrives, having tracked the team from Vandor, and Lando leaves in the Falcon, deserting everyone else.
Enfys reveals that she and her crew are rebels trying to strike back at the syndicates and the Empire.
Han becomes sympathetic to their cause and tries to trick Vos, who reveals Beckett has already alerted him to the double-cross.
Vos sends his guards to kill Enfys, but the Cloud Riders overpower them, leaving Vos defenseless.
Having anticipated Vos's strategy, Han tries to take the coaxium, but Beckett betrays Vos and escapes with it, taking Chewbacca hostage.
Qi'ra kills Vos and sends Han after Beckett.
She contacts Vos's superior, Force-wielder Maul, to inform him of the mission's failure, which she blames on Beckett.
Maul orders Qi'ra to meet with him on Dathomir.

Han confronts Beckett and shoots him before he can return fire.
Qi'ra leaves in Vos's yacht, while Han and Chewbacca give the coaxium to Enfys, who offers Han a chance to join the rebellion against the Empire.
He declines, and she gives him a vial of coaxium, enough to purchase a ship of his own.

Han and Chewbacca locate Lando and challenge him to a rematch in sabacc, once again wagering the Falcon.
This time Han wins in a fair game after having stolen the hidden card from Lando that he used to cheat his way to victory the first time.
Han and Chewbacca then leave for Tatooine to find the crime lord  mentioned by Beckett who is putting together a big, profitable job.

== Cast ==

Alden Ehrenreich as Han Solo:
A cynical smuggler who joins Beckett's crew.
When asked how Solo differs from Han's appearance in other Star Wars films, Ehrenreich stated, "I think the main thing that's different is that the Han we meet in this film is more of an idealist.
He has certain dreams that he follows, and we watch how it affects him as those dreams meet new realities—realities that are harder and more challenging than he'd expected."
Harrison Ford, who portrayed the character in previous films, met with Ehrenreich, giving him some insight and words of advice.

Woody Harrelson as Tobias Beckett: A criminal and Han's mentor.
The character of Beckett was based on Long John Silver from Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson.

Emilia Clarke as Qi'ra: Han's childhood friend and romantic interest.
Describing her character, Clarke said: "She has a couple of guises, but essentially she is just fighting to stay alive.
If you've got a really glamorous lady in a really sordid environment, you kind of know the glamor is hiding a few rough roads.
"
With regard to her character's relationship with Solo, Clarke offered that "They grew up as comrades, essentially.
They grew up as pals, as partners in crime.
There is obviously the romantic side of things.
But they grew up together.
So they were kids together."

Donald Glover as Lando Calrissian: A smuggler, gambler, and self-proclaimed sportsman on the rise in the galaxy's underworld.
Billy Dee Williams, who portrayed the character in previous films, met with Glover, giving him some insight and words of advice.

Thandiwe Newton as Val:
Beckett's wife, a fellow criminal and member of her husband's crew.

Phoebe Waller-Bridge as L3-37:
Lando's droid companion and navigator.
When the character dies in the film her consciousness and data are uploaded to the Millennium Falcon which serves as a retcon of the previous Star Wars films including The Empire Strikes Back in which the starship was described as having "the most peculiar dialect".
Screenwriter Jonathan Kasdan explained that this was done to give "the Falcon a personality that is fused with this amazing character played by Phoebe [which] I think does actually enrich the other movies".

Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca: Han's Wookiee sidekick and best friend, who also serves as his first mate.
Suotamo reprises his role from The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, in the former of which he acted as a body double for Peter Mayhew, who portrayed the character in previous films.

Paul Bettany as Dryden Vos: A ruthless crime lord who has a history with Beckett.
Michael K. Williams had originally been cast, but he was removed from the final film after being unable to return to set during the film's reshoots.
Bettany was cast in his place, with the character being reworked from a motion-capture alien (described by Williams as half-mountain lion, half-human) to a scarred near-human alien lifeform.
Erin Kellyman appears as Enfys Nest, the leader of a gang of pirates called Cloud Riders.
Jon Favreau voices Rio Durant, "a very cool and important alien character" and member of Beckett's crew, and Linda Hunt voices Lady Proxima, the serpent-like leader of the gang to which teenage Han and Qi'ra belong.
Ian Kenny portrays Rebolt while Clint Howard portrays Ralakili.
Additionally, Anthony Daniels cameos as Tak.
Kiran Shah plays
Karjj and Warwick Davis briefly reprises his role from The Phantom Menace as Weazel, a Cloud Rider.
Ray Park reprises his role as Maul, with Sam Witwer providing the voice, reprising the role from The Clone Wars and Rebels animated TV series.
Peter Serafinowicz, Maul's original voice actor in The Phantom Menace, was initially brought to record Maul's dialogue, but his vocal performance was ultimately dropped in favor of Witwer's.
Dee Tails appears as Quay Tolsite, the director of the Pyke Syndicate's operations on Kessel.
Screenwriter Jonathan Kasdan and first assistant director Toby Hefferman portrayed Tag Greenley and Bink Otauna, respectively—two characters that first appeared in the Star Wars Legends comics published by Dark Horse Comics.
The scene was not included in the finished film.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
A first attempt of appearance of a kid Han Solo is present during the pre-production of Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, showing an early draft of a young Solo that takes part in the battle on Kashyyyk.

Later, a planned live-action TV series developed by Star Wars creator George Lucas titled Star Wars:
Underworld would have depicted Han Solo's first meeting with Chewbacca and his winning the Millennium Falcon from Lando Calrissian.
In 2012, Lucas began developing a film about a young Solo, and hired veteran Star Wars screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan to write the screenplay.
After Lucas sold his company to Disney in 2012, Kasdan was hired to help finish the script for Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, leaving his son Jonathan Kasdan in charge of writing Solo until his return.
The film was internally codenamed "Harry and the Boy" and initially planned to follow The Force Awakens.
In February 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed the development of two Star Wars standalone films, one written by Lawrence Kasdan.
Shortly thereafter, it was reported that Disney was working on a film featuring Solo.
Disney CFO Jay Rasulo described the standalone films as origin stories.
In July, Lucasfilm announced that an anthology film focusing "on how [a] young Han Solo became the smuggler, thief, and scoundrel whom Luke Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi first encountered in the cantina at Mos Eisley" would be released on May 25, 2018.
The project was to be directed by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller from a script by Lawrence and Jonathan Kasdan.
Kathleen Kennedy would serve as a producer, with Lawrence Kasdan and Jason McGatlin as executive producers; Allison Shearmur and Simon Emanuel also produce.
Solo's Wookiee friend Chewbacca was also announced to appear in the film.
In May 2016, Lawrence Kasdan stated that filming would start in January 2017.

===
Casting ===
In January 2016, a list of actors was revealed for the role of young Han Solo, including Miles Teller, Ansel Elgort, Dave Franco, Jack Reynor, Scott Eastwood, Logan Lerman, Emory Cohen, and Blake Jenner.

In March 2016, it was reported that Alden Ehrenreich, Reynor and Taron Egerton were on a shortlist for the role.
In May 2016, Ehrenreich was reported to have been cast as the young Han Solo, and was revealed in the role at Star Wars Celebration Europe III two months later.
Miller called casting the role one of "the hardest casting challenges of all time", adding that they "saw over 3,000 people for the part".
Other actors to audition for the role included Chandler Riggs, Rami Malek, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Tom Felton, Nick Robinson, Colton Haynes, Joshua Sasse and Ed Westwick.
By the following October, Tessa Thompson, Naomi Scott, Zoë Kravitz, Emilia Clarke, Kiersey Clemons, Jessica Henwick and Adria Arjona were being considered for the female lead, while Donald Glover was being considered to play a young Lando Calrissian.
Glover was confirmed for Calrissian shortly after, with Clarke cast as the female lead the following month.
Shameik Moore also auditioned for the role of Calrissian.
In early January 2017, Woody Harrelson was revealed to be in negotiations to portray Han Solo's mentor, and was confirmed to be appearing in the film shortly after.
Christian Bale had previously been in discussions for the role.
A subsequent interview with Harrelson bolstered speculation that he may be specifically playing Legends character Garris Shrike, but Harrelson revealed the character's name as Beckett in March 2017.
In February 2017, Phoebe Waller-Bridge joined the cast in an undisclosed role, said to be "a CGI-driven performance" similar to Alan Tudyk in Rogue One as the droid K-2SO.
Additionally, it was reported that Thandie Newton was in negotiations to star in the film.
Waller-Bridge and Newton were confirmed as part of the cast by the end of February, alongside the announcement that Joonas Suotamo would appear as Chewbacca, reprising the role from The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, where he shared it with original Chewbacca actor Peter Mayhew.
Michael K. Williams entered talks to join the film in early March 2017, and was confirmed shortly after, portraying a half-human, half-animal creature.
By the end of the month, Ian Kenny had joined the cast.
Warwick Davis was confirmed as part of the cast by the end of July 2017.Peter
Serafinowicz was set to reprise his voice role as Maul and had recorded dialogue during production at Pinewood Studios.
He was later informed by Lucasfilm after the film's premiere that he had been replaced by Sam Witwer in order to maintain continuity with The Clone Wars and Rebels animated TV series, in which Witwer voiced the character.

===
Filming ===
Filming began on January 30, 2017, at Pinewood Studios, under the working title Star Wars: Red Cup.
By February 10, the film had spent $54.5 million on production.
Lucasfilm announced that principal photography started on February 20, 2017.
Bradford Young served as the cinematographer for the film.
In May 2017, filming took place in Italy, with locations including Tre Cime di Lavaredo and Monte Piana in the Dolomites in Veneto, to the Fassa Dolomites in Trentino.
Filming also took place in the Canary Islands that month.
On June 20, 2017, citing "creative differences", Lucasfilm announced that the directors had left the project with a new director "to be announced soon".
It was reported that the directors were fired after Kennedy and Lawrence Kasdan disagreed with their shooting style; Lord and Miller believed they were hired to make a comedy film, while Lucasfilm was looking for the duo only to add "a comedic touch".
Lucasfilm also felt the directors were encouraging too much improvisation from the actors, which was believed to be "shifting the story off-course" from the Kasdans' script.
To appease Kasdan, who was unhappy with scenes not being filmed "word for word", Lord and Miller shot several takes exactly as written, then shot additional takes.
Lord and Miller refused to compromise on certain scenes, such as filming a scene from fewer angles than Lucasfilm expected, thereby reducing the options available in editing.
The duo were also unhappy when Lawrence Kasdan was brought to the London set, feeling he became a "shadow director".
The decision to remove Lord and Miller was made after a short hiatus in filming taken to review the footage so far.
The original film editor, Chris Dickens, was also removed from the film, replaced by Pietro Scalia.

It was reported that Ron Howard, who had previously collaborated with Lucas as an actor in American Graffiti (1973) and the director of Willow (1988), was a frontrunner to step in as director.
Howard had turned down an offer to direct Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
Joe Johnston and Kasdan were also considered, though in regards to Kasdan Directors Guild of America rules state that a replacement for a director may not be someone already involved in the production.
Two days later, it was announced that Howard would take over directing for the remaining three-and-a-half weeks of scheduled principal photography as well as the scheduled five weeks of reshoots.
Howard wrote, "I'm beyond grateful to add my voice to the Star Wars universe...
I hope to honor the great work already done and help deliver on the promise of a Han Solo film.
"
Howard was expected to arrive in London on June 26 to complete filming.
During the reshoots, actor Michael K. Williams was unable to return to the production, due to a schedule conflict with filming The Red Sea Diving Resort, resulting in his part being redeveloped and recast with Paul Bettany.
Williams stated the reshoots for his character were "to match the new direction which the producers wanted Ron to carry the film in", and that he would not have been available again until November 2017; the production did not want to wait for his availability to make a release in May 2018.
Bettany, who previously worked with Howard on A Beautiful Mind, had heard of the director's involvement with the film and texted him to inquire into joining the film.
"
Two weeks later I was flying to London to be in ‘Star Wars‘"
Bettany detailed in a May 2018 interview with The Los Angeles Times.
Lucas, Howard's friend, mentor and collaborator, made a surprise visit to the set to encourage Howard on his first day shooting.
Intended as a short meeting, Lucas spent the whole day with the crew.
While Lucas had not meant to interfere, at some point he forgot and asked "Why doesn't Han just do this?";
Howard included his suggestion.
On October 17, 2017, Howard announced that principal photography had been completed, and revealed the title of the film.
In March 2018, after it was reported Howard had reshot around 70% of the film, it was announced that Lord and Miller would not challenge for director credit and instead agreed to executive producer credits.
The duo saw an early cut of Howard's film and provided him with their feedback.
Post-production wrapped on April 22, 2018.

===
Visual effects ===
The visual effects were provided by Industrial Light & Magic, Hybride and Blind LTD and Supervised by Nigel Sumner, Julian Foddy, Greg Kegel, Joseph Kasparian, Francois Lambert, Andrew Booth, Rob Bredow and Patrick Tubach with the help of Jellyfish Pictures, Raynault VFX, Lola VFX and Nvizage.
Bredow described working on the train heist scene as a challenge.
"
I’ve always in my own life referenced the Star Wars films in terms of having the coolest explosions ever, you know, back to Joe Viskocil’s explosions of the Death Star and the way those evolved over time.
It was like, ‘How am I going to do something that’s different and unique in the Star Wars universe?".
He would utilize miniature models and built a 3D model of the mountain in the film and blew it up with a variety of firecrackers within a large fish tank built at Pinewood.
The team took inspiration from the YouTube channel
The Slow Mo Guys, specifically a video of the creators Gavin Free and Daniel Gruchy conducting an experiment that saw them blowing up firecrackers in a fish tank to capture the explosion in slow motion.60 versions of the design of the Millennium Falcon were created before the final version seen in the film was settled on.
Taken into consideration by the design team was 1970s culture, examining muscle cars, as well as concept art drafted for the 1977 film.
Lead designer James Clyne described adding an escape pod to the front of the ship as solving a curiosity he had as a boy as to why the Falcon had that design.
Rear-projection visual effects, a technique used to combine foreground performances with pre-filmed backgrounds, were used for the Falcon cockpit scenes, an updated version of the technique used in the original trilogy.
This allowed the actors to have a visual reference for the scene.
The creation of L3 was a combination of practical and visual effects.
Actress Phoebe Waller-Bridge was present on set and wore a costume to perform her scenes, with post-production visual effects done to erase Waller-Bridge out of the footage and to add in interior pieces and wires.

===
Music ===
In July 2017, John Powell was announced as the main composer of the score.
Longtime Star Wars composer John Williams composed and conducted the Han Solo theme,
"The Adventures of Han", for the film.
Powell began writing the music in late 2017 after finishing his work on Ferdinand.
In December 2017, Williams wrote two musical pieces and combined them to create Han's theme.
The following month, Williams recorded the demos with the Recording Arts Orchestra of Los Angeles at the Newman Scoring Stage.
Powell interpolated Williams' new theme into his score, as well as incorporating music by Williams from previous Star Wars films, including the Star Wars main title, and several motifs and cues from A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back, and The Phantom Menace.
Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack album on May 25.
In December 2020, Mondo Death Waltz released the soundtrack on 180g vinyl and limited "hyperspace" vinyl.
It has since been lauded as one of Mondo's best releases and praised the designs
In September 2020, Powell announced on social media that a deluxe edition of the soundtrack album would be remixed and mastered by 5 Cat Studios, featuring all unedited cues from the score and additional demos that Williams had composed for the film.
The deluxe edition was released by Walt Disney Records on November 20, 2020, featuring an additional 40 minutes of previously unreleased music.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Solo had its world premiere on May 10, 2018 at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles, and also screened on May 15, 2018 at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival.
The film debuted in selected countries on May 23 and had its US release on May 25, 2018, the 41st anniversary of the release of the original Star Wars film, in which Harrison Ford first appeared as Han Solo.
===
Marketing ===
A "sneak peek" TV spot was released during Super Bowl LII on February 4, 2018.
It became the most popular Super Bowl trailer on YouTube with 8 million views.
It also had 5.9 million views on Facebook.
The first official teaser trailer was released on February 5, 2018.
Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter criticized the trailer as "dull", and compared it negatively to the look of Rogue One, opining that the visuals "should be the hive of scum and villainy of the Cantina of the very first movie, filled with colorful aliens and things happening all over the place.
That busyness, the sense of danger and hustle, feels appropriate for Solo in a way that what's on show in this first trailer simply doesn't."
He also noted that several plot elements presented in the trailer were reminiscent of The Han Solo Trilogy, a series of novels published in 1997 and 1998.In early March 2018, French artist Hachim Bahous asserted that Disney had plagiarized a series of album covers he designed for Sony Music's label Legacy Recordings in France with character posters for the film.
Disney stated they were investigating the alleged plagiarism and that the Solo posters had been produced by an outside vendor.

==
Reception ==


===
Box office ==
=
Solo:
A Star Wars Story grossed $213.8 million in the United States and Canada, and $179.4 million in other territories, for a total worldwide gross of $393.2 million.
With an estimated production budget of $275 million, the film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even.
A week after its worldwide debut of just $147.5 million, Variety wrote that the film would lose Disney "tens of millions of dollars" off a projected final total gross of $400–450 million while The Hollywood Reporter estimated the losses would range from $50 to $80 million.
In April 2019, Deadline Hollywood calculated the film lost the studio $76.9 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues.
In June 2018, in response to the film's poor commercial performance, director Ron Howard tweeted he was proud of the film, and sorry that fans were not turning out to see it, but was happy for those who had enjoyed it.
The following year, Howard stated that online trolls were partially to blame for the film's underwhelming box-office performance.

====
United States and Canada ====
Initial projections three weeks before its release had the film grossing around $170 million over its four-day Memorial Day opening weekend.
Deadline Hollywood noted that it was tracking higher than the previous Star Wars spin-off film, Rogue One (which debuted to $155 million), and had more interest from audiences than the likes of fellow blockbusters Spider-Man: Homecoming and Guardians of the Galaxy Vol.
2.
After its first day of pre-sales, Fandango announced the film was the second-best seller of advance tickets in 2018, after Avengers: Infinity War.
At the week of its release, projections had the film making $135–170 million over the four-day frame, with Disney predicting a $130–150 million debut.
The film opened in 4,381 theaters, the ninth-highest total ever, including 3,300 3D locations and 400 IMAX screens.
It grossed $14.1 million from Thursday night previews, the lowest of the Disney Star Wars films but the best-ever for Memorial Day weekend, besting the $13.2 million made by Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007).
Including Thursday previews, the film made $35.6 million on its first day, lowering weekend projections to $115 million.
It grossed just $84.4 million in its opening weekend (and $103 million over the four–day weekend), far below projections and marking the lowest Star Wars debut since Attack of the Clones (2002), although it did set a new career-high opening for Howard.
Deadline Hollywood compared the below-expectations opening to Justice League the previous November, and attributed it to fan negativity toward the concept and the behind-the-scenes problems, as well as competition from Deadpool 2 and Avengers: Infinity War.
Many analysts and publications, including Deadline, The Atlantic, Entertainment Weekly and CNN, interpreted the low box office returns as a case of "Star Wars fatigue", since Solo was the fourth film of the series released in 29 months, and came just five months after The Last Jedi.
Other analysts attributed the film's underperformance to lackluster marketing, as well as the divided fan reception to The Last Jedi.
Solo dropped 65% in its second weekend to $29.4 million, the worst sophomore frame for any Star Wars film since the original trilogy.
It dropped another 46% in its third weekend to $15.7 million, finishing second behind newcomer Ocean's 8, and $10 million in its fourth week, finishing fourth.
====
Other territories ====
Worldwide the film was expected to make $285–340 million in its opening weekend, including $150–170 million internationally.
It opened in 43 markets on the Wednesday and Thursday prior to its US release and made a total of $11.4 million, including $3.3 million in China.
It went on to open to just $65 million internationally and $147.5 million worldwide.
It grossed $10.3 million in the United Kingdom, and also finished first in Australia ($5 million), Germany ($4.3 million), France ($3.9 million), Russia ($3.6 million), Spain ($2.6 million), Mexico ($2.5 million), Italy ($2.2 million) and Brazil ($1.3 million).
Despite being the second-largest international opening, it made just $10.1 million in China, far below the other three Disney Star Wars films.
The film held a better-than-expected 47% in its second weekend, making $30.3 million from 54 countries and remaining the top film in several, including Australia, Spain and the United Kingdom.

===
Critical response ===
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, Solo has an approval rating of 69% based on 476 reviews, with an average rating of 6.4/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "
A flawed yet fun and fast-paced space adventure, Solo:
A Star Wars Story should satisfy newcomers to the saga as well as longtime fans who check their expectations at the theater door."
On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 62 out of 100, based on 54 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported that 89% of filmgoers gave it positive score, with 73% saying they would recommend it.
Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4, complimenting the cast but criticizing the lack of creativity, saying, "somehow Han Solo—the roguish Star Wars hellion famous for breaking all the rules—finds himself in a feel-good movie that doesn't break any."
A. O. Scott of The New York Times said, "It doesn't take itself too seriously, but it also holds whatever irreverent, anarchic impulses it might possess in careful check."
He noted that it is "a curiously low-stakes blockbuster, in effect a filmed Wikipedia page".
Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter praised the cast and production values but felt the film as a whole felt too safe, writing, "while Ehrenreich's Solo proves adept at maneuvering the Millennium Falcon out of some tight spots, the picture itself follows a safely predictable course.
Missing here are the sort of plot-related or visual curveballs thrown by Rian Johnson's The Last Jedi or Gareth Edwards with Rogue One.
"Particular
praise was pointed towards Glover's performance as Lando Calrissian.
USA Today asserted that Glover's Calrissian "outshone and outswaggered" the title character of Solo.
TheWrap compared Glover to Cary Grant, proclaiming "Glover sweeps this film off its feet".
While also praising the rest of the cast, Stephanie Zacharek of Time singled Glover out particularly, highlighting his "unruly, charismatic elegance".
Ron Howard said that original Han Solo actor Harrison Ford saw the film twice and spoke positively about it and Ehrenreich's performance.
Billy Dee Williams was more critical of the film, particularly due to the direction of Calrissian: "I think that the reason they didn't have the success they could have had, [is] because they were going for something that was topical, instead of an adventure that's far beyond those questions.
If you're talking about this huge, incredible story, why lock yourself into this tiny moment between a character like Lando and his robot friend?"
In other interviews, he complimented other aspects of the film, including Glover's perceptions of Lando's gender fluidity: "That kid is brilliant!"
===
Accolades ===


== Future ==
Alden Ehrenreich confirmed his contract deal to appear as Han Solo extended for two additional films, giving the studio the option to pursue a sequel to Solo: A Star Wars Story, or feature him in other anthology films in a supporting capacity.
Ehrenreich said he would like any sequels to differentiate themselves from the previous Star Wars trilogies by being standalone, in the vein of the Indiana Jones films, rather than direct follow-ups.
Emilia Clarke, who played Qi'ra, also signed on for future installments.
Ron Howard said that while no sequel was in development, it was up to the fans to decide.
Critics noted the film intentionally left room open for sequels.
Solo writer Jon Kasdan said that he would include bounty hunter Bossk (who briefly appears in The Empire Strikes Back and is mentioned in Solo) if he were to write a sequel for the film.
Kennedy also said that a film focusing on Lando Calrissian could happen, but was not a priority.
Donald Glover also expressed interest in a spin-off film, saying he would imagine it as Catch Me
If You Can in space.
On June 20, 2018, Collider claimed that all future anthology films were on hold due to the disappointing financial performance of Solo.
A day later, Lucasfilm denied the rumors as "inaccurate" and  confirmed that there are multiple unannounced films in development.
Bob Iger has said that the production of new films would go on hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker, though none were cancelled.
On May 23, 2019, the hosts of The Resistance Broadcast encouraged fans on social media to use the hashtag #MakeSolo2Happen.
The campaign was a mixture of celebrating the first movie and to spread awareness that a sequel is wanted.
The campaign reached multiple people involved with the film, including Ron Howard.
To express his gratitude, Jon Kasdan tweeted an image of three crime syndicate logos, hinting that future stories could still be in the works.
Kasdan has hinted that a sequel could feature Jabba the Hutt, being an origin story of Solo partnering up with the character.
In March 2020, Kasdan tweeted that he did not "think anyone's pursuing a Solo sequel at the moment ...
I think a feature, at this point, would be a tough sell".
On May 25, 2020, fans again used the hashtag #MakeSolo2Happen to show their appreciation for the film on its second anniversary.
The hashtag went viral with fans arguing that the film deserved more praise and once again calls were made for a continuation of the story.
A number of people tweeting with the hashtag expressed their desire to see more of Emilia Clarke's Qi'ra.
Rita Dorsch of Comic Book Resources said that, by far, the most interesting part of Solo is Qi'ra's turn and that any follow-up film needs to focus on her.
Writing for CinemaBlend, Dirk Libbey stated.
"
it seems unlikely that the Solo 2 fans will get the movie they want.
Of course, some don't actually need a theatrical follow-up.
They would be happy with a Disney+ series that didn't even necessarily include Han Solo, but instead focused on the criminal organization being run by Qi'ra".

==
Adaptations ==
A novelization by Mur Lafferty, Solo:
A Star Wars Story:
Expanded Edition (ISBN 978-0525619390) was published on September 4, 2018 by Del Rey Books.
It includes scenes from alternate versions of the film's script, including scenes in which Qi’ra is brought back to Lady Proxima, Chewbacca uses some of Lando's "outrageously expensive" bathroom products, and, in an epilogue, Enfys Nest delivers the coaxium to Saw Gerrera and Jyn Erso.
Additionally, a seven-issue comic book adaptation of the film was published by Marvel Comics starting in October 2018, written by Robbie Thompson and pencilled by Will Sliney.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


==
External links ==
Solo:
A Star Wars Story at StarWars.com
Solo: A Star Wars Story at Lucasfilm.com
Solo:
A Star Wars Story at IMDb
Solo:
A Star Wars Story on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Battlefront is a series of first- and third-person shooter video games based on the Star Wars films.
Players take the role of soldiers in either of two opposing armies in different time periods of the Star Wars universe.

The series was launched in 2004 by LucasArts with Star Wars: Battlefront, developed by Pandemic Studios for LucasArts.
The game received positive reviews and sold well.
In 2005 Pandemic developed a sequel, Star Wars: Battlefront II, which was also critically and commercially successful.
The games were followed by Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007) and Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron (2009) for handheld consoles and Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons for mobile devices.
LucasArts made several attempts to develop a third major Battlefront game but no projects were released before The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of LucasArts.
Subsequently, EA DICE acquired a license to develop a new game, titled Star Wars Battlefront which was released on November 17, 2015.
A sequel, Star Wars Battlefront II, was released on November 17, 2017, and was developed by EA DICE, Criterion Games, and Motive Studios.

==
Gameplay ==
Games in the Battlefront series normally revolve around two armies – the Galactic Republic versus the Confederacy of Independent Systems or the Galactic Empire versus the Rebel Alliance or First Order versus the Resistance – fighting each other on various maps.
Maps take place in the Star Wars galaxy, with battlezones varying in theme and size.
Across the battlefield are multiple "command posts" (objectives) that act as spawn points, and can be controlled by either the player or the computer.

Units can spawn from any friendly command post, and vehicles regularly spawn at their respective command posts when destroyed.
Units can capture neutral or hostile command posts by approaching them and standing within the immediate vicinity for about 30 seconds.
The time to capture quickens with more friendly units within the capture zone.
Some vehicles act as mobile command posts, and must be destroyed as they can not be captured.
On some maps (such as Hoth or Endor), certain structures also act as command posts that can not be captured.
Command post capturing works differently on certain campaign missions as well.

Playable heroes and villains play a significant role in changing the course of battles.

The objective of most matches is to eliminate all of the opponents' reinforcement tickets or to capture the command points, to slowly chip away at their tickets.
Reinforcement tickets are used whenever a unit is killed, or when one faction controls a majority of the command posts on the map (usually when the losing faction only has 2-3).
Only one objective needs to be completed.
When all command posts are captured, the team with no command posts has twenty seconds to recapture or neutralize an enemy command post.
If the team cannot take over a post in this time, the match is over.
Certain campaign levels and multiplayer have requirements that differ from the general game play, however the general structure remains the same.
The game's "Conquest" mode is vaguely based on the Battlefield game mode of the same name.

===
Playable characters ===
Numerous characters from the movies, TV series and other games have been available to play as, which include:


==
Development ==
The first console games of the series were developed by Pandemic Studios, and since 2015, a second series of console Battlefront games has been developed by EA DICE.
Battlefront II (2017) is the first in the series to accurately follow the canon of the films, while the games developed by Pandemic Studios were relegated to Star Wars Legends non-canonical status, along with all of the games in the series released before November 2015.

==
Star Wars: Battlefront (Pandemic Studios) ==


===
Star Wars: Battlefront ===
Star Wars:
Battlefront is the first installment in the Battlefront series.
It was released on September 21, 2004, with a Mac port by Aspyr released in July 2005.
The game is available on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Mac OS, and mobile phones.
Jedi are not playable in this game without the help of modified files unsupported by LucasArts.
Other NPCs made playable by similar files include, but are not limited to, Tusken Raiders in the Dune Sea of Tatooine, Ewoks of Endor and Gungans on the Naboo plains.

===
Star Wars: Battlefront II ===
Star Wars:
Battlefront II is the second installment in the Battlefront series, released in Europe on October 31, 2005 – for the PlayStation 2, PSP, Xbox, and Windows – and in North America one day later.
There are some significant differences between Battlefront and Battlefront II.
Battlefront II includes playable Jedi characters, space battles, and story campaigns, as well as Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith-related content.
The release date of Battlefront II coincided with the release of Revenge of the Sith on DVD.

The game is now an Xbox Platinum Hits game, a Sony Greatest Hits game in North America, and an Xbox Classics and PlayStation Platinum game in Europe.

Battlefront II expands upon the original game's single-player experience with mission-based objectives drawn from the first six Star Wars films.
It has a story-based campaign which revolves around the 501st Legion (AKA "Vader's Fist") and its evolution from a legion of clone troopers serving the Republic during the Clone Wars to Imperial stormtroopers.
Many maps from Star Wars Battlefront make a second appearance, and the game adds new locales such as Coruscant and Utapau.
The game also introduces "heroes" – playable characters based on iconic characters from the Star Wars films who are much more powerful than regular soldier (and were also present in the original Battlefront, but only as NPCs that spawned randomly on the battlefield); the hero roster includes Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Leia Organa, Chewbacca, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Yoda, Mace Windu, Ki-Adi Mundi and Aayla Secura (as well as Kit Fisto, available only on the Xbox version of the game via the Xbox Live patch), whereas the villain roster includes Darth Vader, Darth Sidious, Boba Fett, Count Dooku, General Grievous, Darth Maul, Jango Fett, and Anakin Skywalker (as well as Asajj Ventress, also available only via the Xbox Live patch).
There are more modes in this game, such as Conquest, Hunt (where players fight as natives on planets against other natives or certain troopers in an army, such as Wampas vs. Rebels on Hoth or Tusken Raiders vs. Jawas on Tatooine, to earn 50 points first), Capture the Flag (both with 1 and 2 flags), Assault (which, on Tatooine only, is also available as Heroes vs Villains, where one team plays as the heroes and the other one as the villains in a race to rack up points by defeating enemies) and space battles.

=== Canceled sequels ===


====
Star Wars: Battlefront III ====
On September 29, 2006, Computer and Video Games made an unconfirmed claim that Free Radical Design was developing the third game in the Star Wars: Battlefront series, titled Star Wars: Battlefront III.
In June 2008, Kotaku allegedly received information from a former LucasArts employee that Star Wars:
Battlefront III was in the creation process.
On October 2,  Activision Blizzard filed a classification with the Australian Office of Film and Literature Classification listing Star Wars: Battlefront III for the Nintendo DS with a PG rating (E10+ equivalent) for mild animated violence.
However, that same month, Free Radical Design announced that they lost the rights to develop Star Wars: Battlefront III; the game at that point had been in development for two years.
Several years later, Free Radical Design co-founder Steve Ellis said Battlefront III was "pretty much done" in 2008, but that it was effectively canned when LucasArts could not commit to "spend big" on marketing it.
However, GameSpot quoted an unnamed LucasArts employee involved with the project who said Free Radical could not devote sufficient resources to the game and regularly missed deadlines.
A former Free Radical Design employee said some of the technology Free Radical developed for the game, specifically the contiguous game environment from planet surface into space, "is dying with us".
During and after the game's development, screenshots, and gameplay footage became accessible to the public.
In December 2008, Star Wars character renders bearing a Battlefront III watermark surfaced from a laid-off Free Radical employee.
The following month, gameplay footage was leaked from a November 2008 Free Radical in-house showing of Battlefront III footage.
The footage was pulled from IGN after LucasArts demanded its removal.
On April 1, 2012, a user on the game journalist website Betagames discovered Star Wars models and textures buried in Resident Evil:
Operation Raccoon City's archives; PC Gamer's Tom Senior speculated that these could have been from Battlefront III.
Also in April 2012, Past to Present revealed pre-alpha footage of Free Radical Design's Battlefront III.
YouTube videos showing the game's rough state received media attention from outlets such as Joystiq, Kotaku, and Shacknews.
On January 20, 2016, a leaked build of the game surfaced on Reddit.
It is currently playable using an Xbox 360 Development Kits and modified Xbox 360 consoles via a program called "RGLoader".
====
Star Wars:
Battlefront
Online ====
Star Wars:
Battlefront Online was rumored to be the next installment in the series.
On January 28, 2010, Kotaku reported that SOCOM developer Slant Six Games was working with LucasArts to develop an online-only Battlefront title due in 2011.
The game was said to be released for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3.
It was also stated that this game may have been the source of the Star Wars: Battlefront 3 concept art renders.
However, the game has been canceled after the studio was unable to meet its 2010 release deadline.

====
Star Wars:
First Assault and Version Two ====
Star Wars:
First Assault was to be a downloadable multiplayer shooter for Xbox Live Arcade.
Digital Trends speculated that Star Wars: First Assault might help LucasArts recover some of their previous investment in Battlefront III and other projects in the franchise.

Speaking to Kotaku an anonymous insider noted that the game was to be "step zero" towards a third Battlefront game.

When footage of the game was leaked onto YouTube Tech site TechnoBuffalo noted that the gameplay very closely resembled that of the Call of Duty franchise.
Alongside First Assault, LucasArts was also working on a separate game titled "Version 2", which was, reportedly, a code name for Battlefront 3.
====
Star Wars Battlefront IV ====
In 2018, concept art surfaced of a canceled Battlefront IV, rather than attempting to fit within the previous games and films' continuity, concept art showed the game was meant to focus on an alternate reality where Obi-Wan Kenobi and Luke Skywalker fell to the dark side, instead of Anakin Skywalker.

=== Handheld and mobile only games ===


====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron is a handheld game released in North America on October 9, 2007 and in Europe three days later.
The game was released only for the PlayStation Portable.
Renegade Squadron is also available in a bundle pack with the then-new white PSP redesign featuring Darth Vader on the back.

Aside from new heroes and vehicles, such as the Millennium Falcon, a new feature is the ability to create a character, allowing the player to adjust the character's features such as weapon, appearance, and speed.
However, the character will be vulnerable due to the lacking of certain aspects that will be replaced by others.
For example, the character may be fast but weak or have good weapons but no stamina and speed.
Before the game's release, LucasArts had stated that over one million different customizable options would be present.
Another new feature allows players to enter asteroid bases on some space maps.

Commander Col Serra describes the forming of Renegade Squadron in the beginning cutscene of campaign.
Then the player starts a series of missions ranging in objectives while including cut scenes between each mission.
The final mission includes the Battle of Endor, in which the objectives are similar to the footage of Return of the Jedi.

====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron was released on November 3, 2009 for the PlayStation Portable and the Nintendo DS.
This marks the third Battlefront game on the PlayStation Portable and the first on a Nintendo console.
The game was originally discovered through its ESRB rating on the official ESRB website which has since been taken down.
It follows in the same vein as its predecessors with space, land and new air battles.
Elite Squadron is most notable for featuring simultaneous space and ground battles in Instant Action, and is the only game in the series with this feature.
Players usually play in a third person perspective, but in the PSP version, they can also switch to a strategy based mode where they may build troops and upgrade armies.
====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Mobile Squadrons ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Mobile Squadrons is a mobile game developed by THQ Wireless.
It was released on April 2, 2009.
The game features a persistent online community, and has three character classes.
The gameplay is a first person perspective shooter that can use the touch features of a phone, although the player has no control over movement.

==
Star Wars Battlefront (EA DICE) ==


===
Star Wars Battlefront (2015) ===
At an Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) press conference on June 10, 2013, EA DICE (whose parent company, Electronic Arts, had recently acquired a multi-year license to produce Star Wars video games), unveiled a teaser trailer for a new Star Wars: Battlefront game, built on the Frostbite 3 engine.
The teaser showed a first-person view of the Battle of Hoth, including a crashing Snowspeeder and the foot of an AT-AT.
DICE showed additional development footage at the 2014 E3 conference.
The game's title was eventually announced as Star Wars Battlefront.
In April 2015, EA announced a release date of November 17, 2015  at Star Wars Celebration.
The game is a reboot of the series, focusing on capturing the look of the films.
At launch, four planets were confirmed - Hoth, Tatooine, Endor, and Sullust.
Unlike its predecessors, Star Wars Battlefront does not feature the Clone Wars era found in the prequel films, nor does it feature content from The Force Awakens; as a result, the hero and villain roster is also limited, at launch including only Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Leia Organa, Darth Vader, Emperor Palpatine, and Boba Fett.
Free downloadable content (DLC) for the game was released in December 2015, featuring the planet of Jakku with two new maps and a new multiplayer game mode.
The game also features both first and third-person gameplay perspectives, similar to its predecessors.
A gameplay trailer involving the Hoth battle debuted at E3 on June 15, 2015.
The game features a pseudo-campaign — a cooperative experience allowing the player to experience gameplay with one or two players and computer-controlled allies and opponents.

"Outer Rim" is the first DLC pack for the game and was released on March 22, 2016.
It adds new heroes Nien Nunb and Greedo to the game, four new maps set in Jabba the Hutt's Palace (Palace Garage and Jabba's Palace) on Tatooine and a factory area on Sullust (Sorosuub Refinery and Sorosuub Pipelines), and a new mode called "Extraction".
The DLC is available for free to all players who have purchased the game's Season Pass, otherwise costing $10.
The second expansion pack is titled "Bespin" and allows players to fight in the setting of Cloud City, released in September 2016.
The expansion added more maps along with an additional game mode titled sabotage and new heroes Lando Calrissian and Dengar.
The third expansion pack, titled "Death Star", was released in September 2016 as well and added the long-awaited Death Star to the game, along with new heroes Chewbacca and Bossk.

The fourth and final DLC pack was released on December 6, 2016.
It is based on characters and locations from the film Rogue One, and includes Jyn Erso and Orson Krennic as new playable heroes, and a new game mode set both above and on the planet Scarif.
===
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) ===
Blake Jorgensen of Electronic Arts mentioned a sequel in November 2016, and Star Wars Battlefront II was announced in March 2017.
The game was released on November 17, 2017.
Since the restructuring of the Star Wars canon, Battlefront is the first game with a storyline that is considered canonical to the film series.

Star Wars Battlefront II features both single-player and multiplayer game modes, a customizable character class system, and content based on all Star Wars movies up to Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (with content for the other movies, as well as television series being added later on via free DLC).
A Celebration Edition was released in December 2019.
DICE announced that Scarif from Rogue One would be the last content update released for the game.

=== Canceled spin-off ===
In 2019, EA was in the process of developing a game code-named Viking, designed as a spin-off of the Battlefront series with open-world elements.
The game was originally planned for release in fall 2020, coinciding with the next generation of video game consoles, but was canceled in late 2019.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Fan-made sequel games ===


====
Galaxy in Turmoil ====
On January 25, 2016, Frontwire Studios began an attempt to produce an unofficial Battlefront installment called Galaxy in Turmoil.
The fan made game was in production using Unreal Engine 4 and was based on the canceled Star Wars: Battlefront III by Free Radical Design.
Although early versions of the game contained assets from  Free Radical Design, they soon became "place holders" as the full game planned to be released using assets and music made from the ground up.
On June 4, 2016, Galaxy in Turmoil gained a distribution deal through Valve and was planned to be released for free on Steam which generated a fair amount of attention.
On June 22, 2016, Lucasfilm requested the production of Galaxy in Turmoil be halted.

On July 31, 2016, Frontwire Studios announced the cancellation of the game was due to the "possibility of Galaxy in Turmoil taking away attention from Electronic Arts's Battlefront franchise".
Proposals of Galaxy in Turmoil falling under the paywall of Electronic Arts, and ideas of Lucasfilm giving Frontwire Studios a Star Wars license were both rejected due to an agreement between Electronic Arts and Lucasfilm.
Although Frontwire Studios may have fallen within Fair Use laws, legal conflict was avoided and the project was canceled.
There is a playable alpha that contains assets from Free Radical Design that was released to the public then removed early within Galaxy in Turmoil's lifetime.
Galaxy in Turmoil is now planned to be redeveloped as a brand new cyberpunk-themed IP without any Star Wars references, but still with Battlefront III-inspired mechanics including space-to-ground battles.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars video games


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
Thrawn (also known simply as Thrawn) is a Star Wars novel by Timothy Zahn, published on April 11, 2017 by Del Rey Books.
It chronicles the origins of Grand Admiral Thrawn, a popular character originating from the Star Wars Legends line of works, which were declared non-canon to the franchise after Disney redefined Star Wars continuity in April 2014.
The novel was announced in July 2016 alongside news that the character Thrawn would be reintroduced into the Star Wars franchise on the 3D CGI animated television series Star Wars Rebels.

A sequel, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was released in July 2018.
A third novel, Thrawn: Treason, was released in July 2019.

==
Plot ==
Found on an unnamed Outer Rim planet, the exiled Chiss warrior Thrawn pledges himself to Emperor Palpatine and joins the Imperial navy.
Thrawn's cunning and expertise as a tactician help him to rise through the ranks with unprecedented speed, though his renegade tactics ignite the ire of his superiors.
At Thrawn's side is his translator-turned-aide-de-camp, Ensign Eli Vanto, whom he trains in the ways of war.
Meanwhile, ruthless administrator Arihnda Pryce plots her own rise to power.

==
Development ==
The character of Thrawn was originally introduced in Zahn's 1991 novel Heir to the Empire, and became a fan favorite.
He went on to appear in several other novels, short stories, comics, and video games.
Following the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars fiction produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In a prerecorded video, Zahn announced at the London Star Wars Celebration in July 2016 that he was writing a new novel for Del Rey Books titled Thrawn.
The same day, Del Rey confirmed on Twitter the novel's spring 2017 release.
In a subsequent interview with StarWars.com, Zahn noted that the novel would cover several years between Thrawn's "first encounter" with the Empire and the events of the third season of Star Wars Rebels, an animated television series in which the character will appear prior to the book's release.
He said:

It's very exciting [to write Thrawn again].
A writer never knows which characters are going to click with the readers, and it was highly gratifying to me that Thrawn captured the imaginations of so many people over the past quarter century.
Over the years I've written a lot of books and stories that featured him, but with this book I'll be visiting a part of his life that I never before had a chance to explore.

Asked if he would be incorporating any material from previous Thrawn novels, Zahn said, "I've thrown in a few bits and pieces.
Nothing too blatant, just little Easter eggs for those who are familiar with my other books.
"
Though in Legends works Thrawn was mostly used in post-Return of the Jedi storylines, both Rebels and Thrawn take place prior to the events of the original 1977 film and show his rise to power.
Zahn said, "I get to show how he's treated by his fellow officers and shipmates on his way up the military ladder, particularly when he's not in a command position over them.
"A full synopsis of the novel was released in January 2017, followed by an excerpt in March 2017.

==
Publication ==
Thrawn was published on April 11, 2017.
Del Rey Books produced three variant covers: the standard edition is white, featuring Thrawn's face split by the spine; the Barnes & Noble-exclusive edition has the same cover design in black, with a double-sided pull out poster that has a Thrawn portrait on one side and the Del Rey novel timeline on the other; and
the Star Wars Celebration limited edition has a textless cover with Thrawn's full face, the portrait on the back cover, and special end papers.

== Reception ==
Adrian Liang of Omnivoracious called the novel "a solid addition to the new official Star Wars novels", noting that "the Thrawn POV chapters are the weakest" while the Vanto sections "provide the most insight and entertainment."
==
Comic adaptation ==
In July 2017, Marvel Comics announced that a comic book miniseries adaptation of Thrawn is scheduled for release in early 2018.

The first issue was released on February 14, 2018, with five more to follow on a monthly basis.

==
Sequels ==


===
Thrawn: Alliances ===
A sequel to Thrawn, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was announced during New York Comic Con in October 2017.
The novel was scheduled to be released on June 26, 2018, but was later delayed to July 24, 2018.
The cover artwork was revealed in November 2017, and an excerpt was released on the official Star Wars website on March 23, 2018.
The excerpt was the first canon appearance of the planet Batuu, which was featured in Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge, the new theme park expansion at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios, in 2019.
Thrawn: Alliances was released by Del Rey Books on July 24, 2018, and debuted at #1 on The New York Times Best Seller list.
Thrawn: Alliances focuses on Thrawn's partnership with Darth Vader, whom he meets at the conclusion of Thrawn.
In the novel, Grand Admiral Thrawn and Darth Vader are sent on a mission to the unknown regions to explore a disturbance in the Force felt by Emperor Palpatine.
The mission is more than that, however, as Thrawn's split loyalties between the Empire and his native people the Chiss and Vader's past as a Jedi require a test of loyalty for both.
The book also features flashbacks to a Clone Wars conflict featuring Thrawn and Anakin Skywalker.

===
Thrawn: Treason ===
In December 2018, it was announced that Timothy Zahn would write and publish another Thrawn sequel, titled Thrawn: Treason.
The novel was released by Del Rey Books on July 23, 2019, and debuted at #5 on The New York Times Best Seller list.
The novel explores the crisis Thrawn encounters when he discovers that his people are in peril, forcing him to choose between loyalty to the Empire or loyalty to the Chiss Ascendancy.

==
Prequels ==


===
Chaos
Rising ===
At the 2019 New York Comic Con, a new trilogy from Zahn was announced, to be entitled Thrawn: The Ascendency Trilogy, or simply the Thrawn Ascendancy trilogy, to launch with Book I:
Chaos Rising in May 2020.
After being delayed twice, the first novel was ultimately released on September 1, 2020.The prequel follows Thrawn's original rise through the ranks of the Chiss Ascendancy and the allies and enemies he collects along the way.

===
Greater Good ===
In October 2020 a sequel to Chaos Rising was announced, titled Greater Good, which is set for a May 4, 2021 release.
===
Lesser Evil ===
On April 1, 2020, the final novel in the Thrawn Ascendency trilogy was announced, titled Lesser Evil, which is set for a November 16, 2021 release.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Thrawn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Mandalorian is an American space Western television series created by Jon Favreau for the streaming service Disney+.
It is the first live-action series in the Star Wars franchise, beginning five years after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983).
It stars Pedro Pascal as the title character, a lone bounty hunter who goes on the run after being hired to retrieve "The Child".

Star Wars creator George Lucas had begun developing a live-action Star Wars television series by 2009, but this project was deemed too expensive to produce.
He sold Lucasfilm to Disney in October 2012.
Subsequently, work on a new Star Wars series  began for Disney+.
Favreau signed on in March 2018, serving as writer and showrunner.
He executive produces alongside Dave Filoni, Kathleen Kennedy, and Colin Wilson.
The series' title was announced in October 2018, with filming starting at Manhattan Beach Studios in California.
Visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic developed the StageCraft technology for the series, using virtual sets and a 360-degree video wall to create the series' environments.
This has since been adopted by other film and television productions.

The Mandalorian premiered with the launch of Disney+
on November 12, 2019.
The eight-episode first season was met with positive reviews, was nominated for Outstanding Drama Series at the 72nd Primetime Emmy Awards, and won seven Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards.
A second season premiered on October 30, 2020, and a third season is in pre-production.
Three spin-off series will expand on the series' timeline:
The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic, and Ahsoka.

==
Premise ==
Beginning five years after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983) and the fall of the Galactic Empire, The Mandalorian follows Din Djarin, a lone Mandalorian bounty hunter in the outer reaches of the galaxy.
He is hired by remnant Imperial forces to retrieve the child Grogu, but instead goes on the run to protect the infant.
While looking to reunite Grogu with his kind, they are pursued by Moff Gideon, who wants to use Grogu's connection to the Force.

== Cast and characters ==
Pedro Pascal stars as Din Djarin, the series' title character and a lone bounty hunter.
Pascal compared the character to Clint Eastwood, with advanced combat skills and of "questionable moral character".
The character's real name is not given until "Chapter 8: Redemption", but Pascal accidentally revealed it early in November 2019.
His bounty in "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian" is "The Child"—colloquially known as "Baby Yoda" by audience members—an infant of the same species as Star Wars character Yoda.
He is created with animatronics and puppetry, augmented with visual effects.
He becomes the Mandalorian's ward, and his name is revealed to be Grogu in "Chapter 13
: The Jedi".
The first season features several recurring co-stars, including Carl Weathers as Greef Karga, leader of a bounty hunter guild; Werner Herzog as "The Client", an enigmatic man; Omid Abtahi as Dr. Pershing, a scientist working for the client; Nick Nolte as the voice of Kuiil, an Ugnaught moisture farmer who helps the Mandalorian; Taika Waititi as the voice of IG-11, a bounty hunter droid; Gina Carano as Cara Dune, a former Rebel shock trooper-turned-mercenary; Giancarlo Esposito as Moff Gideon, a former officer of the Imperial Security Bureau; and Emily Swallow as "The Armorer", a Mandalorian who forges armor and equipment from beskar steel.
Esposito, Carano, Weathers, and Abtahi return for the second season.
Several actors appear as characters from previous Star Wars media, including Timothy Olyphant as Cobb Vanth, Temuera Morrison as Boba Fett, Katee Sackhoff as Bo-Katan Kryze, Rosario Dawson as Ahsoka Tano, and Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker.
Other recurring co-stars for the second season include Amy Sedaris as Peli Motto, reprising her role from the first season; Misty Rosas, who was the on-set performer for Kuiil in the first season, as the Frog Lady; Mercedes Varnado as Koska Reeves; and Ming-Na Wen as Fennec Shand, also reprising her role from the first season.

==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2019) ===


===
Season 2 (2020) ===


==
Production ==


===
Background ===
Star Wars creator George Lucas began development on a live-action Star Wars television series known as Underworld in early 2009.
More than 50 scripts were written for the series by 2012, but they were eventually deemed too expensive to produce.
In January 2013, ABC president Paul Lee stated that his network would be discussing potential live-action Star Wars television series with Lucasfilm after the latter had been sold by Lucas to ABC's parent company The Walt Disney Company in October 2012.
In November 2017, Disney CEO Bob Iger announced that Disney and Lucasfilm were developing a live-action Star Wars television series for the new streaming service Disney+.
===
Development ===
While working on The Lion King (2019), a photo-realistic remake of the 1994 animated film, in 2017, director Jon Favreau pitched an idea he had for a Star Wars television series to Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy.
Kennedy suggested Favreau discuss the idea with Dave Filoni, executive producer on the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels.
Favreau and Filoni had met at the Skywalker Ranch when Favreau was working on Iron Man (2008) and Filoni was working on the first season of The Clone Wars, and Favreau subsequently voiced the Mandalorian character Pre Vizsla in The Clone Wars for Filoni.
When Favreau met with Filoni about his series idea, the latter drew a doodle of a baby of the same species as the Star Wars character Yoda which became "The Child".
Favreau wanted to explore the "scum and villainy" of the Star Wars universe following the events of the film Return of the Jedi (1983).
He began spending several hours at the end of each day developing the series while he was directing The Lion King.
Lucasfilm announced that Favreau would write and executive produce a new Star Wars series for Disney+ in March 2018.
Kennedy added that the series was an opportunity for a diverse group of writers and directors to be hired to create Star Wars stories, after the franchise's films had been criticized for being written and directed by only white men.
In May, Favreau stated that he had written scripts for four of the series' eight episodes before being officially hired for the project.
On October 3, Favreau announced that the series was titled The Mandalorian and revealed the premise for the show.
The following day, Lucasfilm announced that Filoni, Kennedy, and Colin Wilson would executive produce the series alongside Favreau, with Karen Gilchrist acting as co-executive producer.
The series premiere was set to be available with the launch of Disney+ in November 2019.
Star Pedro Pascal described the series as taking the space Western undertones from the Star Wars films "and infusing it with steroids".
In July 2019, Favreau confirmed that there would be a second season of the series and that he had begun writing it.
Iger announced in February 2020 that the second season would premiere that October.
By late April, Favreau had been writing a third season for "a while" and further development on the season was beginning.
In September, co-star Giancarlo Esposito said the second season would "start to lay the groundwork for the depth and breadth that's going to come in season 3 and season 4, where you’re really gonna start to get answers."
Favreau announced in December 2020 that the third season was in pre-production, and would begin filming in 2021 once the spin-off series
The Book of Boba Fett completed filming.
It was expected to begin filming on April 5, 2021.

===
Casting ===
In November 2018, Pedro Pascal was confirmed to be portraying the Mandalorian after being rumored to be cast in the role for some time.
Pascal initially thought he was being cast as the Star Wars character Boba Fett due to the visual similarities between that character and the Mandalorian, but the latter is actually a separate character named Din Djarin.
Favreau called Pascal "a classic movie star" who "had the presence and skill[s]" necessary to portray a character largely concealed under a helmet.
The Mandalorian is also portrayed by stunt doubles Brendan Wayne and Lateef Crowder.
Pascal worked with Favreau and Filoni to record the character's dialogue later.
In February 2021, Lucasfilm said Gina Carano, a recurring co-star during the first two seasons, was no longer employed by the company.
This came after Carano made a social media post comparing being a Republican in the United States to the treatment of Jewish people during the Holocaust, with Lucasfilm saying the post was "abhorrent and unacceptable".
Carano had been repeatedly warned about her social media posts by Lucasfilm executives who reportedly had been looking for a reason to fire her for two months.
The February 2021 posts were "the final straw", and the decision to fire the actress was made by Lucasfilm executives rather than Favreau.
The Walt Disney Company CEO Bob Chapek said Carano was fired because her posts did not align with the values of Disney, which he said were "universal" and not political.
The Hollywood Reporter reported that Carano's role of Cara Dune was not expected to be recast, though industry insiders felt that was still a possibility due to story and merchandising reasons.

===
Filming ===
The series is filmed at Manhattan Beach Studios in California.
Filoni directed the series' first episode, making his live-action directorial debut, with Rick Famuyiwa, Deborah Chow, Bryce Dallas Howard, and Taika Waititi also directing for the first season.
Filoni, Howard, and Famuyiwa returned for the second season, and were joined by Favreau (who was unable to direct during the first season due to his commitment to The Lion King), Peyton Reed, co-star Carl Weathers, and Robert Rodriguez.

===
New technology ===
Visual effects studio Industrial Light & Magic, a subsidiary of Lucasfilm, opened a new division in November 2018 called ILM TV, specifically intended for episodic and streaming television.
Based in London with support from ILM's San Francisco, Vancouver, and Singapore locations, one of the first projects for the new division was The Mandalorian.
While directing The Jungle Book (2016), Favreau had used large screens on set to create interactive lighting so when live action footage was combined with a digital environment in post-production the effect would be more realistic.
He found the process to be effective, but time-consuming.
When he began working on The Lion King, Favreau worked with visual effects vendor Moving Picture Company, technology developer Magnopus, and the game engine software Unity to develop a new virtual camera system that allowed him to film scenes in a virtual reality environment as if he was filming with physical cameras.
For The Lion King, the results of the virtual photography were then rendered by MPC as final animation for the film.
On The Mandalorian, Favreau wanted to use the virtual technology to aid live action photography and also develop the video wall system.
ILM partnered with video game developer Epic Games to create a new system named StageCraft based on Epic's game engine Unreal Engine.
StageCraft consists of large LED video screens on which digital environments can be rendered in real time for actors to perform in front of.
During pre-production, the virtual photography process developed for The Lion King was used to plan the series' filming and determine what environments would be needed on set.
The digital environments were then created by ILM and added to StageCraft ready for live action photography with the actors.
Some of these environments were based on location photography in countries such as Iceland and Chile, on which Favreau said, "The actors aren't brought on location.
The location is brought to the actors.
"
The environments were designed by the series' visual art department, led by Lucasfilm's creative director Doug Chiang and production designer Andrew L. Jones.
During filming, the digital environments were rendered on a video wall in real time, allowing the filmmakers and actors to see the environments.
ILM used a smaller version of the technology for Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018), but on The Mandalorian they utilized a 21-foot-tall (6.4 m) set that was 75 feet (23 m) in diameter, surrounded by a 360-degree semicircular LED video wall and ceiling.
The Manhattan Beach Studios set is referred to as a "volume", which is traditionally the name for motion capture  stages.
Favreau's initial intention was to use the video wall as a way to provide realistic interactive lighting for the actors, with a section of the screen behind the actors displaying a green screen so a higher quality version of the background could be added in post-production.
During filming tests with the technology, the team realized that the Unreal Engine could render visuals fast enough that they could have the background move in relation to the camera.
This allowed the system to maintain the appearance of parallax, where the environment would appear differently based on the angle it was being looked at just as a real 3D environment would.
This effect causes some distortion to the image on the video wall, but looks like a real environment when viewed through the camera.
The images rendered on the video wall in real time were often of a high enough quality to be used as final effects when filmed on set.
Physical elements were added to the volume to match the digital backgrounds, such as dirt on the floor to match dirt displayed on the video wall.
Interior spaces were also created, such as an office used by Imperial agents where the walls and ceiling were displayed on the video wall around a physical table.
The production had several physical sections of the Razor Crest, the Mandalorian's ship, that could be placed within the volume, such as having the front half of the ship physically built and the back half rendered digitally.
The environments could be manipulated in StageCraft on set as required, allowing the filmmakers to request changes to the environment and have them rendered on the video wall on the same day.
The production was able to change between environments within half an hour, or even faster if the physical elements within the volume were not visible and did not need to be changed.
One of the primary advantages of using the video wall technology was the realistic lighting, with the wall providing ambient light and accurate reflections on the actors.
This was especially important for the Mandalorian, who wears reflective armor.
Traditionally, on a production using green screen, the visual effects team would have to remove the green reflections from a reflective character or object in post-production, and then add new reflections that matched the digital environment.
Using StageCraft, the reflections in the Mandalorian's armor were already correct on set.
It also allowed for the series' cinematographers to light scenes in a way that would match the background, rather than lighting the set and hoping the digital background would match in post-production as they would have to do with green screen.
A technique used by the production to ensure the lighting from the video wall looked natural was to have the actors in shadow, with light from the environment behind them, often creating silhouettes.

===
Music ===
Composer Ludwig Göransson was recommended by several of his previous collaborators to Favreau, including directors Ryan Coogler and Anthony and Joe Russo, and musician Donald Glover.
Favreau knew that music would be important to the series due to the impact of John Williams' score on the Star Wars films, but also wanted the music of the series to be different from the films.
He wanted the series to sound "a little grittier, a little edgier and a little more tech-oriented".
Göransson first met with Favreau in November 2018, when Favreau showed the composer concept art for the series and discussed his inspirations for the story and tone, including Western and samurai films.
They also discussed how they felt when they first heard Williams' Star Wars music, and Göransson set out to recreate those feelings and "capture the soul of what Star Wars is" but in a new way.
Göransson was announced as composer for the series in December 2018.
The basis of the main theme was created from Göransson experimenting with a bass recorder, digitally manipulating it to make it more "futuristic".
Guitars, a piano, drums, and synthesizers are also featured in the main theme.
A 70-piece orchestra was used for the first season, combined with recordings of Göransson playing the main instruments which he augmented with synthesizers and other digital manipulation.
Walt Disney Records released a soundtrack album for each episode of the first season.
Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, orchestra players were recorded remotely or in smaller, distant groups for the second season.
Two albums were released for the second season, each covering four episodes of the season.

==
Themes ==


===
Parenting and fatherhood ===
One of the primary themes of The Mandalorian is parenting and fatherhood, particularly through the father–son relationship dynamic between the Mandalorian and the Child.
Ryan Britt of Fatherly wrote that this is unusual in Star Wars stories, and that past examples of parenting in the franchise have tended to be poor ones, from the murderous Darth Vader (father of Luke Skywalker) to the neglectful Galen Erso, father of Jyn Erso in Rogue One (2016).
Britt wrote: "For years the Star Wars franchise avoided depicting a parent-child dynamic.
With Mando and Baby Yoda, that's finally changing."
The dynamic between Kuiil and IG-11 also reflect the childrearing theme in The Mandalorian.
The two have a relationship similar to that of a father and son, as demonstrated in the scene in which Kuiil teaches IG-11 how to operate and function after the droid is reprogrammed.
Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk argued that parenting has been the subject of past Star Wars stories, but almost always during later stages of parenthood, rather than an infant in early stages such as the Child.
As examples, she cited Obi-Wan Kenobi serving as a mentor to the adolescent Anakin Skywalker, Princess Leia lamenting over her grown son Kylo Ren, or the absence of Rey's parents.
Britt argued strong parental examples in Star Wars are important because the franchise is so often associated with the childhoods of its fans.
The Mandalorian particularly highlights the challenges of being a single parent, and a working parent, as the Mandalorian struggles to continue his day job as a bounty hunter and mercenary while serving as the sole caretaker of the Child.
Richard Newby of The Hollywood Reporter described the show as "the adventures of a single dad looking for a job".
Several reviewers have compared the dynamic between the Child and the Mandalorian to Lone Wolf and Cub, a manga about a samurai warrior and his young son.
Favreau acknowledged Lone Wolf and Cub as an influence in an episode of Disney Gallery:
The Mandalorian.
The Mandalorian's parental role in the series makes him a softer and more relatable character; he changes in a positive way because of raising the Child, becoming less selfish and self-absorbed.
He risked his life and drastically changed his career as a bounty hunter to accept his responsibility as the Child's caretaker and guardian, marking a significant parental sacrifice.
When the Mandalorian seeks work to earn money, he is now doing so to provide not only for himself, but for the Child as well.
We see several examples of the Mandalorian parenting the Child throughout the series, such as when he stops the Child from pressing random buttons in the cockpit of the Mandalorian's spaceship, ultimately by holding him in his lap.
In another example, the Mandalorian establishes a car seat for the Child in the cockpit of his ship, so he can be seated safely and comfortably during their travels.
The relationship between the Mandalorian and the Child is an example of unexpected fatherhood.
The Mandalorian feels a connection and parental bond with the Child because of his own childhood, when he was orphaned upon the death of his parents and was adopted by the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling".
Nevertheless, fatherhood is not a role the Mandalorian initially seeks, and he makes repeated initial attempts to avoid this responsibility.
He first does so in "Chapter 3:
The Sin", when he first leaves the Child with the Client.
He does so again in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", when he plans to leave the Child with Omera, a protective mother on the planet Sorgan, who is willing to take the Child into her own family.
The Mandalorian does not fully commit to the role of fatherhood until the first-season finale, "Chapter 8: Redemption", when the Child himself is also adopted into the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling" and the Mandalorian is formally declared to be his father figure.
He nonetheless continues to search for what he feels may be a more appropriate guardian for the Child, as in the second season's fifth episode, "The Jedi", in which he seeks to leave him with Ahsoka Tano.
Several writers suggested the fact that the Mandalorian's face is concealed has a tabula rasa effect and his anonymity allows viewers to see and imagine themselves as parents.
Britt said this "allow(s) us to dream about what arsenal we might deploy to protect our children".
However, Singer said the show's setting in space make the challenges of child-rearing seem more exciting and exotic than they might otherwise be.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair has noted that none of the day-to-day difficulties of parenthood are portrayed in the series: "There is no shrill squawking from Baby Yoda, no tantrum, no spit-up, no uncontrollable shrieking that burrows into a parent's psyche like a dentist's drill shredding a soft, pink nerve."
Likewise, Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk said the show ignores or does not address many parenting details that make fatherhood difficult, such as what the Child eats, when he goes to sleep, and whether he wears diapers.
She wrote: "The Mandalorian is uninterested in diapers, and so Mando gets to be a very particular image of fatherhood: the guy who doesn't have to sweat the small stuff."
VanAnderonk described this as a wish fulfillment fantasy for parents or prospective parents: "a vision of parenting stripped so thoroughly of all detail and specificity that all that's left are archetypes: the parent, the child".
The Child encounters a handful of other protector figures throughout the first season, including Omera, IG-11, and Peli Motto.
Some observers have criticized the series for the fact that the Mandalorian repeatedly leaves the Child alone or in the hands of relative strangers, as well as for making decisions that place the Child in danger.
One example is in "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner", when he allows a team of dangerous mercenaries to use his ship while the Child is on board, nearly resulting in the Child's death.
An interaction the Mandalorian has with Peli Motto in "Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger" is one of the most overt discussions about the challenges of caring for the Child.
When the Mandalorian accidentally wakes the child, who had been sleeping in Peli's arms, she chides him: "Do you have any idea
how long it took me to get it to sleep?
"
She also condemns the Mandalorian for leaving the child alone on the ship, saying: "you have an awful lot to learn about raising a young one".
ScreenCrush writer Matt Singer argued the Mandalorian's parenting errors makes the show that much more appealing because making mistakes is a large part of being a parent.
Eileen Chase of Today echoed this: "He is not an ideal parent, just like the rest of us who have to balance parenting and work."
===
Good and evil; nature versus nurture ===
The nature of good and evil and the question of nature versus nurture is raised repeatedly throughout The Mandalorian, perhaps most overtly through by Kuiil's reprogramming of IG-11 from a bounty hunter to a nurse droid and protector.
Even after IG-11 is reprogrammed, the Mandalorian does not believe he has truly changed, because he believes droids have an essential nature and that IG-11's nature remains murderous and untrustworthy.
But in reprogramming IG-11, Kuiil nurtures him and helps him to change; Kuiil feels that in the process of learning how to function again, IG-11 gained a new personality.
Kuiil insists to the Mandalorian: "Droids are not good or bad — they are neutral reflections of those who program them."
Keith Phipps of Vulture wrote of IG-11 and the nature versus nurture theme: "He's not bad.
He's just programmed that way, and with care and change he can do a lot of good in the world.
"The
Kuiil and IG-11 scenes also demonstrate that the way in which the "child" character is raised makes a significant difference in whether the child becomes an asset or a threat to those around him.
The droid was a dangerous assassin before Kuiil reprogrammed him, but thanks to the Ugnaught's parenting, he becomes a protector and helper instead.
Some writers have likewise suggested the Child is not inherently good or evil, but that instead, like all children, he is impressionable and does not fully understand the events occurring around him.
He is learning about the world around him and needs guidance as he develops his abilities.
It will largely fall to the Mandalorian to provide this guidance, as when the Mandalorian stops him from strangling Cara Dune.
However, multiple writers have questioned whether the violent acts the Child has repeatedly witnessed throughout The Mandalorian are having a negative impact on his development, and that he is learning to become violent himself as a result.
Phipps wrote of this: "That look of wonder in the Child's eyes as IG-11 kills and kills again is hilarious, but also a little chilling."
One particular scene in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" led many reviewers and fans to question whether the Child may be demonstrating evil tendencies.
During a scene on the Mandalorian's spaceship, the Child observes as the Mandalorian and Cara Dune engage in a friendly arm wrestling match.
During the contest, the Child uses the Force to choke Cara, nearly strangling her before the Mandalorian intervened.
Throughout the Star Wars franchise, that ability has been most commonly associated with the Dark Side of the Force, particularly Darth Vader.
Sarah Bea Milner of Screen Rant wrote: "The moment is genuinely shocking — and more than a little disturbing."
Some reviewers noted, however, that the Child likely mistakenly believed the Mandalorian was in danger and intervened to help.
Additionally, in the same episode, the Child uses Force healing to save Greef Karga, a power typically associated with the Light Side.
Nevertheless, some writers have suggested viewers had been underestimating the Child's capacity for evil because he is so adorable.
Fans speculated the Child could be presenting a false personality or using the Force to manipulate people into caring about him to help ensure his survival.
However, Caitlin Gallagher of Bustle suggested rather than building toward making the Child evil, the show could be suggesting the Mandalorian needs to find a way to raise the Child in a less violent environment.

==
Release ==
The Mandalorian premiered on the streaming service Disney+
on its United States launch day, November 12, 2019.
The second season premiered on October 30, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
For the first season, the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 93% approval rating with an average rating of 7.97/10 based on 36 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Action-packed and expertly-crafted—if at times a bit too withholding—The Mandalorian is a welcome addition to the Star Wars universe that benefits greatly from the cuteness of its cargo.
"
Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 70 out of 100 for the season, based on reviews from 29 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
For the second season, Rotten Tomatoes reported a 94% approval rating with an average score of 8.6/10, based on 23 reviews.
The site's critical consensus reads: "
With fan favorites and fresh faces galore both in front of and behind the camera, The Mandalorian's sophomore season solidifies its place as one of Star Wars's most engaging and exciting sagas.
"
Metacritic assigned a score of 76 out of 100 based on 14 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
===
Accolades ===


===
Industry impact ===
The Mandalorian was the first production to be filmed using real time rendering for realistic, parallax environments.
Favreau believed that the StageCraft technology developed for the series would have a significant impact on the production of films and television series moving forward.
He attributed the breakthroughs made with the technology to the support of Kathleen Kennedy, who was in charge of both Lucasfilm and ILM, as well as to his own drive for innovation, and to previous work done by George Lucas on new technology for the Star Wars films.
Favreau also acknowledged that much of the technology involved in StageCraft is not proprietary and is readily available to others, it just had not been combined in this way before.
Favreau invited other filmmakers and studios to visit the series' set and see how the new technology was being used, noting that Lucas and other filmmakers such as James Cameron had done the same when they had been working on innovative film projects.
Favreau added that the companies working on the series' new technologies—including ILM, Epic, and MPC—were being encouraged to share their work and develop the technology further beyond the requirements of the series.
Several actors working on the series, including Carl Weathers and Giancarlo Esposito, gave high praise to the technology and the way it allowed them to act within the environment rather than pretend in front of green screen.
After learning lessons about the technology during production on the first season of The Mandalorian, ILM was able to make several advancements beginning with the second season.
This included transitioning StageCraft to a fully in-house product utilizing ILM's own game engine, Helios, rather than Epic's Unreal Engine.
In February 2020, ILM announced that it was making its StageCraft technology available to all filmmakers and production studios as a complete end-to-end solution, and that December, it was announced that three additional StageCraft volumes–in Los Angeles, London, and Australia–were being built.

==
Spin-offs ==
In November 2019, Walt Disney Studios CCO Alan Horn said if the series was successful, a film featuring the Mandalorian could be developed.
The next month, Favreau said there was an opportunity to explore the series' characters in other Star Wars films or television series.
Bob Iger said in February 2020 that spin-offs of The Mandalorian were being considered, and there was potential to add more characters to the series with the intention of then giving them their own series.
Favreau said in October that as more characters are introduced in the series, "we are beginning to explore where we could go".
He felt Lucasfilm could be "more responsive" to audience reactions in determining potential spin-offs due to the faster production time for television series than films.
Favreau looked to his experience working in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, where smaller stories exist within the larger narrative, as a potential guide for spin-offs.
Additionally, both Favreau and Pascal were open to the idea of the Mandalorian appearing in a Star Wars film, but Favreau was in "no rush" to do this.
In December 2020, the spin-off series Rangers of the New Republic, Ahsoka, and The Book of Boba Fett were announced, with all three series developed by Favreau and Filoni, set within The Mandalorian's timeline, and planned to culminate in a "climactic story event".
===
The Book of Boba Fett ===
A spin-off miniseries focused on Boba Fett was reported in November 2020.
It was officially announced as The Book of Boba Fett a month later, and was already in production by that point.
Favreau, Filoni, and Robert Rodriguez executive produce, with Morrison and Wen reprising their respective roles as Fett and Fennec Shand.
The series will debut in December 2021.

===
Rangers of the New Republic ===
A spin-off series titled Rangers of the New Republic was announced in December 2020.

===
Ahsoka ===
A limited series titled Ahsoka, featuring Dawson reprising her role as Ahsoka Tano, was revealed in December 2020 with Filoni writing and executive producing alongside Favreau.

==
Other media ==


===
Documentary series ===
A documentary series, Disney Gallery: The Mandalorian, features interviews with the cast and crew of The Mandalorian, behind-the-scenes footage, and roundtable conversations hosted by Favreau that explore the production of the series.
The first season premiered on Disney+
on May 4, 2020, Star Wars Day.
An hour-long special covering the second season was released on December 25, 2020.

===
Publishing ===
Lucasfilm announced a publishing campaign of tie-in books and comics for the series in June 2020.
The campaign was announced to included The Art of The Mandalorian (Season One) by Phil Szostak, an original adult novel written by Adam Christopher and published by Del Rey Books, a visual guide written by Pablo Hidalgo and published by DK, a junior novelization of the first season written by Joe Schreiber, and comic books inspired by the series to be published by Marvel Comics and IDW.
One month later, the novel by Adam Christopher was delayed from December 2020 to November 2021, before both it and the visual guide by Pablo Hidalgo were cancelled in March 2021.

===
Video games ===
In November 2020, Minecraft released a Star Wars-themed downloadable content, which included locations and characters from The Mandalorian.
Din Djarin and Grogu appear in Zero Point, Fortnite Battle Royale's chapter two, season five event.
Djarin's sniper rifle and jetpack were also available as playable items.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
The Mandalorian on Disney+
The Mandalorian at IMDb
The Mandalorian on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Mandalorian on StarWars.com
Star Wars (retroactively titled Star Wars:
Episode IV  –
A New Hope) is a 1977 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas, produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century Fox.
It stars Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Peter Cushing, Alec Guinness, David Prowse, James Earl Jones, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker and Peter Mayhew.
It is the first installment of the original Star Wars trilogy, the first of the franchise to be produced, and the fourth episode of the "Skywalker saga".

Lucas had the idea for a science-fiction film in the vein of Flash Gordon around the time he completed his first film, THX 1138 (1971) and began working on a treatment after the release of American Graffiti (1973).
Star Wars focuses on the journey of Luke Skywalker (Hamill), who along with the wizened Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi (Guinness), smuggler Han Solo (Ford), and his Wookiee companion Chewbacca (Mayhew), attempts to free Princess Leia (Fisher) from the clutches of the tyrannical Galactic Empire.
At the same time, the heroes try to deliver the plans for the Empire's planet-destroying space station, the Death Star, which are carried by the droids R2-D2 (Baker) and C-3PO (Daniels), to the Rebel Alliance, but face opposition from the Sith Lord Darth Vader (Prowse, voiced by Jones).

After a turbulent production, Star Wars was released in a limited number of theaters in the United States on May 25, 1977, and quickly became a blockbuster hit, leading to it being expanded to a much wider release.
The film opened to critical acclaim, most notably for its groundbreaking visual effects.
It grossed a total of $775 million (over $550 million during its initial run), surpassing Jaws (1975) to become the highest-grossing film at the time until the release of E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982).
When adjusted for inflation, Star Wars is the second-highest-grossing film in North America (behind Gone with the Wind) and the fourth-highest-grossing film in the world.
It received ten Oscar nominations (including Best Picture), winning seven.
In 1989, it became one of the first 25 films that was selected by the U.S. Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
At the time, it was the most recent film in the registry and the only one chosen from the 1970s.
In 2004, its soundtrack was added to the U.S. National Recording Registry, and was additionally listed by the American Film Institute as the best movie score of all time a year later.
Today, it is widely regarded by many in the motion picture industry as one of the greatest and most important films in motion picture history.

The film has been reissued multiple times with Lucas's support—most significantly with its 20th-anniversary theatrical "Special Edition"—incorporating many changes including modified computer-generated effects, altered dialogue, re-edited shots, remixed soundtracks and added scenes.
The film became a pop-cultural phenomenon and launched an industry of tie-in products, including novels, comics, video games, amusement park attractions, and merchandise including toys, games, clothing and many other spin-off works.

The film's success led to two critically and commercially successful sequels, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983), and later to a prequel trilogy, a sequel trilogy, two anthology films and various spin-off TV series.

==
Plot ==
Amid a galactic civil war, Rebel Alliance spies have stolen plans  to the Galactic Empire's Death Star, a massive space station capable of destroying an entire planet.
Imperial Senator Princess Leia of Alderaan, secretly one of the Rebellion's leaders, has obtained its schematics, but her starship is intercepted by an Imperial Star Destroyer under the command of the ruthless Darth Vader.
Before she is captured, Leia hides the plans in the memory of astromech droid R2-D2, who flees in an escape pod to the desert planet Tatooine accompanied by protocol droid C-3PO.

The droids are captured by Jawa traders, who sell them to moisture farmers Owen and Beru Lars and their nephew Luke Skywalker.
While Luke is cleaning R2-D2 part of a holographic recording of Leia starts playing, a message for Obi-Wan Kenobi where she requests his help.
Later, after Luke finds R2-D2 missing, he is attacked by scavenging Sand People while searching for him, but is rescued by elderly hermit "Old Ben" Kenobi, an acquaintance of Luke's, who reveals that "Obi-Wan" is his true name.
Obi-Wan tells Luke of his days as one of the Jedi Knights, the former peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who drew mystical abilities from a metaphysical energy field known as "the Force", but were ultimately hunted to near-extinction by the Empire.
Luke learns that his father fought alongside Obi-Wan as a Jedi Knight during the Clone Wars until Vader, Obi-Wan's former pupil, turned to the dark side of the Force and murdered him.
Obi-Wan presents Luke with his father's old lightsaber, the signature weapon of Jedi Knights.

R2-D2 plays Leia's full message, in which she begs Obi-Wan to take the Death Star plans to her home planet of Alderaan and give them to her father, a fellow veteran, for analysis.
Although Luke initially declines Obi-Wan's offer to accompany him to Alderaan and learn the ways of the Force, he is left with no choice after discovering that Imperial stormtroopers have killed his aunt and uncle and destroyed their farm in their search for the droids.
Traveling to a cantina in Mos Eisley to search for transport, Luke and Obi-Wan hire Han Solo, a smuggler with a price on his head due to his debt to local mobster Jabba the Hutt.
Pursued by stormtroopers, Obi-Wan, Luke, R2-D2 and C-3PO flee Tatooine with Han and his Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca on their ship the Millennium Falcon.
As they reach the planet's orbit, two Star Destroyers try to intercept them, but Han is able to jump to hyperspace by reaching lightspeed.

Before the Falcon can reach Alderaan, Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin interrogates Leia about the location of the Rebels's secret base, with the threat of destroying her home planet, and, when she answers that the base is on Dantooine, he orders Alderaan destroyed simply as a show of force.
As the group arrives in the asteroid field that now stands in place of Alderaan, Han spots an Imperial TIE fighter and is taunted into chasing it and shooting it down, allowing the Falcon to be captured by the space station's tractor beam.
Inside the Death Star, Obi-Wan attempts to disable the tractor beam, and Luke persuades Han and Chewbacca to help him rescue Leia after discovering that she is scheduled to be executed.
After disabling the tractor beam, Obi-Wan sacrifices his life in a lightsaber duel with Vader, allowing the rest of the group to escape the Death Star with Leia.
Using a tracking device, the Empire tracks the Falcon to the hidden Rebel base, actually located on Yavin IV.

Leia's schematics reveal a hidden weakness in the Death Star's thermal exhaust port, which could allow the Rebels to trigger a chain reaction in its main reactor with a precise torpedo strike.
While Han abandons the Rebels after collecting his reward for rescuing Leia, Luke joins their starfighter squadron in a desperate attack against the approaching Death Star.
In the ensuing battle, the Rebels suffer heavy losses as Vader leads a squadron of TIE fighters against them, but Han unexpectedly returns to aid them in the Falcon, narrowly managing to save Luke before Vader can shoot him down.
Guided by the disembodied voice of Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke turns off his targeting computer and uses the Force to aim his torpedoes into the exhaust port, destroying the Death Star moments before it fires on the Rebel base.
In a triumphant ceremony at the base, Leia awards Luke and Han medals for their heroism.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker: A young adult raised by his aunt and uncle on Tatooine, who dreams of something more than his current life and learns the way of the Jedi.
Lucas favored casting young actors who lacked long experience.
To play Luke (then known as Luke Starkiller), Lucas sought actors who could project intelligence and integrity.
While reading the script, Hamill found the dialogue to be extremely odd because of its universe-embedded concepts.
He chose to simply read it sincerely, and he was cast instead of William Katt, who was subsequently cast in Brian De Palma's Carrie (Lucas shared a joint casting session with De Palma, a longtime friend).

Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A cynical smuggler hired by Obi-Wan and Luke
to take them to Alderaan in his ship, the Millennium Falcon, co-piloted with Chewbacca.
Lucas initially rejected casting Ford for the role, as he "wanted new faces"; Ford had previously worked with Lucas on American Graffiti.
Instead, Lucas asked Ford to assist in the auditions by reading lines with the other actors and explaining the concepts and history behind the scenes that they were reading.
Lucas was eventually won over by Ford's portrayal and cast him instead of Kurt Russell, Nick Nolte, Sylvester Stallone, Bill Murray, Christopher Walken, Burt Reynolds, Jack Nicholson, Al Pacino, Steve Martin, Chevy Chase, or Perry King (who later played Han Solo in the radio plays).

Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia: A member of the Imperial Senate and one of the many Leaders of the Rebel Alliance.
Many young Hollywood actresses auditioned for the role of Princess Leia, including Amy Irving, Terri Nunn (also a singer), Cindy Williams, Karen Allen, and Jodie Foster.
Foster, for one, turned down the role because she was already under contract with Disney and working on two films at the time.
Fisher was cast under the condition that she lose 10 pounds (4.5 kg) for the role.

Peter Cushing as Grand Moff Tarkin: Commander of the Death Star.
Lucas originally had Cushing in mind for the role of Obi-Wan Kenobi, but Lucas believed that "his lean features" would be better employed in the role of Grand Moff Tarkin instead.
Lucas commended Cushing's performance, saying "[He] is a very good actor.
Adored and idolized by young people and by people who go to see a certain kind of movie.
I feel he will be fondly remembered for the next 350 years at least.
"
Cushing, commenting on his role, joked: "I've often wondered what a 'Grand Moff' was.
It sounds like something that flew out of a cupboard."

Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi:
An aging Jedi Master and former mentor of Darth Vader who introduces Luke to the Force.
Lucas' decision to cast "unknowns" was not taken favorably by his friend Francis Ford Coppola and the studio.
Lucas felt Obi-Wan Kenobi should be played by an established actor.
Producer Gary Kurtz said, "The Alec Guinness role required a certain stability and gravitas as a character... which meant we needed a very, very strong character actor to play that part."
Before Guinness was cast, Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune (who starred in many Akira Kurosawa films) was considered for the role.
According to Mifune's daughter, Mika Kitagawa, her father turned down Lucas' offers for Kenobi and Darth Vader because "he was concerned about how the film would look and that it would cheapen the image of samurai...
At the time, sci-fi movies still looked quite cheap as the effects were not advanced and he had a lot of samurai pride.
"
Guinness was one of the few cast members who believed that the film would be successful; he negotiated a deal for 2.25% of the one-fifth gross royalties paid to Lucas, which made him quite wealthy in later life.
He agreed to take the part of Kenobi on the condition that he would not have to do any publicity to promote the film.
Lucas credited him with inspiring the cast and crew to work harder, saying that Guinness contributed significantly to the completion of the filming.
Harrison Ford said, "It was, for me, fascinating to watch Alec Guinness.
He was always prepared, always professional, always very kind to the other actors.
He had a very clear head about how to serve the story."

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A protocol droid who is "fluent in over six million forms of communication".
Daniels auditioned for and was cast as C-3PO; he has said that he wanted the role after he saw a Ralph McQuarrie drawing of the character and was struck by the vulnerability in the robot's face.
Initially, Lucas did not intend to use Daniels' voice for C-3PO.
Thirty well-established voice actors read for the voice of the droid.
According to Daniels, one of the major voice actors, believed by some sources to be Stan Freberg, recommended Daniels' voice for the role.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2:
An astromech droid who is carrying the Death Star plans and a secret message for Obi-Wan from Princess Leia.
When filming was underway in London, where additional casting took place, Baker, performing a musical comedy act with his acting partner Jack Purvis, learned that the film crew was looking for a small person to fit inside a robot suit and maneuver it.
Baker, who was 3 feet 8 inches (1.12 m) tall, was cast immediately after meeting George Lucas.
He said, "He saw me come in and said 'He'll do' because I was the smallest guy they'd seen up until then."
He initially turned down the role three times, hesitant to appear in a film where his face would not be shown and hoping to continue the success of his comedy act, which had recently started to be televised.
R2-D2's recognizable beeps and squeaks were made by sound designer Ben Burtt imitating "baby noises", recording this voice as it was heard on an intercom, and creating the final mix using a synthesizer.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca "Chewie":
A 200-year-old Wookiee, Han Solo's sidekick, and first mate of the Millennium Falcon.
Mayhew learned of a casting call for Star Wars, which was being shot in London, and decided to audition.
The 7-foot-3-inch (2.21 m)
tall actor was immediately cast as Chewbacca after he stood up to greet Lucas.
He recounted, "I sat down on one of the sofas, waiting for George.
Door opened, and George walked in with Gary behind him.
So, naturally, what did I do?
I'm raised in England.
Soon as someone comes in through the door, I stand up.
George goes 'Hmm [looked up].'
Virtually turned to Gary, and said 'I think we've found him.'
As a result of his height, Mayhew was eligible for either the role of Chewbacca or Darth Vader, ultimately choosing the former because he wanted to play a hero in the story.
Mayhew modeled his performance of Chewbacca after the mannerisms of animals he saw at public zoos.
David Prowse as Darth Vader: A Sith lord of the Galactic Empire who aims to destroy the Rebel Alliance.

James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader.
Lucas originally intended for Orson Welles to voice the character after dismissing Prowse due to his West Country English accent (which led to him being nicknamed, within the cast, as "Darth Farmer").
However, determining that Welles' voice would be too familiar to audiences, Lucas instead cast then-relatively less recognizable Jones.
Other actors include Phil Brown and Shelagh Fraser as Luke's Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru; Jack Purvis, Kenny Baker's partner in his London comedy act, as the Chief Jawa in the film; and Eddie Byrne as Vanden Willard, a Rebel general.
Denis Lawson and Garrick Hagon played rebel pilots Wedge Antilles and Biggs Darklighter (Luke's childhood friend), respectively.
Don Henderson and Leslie Schofield appear as Imperial Generals Cassio Tagge and Moradmin Bast, respectively, and Richard LeParmentier plays Admiral Motti.
Alex McCrindle portrays General Jan Dodonna, Alfie Curtis portrays Dr. Evazan, and Peter Geddis portrays Captain Raymus Antilles.
Michael Leader plays a minor role as a Stormtrooper known for accidentally hitting his helmet against a door.
Heavily synthesised audio recordings of John Wayne from earlier films were used as the voice of the Imperial spy Garindan.
Robert Clarke plays Wulff Yularen, an Imperial officer known more for his appearance in the Clone Wars.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Lucas had the idea for a space-fantasy film in 1971, after he completed directing his first full-length feature, THX 1138.
Originally, Lucas wanted to adapt the Flash Gordon space adventure comics and serials into his own films, having been fascinated by them since he was young.

He later said:

I especially loved the Flash Gordon serials ...
Of course I realize now how crude and badly done they were ...
loving them that much when they were so awful, I began to wonder what would happen if they were done really well.

At the Cannes Film Festival following the completion of THX 1138, Lucas pushed towards buying the Flash Gordon rights, but they were already tied-up with Dino De Laurentiis.
Lucas later recounted:

I wanted to make a Flash Gordon movie, with all the trimmings, but I couldn't obtain the rights to the characters.
So I began researching and went right back and found where Alex Raymond (who had done the original Flash Gordon comic strips in newspapers) had got his idea from.
I discovered that he'd got his inspiration from the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs (author of Tarzan) and especially from his John Carter of Mars series books.
I read through that series, then found that what had sparked Burroughs off was a science fantasy called Gulliver on Mars, written by Edwin Arnold and published in 1905.
That was the first story in this genre that I have been able to trace.
Jules Verne had got pretty close, I suppose, but he never had a hero battling against space creatures or having adventures on another planet.
A whole new genre developed from that idea.

Director Francis Ford Coppola, who accompanied Lucas in trying to buy the Flash Gordon rights, recounted in 1999: "
[George] was very depressed because he had just come back
and they wouldn't sell him Flash Gordon.
And he says, 'Well, I'll just invent my own.'"
He secured a two-film development deal with United Artists; the two films were American Graffiti and a space opera, tentatively titled "The Star Wars" and inspired by Flash Gordon.
Lucas would later claim that he had the idea for an original space opera long before 1971, and that he even tried to film it before American Graffiti.
Believing that the bleak tone of THX 1138 led to its poor reception, Lucas chose to make Star Wars more optimistic; this is what led to its fun and adventurous tone.

Lucas went to United Artists and showed them the script for American Graffiti, but they passed on the film, which was then picked up by Universal Pictures.
United Artists also passed on Lucas' space-opera concept, which he shelved for the time being.
After spending the next two years completing American Graffiti, Lucas turned his attention to his space opera.
He drew inspiration from politics of the era, later saying, “It was really about the Vietnam War, and that was the period where Nixon was trying to run for a [second] term.
"Lucas began writing in January 1973, "eight hours a day, five days a week", by taking small notes, inventing odd names and assigning them possible characterizations.
Lucas would discard many of these by the time the final script was written, but he included several names and places in the final script or its sequels.
He used these initial names and ideas to compile a two-page synopsis titled Journal of the Whills, which told the tale of the training of apprentice CJ Thorpe as a "Jedi-Bendu" space commando by the legendary Mace Windy.
Frustrated that his story was too difficult to understand, Lucas then began writing a 13-page treatment called The Star Wars on April 17, 1973, which had narrative parallels with Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress.
While impressed with the "innocence of the story, plus the sophistication of the world" of the film, United Artists declined to budget the film.
Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz presented the film treatment to Universal Pictures, the studio that financed American Graffiti; while they agreed it could be "a very commercial venture", they had doubts about Mr. Lucas' ability to pull it all off," and said that Lucas should follow American Graffiti with more consequential themes.
Walt Disney Productions also turned down the film.

Lucas said, "I've always been an outsider to Hollywood types.
They think I do weirdo films."
According to Kurtz, Lew Wasserman, the studio's head, "just didn't think much of science fiction at that time, didn't think it had much of a future then, with that particular audience."
He said that "science fiction wasn't popular in the mid-'70s ...
what seems to be the case generally is that the studio executives are looking for what was popular last year, rather than trying to look forward to what might be popular next year."
Kurtz said, "Although Star Wars wasn't like [then-current science fiction] at all, it was just sort of lumped into that same kind of category.
"Lucas explained in 1977 that the film is not "about the future" and that it "is a fantasy much closer to the Brothers Grimm than it is to 2001."
He added: "My main reason for making it was to give young people an honest, wholesome fantasy life, the kind my generation had.
We had Westerns, pirate movies, all kinds of great things.
Now they have The Six Million Dollar Man and Kojak.
Where are the romance, the adventure, and the fun that used to be in practically every movie made?"
Lucas would later recontextualize the discussion around the film, saying it was born out of research into "psychological underpinings of mythology", a claim that had been dismissed by Kurtz as self-aggrandizing: "
The whole idea of Star Wars as a mythological thing, I think came about because of [later Lucas] interviews that tied it to The Hero with a Thousand Faces" and by Steven Hart and Michael Kaminski: "It is here that the true origin of Star Wars comes from -- not from myth and legend, but from the 'schlock' sold on newspapers stands and played in matinees.
"There were also concerns regarding the project's potentially high budget.
Lucas and Kurtz, in pitching the film, said that it would be "low-budget, Roger Corman style, and the budget was never going to be more than—
well, originally we had proposed about 8 million, it ended up being about 10.
Both of those figures are very low budget by Hollywood standards at the time."
After Disney rejected the project, Lucas and Kurtz persisted in securing a studio to support the film because "other people had read it and said, 'Yeah, it could be a good idea.'
"
Lucas pursued Alan Ladd Jr., the head of 20th Century-Fox, and in June 1973 completed a deal to write and direct the film.
Although Ladd did not grasp the technical side of the project, he believed that Lucas was talented.
Lucas later stated that Ladd "invested in me, he did not invest in the movie."
The deal gave Lucas $150,000 to write and direct the film.
American Graffiti's positive reception afforded Lucas the leverage necessary to renegotiate his deal with Ladd and request the sequel rights to the film in August 1973.
For Lucas, this deal protected Star Wars's potential sequels and most of the merchandising profits.

===
Writing ===
Since commencing his writing process in January 1973, Lucas had done "various rewrites in the evenings after the day's work."
He would write four different screenplays for Star Wars, "searching for just the right ingredients, characters and storyline.
It's always been what you might call a good idea in search of a story.
"
By May 1974, he had expanded the treatment for The Star Wars into a rough draft screenplay, adding elements such as the Sith, the Death Star, and a general by the name of Annikin Starkiller.
He changed Starkiller to an adolescent boy, and he shifted the general into a supporting role as a member of a family of dwarfs.
Lucas envisioned the Corellian smuggler, Han Solo, as a large, green-skinned monster with gills.
He based Chewbacca on his Alaskan Malamute dog, Indiana (whom he would later use as eponym for his character Indiana Jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the passenger seat of his car.
Lucas completed a second draft in January 1975 as Adventures of the Starkiller, Episode One: The Star Wars, making heavy simplifications and introducing the young hero on a farm as Luke Starkiller.
Annikin became Luke's father, a wise Jedi knight.
"
The Force" was also introduced as a mystical energy field.
This draft still had some differences from the final version in the characters and relationships.
For example, Luke had several brothers, as well as his father, who appears in a minor role at the end of the film.
The script became more of a fairy tale quest as opposed to the action/adventure of the previous versions.
This version ended with another text crawl, previewing the next story in the series.
This draft was also the first to introduce the concept of a Jedi turning to the dark side: the draft included a historical Jedi who was the first to ever fall to the dark side, and then trained the Sith to use it.
The script would introduce the concept of a Jedi Master and his son, who trains to be a Jedi under his father's friend; this would ultimately form the basis for the film and, later, the trilogy.
However, in this draft, the father is a hero who is still alive at the start of the film.
Han Solo and Chewbacca's identities closely resembled those seen in the finished film.
According to Lucas, the second draft was over 200 pages long, and led him to split up the story into multiple films spanning over multiple trilogies.
Lucas began to rewrite this draft, creating a synopsis for the third draft.
During work on this rewrite, Lucas began researching the science-fiction genre by watching films and reading books (including J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit) and comics.
He also claims to have read scholastic works like Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, James George Frazer's The Golden Bough, and even Bruno Bettelheim's The Uses of Enchantment.
These claims are doubted by Michael Kaminski and Chris Taylor, with Kaminski pointing out that Bettelheim's book would not come out until after Star Wars was filmed and adding that "the original trilogy-Campbell connection is greatly exaggerated and practically non-existent", noting that, in fact, the second draft is "even closer to Campbell's structure" than the third.
According to Lucas, he wrote a rough draft of about 250–300 pages long, which contained the outline for the entire original Star Wars trilogy.
He realized that it was too long for a single film, and decided to subdivide it into a trilogy.
Lucas stated that the story evolved over time and that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now [in 1983] ...
As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ...
I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday."
He later described that, having split the script into three episodes, "the first part didn't really work", so he had to take the ending off of Episode VI and put it in the original Star Wars, which resulted in a Death Star being included in both films.

In 1975 Lucas suggested he could make a trilogy, which "ends with the destruction of the Empire" and a possible prequel "about the backstory of Kenobi as a young man."
After the film's smash success, Lucasfilm announced that Lucas had already written "twelve stories in the Adventures of Luke Skywalker" which, according to Kurtz, were set to be "separate adventures rather than direct sequels.
"During
the writing of the third draft, Lucas hired conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie to create paintings of certain scenes, several of which Lucas included with his screenplay when he delivered it to 20th Century-Fox.
On February 27, the studio granted a budget of $5 million; this was later increased to $8.25 million.
Subsequently, Lucas started writing with a budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the film, and (with Fox having just shut down its special effects department) reducing the number of complex special effects shots called for by the script.

The third draft, dated August 1, 1975, was titled The Star Wars From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller.
This third draft had most of the elements of the final plot, with only some differences in the characters and settings.
The draft characterized Luke as an only child, with his father already dead, replacing him with a substitute named Ben Kenobi.
This script would be re-written for the fourth and final draft, dated January 1, 1976, as The Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I:
The Star Wars.
Lucas worked with his friends Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck to revise the fourth draft into the final pre-production script.
Lucas finished writing his script in March 1976, when the crew started filming.
He said, "What finally emerged through the many drafts of the script has obviously been influenced by science-fiction and action-adventure
I've read and seen.
And I've seen a lot of it.
I'm trying to make a classic sort of genre picture, a classic space fantasy in which all the influences are working together.
There are certain traditional aspects of the genre I wanted to keep and help perpetuate in Star Wars."
During production, he changed Luke's name from Starkiller to Skywalker and altered the title to The Star Wars and later Star Wars.
He would also continue to tweak the script during filming, including adding the death of Obi-Wan after realizing he served no purpose in the ending of the film.
For the film's opening crawl, Lucas originally wrote a composition consisting of six paragraphs with four sentences each.
He said, "The crawl is such a hard thing because you have to be careful that you're not using too many words that people don't understand.
It's like a poem.
"
Lucas showed his draft to his friends.
Director Brian De Palma, who was there, described it: "
The crawl at the beginning looks like it was written on a driveway.
It goes on forever.
It's gibberish."
Lucas recounted what De Palma said the first time he saw it: "George, you're out of your mind!
Let me sit down and write this for you."
De Palma and Jay Cocks helped edit the text into the form used in the film.
===
Design ===
George Lucas recruited many conceptual designers, including Colin Cantwell, who worked on 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), to conceptualize the initial spacecraft models; Alex Tavoularis to create the preliminary conceptual storyboard sketches of early scripts; and Ralph McQuarrie to visualize the characters, costumes, props and scenery.
McQuarrie's pre-production paintings of certain scenes from Lucas's early screenplay drafts helped 20th
Century-Fox visualize the film, which positively influenced their decision to fund the project.
After McQuarrie's drawings for Lucas's colleagues Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins (who were collaborating for a film) caught his interest, Lucas met with McQuarrie to discuss his plans for the untitled space fantasy film he wanted to make.
Two years later, after completing American Graffiti, Lucas approached McQuarrie and asked him if he would be interested "in doing something for Star Wars."
McQuarrie produced a series of artworks from simple sketches; these set a visual tone for the film, and for the rest of the original trilogy.

The film was ambitious as Lucas wanted to create fresh prop prototypes and sets (based on McQuarrie's paintings) that had never been realized before in science fiction films.
He commissioned production designers John Barry and Roger Christian, who were working on the sets of the film Lucky Lady (1975) when Lucas first approached them, to work on the production sets.
Christian recounted in 2014: "George came to the set I was doing, it was an old salt factory design
and he helped me shovel salt, just like two students in plaid shirts and sneakers.
And we spoke and he looked at the set and couldn't believe it wasn't real.
"
They had a conversation with Lucas on what he would like the film to appear like, with them creating the desired sets.
Christian said that Lucas "didn't want anything [in Star Wars] to stand out, he wanted it [to look] all real and used.
And I said, 'Finally somebody's doing it the right way.
'"Lucas described a "used future" concept to the production designers in which all devices, ships, and buildings to do with Tatooine or the Rebels looked aged and dirty, as opposed to the sleeker designs of the Empire.
Lucas also wanted the spaceships to look "cobbled together, as opposed to a sleek monoshape."
Barry said that the director "wants to make it look like it's shot on location on your average everyday
Death Star or Mos Eisley Spaceport or local cantina.
"
Lucas believed that "what is required for true credibility is a used future", opposing the interpretation of "future in most futurist movies" that "always looks new and clean and shiny."
Christian supported Lucas's vision, saying "All science fiction before was very plastic and stupid uniforms and Flash Gordon stuff.
Nothing was new.
George was going right against that.
"The
designers started working with the director before Star Wars was approved by 20th Century-Fox.
For four to five months, in a studio in Kensal Rise, England, they attempted to plan the creation of the props and sets with "no money."
Although Lucas initially provided funds using his earnings from American Graffiti, it was inadequate.
As they could not afford to dress the sets, Christian was forced to use unconventional methods and materials to achieve the desired look.
He suggested that Lucas use scrap in making the dressings, and the director agreed.
Christian said, "I've always had this idea.
I used to do it with models when I was a kid.
I'd stick things on them and we'd make things look old."
Barry, Christian, and their team began designing the props and sets at Elstree Studios.
According to Christian, the Millennium Falcon set was the most difficult to build.
Christian wanted the interior of the Falcon to look like that of a submarine.
He found scrap airplane metal "that no one wanted in those days and bought them."
He began his creation process by breaking down jet engines into scrap pieces, giving him the chance to "stick it in the sets in specific ways.
"
It took him several weeks to finish the chess set (which he described as "the most encrusted set") in the hold of the Falcon.
The garbage compactor set "was also pretty hard, because I knew I had actors in there
and the walls had to come in, and they had to be in dirty water
and I had to get stuff that would be light enough so it wouldn't hurt them but also not bobbing around.
"
A total of 30 sets consisting of planets, starships, caves, control rooms, cantinas, and the Death Star corridors were created; all of the nine sound stages at Elstree were used to accommodate them.
The massive rebel hangar set was housed at a second sound stage at Shepperton Studios; the stage was the largest in Europe at the time.

===
Filming ===
In 1975, Lucas formed his own visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) after discovering that 20th Century-Fox's visual effects department had been disbanded.
ILM began its work on Star Wars in a warehouse in Van Nuys.
Most of the visual effects used pioneering digital motion control photography developed by John Dykstra and his team, which created the illusion of size by employing small models and slowly moving cameras.
George Lucas tried "to get a cohesive reality" for his feature.
However, since the film is a fairy tale, as he had described, "I still wanted it to have an ethereal quality, yet be well composed and, also, have an alien look."
He designed the film to have an "extremely bizarre, Gregg Toland-like surreal look with strange over-exposed colors, a lot of shadows, a lot of hot areas.
"
Lucas wanted Star Wars to embrace the combination of "strange graphics of fantasy" and "the feel of a documentary" to impress a distinct look.
To achieve this, he hired the British cinematographer Gilbert Taylor.
Originally, Lucas's first choice for the position was Geoffrey Unsworth, who also provided the cinematography for Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey.
Unsworth was interested in working with the director, and initially accepted the job when it was offered to him by Lucas and Kurtz.
However, he eventually withdrew to work on the Vincente Minnelli-directed A Matter of Time (1976)
instead, which "really annoy[ed]" Kurtz.
Lucas called up for other cinematographers, and eventually chose Taylor, basing his choice on Taylor's cinematography for Dr. Strangelove and A Hard Day's Night (both 1964).
On his decision, Lucas said: "I thought they were good, eccentrically photographed pictures with a strong documentary flavor.
"Taylor said that Lucas, who was consumed by the details of the complicated production, "avoided all meetings and contact with me from day one, so I read the extra-long script many times and made my own decisions as to how I would shoot the picture."
Taylor also said, "I took it upon myself to experiment with photographing the lightsabers and other things onstage before we moved on to our two weeks of location work in Tunisia.
"
Taylor was aware of the "enormous amount of process work" to follow principal photography and believed "a crisp result would help.
"During production, Lucas and Taylor—whom Kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety"—had disputes over filming.
With a background in independent filmmaking, Lucas was accustomed to creating most of the elements of the film himself.
His lighting suggestions were rejected by Taylor, who believed that Lucas was overstepping his boundaries by giving specific instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself.
Taylor refused to use the soft-focus lenses and gauze Lucas wanted after Fox executives complained about the look.
Kurtz stated that "In a couple of scenes ... rather than saying, 'It looks a bit over lit, can you fix that?', [
Lucas would] say, 'turn off this light, and turn off that light.'
And Gil would say, 'No, I won't do that
, I've lit it the way I think it should be—tell me what's the effect that you want, and I'll make a judgment about what to do with my lights.'"

Originally, Lucas envisioned the planet of Tatooine, where much of the film would take place, as a jungle planet.
Gary Kurtz traveled to the Philippines to scout locations; however, because of the idea of spending months filming in the jungle would make Lucas "itchy", the director refined his vision and made Tatooine a desert planet instead.
Kurtz then researched all American, North African, and Middle Eastern deserts, and found Tunisia, near the Sahara desert, as the ideal location.
Lucas later stated that he had wanted to make it look like outer space.
When principal photography began on March 22, 1976, in the Tunisian desert for the scenes on Tatooine, the project faced several problems.
Lucas fell behind schedule in the first week of shooting due to malfunctioning props and electronic breakdowns.
Moreover, a rare Tunisian rainstorm struck the country, which further disrupted filming.
Taylor said, "you couldn't really see where the land ended and the sky began.
It was all a gray mess, and the robots were just a blur.
"
Given this situation, Lucas requested heavy filtration, which Taylor rejected, who said: "I thought the look of the film should be absolutely clean ...
But George saw it differently, so we tried using nets and other diffusion.
He asked to set up one shot on the robots with a 300mm, and the sand and sky just mushed together.
I told him it wouldn't work, but he said that was the way he wanted to do the entire film, all diffused.
"
This difference was later settled by 20th Century-Fox executives, who backed Taylor's suggestion.
Filming began in Chott el Djerid, while a construction crew in Tozeur took eight weeks to transform the desert into the desired setting.
Other locations included the sand dunes of the Tunisian desert near Nafta, where a scene featuring a giant skeleton of a creature lying in the background as R2-D2 and C-3PO make their way across the sands was filmed.
When actor Anthony Daniels wore the C-3PO outfit for the first time in Tunisia, the left leg piece shattered down through the plastic covering his left foot, stabbing him.
He also could not see through his costume's eyes, which was covered with gold to prevent corrosion.
Abnormal radio signals caused by the Tunisian sands made the radio-controlled R2-D2 models run out of control.
Kenny Baker, who portrayed R2-D2, said: "I was incredibly grateful each time an [R2] would actually work right."
After several scenes were filmed against the volcanic canyons outside Tozeur, production moved to Matmata to film Luke's home on Tatooine.
Lucas chose Hotel Sidi Driss, which is larger than the typical underground dwellings, to shoot the interior of Luke's homestead.
Additional scenes for Tatooine were filmed at Death Valley in North America.

After two-and-a-half weeks of filming in Tunisia, production moved to Elstree Studios, near London, to film interior scenes.
Elstree was chosen as a studio over other options in Hollywood or elsewhere.
Star Wars required the use of nine different sound stages simultaneously, which most studios couldn't accommodate.
Because of stricter working conditions, filming in Britain had to finish by 5:30 pm, unless Lucas was in the middle of a scene.
Despite Lucas's efforts, his crew had little interest in the film.
Most of the crew considered the project a "children's film", rarely took their work seriously, and often found it unintentionally humorous.
Actor Baker later confessed that he thought the film would be a failure.
Harrison Ford found it strange that "there's a princess with weird buns in her hair", and called Chewbacca a "giant in a monkey suit.
"The
Elstree sets designed by John Barry, according to Gilbert Taylor, "were like a coal mine."
He said that "they were all black and gray, with really no opportunities for lighting at all."
To resolve the problem, he worked the lighting into the sets by chopping in its walls, ceiling and floors.
This would result in "a 'cut-out' system of panel lighting", with quartz lamps that could be placed in the holes in the walls, ceiling and floors.
His idea was supported by the Fox studio, which agreed that "we couldn't have this 'black hole of Calcutta.'
"
The lighting approach Taylor devised "allowed George to shoot in almost any direction without extensive relighting, which gave him more freedom."
In total, the filming in Britain took 14-and-a-half weeks.

Lucas commissioned computer programmer Larry Cuba to create the animated Death Star plans shown at the rebel base on Yavin 4.
This was written with the GRASS programming language, exported to a Vector General monitor and filmed on 35 mm to be rear-projected on the set.
It is the only computer animation in the original version of the film.
The Yavin scenes were filmed in the Mayan temples at Tikal, Guatemala.
Lucas selected the location as a potential filming site after seeing a poster of it hanging at a travel agency while he was filming in Britain.
This inspired him to send a film crew to Guatemala in March 1977 to shoot scenes.
While filming in Tikal, the crew paid locals with a six-pack of beer to watch over the camera equipment for several days.
While shooting, Lucas rarely spoke to the actors, who believed that he expected too much of them while providing little direction.
His directions to the actors usually consisted of the words "faster" and "more intense".
Kurtz stated that "it happened a lot where he would just say, 'Let's try it again a little bit faster.'
That was about the only instruction he'd give anybody.
A lot of actors don't mind—
they don't care, they just get on with it.
But some actors really need a lot of pampering and a lot of feedback, and if they don't get it, they get paranoid that they might not be doing a good job."
Kurtz has said that Lucas "wasn't gregarious, he's very much a loner and very shy, so he didn't like large groups of people
, he didn't like working with a large crew, he didn't like working with a lot of actors.
"Ladd offered Lucas some of the only support from the studio; he dealt with scrutiny from board members over the rising budget and complex screenplay drafts.
Initially, Fox approved $8 million for the project; Gary Kurtz said: "we proceeded to pick a production plan and do a more final budget with a British art department and look for locations in North Africa, and kind of pulled together some things.
Then, it was obvious that 8 million wasn't going to do it—they had approved 8 million."
After requests from the team that "it had to be more," the executives "got a bit scared.
"
For two weeks, Lucas and his crew "didn't really do anything except kind of pull together new budget figures.
"
At the same time, after production fell behind schedule, Ladd told Lucas he had to finish production within a week
or he would be forced to shut down production.
Kurtz said that "it came out to be like 9.8 or .9 or something like that, and in the end they just said, 'Yes, that's okay
, we'll go ahead.'
"
The crew split into three units, with those units led by Lucas, Kurtz, and production supervisor Robert Watts.
Under the new system, the project met the studio's deadline.
During production, the cast attempted to make Lucas laugh or smile, as he often appeared depressed.
At one point, the project became so demanding that Lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce his stress level.
Post-production was equally stressful due to increasing pressure from 20th Century-Fox.
Moreover, Mark Hamill's car accident left his face visibly scarred, which restricted re-shoots.

===
Post-production ===
Star Wars was originally slated for release on Christmas 1976; however, its production delays pushed the film's release to mid-1977.
Editor John Jympson began cutting the film together while Lucas was still filming in Tunisia; as Lucas noted, the editor was in an "impossible position" because Lucas had not explained any of the film's material to him.
When Lucas watched Jympson's rough cut for the first time, he disliked what he saw.
J. W. Rinzler wrote that "Jympson's selection of takes was questionable, and he seemed to be having trouble doing match-cuts.
"
Lucas was prepared to give Jympson more time; Jympson disliked Lucas' working style.
As production went on, Lucas still disapproved of Jympson's cut and fired him halfway through the film's production.
He commented: "Unfortunately it didn't work out.
It's very hard when you are hiring people to know if they are going to mesh with you
and if you are going to get what you want.
In the end, I don't think he fully understood the movie and
what I was trying to do.
I shoot in a very peculiar way, in a documentary style, and it takes a lot of hard editing to make it work."
After attempting to persuade Jympson to cut the film his way, Lucas replaced him with Paul Hirsch, Richard Chew and his then-wife, Marcia Lucas, who was also cutting the film New York, New York (1977) with Lucas's friend Martin Scorsese.
Richard Chew considered the film to  have been cut in a slow, by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master shots that flowed into close-up coverage.
He found that the pace was dictated by the actors instead of the cuts.
Hirsch and Chew worked on two reels simultaneously.
Jympson's original assembly contained a large amount of footage which differed from the final cut of the film, including several alternate takes and a number of scenes which were subsequently deleted to improve the narrative pace.
The most significant material cut was a series of scenes from the first part of the film which introduced Luke Skywalker.
These early scenes, set in Anchorhead on the planet Tatooine, presented the audience with Luke's everyday life among his friends as it is affected by the space battle above the planet; they also introduced the character of Biggs Darklighter, Luke's closest friend who departs to join the rebellion.
Chew explained the rationale behind removing these scenes as a narrative decision: "In the first five minutes, we were hitting everybody with more information than they could handle.
There were too many story lines to keep straight: the robots and the Princess, Vader, Luke.
So we simplified it by taking out Luke and Biggs.
"
In an examination of this early cut, which has come to be called the "Lost Cut", David West Reynolds noted the film adopted a "documentary-like" approach that emphasized "clarity, especially in geographic and spatial relationships" over "dramatic or artistic concerns".
As a result, the film was more "leisurely paced".
Reynolds estimated this early cut contained "30-40%" different footage from the final cut, with most of the differences coming from extended cuts or alternate takes rather than deleted scenes.
After viewing a rough cut, Alan Ladd likened the early Anchorhead scenes to "American Graffiti in outer space.
"
Lucas was looking for a way of accelerating the storytelling, and removing Luke's early scenes would distinguish Star Wars from his earlier teenage drama and "get that American Graffiti feel out of it."
Lucas also stated that he wanted to move the narrative focus to C-3PO and R2-D2: "At the time, to have the first half-hour of the film be mainly about robots was a bold idea.
"Meanwhile, Industrial Light & Magic was struggling to achieve unprecedented special effects.
The company had spent half of its budget on four shots that Lucas deemed unacceptable.
With hundreds of uncompleted shots remaining, ILM was forced to finish a year's work in six months.
Lucas inspired ILM by editing together aerial dogfights from old war films, which enhanced the pacing of the scenes.
Sound designer Ben Burtt had created a library of sounds that Lucas referred to as an "organic soundtrack."
Blaster sounds were a modified recording of a steel cable, under tension, being struck.
The lightsaber sound effect was developed by Burtt as a combination of the hum of idling interlock motors in aged movie projectors and interference caused by a television set on a shieldless microphone.
Burtt discovered the latter accidentally as he was looking for a buzzing, sparking sound to add to the projector-motor hum.
For Chewbacca's growls, Burtt recorded and combined sounds made by dogs, bears, lions, tigers, and walruses to create phrases and sentences.
Lucas and Burtt created the robotic voice of R2-D2 by filtering their voices through an electronic synthesizer.
Darth Vader's breathing was achieved by Burtt breathing through the mask of a scuba regulator implanted with a microphone, which began the idea of Vader having been a burn-victim, which was not the case during production.
In February 1977, Lucas screened an early cut of the film for Fox executives, several director friends, along with Roy Thomas and Howard Chaykin of Marvel Comics who were preparing a Star Wars comic book.
The cut had a different crawl from the finished version and used Prowse's voice for Darth Vader.
It also lacked most special effects; hand-drawn arrows took the place of blaster beams, and when the Millennium Falcon fought TIE fighters, the film cut to footage of World War II dogfights.
The reactions of the directors present, such as Brian De Palma, John Milius, and Steven Spielberg, disappointed Lucas.
Spielberg, who said he was the only person in the audience to have enjoyed the film, believed that the lack of enthusiasm was due to the absence of finished special effects.
Lucas later said that the group was honest and seemed bemused by the film.
In contrast, Ladd and the other studio executives loved the film; Gareth Wigan told Lucas: "This is the greatest film I've ever seen" and cried during the screening.
Lucas found the experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any approval from studio executives before.
The delays increased the budget from $8 million to $11 million.
With the project $2 million over budget, Lucas was forced to make numerous artistic compromises to complete Star Wars.
Ladd reluctantly agreed to release an extra $20,000 funding and in early 1977 second unit filming completed a number of sequences including exterior desert shots for Tatooine in Death Valley and China Lake Acres in California, and exterior Yavin jungle shots in Guatemala, along with additional studio footage to complete the Mos Eisley Cantina sequence.

Lucas had to write around a scene featuring a human Jabba the Hutt, which was scrapped due to not being in focus.
Lucas would later claim he wanted to superimpose a stop-motion creature over the actor - which he did in the 1997 Special Edition with a computer-generated version of Jabba.
However, all the script drafts (with the exception of one that Lucas doctored after the fact) describe Jabba as humanoid, the notion of him being an alien not having come up until work on the 1979 re-release, and scrapped until the Special Edition.

==
Soundtrack ==
On the recommendation of his friend Steven Spielberg, George Lucas hired composer John Williams.
Williams had worked with Spielberg on the film Jaws, for which he won an Academy Award.
Lucas originally hired Williams to consult on music editing choices and to compose the source music for the music, telling Williams that he intends to use extant music.
Lucas believed that the film would portray visually foreign worlds, but that the musical score would give the audience an emotional familiarity; he wanted a grand musical sound for Star Wars.
Therefore, Lucas assembled his favorite orchestral pieces for the soundtrack, until Williams convinced him that an original score would be unique and more unified, having viewed Lucas' music choices as a temp track.
However, a few of Williams' eventual pieces were influenced by the temp track: the "Main Title Theme" was inspired by the theme from the 1942 film Kings Row, scored by Erich Wolfgang Korngold; and the track "Dune Sea of Tatooine" drew from the soundtrack of Bicycle Thieves, scored by Alessandro Cicognini.
Lucas would later deny having ever conceived using extant music for the film.
In March 1977, Williams conducted the London Symphony Orchestra to record the Star Wars soundtrack in 12 days.
The original soundtrack was released as a double LP in 1977 by 20th Century Records.
20th Century Records also released The Story of Star Wars that same year, a narrated audio drama adaptation of the film utilizing some of its original music, dialogue, and sound effects.
The American Film Institute's list of best film scores ranks the Star Wars soundtrack at number one.

==
Cinematic and literary allusions ==
According to George Lucas, different concepts of the film were inspired by numerous sources, such as Beowulf and King Arthur for the origins of myth and religion.
Lucas had originally intended to remake the 1930s Flash Gordon film serials, but was unable to obtain the rights; thus, he resorted to drawing from Akira Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress and, allegedly, Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces.
Star Wars features many elements derived from Flash Gordon, such as the conflict between rebels and Imperial Forces, the wipes between scenes, the fusion of futuristic technology and traditional mythology, and the famous opening crawl that begins each film.
The film has also been compared to The Wizard of Oz.
The influence of The Hidden Fortress can be seen in the relationship between C-3PO and R2-D2, which evolved from the two bickering peasants, Tahei and Matashichi, and a Japanese family crest seen in the earlier film is similar to the Imperial Crest.
Star Wars also borrows heavily from another Kurosawa film, Yojimbo (1961).
In both films, several men threaten the hero, bragging about how wanted they are by the authorities, and have an arm being cut off by a blade; Kuwabatake Sanjuro (played by Toshiro Mifune) is offered "twenty-five ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the mission", whereas Han Solo is offered "Two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach Alderaan.
"
Its sequel Sanjuro (1962) also inspired the hiding-under-the-floor trick featured in the film.
Another source of influence was Lawrence of Arabia (1962), which inspired the film's visual approach, including long-lens desert shots.
There are also thematic parallels, including the freedom fight by a rebel army against an empire, and politicians who meddle behind the scenes.
Tatooine is similar to the desert planet of Arrakis from Frank Herbert's Dune series.
Arrakis is the only known source of a longevity spice; Star Wars makes references to spice in "the spice mines of Kessel", and a spice freighter.
Other similarities include those between Princess Leia and Princess Alia, and Jedi mind tricks and "The Voice", a controlling ability used by the Bene Gesserit.
In passing, Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru are "moisture farmers"; in Dune, dew collectors are used by Fremen to "provide a small but reliable source of water."
Frank Herbert reported that "David Lynch, [director of the 1984 film Dune] had trouble with the fact that Star Wars used up so much of Dune.
"
The pair found "sixteen points of identity" and they calculated that "the odds against coincidence produced a number larger than the number of stars in the universe.
"The
Death Star assault scene was modeled after the World War II film The Dam Busters (1955), in which Royal Air Force Lancaster bombers fly along heavily defended reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams, in order to cripple the heavy industry of Germany's Ruhr region.
Some of the dialogue in The Dam Busters is repeated in the Star Wars climax; Gilbert Taylor also filmed the special effects sequences in The Dam Busters.
In addition, the sequence was partially inspired by the climax of the film 633 Squadron (1964), directed by Walter Grauman, in which RAF de Havilland Mosquitos attack a German heavy water plant by flying down a narrow fjord to drop special bombs at a precise point, while avoiding anti-aircraft guns and German fighters.
Clips from both films were included in Lucas's temporary dogfight footage version of the sequence.
There are also similarities in the Death Star trench sequence to the bridge attack scene in The Bridges at Toko-Ri.
The opening shot of Star Wars, in which a detailed spaceship fills the screen overhead, is a reference to the scene introducing the interplanetary spacecraft Discovery One in Stanley Kubrick's seminal 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey.
The earlier big-budget science fiction film influenced the look of Star Wars in many other ways, including the use of EVA pods and hexagonal corridors.
The Death Star has a docking bay reminiscent of the one on the orbiting space station in 2001.
Although golden and male, C-3PO was inspired by the silver female robot Maria, the Maschinenmensch from Fritz Lang's 1927 film Metropolis.

==
Marketing ==
While the film was in production, a logo was commissioned from Dan Perri, a title sequence designer who had worked on the titles for films such as The Exorcist (1973) and Taxi Driver (1976).
Perri devised a foreshortened STAR WARS logotype consisting of block-capital letters filled with stars and skewed towards a vanishing point.
This logo design was originally conceived to follow the same perspective as the film's opening crawl.
In the end, Perri's logo was not used for the film's opening title sequence, although it was used widely on pre-release print advertising and on cinema marquees.
The logotype eventually selected for on-screen use originated in a promotional brochure that was distributed by Fox to cinema owners in 1976.
This brochure was designed by Suzy Rice, a young art director at the Los Angeles advertising agency Seiniger Advertising.
On a visit to ILM in Van Nuys, Rice was instructed by Lucas to produce a logo that would intimidate the viewer, and he reportedly asked for the logo to appear "very fascist" in style.
Rice's response to her brief was to use an outlined, modified Helvetica Black.
After some feedback from Lucas, Rice decided to join the S and T of STAR and the R and S of WARS.
Lucas signed off on the brochure in between takes while filming inserts for the Mos Eisley Cantina scene.
Gary Kurtz was impressed with Rice's logo and selected it over Perri's design for the film's opening titles, after modifying the letter W to flatten the pointed tips originally designed by Rice.
This finalized the design of one of the most recognizable logos in cinema design, although Rice's contribution was not credited in the film.
For the US release in 1977, 20th Century-Fox commissioned a promotional film poster from the advertising agency Smolen, Smith and Connolly.
They used the freelance artist Tom Jung who was given the brief of "good over evil."
His poster, known as Style ‘A’, depicted Luke Skywalker standing in a heroic pose, brandishing a shining lightsaber above his head, with Princess Leia below him, and a large, ghostly image of Darth Vader's helmet looming behind them.
Some Fox executives considered this poster "too dark" and commissioned the Brothers Hildebrandt, a pair of well-known fantasy artists, to rework the poster for the UK release.
When the film opened in British theaters, the Hildebrandts' Style ‘B’ poster was used in cinema billboards.
Fox and Lucasfilm subsequently decided that they wanted to promote the new film with a less stylized and more realistic depiction of the lead characters.
Producer Gary Kurtz turned to the film poster artist Tom Chantrell, who was already well known for his prolific work for Hammer horror films, and commissioned a new version.
Two months after Star Wars opened, the Hildebrandts' poster was replaced by Chantrell's Style ‘C’ poster in UK cinemas.
Charles Lippincott was the marketing director for Star Wars.
As 20th Century-Fox gave little support for marketing beyond licensing T-shirts and posters, Lippincott was forced to look elsewhere.
He secured deals with Marvel Comics for a comic book adaptation, and with Del Rey Books for a novelization.
A fan of science fiction, he used his contacts to promote the film at the San Diego Comic-Con and elsewhere within science-fiction fandom.

==
Release ==
While initially being released only in a limited theatrical run, Star Wars was an unprecedented success for 20th Century-Fox, soon becoming a blockbuster hit and expanding to a much wider release.
It would eventually see many theatrical and home video re-releases.

===
Premiere and initial release ===
Worried that Star Wars would be beaten out by other summer films, such as Smokey and the Bandit, 20th Century-Fox moved the release date to May 25, the Wednesday before Memorial Day.
However, fewer than 40 theaters ordered the film to be shown.
In response, the studio demanded that theaters order Star Wars if they wanted the eagerly anticipated The Other Side of Midnight based on Sidney Sheldon's 1973 novel by the same name.

Star Wars debuted on Wednesday, May 25, 1977, in fewer than 32 theaters, and eight more on Thursday and Friday.
Kurtz said in 2002, "That would be laughable today.
"
It immediately broke box office records, effectively becoming one of the first blockbuster films, and Fox accelerated plans to broaden its release.
Lucas himself was not able to predict how successful Star Wars would be.
After visiting the set of the Steven Spielberg film Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Lucas was sure Close Encounters would outperform the yet-to-be-released Star Wars at the box office.
Spielberg disagreed, and believed Star Wars would be the bigger hit.
Lucas proposed they trade 2.5% of the profit on each other's films; Spielberg took the trade, and still receives 2.5% of the profits from Star Wars.
Amidst Fox pessimism, Lucas elected to forgo his option to an extra $500,000 fee for directing Star Wars, in exchange for releasing ownership of the merchandising and sequel rights for the movie to Fox.
The Other Side of Midnight was supposed to be the studio's big summer hit, while Lucas's movie was considered the "B track" for theater owners nationwide.
While Fox requested Mann's Chinese Theatre, the studio promised that the film needed only two weeks.

Fearing that the film would fail, Lucas had made plans to be in Hawaii with his wife Marcia.
Having forgotten that the film would open that day, he spent most of Wednesday in a sound studio in Los Angeles.
When Lucas went out for lunch with Marcia, they encountered a long line of people along the sidewalks leading to Mann's Chinese Theatre, waiting to see Star Wars.
He was still skeptical of the film's success, even with enthusiastic reports from Ladd and the studio.
While in Hawaii, it was not until he watched Walter Cronkite discuss the gigantic crowds for Star Wars on the CBS Evening News that Lucas realized he had become very wealthy.
Francis Ford Coppola, who needed money to finish Apocalypse Now, sent a telegram to Lucas's hotel asking for funding.
Even technical crew members, such as model makers, were asked for autographs, and cast members became instant household names; when Ford visited a record store to buy an album, enthusiastic fans tore half his shirt off.
The film was a huge success for 20th Century-Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company.
Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price had doubled to a record high.
Prior to 1977, 20th Century-Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.
Although the film's cultural neutrality helped it to gain international success, Ladd became anxious during the premiere in Japan.
After the screening, the audience was silent, leading him to fear that the film would be unsuccessful.
Ladd was reassured by his local contacts that this was a positive reaction considering that in Japan, silence was the greatest honor to a film, and the subsequent strong box office returns confirmed its popularity.
After two weeks William Friedkin's Sorcerer replaced Star Wars at Mann's Chinese Theatre because of contractual obligations; Mann Theatres moved the film to a less-prestigious location after quickly renovating it.
When Star Wars made an unprecedented second opening at Mann's Chinese Theatre on August 3, 1977, after Sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a ceremony in which C-3PO, R2-D2 and Darth Vader placed their footprints in the theater's forecourt.
At that time Star Wars was playing in 1,096 theaters in the United States.
Approximately 60 theaters played the film continuously for over a year; in 1978, Lucasfilm distributed "Birthday Cake" posters to those theaters for special events on May 25, the one-year anniversary of the film's release.
Star Wars premiered in the UK on December 27, 1977.
News reports of the film's popularity in America caused long lines to form at the two London theaters that first offered the film; it became available in 12 large cities in January 1978, and other London theaters in February.

===
Theatrical re-releases ===
Star Wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982, with the subtitle Episode IV – A New Hope being added in 1981.
The film was digitally remastered with some altered scenes in 1997 for a theatrical rerelease, dubbed the "Special Edition."

Since its original release, the film has also been dubbed and subtitled into numerous languages.

In 2010, Lucas announced that all six previously released Star Wars films would be scanned and transferred to 3D for a theatrical release, but only 3D versions of the prequel trilogy were completed before the franchise was sold to Disney in 2012.

In 2013, Star Wars was dubbed into Navajo, making it the first major motion picture translated into a Native American language.
The texts Episode IV and A New Hope were first published on a title page for the film's script in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars, in what Kaminski calls "outright forgery", remarking that "the script itself wasn't even the authentic revised fourth draft, but more like a transcription of the finished film, edited and combined with the real fourth draft.
"
The title was changed when the film entered re-releases.
Official sources state that the change was made at the theatrical re-release of April 10
, 1981.The retronymic inclusion of subtitles brought the film into line with the introduction to its sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, which was reconcieved during rewrites as "Episode V" and eventually released as such in 1980.
Lucas claims this was intended from the beginning, and was only dropped to avoid confusing audiences: "
Star Wars was the fourth story in the saga and was to have been called 'Star Wars, Episode Four:
A New Hope'.
"
In 2014, Kurtz recalled they had toyed with the idea "of calling it Episode III, IV, or V.
" Hamill recalls having asked Lucas "Why are we doing episode four?"
and being answered that Lucas wanted "to give the audience a feeling that they'd missed something and that they were coming into the middle of this story" or that it was "the most commercial section" of the overriding story.
Kaminski, however, points out that all early drafts carry an "Episode One" subtitle, and that even early drafts of the sequel are called "Episode II."
====
Special Edition ====
After ILM used computer-generated effects for Steven Spielberg's 1993 film Jurassic Park, Lucas decided that digital technology had caught up to his "original vision" for Star Wars.
For the film's 20th anniversary in 1997, Star Wars was digitally remastered with some altered scenes and re-released to theaters, along with The Empire
Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
, under the campaign title Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition.
This version of the film runs 124 minutes.

The Special Edition contains visual shots and scenes that were unachievable in the original release due to financial, technological, and time constraints; one such scene involves a meeting between Han Solo and Jabba the Hutt.
The process of creating the new visual effects for Star Wars was featured in the documentary film, Special Effects:
Anything Can Happen, directed by Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt.
Although most changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many fans and critics believe that Lucas degraded the film with the additions.
A particularly controversial change in which a bounty hunter named Greedo shoots first when confronting Han Solo has inspired T-shirts bearing the phrase "Han Shot First.
"Star
Wars required extensive recovery of misplaced footage and restoration of the whole film before Lucas's Special Edition modifications could be attempted.
It was discovered that in addition to the negative motion picture stocks commonly used on feature films, Lucas had also used Color Reversal Internegative (CRI) film, a reversal stock subsequently discontinued by Kodak.
CRI proved to deteriorate faster than negative stocks did, although it theoretically was of higher quality, as it saved two generations (an interpositive followed by an internegative), where employed.
Because of this, the entire composited negative had to be disassembled, and the CRI portions cleaned separately from the negative portions.
Once the cleaning was complete, the film was scanned into the computer for restoration.
In many cases, entire scenes had to be reconstructed from their individual elements.
Digital compositing technology allowed the restorers to correct for problems such as misalignment of mattes and "blue-spill.
"In
1989
, the 1977 theatrical version of Star Wars was selected for preservation by the National Film Registry of the United States Library of Congress.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Edition were initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical release.
By 2015, this copy had been transferred to a 2K scan, now available to be viewed by appointment.

===
Home media ===
In the United States, France, West Germany, Italy and Japan, parts of or the whole film were released on Super 8.
The whole film was released for all these countries (including subtitled silent editions and an American Spanish-language edition), except for Italy, where the film (titled "Guerre stellari") was released by IE International as eight brief scenes: Battaglia spaziale ("Space battle", the Battle of Yavin), Duello col laser ("Duel with the laser", Obi-Wan and Darth Vader's duel), La cattura dell'astronave
("The capture of the spaceship"), La liberazione di Leia ("Leia's liberation", the adventure on the Death Star), Messaggio dallo spazio ("Message from space", Leia giving R2-D2 the plans), SOS nella galassia ("SOS in the galaxy") and Trappola mortale ("Deadly trap", the Falcon being captured by the Death Star).
A full Super 8 version of the film was only made available in Italy as a pirate six-reel set.
Star Wars debuted on Betamax, CED, LaserDisc, Video 2000, and VHS between the 1980s and 1990s by CBS/Fox Video.
The final issue of the original theatrical release (pre-Special Edition) to VHS format occurred in 1995, as part of "Last Chance to Own the Original" campaign, available as part of a trilogy set and as a standalone purchase.
The film was released for the first time on DVD on September 21, 2004, in a box set with The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of supplementary material.
The films were digitally restored and remastered, and more changes were made by Lucas.
The DVD features a commentary track from Lucas, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher.
The bonus disc contains the documentary Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy, three featurettes, teasers, theatrical trailers, TV spots, still galleries, an exclusive preview of Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, a playable Xbox demo of the LucasArts game Star Wars: Battlefront, and a making-of documentary on the Episode III video game.
The set was reissued in December 2005 as part of a three-disc limited edition boxed set without the bonus disc.
The trilogy was re-released on separate two-disc limited edition DVD sets from September 12 to December 31, 2006, and again in a limited edition tin box set on November 4, 2008; the original versions of the films were added as bonus material.
The release was met with criticism as the unaltered versions were from the 1993 non-anamorphic LaserDisc masters and were not re-transferred using modern video standards.
The transfer led to problems with colors and digital image jarring.
All six Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011 in three different editions, with A New Hope available in both a box set of the original trilogy and with all six films on Star Wars:
The Complete Saga, which includes nine discs and over 40 hours of special features.
The original theatrical versions of the films were not included in the box set.
New changes were made to the films, provoking mixed responses.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Fox released A New Hope for digital download on April 10, 2015.
In December 2016, Rogue One director Gareth Edwards revealed that Lucasfilm had recently completed a 4K restoration of Star Wars, but did not elaborate on whether the restored version was based on the 1977 original or a subsequent re-release.
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued the film on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars remains one of the most financially successful films of all time.
The film opened on a Wednesday in 32 theaters expanding to 43 screens on the Friday and earning $2,556,418 in its first six days to the end of the Memorial Day weekend ($10.8 million in 2019 dollars).
Per Variety's weekly box office charts, the film was number one at the US box office for its first three weeks.
It was replaced by The Deep but gradually added screens and returned to number one in its seventh week, building up to $7 million weekends as it entered wide release ($29.5 million in 2019 dollars) and remained number one for the next 15 weeks.
It replaced Jaws as the highest-earning film in North America just six months into release, eventually earning over $220 million during its initial theatrical run ($928 million in 2019 dollars).
Star Wars entered international release towards the end of the year, and in 1978 added the worldwide record to its domestic one, earning $410 million in total.
Its biggest international market was Japan, where it grossed $58.4 million.
On July 21, 1978 while still in current release in 38 theaters in the U.S., the film expanded into a 1,744 theater national saturation windup of release and set a new U.S. weekend record of $10,202,726.
The gross prior to the expansion was $221,280,994.
The expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take its gross to $265,055,905.
Reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought its cumulative gross in the U.S and Canada to $323 million, and extended its global earnings to $530 million.
The film remained the highest-grossing film of all time until E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial broke that record in 1983.The release of the Special Edition in 1997 was the highest-grossing reissue of all-time with a gross of $138.3 million, bringing its total gross in the United States and Canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the all-time number one spot.
Internationally, the reissue grossed $117.2 million, with $26 million from the United Kingdom and $15 million from Japan.
In total, the film has grossed over $775 million worldwide.
Adjusted for inflation, it had earned over $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011 prices, which saw it ranked as the third-highest-grossing film at the time, according to Guinness World Records.
At the North American box office, it ranks second behind Gone with the Wind on the inflation-adjusted list.

===
Critical response ===
The film was met with critical acclaim upon its release.
In his 1977 review, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times called the film "an out-of-body experience," compared its special effects to those of 2001: A Space Odyssey, and opined that the true strength of the film was its "pure narrative."
Vincent Canby of The New York Times called the film "the movie that's going to entertain a lot of contemporary folk who have a soft spot for the virtually ritualized manners of comic-book adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most beautiful movie serial ever made."
A.D. Murphy of Variety described the film as "magnificent" and said George Lucas had succeeded in his attempt to create the "biggest possible adventure fantasy" based on the serials and older action epics from his childhood.
Writing for The Washington Post, Gary Arnold gave the film a positive review, writing that the film "is a new classic in a rousing movie tradition: a space swashbuckler."
However, the film was not without its detractors: Pauline Kael of The New Yorker criticized Star Wars, stating that "there's no breather in the picture, no lyricism", and that it had no "emotional grip."
John Simon of New York magazine also panned the film and wrote, "Strip Star Wars of its often striking images and its highfalutin scientific jargon, and you get a story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming banality."
Stanley Kauffmann, reviewing the film in The New Republic, opined that it "was made for those (particularly males) who carry a portable shrine within them of their adolescence, a chalice of a Self that was Better
Then, before the world's affairs or—in any complex way—sex intruded.
"When
Star Wars opened in the UK, stating that Lucas's earlier films were better, Derek Malcolm of The Guardian concluded that it "plays enough games to satisfy the most sophisticated."
The Daily Telegraph's science correspondent Adrian Berry said that Star Wars "is the best such film since 2001 and in certain respects it is one of the most exciting ever made."
He described the plot as "unpretentious and pleasantly devoid of any 'message.'"

A few critics found fault in the lack of representation of African Americans in the space fantasy, with a writer for New Journal and Guide calling it "one of the most racist movies ever produced", pointing out that "the force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the voice of a black man."
Lucas felt hurt at the accusations.
The film continues to receive critical acclaim from modern critics.
The film review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes indicates a 92% approval rating based on 125 reviews with an overall rating of 8.81/10.
Its consensus states in summary, "A legendarily expansive and ambitious start to the sci-fi saga
, George Lucas opened our eyes to the possibilities of blockbuster filmmaking and things have never been the same."
Metacritic reports a weighted average score of 90 out of 100 based on 24 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim.
"
In his 1997 review of the film's 20th anniversary release, Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune gave the film four out of four stars, saying, "A grandiose and violent epic with a simple and whimsical heart."
A San Francisco Chronicle staff member described the film as "a thrilling experience."

In 2001 Matt Ford of the BBC awarded the film five out of five stars and wrote, "Star Wars isn't the best film ever made, but it is universally loved."
CinemaScore reported that audiences for Star Wars's 1999 re-release gave the film a "A+" grade.
Gene Siskel, writing for the Chicago Tribune in 1999, said, "What places it a sizable cut above the routine is its spectacular visual effects, the best since Stanley Kubrick's 2001."
Andrew Collins of Empire magazine awarded the film five out of five and said, "Star Wars' timeless appeal lies in its easily identified, universal archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the 70s by the special effects, so be it."
In his 2009 review, Robert Hatch of The Nation called the film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned.
I doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the imitations must already be on the drawing boards.
"
In a more critical review, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader stated, "None of these characters has any depth, and they're all treated like the fanciful props and settings."
Peter Keough of the Boston Phoenix said, "Star Wars is a junkyard of cinematic gimcracks not unlike the Jawas' heap of purloined, discarded, barely functioning droids."
===
Accolades ===
The film garnered numerous accolades after its release.
Star Wars won six competitive Academy Awards at the 50th Academy Awards: Best Art Direction, Best Costume Design, Best Film Editing, Best Original Score, Best Sound and Best Visual Effects.
A Special Achievement for Sound Effects Editing went to sound designer Ben Burtt and a Scientific and Engineering Award went to John Dykstra for the development of the Dykstraflex Camera (shared with Alvah J. Miller and Jerry Jeffress, who were both granted for the engineering of the Electronic Motion Control System).
Additional nominations included Alec Guinness for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, which went to Jason Robards for Julia and George Lucas for Best Original Screenplay, Best Director, and Best Picture, which were instead awarded to Woody Allen's Annie Hall.
At the 35th Golden Globe Awards, the film was nominated for Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor (Alec Guinness), and it won the award for Best Score.
It received six British Academy Film Awards nominations: Best Film, Best Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Production/Art Design, Best Sound, and Best Score; the film won in the latter two categories.
John Williams's soundtrack album won the Grammy Award for Best Album of Original Score for a Motion Picture or Television Program, and the film attained the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.
The film also received twelve nominations at the Saturn Awards, winning nine:
Best Science Fiction Film, Best Direction and Best Writing for George Lucas, Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, Best Music for John Williams, Best Costume for John Mollo, Best Make-up for Rick Baker and Stuart Freeborn, Best Special Effects for John Dykstra and John Stears, and Outstanding Editing for Paul Hirsch, Marcia Lucas and Richard Chew.
==
Legacy ==
Star Wars launched the careers of many of the film's actors: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia), Peter Mayhew (Chewbacca), Anthony Daniels (C-3PO), and James Earl Jones (voice of Darth Vader).
Ford, who subsequently starred in the Indiana Jones series (1981–present), Blade Runner (1982), and Witness (1985) after working on the film, told the Daily Mirror that Star Wars "boosted my career", and said, "I think the great luck of my career is that I've made these family movies which are introduced to succeeding generations of kids by their families at the time it seems appropriate.
"The
film has spawned a series of films consisting of three trilogies (including the original film), anthology films and an extensive media franchise called the Star Wars expanded universe including books, television series, computer and video games, and comic books.
The original Star Wars trilogy is considered one of the best film trilogies in history.
All of the main films have been box office successes, with the overall box office revenue generated by the Star Wars films (including the animated The Clone Wars) totaling over $10.1 billion, making it the second highest-grossing film series as of 2019.The film also spawned the Star Wars Holiday Special, which debuted on CBS on November 17, 1978 and is often considered a failure; Lucas himself disowned it.
The special has never been aired after its original broadcast, and it has never been officially released on home video.
However, many bootleg copies exist, and the special has consequently become something of an underground legend.
A radio drama adaptation of the film was broadcast on the American National Public Radio network in 1981.
The adaptation was written by Brian Daley and directed by John Madden, and was produced with cooperation from George Lucas, who donated the rights to NPR.
John Williams's music and Ben Burtt's sound design were retained for the show, and Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker) and Anthony Daniels (C-3PO) reprised their roles.
The radio drama narrative began with a version of the backstory to the film which relates Princess Leia's acquisition of the secret Death Star plans.
It also featured scenes not seen in the final cut of the film, such as Luke Skywalker's observation of the space battle above Tatooine through binoculars, a skyhopper race, and Darth Vader's interrogation of Princess Leia.
The radio version was originally considered to be part of the official Star Wars canon, but has since been supplanted by revised canonical narratives.

===
In popular culture ===
Star Wars and its ensuing film installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a wide range of media.
Hardware Wars, released in 1978, was one of the first fan films to parody Star Wars.
It received positive critical reaction, went to earn over $1 million, and is one of Lucas's favorite Star Wars spoofs.
Writing for The New York Times, Frank DeCaro said, "Star Wars littered pop culture of the late 1970s with a galaxy of space junk."
He cited Quark (a short-lived 1977 sitcom that parodies the science fiction genre) and Donny & Marie (a 1970s variety show that produced a 10-minute musical adaptation of Star Wars guest starring Daniels and Mayhew) as "television's two most infamous examples."
Mel Brooks's Spaceballs, a satirical comic science fiction parody, was released in 1987 to mixed reviews.
Lucas permitted Brooks to make a spoof of the film under "one incredibly big restriction: no action figures.
"Contemporary animated comedy TV series Family Guy, Robot Chicken, and
The Simpsons have produced episodes satirizing the film series.
Star Wars, together with Lucas, is the subject of the 2010 documentary film
The People vs. George Lucas that details the issues of filmmaking and fanaticism pertaining to the film franchise and its creator.
Many elements of the film have also endured presence in popular culture.
The iconic weapon of choice of the Jedi, the lightsaber, was voted as the most popular weapon in film history in a survey of approximately 2,000 film fans.
Characters such as Darth Vader, Han Solo, and Yoda have become iconic, and all three were named in the top twenty of the British Film Institute's "Best Sci-Fi Characters of All-Time" list.
The expressions "Evil empire" and "May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon.
A pun on the latter phrase has led to May 4 being regarded by many fans of the franchise as an unofficial Star Wars Day.
To commemorate the film's 30th anniversary in May 2007, the United States Postal Service issued a set of 15 stamps depicting the characters of the franchise.
Approximately 400 mailboxes across the country were also designed to look like R2-D2.
===
Cinematic influence ===
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.
"
It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures.
The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.
Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.
Filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by Star Wars include James Cameron, J.J. Abrams, Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Gareth Edwards, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Peter Jackson, Joss Whedon, Christopher Nolan, Ridley Scott, John Singleton, and Kevin Smith.
Scott, Cameron, and Jackson were influenced by Lucas's concept of the "used future" (where vehicles and culture are obviously dated) and extended the concept for their films, such as Scott's science fiction films Alien (1979) and Blade Runner (1982), Cameron's acclaimed sequel Aliens (1986) and his earlier breakthrough film
The Terminator (1984).
Jackson used the concept for his production of The Lord of the Rings trilogy to add a sense of realism and believability.
Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film, Inception.
Some critics have blamed Star Wars, as well as Jaws, for ruining Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy.
On a late 1977 episode of Sneak Previews, Gene Siskel expressed concern that, "It's so successful and so mindless fun
that I hope Hollywood doesn't forget that there are people who like to see serious pictures too.
"
Another critic, Peter Biskind, later complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies...
They marched backward through the looking-glass.
"
In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth."
===
Recognition ===
In its May 30, 1977 issue, the film's year of release, Time magazine named Star Wars the "Movie of the Year.
"
The publication said it was a "big early supporter" of the vision which would become Star Wars.
In an article intended for the cover of the issue, Time's Gerald Clarke wrote that Star Wars is "a grand and glorious film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the best movie of the year so far.
The result is a remarkable confection: a subliminal history of the movies, wrapped in a riveting tale of suspense and adventure, ornamented with some of the most ingenious special effects ever contrived for film.
"
Each of the subsequent films of the Star Wars saga has appeared on the magazine's cover.

Star Wars was voted the second most popular film by Americans in a 2008 nationwide poll conducted by the market research firm, Harris Interactive.
Star Wars has also been featured in several high-profile audience polls: in 1997, it ranked as the 10th Greatest American Film on the Los Angeles Daily News Readers' Poll; in 2002, the film and its sequel
The Empire Strikes Back were voted as the greatest films ever made in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Films poll; in 2011, it ranked as Best Sci-Fi Film on Best in Film:
The Greatest Movies of Our Time, a primetime special aired by ABC that counted down the best films as chosen by fans, based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People magazine; in 2014 the film placed 11th in a poll undertaken by The Hollywood Reporter, which balloted every studio, agency, publicity firm, and production house in the Hollywood region.
Reputable publications also have included Star Wars in their best films lists: in 2008, Empire magazine ranked Star Wars at No.
22 on its list of the "500 Greatest Movies of All Time"; in 2010, the film ranked among the "All-Time 100" list of the greatest films as chosen by Time magazine film critic Richard Schickel; the film was also placed on a similar list created by The New York Times, "The New York Times Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies
Ever Made"; in 2012, the film was included in Sight & Sound's prestigious decennial critics poll "Critics' Top 250 Films", ranking at 171st on the list, and in their directors poll at 224th.
Lucas's original screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time.
In 1989, the United States Library of Congress named Star Wars among its first selections to the National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"; at the time, it was the most recent film to be selected and it was the only film from the 1970s to be chosen.
Although Lucas declined to provide the Library with a workable copy of the original film upon request (instead offering the Special Edition), a viewable scan was made of the original copyright deposit print.
The soundtrack was added to the United States National Recording Registry 15 years later (in 2004).
The lack of a commercially available version of the 1977 original theatrical edit of the film since early '80s VHS releases has spawned numerous restorations by disgruntled fans over the years, such as Harmy's Despecialized Edition.
In addition to the film's multiple awards and nominations, Star Wars has also been recognized by the American Film Institute on several of its lists.
The film ranks first on 100 Years of Film Scores, second on Top 10 Sci-Fi Films, 15th on 100 Years...
100 Movies (ranked 13th on the updated 10th anniversary edition), 27th on 100 Years...100 Thrills, and 39th on 100 Years...
100 Cheers.
In addition, the quote "May the Force be with you" is ranked eighth on 100 Years...
100 Movie Quotes, and Han Solo and Obi-Wan Kenobi are ranked as the 14th and 37th greatest heroes respectively on 100 Years...
100 Heroes & Villains.
==
Merchandising ==
Little Star Wars merchandise was available for several months after the film's debut, as only Kenner Products had accepted marketing director Charles Lippincott's licensing offers.
Kenner responded to the sudden demand for toys by selling boxed vouchers in its "empty box" Christmas campaign.
Television commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a "Star Wars Early Bird Certificate Package" could be redeemed for four action figures between February and June 1978.
Jay West of the Los Angeles Times said that the boxes in the campaign "became the most coveted empty box[es] in the history of retail.
"
In 2012, the Star Wars action figures were inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame.
The novelization of the film was published as Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker in December 1976, six months before the film was released.
The credited author was George Lucas, but the book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster.
Marketing director Charles Lippincott secured the deal with Del Rey Books to publish the novelization in November 1976.
By February 1977, a half million copies had been sold.
Foster also wrote the sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978) to be adapted as a low-budget film if Star Wars was not a financial success.
Marvel Comics also adapted the film as the first six issues of its licensed Star Wars comic book, with the first issue sold in April 1977.
Roy Thomas was the writer and Howard Chaykin
was the artist of the adaptation.
Like the novelization, it contained certain elements, such as the scene with Luke and Biggs, that appeared in the screenplay but not in the finished film.
The series was so successful that, according to Jim Shooter, it "single-handedly saved Marvel.
"
In 2013, Dark Horse Comics published a comic adaption of the original screenplay's plot.
Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set.
Released in 1979, the 24-page Star Wars read-along book was accompanied by a 33⅓ rpm 7-inch phonograph record.
Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the movie with an abridged and condensed version of the story.
The record was produced by Buena Vista Records, and its content was copyrighted by Black Falcon, Ltd., a subsidiary of Lucasfilm "formed to handle the merchandising for Star Wars."
The Story of Star Wars was a 1977 record album presenting an abridged version of the events depicted in Star Wars, using dialogue and sound effects from the original film.
The recording was produced by George Lucas and Alan Livingston, and was narrated by Roscoe Lee Browne.
The script was adapted by E. Jack Kaplan and Cheryl Gard.
An audio CD boxed set of the Star Wars radio series was released in 1993, containing the original 1981 radio drama along with the radio adaptations of the sequels
, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.

==
Sequels ==
A sequel
, The Empire Strikes Back, was released in 1980.
In 1983, the final installment of the trilogy, Return of the Jedi, was released.
A prequel trilogy was released between 1999 and 2005, and following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, a sequel trilogy was released between 2015 and 2019.
Spin-off films Rogue One and Solo
: A Star Wars Story are set before and explore the backstory to the original film.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==
Paul Duncan (2020): The Star Wars Archives.
1977–1983, Taschen GmbH
; Anniversary edition, ISBN 978-3836581172
George Lucas (Alan Dean Foster), Donald F. Glut & James Kahn (2017): Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (Novelizations), Arrow, ISBN 978-1784759384
J. W. Rinzler (2007).
The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film, Quarto Publishing, ISBN 978-1781311905
Bailey, T. J. (2005).
Devising a Dream:
A Book of Star Wars Facts and Production Timeline.
Louisville, KY:
Wasteland Press.
ISBN 1-933265-55-8.

Blackman, W. Haden (2004).
The New Essential Guide to Weapons and Technology, Revised Edition (Star Wars).
New York: Del Rey.
ISBN 0-345-44903-7.

Steven A. Galipeau (2001).
The Journey of Luke Skywalker:
An Analysis of Modern Myth and Symbol, Open Court, ISBN
978-0812694321
Sansweet, Stephen (1992).
Star Wars:
From Concept to Screen to Collectible.
San Francisco:
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 0-8118-0101-2.
==
External links ==
Star Wars essay [1] by Matt Zoller Seitz at National Film Registry
Star Wars essay
[2] by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy:
The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010 ISBN 0826429777,
pages 740 & 741
Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars at AllMovie
Star Wars at the American Film Institute Catalog
Star Wars, Episode IV:
A New Hope (1977) at Filmsite.org
Star Wars at IMDb
Star Wars at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars:
Episode IV
A New Hope on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Luke Skywalker is a fictional character and the main protagonist of the original film trilogy of the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
Portrayed by Mark Hamill, Luke first appeared in Star Wars (1977), and he returned in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
Three decades later, Hamill returned as Luke in the Star Wars sequel trilogy, appearing in all three films: The Force Awakens (2015),
The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
He reprised the role in The Mandalorian episode "Chapter 16:
The Rescue" (2020), voicing the character that was portrayed by a body double with digital de-aging.

Originally a farmer on Tatooine living with his uncle and aunt, Luke becomes a pivotal figure in the Rebel Alliance's struggle against the Galactic Empire.
The son of fallen Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker (turned Sith Lord Darth Vader) and Padmé Amidala, Luke is the twin brother of Rebellion leader Princess Leia and eventual brother-in-law of the smuggler Han Solo.
Luke trains to be a Jedi under Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, and rebuilds the Jedi Order.
He later trains his nephew, Ben Solo, and mentors Rey.
Though Luke dies at the end of The Last Jedi, he returns as a Force spirit in The Rise of Skywalker, encouraging Rey to face her grandfather, the resurrected Emperor Palpatine.
At the end of the film, the spirits of Luke and Leia give Rey their blessing to adopt the Skywalker surname and continue their family's legacy.

The character also briefly appears in the prequel film Episode III – Revenge of the Sith as an infant.
In the de-canonized Star Wars Expanded Universe (renamed Legends), Luke is a main character in many stories set after Return of the Jedi, which depict him as a powerful Jedi Master, the husband of Mara Jade, father of Ben Skywalker and maternal uncle of Jaina, Jacen and Anakin Solo.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
In the original Star Wars trilogy, Luke Skywalker represents the hero archetype of "the young man, called to adventure, the hero going out facing the trials and ordeals, and coming back after his victory with a boon for the community".

===== A New Hope (1977) =====
In a deleted scene preceding the character's first appearance in the film (preserved in the film's radio dramatization), Luke says goodbye to his best friend Biggs Darklighter, who has just joined the Imperial Academy.
His childhood friends disparagingly call him "Wormie".
In the original 1977 film (later having the extended title, A New Hope), Luke lives at a moisture farm on the desert planet of Tatooine with his Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru.
Luke takes his first steps toward his destiny when he purchases the droids C-3PO and
R2-D2.
While examining R2-D2, he sees a message from Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan.
When R2-D2 goes missing, Luke goes out to search for the droid, and is saved from a band of Tusken Raiders by Obi-Wan Kenobi, an old hermit.
Luke and Obi-Wan retreat to the latter’s home, and R2-D2 plays the full message for Obi-Wan from Leia, beseeching him to help her defeat the Galactic Empire.
Obi-Wan says that he and Luke's father were once Jedi Knights, and that his father was murdered by a traitorous Jedi named Darth Vader.
Obi-Wan presents Luke with his father's lightsaber and offers to take him to Alderaan and train him in the ways of the Force, but Luke declines his offer, feeling obligated to continue farming for his uncle.

Luke changes his mind when he returns home to find out that Imperial stormtroopers have raided the moisture farm, killing his aunt and uncle while away.
He and Obi-Wan then travel to Mos Eisley, where they meet smugglers Han Solo and Chewbacca at a cantina.
They team up and travel on the Millennium Falcon to Alderaan, only to find out that it has been destroyed by the Death Star.
The Falcon is brought into the Star's hangar bay via tractor beam, where Luke and Han disguise themselves and infiltrate the station.
When they discover Princess Leia is there, Luke persuades a reluctant Han and Chewbacca to help rescue her.
Obi-Wan deactivates the tractor beam, and he later sacrifices his life in a duel with Vader, so that Luke and his friends can board the Falcon and escape.

During the Battle of Yavin, Luke joins the Rebel Alliance in attacking the Death Star.
In the trench leading to the Death Star's exhaust port, Luke hears Obi-Wan's voice, telling him to "trust his feelings"; he takes Obi-Wan's advice and switches off his X-wing's missile guidance system, instead using the Force to guide the missiles and destroy the Death Star.
In the film's final scene, he joins Han and Chewbacca in receiving a medal of honor for his heroism.

=====
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
=====
Three years after the destruction of the Death Star, Luke is now the commander of the Rebel Alliance's Rogue Squadron.
While on a mission on the ice planet Hoth, he is captured by a wampa, but manages to escape using his lightsaber.
In the frozen wasteland, he sees Obi-Wan's Force ghost, who tells him to travel to the planet Dagobah and complete his training with the Jedi Master Yoda.
Luke collapses but is later rescued by Han.
When the Empire discovers the Rebel base on Hoth, Luke leads his squadron of Snowspeeders to battle the enemy’s AT-ATs, but he is forced to retreat when his wingmen are overwhelmed.
Escaping in his X-wing, he travels to Dagobah and meets Yoda.
He undergoes rigorous Jedi training, quickly increasing his power in the Force.

During his training, Luke sees a vision of his friends in danger.
Against both Obi-Wan and Yoda's advice to stay and complete his training, he travels to Bespin to save them, unwittingly falling into a trap placed by Darth Vader.
He engages in a lightsaber duel with Vader.
As his mentors warned, Luke proves to be no match for Vader; the Sith Lord easily overpowers Luke and severs his right hand.
Vader then reveals that he is Luke's father, and offers him the chance to turn to the dark side of the Force and rule the galaxy at his side.
Resolving that he would rather die than become an agent of evil, Luke throws himself into a deep reactor chasm.
He survives, but is pulled into a garbage chute to the underside of Cloud City, and left hanging perilously onto a vane rod.
Leia, flying away from Cloud City in the Millennium Falcon, senses Luke's call out to her with the Force, and turns the ship around to save him.
Aboard the ship, he hears Vader telepathically telling him that it is his destiny to join the dark side.
Luke's severed hand is replaced with a bio-mechanical one.

=====
Return of the Jedi (1983) =====
One year after the invasion on Bespin, Luke is now a Jedi Knight, and has constructed his own lightsaber.
He returns to Tatooine with Leia, the droids, and Lando Calrissian to save Han, frozen in carbonate, from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
Luke offers to negotiate with Jabba, who rejects his offer and casts him into a pit to battle a rancor.
When Luke kills the rancor, he is sentenced to death in the Sarlacc Pit.
Luke escapes with R2-D2's help, saving his friends and destroying Jabba's sail barge.

Luke returns to Dagobah, and learns from a dying Yoda that Vader is indeed his father.
Luke then learns from Obi-Wan's spirit that he has a twin sister, whom he immediately realizes is princess Leia.
Both Jedi Masters tell Luke that he must face Vader again to finish his training and save the galaxy, but he is disturbed by the idea of killing his own father.

Arriving on Endor as part of a Rebel commando squad, Luke surrenders to Vader in an attempt to bring his father back from the dark side of the Force.
Vader brings Luke to the second Death Star orbiting around Endor, where his master, the Emperor, tries to tempt Luke to the dark side, revealing his plan to destroy the Rebel fleet.
Luke, enraged at the thought of losing his friends, lashes out at the Emperor with his lightsaber, but Vader blocks his strike, and father and son once again duel with each other.
Luke regains control of his emotions until Vader senses that Luke has a sister, and threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit.
Luke snaps and overpowers Vader, severing his father's mechanical right hand.
The Emperor orders Luke to kill Vader and then take his place.
Luke looks at his own bionic hand and realizes that he is on the verge of suffering his father's fate.
He casts his lightsaber aside, declaring himself a Jedi.

Furious, the Emperor tortures Luke with Force lightning.
In agony, Luke calls out to his father for help; unwilling to let his son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor shaft, but is mortally wounded by the Emperor's Force lightning in the process.
As Rebel fighters head toward the second Death Star's main reactor, Luke removes Vader's mask and looks upon his father's real face for the first and last time.
The redeemed Anakin Skywalker reassures Luke that there was good in him after all before dying, and to tell his sister that he was right about him.
On Endor, Luke burns his father's armor and prosthetics on a funeral pyre, giving him a proper Jedi funeral.
During the Rebels' victory celebrations on Endor, Luke sees his father's spirit appear alongside those of Obi-Wan and Yoda.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
Revenge of the Sith (2005) =====
In the prequel film Revenge of the Sith (2005), during the waning days of the  Clone Wars between the Galactic Republic and the Separatists, Senator Padmé Amidala, wife of Anakin Skywalker, becomes pregnant to Luke and his twin sister Leia.
Foreseen fear of Padmé dying from the birth of Luke and Leia becomes a primary catalyst into Anakin's fall to the dark side as Darth Vader by Darth Sidious, who had secretly orchestrated the Clone Wars from both sides in order to transform the democratic Galactic Republic into the autocratic Galactic Empire mere days before Luke's birth.
After being Force-choked by Vader, Padmé is taken to Polis Massa, where she gives birth to Luke and Leia and dies, having lost the will to live.
At the time, Vader was not aware that Padmé had given birth to twins, believing that he killed her out of his anger.
After the twins are separated in order to be protected from the Sith, Luke is taken by Obi-Wan Kenobi to the desert planet Tatooine, where he is adopted by his father's stepbrother, Owen Lars, and his wife, Beru.
The infant Luke is portrayed by Aidan Barton, the son of Roger Barton, an editor of the film.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens (2015) =====
In the first installment of the sequel trilogy, The Force Awakens (2015), the opening crawl reveals that Luke Skywalker had mysteriously vanished some time in the thirty years after the destruction of the second Death Star.
Luke went into hiding after his nephew and apprentice, Ben Solo, turned to the dark side and was later dubbed Kylo Ren.
When Ren killed all of his fellow apprentices and ushered in the despotic reign of the First Order, Luke felt responsible, and disappeared.
At the end of the film, the Resistance manage to reconstruct a map, which traces the location of the temple from the Empire's archives to his location, and he is subsequently found on the planet
Ahch-To by the young scavenger, Rey, who presents him with the lightsaber previously wielded by both Luke and his father.

The Art of Star Wars:
The Last Jedi notes that Luke's exile is a reversal from his decision to help his friends in The Empire Strikes Back.

=====
The Last Jedi (2017) =====
In The Last Jedi (2017), Luke throws the lightsaber away after being given it by Rey.
He then seals himself in his home, refusing to talk with Rey.
However, when he sees Chewbacca without Han Solo and that Rey came on the Millennium Falcon, he inquires about what has gone on with his family.
Rey informs Luke about Solo's death at the hands of Kylo Ren and that the First Order has risen to rule the galaxy.
Rey asks Luke to train her in the ways of the Force.
Luke is initially reluctant to train Rey, telling her that it is time for the Jedi Order to end.

After some persuasion from R2-D2, Luke starts training Rey, originally for the purpose of showing her why the Jedi Order needs to end, but grows increasingly afraid of her power.
Luke then tells Rey the history of the Jedi Order, how Darth Sidious rose to power and how the Jedi were partly responsible for Darth Vader's rise.
Luke also initially tells Rey that Kylo was corrupted by Supreme Leader Snoke and that when he confronted his nephew, he retaliated by destroying his Jedi temple.
This is proven false, however, and, after a furious moment with his new apprentice, Luke tells Rey that he had briefly considered killing the sleeping Ben after seeing a vision of the destruction he could cause, but immediately relented; Ben woke to see Luke with his lightsaber drawn and turned to the dark side because he felt betrayed.
Upon learning this, Rey urges Luke to help her redeem Ben, but he refuses to participate in this nor help the Resistance, saying, "This is NOT going to go the way you think.
"
When Rey leaves, an embittered Luke tries to burn the Jedi temple next to his home on Ahch-To, but fails and is visited by the spirit of Yoda, who assures Luke that he still has a purpose.

Luke appears on the planet Crait, as the Resistance are staging a standoff against the First Order, and he apologizes to Leia for allowing Ben to fall to the dark side.
Luke steps in front of the First Order's artillery, and unexpectedly survives an onslaught of blaster fire ordered by Ren.
Ren charges at Luke in hand-to-hand combat, seemingly bisecting him with his lightsaber, but Luke remains unscathed;
still on Ahch-To, Luke has sent a projection of himself to Crait, using the Force.
This distraction allows the Resistance to escape the planet.
Luke tells Kylo that he will not be the last Jedi before his projection disappears.
On Ahch-To, Luke collapses then looks off in the horizon to see the planet's two suns setting before he becomes one with the Force and vanishes.

=====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) =====
Luke appears briefly in The Rise of Skywalker, the ninth and final chapter of the series.
When Rey discovers her lineage as the granddaughter of Darth Sidious, she exiles herself on Ahch-To as Luke did.
Meaning to isolate herself, she throws Luke's lightsaber towards the burning wreckage of Kylo Ren's TIE whisper she had traveled there with.
Luke appears as a Force spirit, and reprimands Rey for treating the lightsaber with disrespect just as he did.
Luke then admits that he was wrong to not participate in the Resistance, and thanks Rey for helping him rediscover himself.
Luke convinces Rey to not view herself as a Palpatine, but as the good person Leia saw her as when training her, and not to give up on her battle against the Sith Lord.
Luke lends Rey his old T-65B X-wing and tells Rey to combine his father's lightsaber with Leia's old lightsaber in her battle on Exegol.

After Rey vanquishes Sidious once and for all, she visits the moisture farm on Tatooine where Luke was raised.
She buries Luke and Leia's lightsabers, revealing that she has constructed her own.
A local asks Rey who she is.
As Leia, who died earlier, and Luke appear as Force spirits, Rey names herself Rey Skywalker.

===
Television series ===
At the end of the Star Wars Rebels episode "Twin Suns", a silhouette of Luke Skywalker is seen from afar by Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Luke appears in the animated Disney micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny (with Mark Hamill once again reprising his role).
The episode "The Path Ahead" details him training with Yoda on Dagobah.
He also appears in the episode "Traps and Tribulations", which takes place shortly after the Battle of Endor and shows him and Leia assisting the Ewoks in stopping a rampaging monster known as a Gorax.
Luke appears in the season 2 finale of The Mandalorian after making contact with Grogu through The Force in "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy".
In "Chapter 16: The Rescue", he arrives on Moff Gideon's cruiser and destroys all Dark Troopers in aid of Grogu, Din Djarin and his companions.
He then takes Grogu with him to train him in his New Jedi Order with Djarin's permission.

===
Video games ===
Luke is a playable character in Star Wars Battlefront II, and in the online multiplayer of Star Wars Battlefront.

===
Literature ===
Luke is the main character of the novel Heir to the Jedi and the junior novel
The Legends of Luke Skywalker (the latter of which was adapted as a manga).
He is also a main character of the 2015 comic Star Wars, which takes place between the films of the original trilogy.

====
Heir to the Jedi ====
Star Wars:
Heir to the Jedi was announced as one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
Set between A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back
, Heir to the Jedi chronicles the adventures of Luke as he continues to battle the Empire with his Rebel friends and begins to develop his Force abilities.
The novel is written from the first-person perspective of Luke, and is only the second Star Wars novel to attempt this type of narrative voice.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.
The Legends-branded novels, comic books and video games detail
Luke's exploits following Return of the Jedi.

====
Novels ====
In the novel The Truce at Bakura, set one day after the battle of Endor, Luke and his friend Wedge Antilles recover a message droid from the titular planet, which was being invaded by the Ssi-Ruuk.
Luke commands a task force, turning back the enemy army.
He also meets Dev Sibwarra, a Force-sensitive human who had been captured by the Ssi-Ruuk, who is killed in the battle after turning against his captors.
In the novel The Courtship of Princess Leia, set four years after the Battle of Endor, Luke travels to the planet Dathomir.
There, he discovers a group of Force-sensitive witches called the Witches of Dathomir, banded into two separate groups: a collective of benign, matriarchal clans; the one he is in contact with being the Singing Mountain Clan, and the witches who have turned to the dark side, called the Nightsisters.
Discovering a prophecy in which it was told a Jedi would change the way of life on the land, Luke eventually realizes truly what the Force is for the first time in his life.
While there, he destroys most of the Nightsisters (including their powerful leader, Gethzirion, and the galaxy's most powerful remaining warlord, Warlord Zsinj).
Thanks to the help of the prophecy and witches, Luke recovers old Jedi records left by Yoda about 400 years prior.
He decides to start a new Jedi Academy, something he has been trying to do for six months before the start of the novel by finding old Jedi records and archives.
In The Thrawn Trilogy, Luke meets former Emperor's Hand Mara Jade, who is bound by Palpatine's disembodied voice that repeatedly commands "You will kill Luke Skywalker".
Mara Jade is working with her boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named Talon Karrde, who also plays a crucial role in this era.
Although she was ready to fulfill that order to stop the voice, circumstances force her to keep him alive long enough to have him help escape a mutual danger.
Despite her threats, Luke learns of Mara's curse and vows to free her from it.
Meanwhile, the rest of the New Republic is fighting against Grand Admiral Thrawn, and thanks to Leia's help, he is eventually defeated, although Luke tried several times to get near him and his ally, Joruus C'baoth.
Eventually, the desperate pair fights against Luke's clone, Luuke Skywalker, C'baoth's apprentice.
During the fight, Mara Jade destroys the clone and, with Leia's help, destroys C'baoth.
This entire time, C'baoth has been obsessed with "molding" Luke and Mara to serve him, perhaps due to the fact that the Spaarti cloning cylinders he was made from have a reputation of turning people insane later in life.
Nonetheless, C'baoth is defeated along with Luuke, and Mara's sacrifice silences her curse and completes her reconciliation with the Jedi, whom she later joins.
In the Jedi Academy trilogy, Luke resigns his commission in the New Republic's starfighter corps to pursue his Jedi studies and rebuild the Jedi Order in the Massassi Temple on Yavin 4, a decision some anti-Jedi politicians use against him.
Luke becomes the New Jedi Order's leader.
His students in the ways of the Force include; Gantoris, Kam Solusar, Tionne, Streen, Cilghal, Kirana Ti and others.
He is forced to contend with the spirit of ancient Sith Lord Exar Kun, who lures one of his most powerful students, Kyp Durron, to the dark side.

In the Hand of Thrawn Duology, Luke, now a Jedi Master, works again with Mara Jade, who has learned to better her Force knowledge since her training at Luke's Jedi Academy.
He falls in love with her and they eventually marry.
Later, in Edge of Victory: Rebirth, they have a son whom they name Ben, after Obi-Wan Kenobi's pseudonym.

In the New Jedi Order series, Luke creates a New Jedi Council.
He idealises a new conclave, made up of Jedi, politicians and military officers.
Included in this new Jedi Order are Tresina Lobi, Kenth Hammer, Kyle Katarn, Kyp Durron, Cilghal, Saba Sebatynee and himself.
From the politicians and military came new Chief of State Cal Omas, Admiral Sienn Sovv (Sullustan male) and four others.
In Force Heretic: Remnant, he spearheads the mission into the Unknown Regions during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion to find the mysterious planet of Zonama Sekot, a planet that creates living starships.
After the invasion is defeated with the help of the new Mandalorian Warriors, a Sekotian fleet and a Galactic Alliance-Imperial Remnant fleet, Luke leads the New Jedi Order on Denon, the temporary capital of the Galactic Alliance and the site of the newly rebuilt Jedi Temple on Coruscant.
In The Swarm War, the New Jedi Order moves to Ossus, the site of former famous Jedi temples and libraries that were mostly destroyed 4,000 years prior.
Upon the Killik's invasion of Chiss space and the transformation of most of the Myrkr mission survivors into Killik Joiners, Luke determines that the Killik's collective mind is being unconsciously controlled by a hive called the Dark Nest.
The Dark Nest is controlled by a former Nightsister named Lomi Plo, who became their Unseen Queen with her ability to become invisible by exploiting the doubts of inferiors.
One of the Myrkr mission survivors, Alema Rar, attempted to plant seeds of doubt in Luke's mind by suggesting that his wife, Mara, may be somehow responsible for the death of his mother, Padmé Amidala, which he almost believes because of Mara's previous involvement as the Emperor's Hand.
This allows Lomi to escape from Luke.
Luke discovers recordings of his father Force-choking his mother on Mustafar, his own birth, and his mother's death hidden inside the protective memory archives of R2-D2.
Because of this, he is able to overcome his doubts about Mara and defeat Lomi Plo in the final battle of the Swarm War, cutting her into four pieces.
Luke also withdraws the Jedi from Cal Omas' Advisory Council, as he plans to create a New Jedi Council that will give aid to the Galactic Alliance when needed.
He also becomes the Grand Master of the New Jedi Order to give the Jedi a clear sense of direction.
He has told the Jedi to either follow his leadership or make the order their priority, or leave.
Jedi Danni Quee and Tenel Ka have resigned because of their duties to Zonoma Sekot and Hapes, respectively, while Corran Horn tries to resign, but Luke talks him out of it.
Luke is also forced to exile Tahiri, Lowbacca, and Tesar Sebatayne to Dagobah for divulging secret information to people outside the New Jedi Order.

In the Legacy of the Force series, Luke begins having visions of a figure cloaked in darkness destroying the galaxy and the Jedi Decree.
In his dreams, this figure's presence is much like that of Darth Vader.
Luke has been troubled by the fact that he has been unable to discern the identity of this figure.
Complicating matters even more is the recent schism that has developed between Luke and his nephew, Jacen Solo.
Already a tremendously powerful Jedi Knight, Jacen has begun adopting radical and extreme interpretations of the Force, causing a dramatic change in his personality.
Luke fears that Jacen is pursuing the same path that ultimately led to Anakin Skywalker's fall to the dark side.
In Bloodlines, the situation worsens when Luke's son, Ben, becomes Jacen's apprentice.
Luke must also battle his wife, who refuses to confront Jacen for fear of alienating Ben.
In Tempest, Luke determines that the dark figure from his dreams is Lumiya, a former Emperor's Hand now known as the "Dark Lady of the Sith".
Luke and Lumiya had fought several times over the years, but when Mara is murdered in Sacrifice, Lumiya deceives Luke into believing that she killed her.
They battle again, and Luke saves a weaponless Lumiya from falling to her death simply so that he can kill her himself.
Luke returns to Coruscant where he is found by Ben, standing guard over Mara's body; upon speaking with his son, he realizes that Lumiya could not have killed her.
Later in his private cabin, Luke breaks down over the death of his wife, knowing that her murderer is still at large.
He does not realize that the killer is his own nephew, Jacen, who has now taken the Sith name Darth Caedus.
In Revelation, Ben proves that Jacen killed Mara, but Luke is now reluctant to kill Jacen out of fear that he or his son will fall to the dark side in the process.
(
The decision is taken out of his hands in Invincible, when Jaina kills Jacen in a final lightsaber duel).

In Fate of the Jedi novels, set about 40 years after the first film, Luke Skywalker, now in his early sixties, is deposed by the government from his position as Grand Master, and exiled from Coruscant.
However, if he finds the reason of why Jacen Solo fell to the dark side, he can be allowed to return.
Ben insists on coming with him.
Together, father and son explore dangerous and little-known portions of the galaxy.
Luke and Ben learn much about each other, about the Force, and about the great dangers threatening the Jedi.
The great love the two surviving Skywalkers have for each other grows even greater as they repeatedly save each other's lives and explore the limits and powers and mysteries of the Force.

=====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor =====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor is a standalone novel that chronicles the Battle of Mindor, a fictional event in the Star Wars expanded universe.
The novel was written by Matthew Stover and released in December 2008.

The novel is set shortly after Return of the Jedi and the novel Prophets of the Dark Side, with Luke Skywalker and the Rebel Alliance attempting to stop Lord Shadowspawn and his "shadow stormtroopers", culminating in the Battle of Mindor.
Matthew Stover has said on his personal weblog, Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor is my attempt to get the EU back to its pre-Zahn roots -- specifically, to evoke memories of my all-time favorite Star Wars books, Brian Daley's Han Solo novels.

====
Comic books ====
Luke Skywalker appears in the Marvel-published Star Wars comics adaptations of the original trilogy, as well as an ongoing series that ran from 1977–86.
When Dark Horse acquired the license two years later, he appeared in numerous projects based on the franchise as well.
In Star Wars: Legacy, set 125 years after the events of the original films, Luke appears as a spirit in the Force to his descendant Cade Skywalker and persuades him to once again become a Jedi in order to defeat the evil Darth Krayt and his burgeoning Sith empire.

====
Video games ====
An older and wiser Luke Skywalker also appears in the Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast and Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy video games at the rank of Jedi Master.
In Jedi Outcast, Luke helps Kyle Katarn in his fight against Desann and Empire Reborn by driving them away from the Valley of the Jedi.
Luke appears in the game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed in a downloadable alternate storyline where Starkiller duels Luke.
He also appears in the Disney Lucasfilm video game Star Wars Commander.
Luke is also a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0.
==
Characterization ==


===
Psychoanalytic ===
Each of the Star Wars characters instantiates one of the archetypes in Joseph Campbell's Hero's journey, with Luke Skywalker symbolizing the Hero archetype.
As such, he is a formulaic, relatable protagonist who encounters the basic struggle between good and evil in the same way as other heroic figures such as Harry Potter, Bilbo Baggins, and Jesus Christ.
Luke's central dilemma is the ongoing war between good and evil, both externally and internally.

===
Religious ===
Some argue that Luke mirrors fundamental values of Christianity and Abrahamic religion; Luke's journey is often compared to that of Jesus Christ.
Scholars argue that Luke is a Christ-like figure, while Yoda represents a god and Darth Vader represents the temptations of evil.
Luke's struggle between good and evil is contrasted with that of his father, Anakin Skywalker, in a way that represents the story of the Prodigal Son.

==
Concept and creation ==
Luke was variously conceived of as a 60-year-old grizzled war hero, later as a Jedi Master, and as a woman.
In an interview about his early drafts, Lucas said:

The first [version] talked about a princess and an old general.
The second version involved a father, his son, and his daughter; the daughter was the heroine of the film.
Now the daughter has become Luke, Mark Hamill's character.
There was also the story of two brothers where I transformed one of them into a sister.
The older brother was imprisoned, and the young sister had to rescue him and bring him back to their dad.

Though Luke's surname was "Skywalker" in Lucas's 1973 treatment of The Star Wars, it was changed to "Starkiller" in subsequent drafts, at one point featuring in the title (The Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller).
The "Starkiller" surname remained for the first few months of production; Hamill used the name "Luke Starkiller" the sole time he referred to himself during filming (dubbed "Skywalker" in the film).
"
Starkiller" was dropped due to what Lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with Charles Manson.
An alternative ending pitched by George Lucas for Return of the Jedi was Luke assuming his father's role as Darth Vader after the latter's death and intending to rule in his place.
Though Lawrence Kasdan favored the idea, Lucas ultimately declined, since the films were made for children.
Another conclusion to the film featured the character disappearing into the wilderness akin to "Clint Eastwood in the spaghetti westerns.
"According to Mark Hamill
, during the filming of the original Star Wars film, George Lucas asked him if he would reprise the role for a cameo when he was in his 60s to pass the torch to the next generation.
In 1983, Hamill stated that his return to the franchise would be "either be another plane of existence or not the same character".
Hamill learned of the sequel trilogy over the summer of 2012 at a Star Wars Celebration during lunch when Lucas told him one was in development.
Hamill recalled shaving his beard to portray the Trickster in The Flash, then letting it grow back for the filming of Star Wars.
Luke's lack of screen time in The Force Awakens was due to concerns by screenwriter Michael Arndt that his presence would mean the audience would have less interest in protagonist Rey, leading to an agreement that he be removed from the screen and instead become a plot device.
Hamill attended meetings for script readings, and helped conceal Luke's role in the film; instead of dialogue, he read stage directions.
Abrams said it allowed him to remain involved and that his reading helped make a "better experience for everyone".
According to concept designer Christian Alzmann, Luke's appearance in The Last Jedi was partly inspired by that of Colonel Kurtz in Apocalypse Now (1979).

== Reception ==
In 2015, Luke Skywalker was selected by Empire magazine as the 50th-greatest movie character of all time.
Empire also ranked him as the third greatest Star Wars character.
Luke was also on the ballot for the American Film Institute's 100 Years...
100 Heroes and Villains.
On their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters, Fandomania.com ranked Luke at number 14.
IGN listed Luke as their 4th top Star Wars character, and he was chosen twice by IGN's readers as one of their favorite Star Wars characters.
IGN's Jesse Schedeen also picked Luke Skywalker as one of the characters they most wanted to appear on the Wii, as well as listing Skywalker as one of their favorite Star Wars heroes.
Schedeen also listed the character as one of the Star Wars characters they wanted to see in Soulcalibur.
IGN also called the fight between Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader in Return of the Jedi one of the ultimate movie "boss battles".
In a feature on speeches made by Luke Skywalker, IGN's Todd Gilchrist said that his favorite speech made by Luke was "I am a Jedi, like my father before me".
UGO Networks listed Luke as one of their best heroes of all time, and he was voted as one of the coolest Star Wars characters by UGO's readers.
Inventor Dean Kamen has also code-named his new prosthetic arm system "Luke" in honor of the character.
Mark Hamill was nominated a Saturn Award for Best Actor in for his portrayal of Luke Skywalker in Star Wars, and won the award for his portrayal in The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and The Last Jedi.
In 1976, Mark Hamill had a serious car accident after filming Star Wars, which involved an operation on his face.
It was speculated that the Wampa attack at the beginning of The Empire Strikes Back was written in to explain his facial injuries, but George Lucas specifically disputed this in the DVD commentary of The Empire Strikes Back.
In regards to Luke's portrayal in The Last Jedi, many fans expressed disappointment in how he was depicted "as a grumpy old man whose failures had driven him into hiding" and the actions the character takes in contributing to Kylo Ren's backstory, a stark departure in how Luke was characterized in the original trilogy.
Hamill originally stated that he "pretty much fundamentally [disagreed] with every choice [The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson] made for this character," but that he had the utmost respect for Johnson and was willing to do his part to realize Johnson's vision.
While regarding the possibility of a younger actor playing the role, Hamill expressed support towards Sebastian Stan, whose physical resemblance to a young Hamill went viral.
However he noted that child actor Jacob Tremblay would be his top choice if the story were to be focused on a very young Luke.
In 2016, when asked about the character's sexual orientation and if Luke could be gay, Hamill said Luke's sexual orientation "is meant to be interpreted by the viewer."
He added, "if you think Luke is gay, of course he is.
You should not be ashamed of it.
Judge Luke by his character, not by who he loves.
"
Hamill later said that he considered the possibility that Luke could have found love between Episode VI and Episode VII.

==
Cultural impact ==
Skywalker remains an American icon.
In fact, Luke Skywalker is often still used by child psychotherapists to help children to project their thoughts and state of being in a way that is understandable to both the child and their therapist.
Another way that therapists utilize Star Wars in sessions is to teach their patients that the Force represents the self-understanding that they achieve in therapy.
Children are taught that they are Luke and their therapist
is Obi-Wan as eventually, as Luke no longer needed his mentor, patients will one day no longer need their therapist.
Star Wars has been related back to cultural events of its time, such as the Cold War and Nixon-era politics.
The severing of Luke's hand and Darth Vader's bionic presence supposedly, according to space.com, symbolize the unity of the military and amputees.

==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
Further reading ==
Dunk, Steve (December 28, 2017). "
A Hero's Journey - Luke Skywalker".
TheForce.net.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.

==
External links ==
Luke Skywalker in the StarWars.com Databank
Luke Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Luke Skywalker on IMDb
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
A hobgoblin is a spirit (creature) of the hearth, typically appearing in folklore, once considered helpful
but since the spread of Christianity has often been considered mischievous.
Shakespeare identifies the character of Puck in his A Midsummer Night's Dream as a hobgoblin.

==
Etymology ==
The term "hobgoblin" comes from "hob" ("elf")
[A Hob, is also flat metal shelf at the side or back of a fireplace, having its surface level with the top of the grate and used especially for heating pans.
(
Meaning that a hobgoblin may simply be referring to a household Goblin or spirit that resides in this particular location in a household)] "goblin" ("mischievous and ugly fairy"); "Hob" is simply a rustic name for the countryside goblin, "a piece of rude familiarity to cover up uncertainty or fear".
"
Hob" is generally explained as a diminutive  for "Robert", and here short for "Robin Goodfellow".
The earliest instance of the word can be traced to about 1530, although it was likely in use for some time prior to that.

==
Folklore ==
Hobgoblins seem to be small, hairy little men who, like their close relatives the brownies, are often found within human dwellings, doing odd jobs around the house while the family is asleep.
Such chores are typically small tasks like dusting and ironing.
Often, the only compensation necessary in return for these is food.

While brownies are more peaceful creatures, hobgoblins are more fond of practical jokes.
They also seem to be able to shapeshift, as seen in one of Puck's monologues in A Midsummer Night's Dream.
Robin Goodfellow is perhaps the most mischievous and most infamous of all his kind, but many are less antagonizing.
Like other fae folk, hobgoblins are easily annoyed.
They can be mischievous, frightening, and even dangerous.
Attempts to give them clothing will often banish them forever, though whether they are offended by such gifts or are simply too proud to work in new clothes differs from teller to teller.

Billy Blind is a clever hobgoblin or brownie found in several ballads collected by Francis James Child.
Billy Blind helps humans in dramatic situations by offering valuable information and advice.
Blue Burches is the name of a shapeshifting hobgoblin who played harmless pranks in the home of a shoemaker and his family on the Blackdown Hills in Somerset.
His usual form was that of an old man wearing baggy blue breeches
but he also took the form of a white horse, a black pig and a wisp of blue smoke.
The family took his presence in good stride but some clergymen learned of his existence and banished him from the house.
Robin Roundcap (not to be confused with Robin Redcap) haunted Spaldington Hall in Spaldington, East Riding of Yorkshire and was a hearth spirit of the true hobgoblin type.
He helped thresh the corn and performed other domestic chores, but when he was in the mood for mischief he would mix the wheat and chaff again, kick over the milk pail, and extinguish the fire.
He is said to have been confined in a well for a stipulated number of years through the prayers of three clergymen.
This well is known as Robin Roundcap's Well.
Dobby is another term for hobgoblin in Lancashire and Yorkshire according to the folklorist Elizabeth Mary Wright, especially one that is a relentless prankster.
Much like the boggart, a dobby's pranks may become so troublesome that a family decides to move elsewhere, only to find that the dobby has followed them (one version of this tale involves Robin Roundcap).
However, one Yorkshire dobby (or hob) lived in a cave and was noted for curing children of the whooping cough.
Dobbies could be just as industrious as other hobgoblins and brownies, which led to the expression
"Master Dobbs has been helping you" whenever a person has accomplished more work than was expected.

==
Variants ==
The bauchan is a Scottish domestic hobgoblin that is mischievous and belligerent but also very helpful when the need arises.
The bwbach (or boobach, plural bwbachod) is a Welsh domestic hobgoblin that will perform household chores in return for bowls of cream.
They are good-natured but mischievous and have a dislike of clergymen and teetotalers, upon whom they will play relentless pranks.

==
Literature ==
In the poem "L'Allegro" (1645) by John Milton a domestic hobgoblin or brownie, known as a Lubbar Fend (or lubber fiend) and described as strong and hairy, threshes the corn then lays by the fireplace enjoying his bowl of cream that he earns as payment.
In the earlier play The Knight of the Burning Pestle (1607) by Francis Beaumont, a similar being is known as Lob-Lie-by-the-Fire, described as a giant and the son of a witch.
The folklorist Katharine Briggs stated that the two creatures are generally equated.
Her own fantasy novel, Hobberdy Dick (1955), is about a hobgoblin that lives in the home of a 17th-century Puritan family.
In John Bunyan's hymn "To Be a Pilgrim" (1684), the hobgoblin is coupled with "a foul fiend" as two monstrous beings who try and fail to "daunt the Pilgrim's spirit".

The term "hobgoblin" is used sometimes to mean a superficial object that is a source of (often imagined) fear or trouble.
The best-known example of this usage is probably Ralph Waldo Emerson's line, "A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds", from the essay Self-Reliance.
Hobgoblins appear in the works of J. R. R. Tolkien as a larger kind of orc.
In the preface of The Hobbit, he states that "Orc is not an English word.
It occurs in one or two places but is usually translated goblin (or hobgoblin for the larger kinds)".

== See also ==
Bogeyman
Dobby (Harry Potter)
Hob (folklore)
Household deity
Kobold


== References ==
Rey, also known as Rey Skywalker, is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise and the main protagonist of the sequel film trilogy.
She was created by Lawrence Kasdan, J. J. Abrams, and Michael Arndt for The Force Awakens (2015), the first installment of the trilogy, and is portrayed by Daisy Ridley.
She also appears in the film's sequels, The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), and related Star Wars media.

Rey is introduced as a scavenger who was left behind on the planet Jakku when she was a child.
She later becomes involved with the Resistance's conflict with the First Order.
Powerful with the Force, Rey trains to be a Jedi under Luke Skywalker and General Leia, and faces adversaries such as Supreme Leader Snoke, Kylo Ren, and the resurrected Emperor Palpatine—who is revealed to be her grandfather in The Rise of Skywalker.
Rey later adopts the name "Skywalker" to honor her mentors and the family legacy.
Reception to the character and Ridley's performance has been highly positive.
Ridley has garnered multiple accolades for her performances as Rey, including two Saturn Award nominations.

==
Development ==


===
Creation and casting ===
Screenwriter Michael Arndt said that he found Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy's offer to write Episode VII daunting in mid-2012, but he became interested when it was explained to him that the tale was about the origin story of a female Jedi and he met with George Lucas.
The character was known as Kira in the early stages of production, and Arndt described her as a "loner, hothead, gear-head, badass".
Arndt said that he struggled with introducing the young woman as the main character in his story while keeping her from being overshadowed after her early meeting with Luke Skywalker, whose role in the film was eventually minimized.
Ridley recalled that director and writer J. J. Abrams originally intended to name the character "Keera"  [sic], but during filming in Abu Dhabi, Abrams revealed to Ridley that he was thinking of going with "Rey".
On creating a female lead for the new trilogy, Abrams stated that from his initial discussions with writer Lawrence Kasdan, he was excited at the concept of having a woman at the center of the story.
He said that "We always wanted to write Rey as the central character" and that other female representation in the story was also important.
Kennedy stated that, "Rey is the new generation's Luke Skywalker.
"
Rey's background as a scavenger was part of the developers attempting to portray her as "the ultimate outsider and the ultimate disenfranchised person", due to their belief that a person of that nature would likely experience a prolonged journey compared to other types of people.
Daisy Ridley was largely unknown before being cast for the role of Rey.
Ridley said that she auditioned many times for the role over the course of seven months and had to keep her casting a secret for three months.
She was announced as part of the cast at the end of April 2014.
She only had experience with small parts in TV shows.
Her inexperience and lack of exposure were a crucial part of what convinced Abrams to give Ridley the role, as the previous installments had featured relatively unknown talent that would not experience heightened degrees of scrutiny.
Abrams stated that Ridley "was so funny and had a great spark", as well as having her act out an emotional scene, proclaiming that "she nailed it on the first take."
Abrams went on to praise Ridley, saying, "She was born with this gift to be in a moment and make it her own.
She simultaneously works from the inside out and the outside in."
Kennedy proclaimed, "Daisy had a physicality and a self-confidence that was so important to the character we were looking for.
She epitomizes that optimism where anything is possible."
Director Dusan Lazarevic, who was present at the casting of Ridley for a role in British drama series Silent Witness, in addition to praising her acting range, stated, "She showed a combination of vulnerability and strength which gave her a complexity, and there was an intelligence in her eyes that was an indicator she could play quite a complicated part."
Cailey Fleming was additionally cast to portray a young Rey.
Although Ridley said she was "riddled with doubts and insecurities", she said that Rey's hopefulness is what she related to most
: it "was something driving me through the auditions—even though it felt so insanely out of anything that I could've imagined.
"
Ridley recalled her shooting experience as starting off bumpy, with Abrams telling her that her first few takes were "wooden".
But Ridley and Abrams had an "incredibly collaborative" process creating Rey; Ridley recalled that the character "changed from when we first began, she became softer.
And I think that's probably me, because Americans tend not to understand me, so it helped, slowing down the speech and everything just made it softer than I am."
Ridley has said that Rey will have "some impact in a girl power-y way", adding that the character "doesn't have to be one thing to embody a woman in a film.
It just so happens she's a woman
but she transcends gender.
She's going to speak to men and women.
"
In an interview with Elle, Ridley said, "She's so strong.
She's cool and smart and she can look after herself," adding, "Young girls can look at her and know that they can wear trousers if they want to.
That they don't have to show off their bodies.
"Composer
John Williams said he immediately loved Ridley in the film and found composing her theme an interesting challenge.
He said that her theme does not suggest a love theme, but rather a strong female adventurer character infused with the Force for a mature, thoughtful theme.
He added that the "musical grammar" of Rey's theme is not heroic, but conveys "an adventurous tone that needs to illustrate empathy."
===
Characterization ===
Rey is introduced as a 19-year-old woman in The Force Awakens.
She is stubborn, headstrong, brave, optimistic, and maintains fierce loyalty to her friends.
Matthew Yglesias of Vox wrote, "Rey is considerably less callow than Luke".
Ridley says of the character, "It's not because Rey is strong that she's amazing.
It's all the complexities of a human.
It's because she is a well-drawn person who is struggling with things
and you're with her.
"Rey is highly Force-sensitive, which is revealed when she is presented with the lightsaber first owned by Anakin Skywalker, then his son Luke.
Without training, she is able to use the Force and defeat the powerful (albeit injured)
Kylo Ren in a duel.
On the mirror-invoking vision Rey experiences in The Last Jedi, writer and director Rian Johnson said that it represents the character learning that she has to connect with herself.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
Rey is first introduced as an orphan living alone on the desert planet Jakku, scraping a living through scavenging parts from ships.
She rescues the astromech droid BB-8 and encounters Finn (John Boyega), a former stormtrooper.
Attacked by First Order troops, Rey steals and pilots the Millennium Falcon to evade them and escape Jakku.
Smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Wookiee Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) take back the Falcon in their freighter ship.
She saves Finn and they escape the freighter in the Falcon.
Impressed with Rey's bravery and piloting skill, Han offers her a job on the Falcon; however, Rey declines his offer, feeling that she has to return to Jakku.

After they convene at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong'o) castle on the planet
Takodana to return BB-8 to the Resistance, the First Order is alerted to their presence.
Rey visits the castle's basement vault in which Maz has stored a lightsaber that once belonged to Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and his father before him.
Upon touching it, she experiences a terrifying vision: she sees a battle led by First Order enforcer Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), a flashback of her younger self being left behind on Jakku, and a vision of Luke, the last Jedi Master in the galaxy, who has been missing for several years.
Maz debates that whoever abandoned her will never return to Jakku, and her only option is to seek out strength in the Force.
Feeling overwhelmed, Rey rejects the lightsaber and flees into the forest.

The First Order attacks Maz's castle, and Ren captures Rey when the Resistance arrives.
Ren takes her to Starkiller Base, where he probes her mind for the map piece that BB-8 showed her.
Ren uses the Force to read Rey's mind, revealing Rey feels that Han is like the father she never had.
Rey then resists him and reads Ren's emotions, exposing his fear that he will never be as powerful as his grandfather, Darth Vader.
Ren reports to his master, Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), who commands that Rey should be brought before him.
Left alone with a stormtrooper guarding her, Rey uses a Jedi mind trick to get him to help free her.
After sneaking around inside the base looking for a way to escape, she is elated to find Finn, Han, and Chewbacca have come for her.
They watch in horror as Ren kills his own father, Han.

As they try to escape the base through the woods, Ren challenges Rey and Finn, using his lightsaber.
After Ren seriously injures Finn and disarms him of Luke's lightsaber, Rey uses the Force to retrieve the weapon and battles Ren herself.
Initially overpowered, Rey rejects Ren's offer to train her and uses the Force with the lightsaber, disfiguring his face.
After escaping the destroyed base in the Millennium Falcon with Chewbacca and the wounded Finn, she returns to the Resistance base.
While the Resistance celebrates the victory, Rey mourns Han's death with Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) and visits Finn, who is still unconscious.
She decides to seek out Luke's location, using information provided by BB-8 and the re-activated R2-D2 (Kenny Baker).
Rey, Chewbacca, and R2 travel in the Falcon to the oceanic planet of Ahch-To; upon finding Luke, Rey presents him with his longtime lightsaber.

=====
Related works and merchandising =====
Rey is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Rey's Survival Guide (2015) by Jason Fry is a first-person account from Rey's perspective about herself and her home planet of Jakku.
Rey is also a point of view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
Fans noticed a lack of tie-in toys featuring Rey.
Hasbro released a version of Monopoly based on The Force Awakens that excluded the Rey character.
After receiving criticism, Hasbro stated that they did not include Rey to avoid revealing spoilers, and would be including Rey in future toy releases.
Paul Southern, the head of Lucasfilm Licensing, said that they wanted to protect the secrets that "the Force awakens in Rey" and that her character carries a lightsaber.
He said that demand for Rey products was underestimated.
Abrams said, "I will say that it seems preposterous and wrong that the main character of the movie is not well represented in what is clearly a huge piece of the Star Wars world in terms of merchandising."
Regarding Rey's relative absence in Star Wars merchandising, CBBC presenter and voice actor Christopher Johnson stated: "It still baffles me to this day that some toy manufacturers don't think that girls want to play with 'superhero' toys and that boys aren't interested in female characters."
====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Rey is one of the key characters of The Last Jedi.
Picking up directly where the previous installment left off, Rey presents Luke with his lightsaber, but Luke dismissively throws it aside.
Luke eventually agrees to teach Rey the ways of the Force.
Rey demonstrates immense raw strength and a clear temptation toward the dark side of the Force that reminds Luke of Kylo Ren, who was once his nephew and student, Ben Solo.
All the while, Rey feels a sudden connection through the Force with Ren, who tells her that Luke tried to kill him while he was the Jedi master’s student (Luke later tells her that he was tempted to kill Ben after seeing a vision of the pain and suffering he would cause, but relented).
In one of their conversations, Rey and Ren touch hands, and through this Rey swears that she is able to feel conflict within Ren, and becomes determined to turn him back to the light side.
Rey asks Luke once more to come with her and rejoin the Resistance, but he declines.
So, Rey, Chewbacca, and R2-D2 leave without him, and Rey goes to meet Ren in the Supremacy.

Ren takes Rey prisoner and brings her before Snoke.
Snoke tells her that he created the Force connection between her and Ren as a trap to reach Luke.
Snoke tortures and taunts Rey, showing her the attack on the Resistance transports, and eventually orders Ren to kill her.
Ren instead kills Snoke, and he and Rey fight Snoke's guards side by side.
After the duo win, Ren asks Rey to join him and create a new order separate from the legacies of Snoke and Luke, but Rey refuses.
In an attempt to get her to turn, Ren gets Rey to admit that her parents abandoned her.
Despite the revelation, Rey refuses to join him and uses the Force to summon Luke's lightsaber, but Ren does so, too, resulting in a standoff that ultimately breaks the lightsaber.
Shortly afterwards, Resistance leader Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern) rams her cruiser into Snoke's flagship, separating Rey from Ren.
Rey subsequently uses Snoke's escape craft to flee the dreadnought as later stated by General Hux.

Rey is later revealed to have made her way back to the Millennium Falcon, aiding the Resistance in fighting the First Order’s troops during the Battle of Crait.
Despite their valiant efforts, the Resistance loses the battle, and Rey focuses her efforts on finding the surviving Resistance fighters to help evacuate them.
Eventually, she finds the Resistance fighters behind a dead-end, and uses the Force to move the rocky barrier aside, clearing the path for them to board the Falcon.
Rey reunites with Finn and Leia and meets Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) for the first time aboard the Falcon.
Rey feels Luke’s death through the Force, and reassures Leia that he met his end with "peace and purpose".
As she holds the leftovers of Luke's lightsaber, Rey asks Leia how they can rebuild the Resistance from what remains, and
Leia, gesturing towards Rey, says that they now have all they need.
Unbeknownst to Leia, that includes the fact that Rey stole the sacred Jedi texts from Luke before Yoda's (Frank Oz) ghost burned the tree cave they were in.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Rey is the main protagonist of the trilogy's final film, The Rise of Skywalker, which is set one year after the events of The Last Jedi.
Rey is continuing her Jedi training at the Resistance base under the tutelage of Leia.
The Resistance announces that the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) has been manipulating events from the Sith world Exegol and has built a secret armada of Star Destroyers—the Final Order.
Rey discovers from Luke's old notes that a Sith wayfinder can lead them to Exegol.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and BB-8 leave for Pasaana, where a clue to the wayfinder's location is hidden.
Rey locates the clue—a dagger with Sith inscriptions—with the help of Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams).
Meanwhile, Rey continues communicating with Ren; through this correspondence, Ren learns where Rey is and comes for her.
Rey confronts Ren, inadvertently allowing Chewbacca to be taken aboard a First Order transport.
Attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys the transport with Force lightning, seemingly killing him.
Rey is stricken with guilt and reveals to Finn that she has been having visions of herself and Ren sitting on the Sith throne.

Rey and the others travel to Kijimi, where programmer Babu Frik extracts the location of the wayfinder—the moon Kef Bir—from C-3PO's memory files.
Ren and the First Order follow Rey to Kijimi.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive and the group mounts a rescue mission.
Rey retrieves the dagger aboard Ren's Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast and has visions of her parents being killed with it; Ren informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter.
Palpatine had fathered a son who renounced him; he and his wife hid Rey on Jakku, assuming lives as "nobodies" to protect her.
Palpatine eventually found Rey's parents and had them killed, but never found Rey.
Ren also reveals that as the grandchildren of Sith Lords, their connection is actually a dyad in the Force.
Ren urges her to join him so they can overthrow Palpatine and take the throne of the Sith together, but Rey refuses and escapes aboard the Millennium Falcon with her friends.

Together, they travel to Kef Bir where Rey retrieves the wayfinder on the remains of the second Death Star; upon touching the artifact, she has a vision of herself as a Sith.
Having tracked them, Ren destroys the wayfinder and duels Rey.
Leia, dying, calls to Ren through the Force; Rey impales him as he is distracted.
Also sensing Leia's death, Rey realizes what she did to Ren and regrets impaling him.
She uses the Force to heal him and confesses that she did want to join him as Ben Solo before escaping aboard his TIE fighter.
Disturbed by her Sith lineage, Rey exiles herself on Ahch-To.
Luke's Force spirit encourages her to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber and his old X-wing.
Rey departs for Exegol with the wayfinder from Ren's ship.
Meanwhile, Ren resumes his true identity as Ben Solo.

Rey transmits her coordinates to the Resistance, allowing them to launch an offensive against the Final Order forces.
Rey confronts Palpatine, who demands she kill him in anger for his spirit to pass into her, making her "Empress Palpatine".
However, Ben arrives and joins Rey.
Palpatine absorbs their life energy to restore his full power and incapacitates Ben.
He then attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who restore her strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing him and herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive Rey at the cost of his own life; Rey kisses Ben before he vanishes into the Force.
Rey then returns to the Resistance base and reunites with her friends, celebrating their victory.

Sometime later, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries the Skywalker lightsabers, having built her own in a golden color.
A passerby asks Rey her name; after seeing the Force spirits of Luke and Leia, she responds, "Rey Skywalker".
=====
Related works =====
The novelization of The Rise of Skywalker reveals that Rey's father was a nonidentical clone of Palpatine.
An upcoming issue of the comic book series Star Wars Adventures will feature a story set after the events of the film featuring Rey, Finn, and Poe continuing to fight the First Order.
===
Television ===


====
Star Wars Rebels (2014) ====
Rey makes a brief cameo as a disembodied voice in the television series Star Wars Rebels, in the episode "A World Between Worlds".
In the episode, set 16 years before her birth and 35 years before The Force Awakens, the young padawan Ezra Bridger briefly hears some of her lines from the film (specifically her speaking to the unconscious Finn at the end) in the World Between Worlds, a dimension that exists outside of time and space.

====
Forces of Destiny (2017) ====
Rey stars in the micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, voiced by Daisy Ridley.
===
Video games ===
The character of Rey appears in the video games Disney Infinity 3.0, Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, and Star Wars Battlefront II (2017),
all voiced by Ridley, as well as in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.
The character was also introduced as a player "skin" in the game Fortnite.

==
Reception ==


===
General ===
The character and Ridley's portrayal have received critical acclaim.
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal proclaimed that Rey is "a woman warrior with the stylish ferocity of a kung-fu star," praising "the verve [Ridley] must have been born with plus the skill she must have acquired as a young actress coming up in England," and stating, "It's hard to imagine what the movie—and the sequels to come—might have been if they'd cast the wrong person, but here Daisy Ridley is in all her unassuming glory, and all's right with the galaxy."
Adam Howard of MSNBC stated that "one of the most pleasant surprises of the film has been the strength of its lead female character," adding that some have likened Rey to a "new feminist icon".
Relatedly, Emily Rome of HitFix argued that Rey is "everything we wanted in a Star Wars female character," praising her for being a character that is "independent, skilled, scrappy, tough, and doesn't need saving."
In a personal essay, Nicole Sperling of Entertainment Weekly wrote about her daughters feeling empowered after viewing the film, stating, "They never commented on how pretty Rey is.
They never had to flinch because Rey was a sexual object to some man in power.
They just felt strong.
Equal.
"Megan
Garber of The Atlantic wrote that Rey "proves herself to be, in extremely short order, extremely adept as a fighter".
Some fans opined that Rey is too skilled despite her inexperience during The Force Awakens, making her a Mary Sue.
Rome wrote that "the speed with which Rey mastered Jedi mind tricks and lightsaber fighting with zero training is the stuff of fan fiction.
Rey is geek feminist wish-fulfillment."
Tasha Robinson of The Verge said that Rey "keeps falling into standard-issue damsel-in-distress situations, then capably rescuing herself."
Robinson wrote "Rey is kind of a Mary Sue character" and that "She's a fantasy wish-fulfillment character with outsized skills, an inhuman reaction time, and a clever answer to every question—but so are the other major Star Wars heroes."
Other outlets, including Ridley herself, have argued that the term Mary Sue carries an inherent gender bias, and that the male characters from the original trilogy did not face comparable criticism.
J. J. Abrams stated that "the people who are getting freaked out are the people who are accustomed to [male] privilege, and this is not oppression, this is about fairness."
He elaborated, "You can probably look at the first [Star Wars] movie that George [Lucas] did and say that Leia was too outspoken, or she was too tough.
Anyone who wants to find a problem with anything can find the problem.
The internet seems to be made for that."
Adrienne Tyler of Screen Rant argued Rey's abilities are explained in The Rise of Skywalker as resulting from the pair forming a dyad in the Force, sharing the same fighting capabilities.
Rey's unique hairstyle attracted attention before and after The Force Awakens was released, being compared to Leia's hairdo from the original film, with debate over whether it would become as popular.
Rey has also been compared to the titular character from the Hayao Miyazaki anime film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (1984).Richard Roeper described Ridley's portrayal of Rey as "a breakout performance", continuing by calling the character "tough and resourceful and smart and brave".
Ridley was nominated for a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Actress for her portrayal.
The first Reel Women in Technology Award for a fictional character was awarded to the character Rey.
Some fans criticized Rey's trilogy-wide character arc as insufficient.

Fan fiction author Ricca said that tension that was built in the first two films never gets resolved in the last film.

She wanted a moment at the end of The Rise of Skywalker in which Rey reacts to and reflects on everything that has happened to her.
Some critics and fans have noted a visual resemblance between Rey's character design to that of Bastila Shan from the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, and that her character arc shares thematic similarities with that of Bastila's.
===
Parentage ===
The question of Rey's parentage was a significant point of discussion for the series, and spawned numerous fan theories.
The most popular theories were that she is the daughter of Luke Skywalker or Han Solo, or is Obi-Wan Kenobi's granddaughter (because of a scene where Rey hears Kenobi's echoed voice following a vision in The Force Awakens).
The view that she is Luke's daughter was especially prominent, with fans and critics highlighting their story arc similarities, Star Wars being a Skywalker saga, Rey having a strong attachment to Luke's lightsaber, and being exceptionally strong with the Force without any training.
Some fan theories about Rey's parentage pointed to "Rey's Theme" featured in John Williams' score of The Force Awakens, as the theme shared similarities with the themes for Darth Vader and Luke.
Abrams stated that he intentionally withheld Rey's last name and background in The Force Awakens.
He said that he felt that the origin of Kylo Ren was the only thing that could be revealed in his film and that he knew "quite a bit" about Rey's origin but would give courtesy to The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson by not saying any more.
Former Star Wars:
Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow stated that the answer of Rey's origin would be "deeply and profoundly satisfying" and that Rey is "important in this universe, not just in the context of The Force Awakens, but in the entire galaxy.
She deserves it."
Ridley said that she knew who Rey's parents were.
In The Last Jedi, Rey is coaxed by Kylo Ren into admitting that her parents were "nobodies".
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox equated this scene with Luke finding out that Darth Vader is his father, which was his greatest nightmare.

To VanDerWerff, "Rey's greatest nightmare is being no one."
She added that while Kylo Ren "has every reason to be lying" about this, to her mind it is a good thing that "Rey is the child of nobody of particular importance to the story so far."

Josh Spiegel of The Hollywood Reporter stated that although some fans might be disappointed by Ren's revelation, it "fits in perfectly" with the film's through line that one can be "both exceptionally gifted in the Force and also not a Skywalker" because "the spirit of the Jedi extends ... to anyone with a gift and the power to believe.
"

Conversely, Casey Cipriani of Bustle opined that while Ren might be right about Rey's parents, he is unreliable and "we have to take what he says with a grain of salt and look elsewhere [within the story] for hints of Rey's lineage.
"Before
the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Abrams said that "there's more to the story than you've seen," though, according to Ridley, the facts presented in The Last Jedi would not change.
Rey being revealed as a Palpatine in The Rise of Skywalker received a mixed reception.
Joanna Robinson of Vanity Fair interprets the twist as a rebuttal to the themes presented in Episode VIII, calling it "a blow to those fans who eagerly devoured [Rian] Johnson’s message that anyone from anywhere can be a Force-wielding hero."
Contrarily, Ryan Britt of Fatherly writes that the revelation may be resonant for those with a "Dark Side-inclined family," because Rey decides not to play Palpatine's "stupid game", and "when Palpatine’s face melts off and the dark side disappears into the ether, a lot of emotional family bullshit goes with it.
"
Inverse similarly argues that the end of the film sees Rey reject "any power her grandfather held over her" and "bury the past", in a completion of the hero's journey.
Following the film's release, Daisy Ridley revealed that the identity of Rey's parents had been in constant flux over the course of the production of the Sequel Trilogy.
According to Ridley, during the early production of the Sequel Trilogy, Lucasfilm had been "toying with an Obi-Wan connection" before settling on the idea of her character being no one.
J.J. Abrams then pitched the idea of Emperor Palpatine being Rey's grandfather to Ridley at the start of production on Episode IX, although this aspect of her character "kept changing" over the course of filming.
James Hunt of Screen Rant argues that the idea of an Obi-Wan connection "would've been an equally bad decision," because it would still mean the character "is powerful because of her lineage, rather than Rey simply being powerful because the Force chose her.
It continues the focus on nostalgia and trying to connect everything, rather than letting Rey be wholly new."
==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations
Sources


==
Further reading ==
Hawkes, Rebecca (December 23, 2015).
"
Who is Rey?
Everything we know about Daisy Ridley's mysterious new Star Wars heroine".
The Daily Telegraph.
Retrieved December 29, 2015.

Oswald, Anjelica (October 22, 2015).
"
Meet Daisy Ridley, the 23-year-old who snagged a lead role in 'Star Wars:
The Force Awakens' –
her Hollywood career is about to blow up".
Business Insider.
Retrieved December 19, 2015.

==
External links ==
Rey in the StarWars.com Databank
Rey on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
C-3PO () or See-Threepio is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who appears in the original trilogy, the prequel trilogy and the sequel trilogy.
Built by Anakin Skywalker, C-3PO was designed as a protocol droid intended to assist in etiquette, customs, and translation, boasting that he is "fluent in over six million forms of communication".
Along with his astromech droid counterpart and friend R2-D2, C-3PO provides comic relief within the narrative structure of the films, and serves as a foil.
Anthony Daniels has portrayed the character in ten of eleven of the Star Wars films released to date, with the exception of Solo:
A Star Wars Story, where the character does not appear.

Anthony Daniels is also the only person to be involved in all 11 Star Wars films.
Despite his oblivious nature, C-3PO has played a pivotal role in the galaxy's history, appearing under the service of Shmi Skywalker, the Lars homestead, Padmé Amidala, Bail Organa, Raymus Antilles, Luke Skywalker, Jabba the Hutt, and Leia Organa.
In the majority of depictions, C-3PO's physical appearance is primarily a polished gold plating, although his appearance varies throughout the films; including the absence of metal coverings in The Phantom Menace, a dull copper plating in Attack of the Clones, and a red left arm in The Force Awakens.
C-3PO also appears frequently in both canon and Star Wars Legends continuities of novels, comic books, and video games, and was a protagonist in the animated television series Droids.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====


=====
Star Wars (1977) =====
In Star Wars, C-3PO is introduced to the audience when he and R2-D2 are aboard the consular ship Tantive IV when it is attacked by the Imperial Star Destroyer Devastator.
When R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) attempts to leave the ship to deliver a secret message from Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) to Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness), C-3PO follows him into an escape pod, which lands on the planet Tatooine.
There, the droids are captured by Jawas, and are taken to be sold.
In the process of being sold to Owen Lars (Phil Brown), C-3PO convinces his new owner to buy R2-D2 as well (after they originally bought R5-D4 and his motivator exploded on the way back to the garage).
The duo ultimately lead Lars' nephew, Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), to Obi-Wan, for whom R2-D2 plays Leia's message.
After Imperial stormtroopers destroy the Lars homestead, C-3PO and
R2-D2 go along with Luke and Obi-Wan on a mission to rescue Leia, transported by smugglers Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) on board the Millennium Falcon.
When the ship is taken hostage on the Death Star, C-3PO helps R2-D2 shut down the space station's trash computer, saving their human companions' lives, before escaping on board the Falcon.
When R2-D2 is damaged during the Battle of Yavin, a grief-stricken C-3PO offers to donate his own parts to help repair his counterpart.
C-3PO and a repaired R2-D2 are present at the celebration of the Death Star's destruction at the end of the film.

Throughout the film C-3PO is a foil to R2-D2's antics, even when C-3PO translates R2-D2's machine speech for the audience.
C-3PO is originally the property of the captain on the Tantive IV, but seems to follow R2-D2 in a relationship akin to those between human children; C-3PO often following R2-D2 around, and R2-D2 needing C-3PO to translate for him.
When R2-D2 is damaged in the Battle of Yavin, C-3PO offers to donate any mechanical parts helpful in his repair; but this transference is never confirmed.

=====
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) =====
In The Empire Strikes Back, C-3PO is responsible for identifying the Empire's probe droid, alerting the Rebels to the Empire's awareness of their location on the sixth planet of the Hoth system.
C-3PO escapes with Han, Chewbacca, and Leia in the Millennium Falcon, while R2-D2 joins Luke in his search for Yoda (Frank Oz).
During this time C-3PO and Han are often shown as foils, with C-3PO quoting odds and Han defying them.
After a chase through an asteroid field, the Falcon escapes to Cloud City at Bespin.

While exploring a room in Cloud City, C-3PO is blasted by an off-camera stormtrooper.
In search of C-3PO, Chewbacca heads to the Ugnaught recycling facility where he finds the dismembered parts of the droid.
When Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) reveals his presence to the group that same day, Chewbacca is sent into a holding cell, but is permitted to rebuild the droid, which he does poorly.
Thereafter, Chewbacca carries the partially rebuilt C-3PO on his back during Han's encasement in carbonite.

With the help of the city's administrator, Lando Calrissian
(Billy Dee Williams), Princess Leia, Chewbacca, and C-3PO escape the city.
Having C-3PO on Chewbacca's back proves to be beneficial, in that when Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch) escapes the city with a frozen Han, C-3PO notifies them of pursuing stormtroopers.
While escaping Vader's flagship Executor, R2-D2 begins repairing C-3PO.
Upon making their way to the Rebel's rendezvous point, C-3PO is fully repaired.

=====
Return of the Jedi (1983) =====
In Return of the Jedi, Luke commands C-3PO and R2-D2 to deliver a message to Jabba the Hutt from Luke, who offers 3PO's services as a translator and R2-D2's on Jabba's flying sail barge.
C-3PO's first translation for the crime lord is of the bounty hunter Boushh—Leia in disguise—claiming the bounty for Chewbacca as part of her plan to rescue Han.
Later, Luke infiltrates the palace and kills Jabba's rancor in a duel; whereupon Jabba transfers his court to the sail barge with Luke, Han, and Chewbacca as food for the Sarlacc, while Leia serves as Jabba's slave.
When Luke attempts escape, R2-D2 tosses him his lightsaber, with which he attacks Jabba's guards.
In the midst of the battle, C-3PO is attacked by Jabba's pet Salacious Crumb, who pulls out his right photoreceptor before being driven off by R2-D2.
Thereafter the two escape the sail barge and are retrieved by the protagonists.

C-3PO accompanies the strike force to the Forest Moon of Endor to disable the shield generator protecting the second Death Star.
When he, Han, Luke, Chewbacca, and R2-D2 are captured by the Ewoks, C-3PO is perceived to be a god by the latter.
When the human prisoners are threatened by the Ewoks, Luke uses the Force to levitate the droid above the crowd as demonstration of the supposed god's ability.
Later that night, C-3PO narrates the history of the Rebel Alliance's fight against the Galactic Empire to the tribe, convincing them to help the Rebels at the Battle of Endor.
After the Empire's second Death Star is destroyed, C-3PO joins the protagonists on Endor in celebrating the fall of the Empire.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Phantom Menace (1999) =====
C-3PO returns in Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace, the first chapter of the Star Wars prequel trilogy, where it was revealed that nine-year-old slave Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) built him out of spare parts.
C-3PO meets his future partner, R2-D2, along with
Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson), Queen Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman) of Naboo, and Gungan Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best).
C-3PO and R2-D2 help perfect Anakin's podracer for the Boonta Eve Classic race.

Shortly afterwards, C-3PO becomes part of Anakin's pit crew, where he sees Anakin defeat Sebulba.
C-3PO and Anakin part ways
when Qui-Gon frees the boy after winning a bet with Anakin's master, Watto.
Before parting from C-3PO, Anakin assures the droid that his mother Shmi (Pernilla August) will not sell him.

=====
Attack of the Clones (2002) =====
In Episode II – Attack of the Clones, set 10 years later, Shmi is kidnapped by a group of Tusken Raiders.
Sensing that his mother is in danger, Anakin (now portrayed by Hayden Christensen) travels with Padmé to Tatooine, where they reunite with C-3PO, now with a metallic gray-colored body.
He recognizes Anakin and Padmé and presents them to Anakin's stepfamily, Owen (Joel Edgerton) and Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson) and Beru Whitesun (Bonnie Piesse).
When Anakin returns with his mother's body, C-3PO attends her funeral.

After Anakin and Padmé's visit to Tatooine, C-3PO accompanies them to the planet Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) from Sith Lord Count Dooku (Christopher Lee).
Shortly afterward, he follows R2-D2 into a droid-construction site, where his head is temporarily attached to the torso of a battle droid, while the head of the droid is placed onto C-3PO's torso.
Influenced by the battle droid's programming, he reluctantly participates in the film's climactic battle scene, where he is stopped by Jedi Kit Fisto (Silas Carson).
Having been restored by R2-D2, he leaves Geonosis with the other protagonists.
At the end of the film, he is a witness to Padmé and Anakin's marriage on Naboo.

=====
Revenge of the Sith (2005) =====
In Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, C-3PO is aware of Padmé's pregnancy and, in a deleted scene, is present during a secret meeting held with Senators Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) and Mon Mothma (Genevieve O'Reilly).
After Anakin falls to the dark side of the Force and becomes the Sith Lord Darth Vader, he takes C-3PO and R2-D2 with him as he massacres of the Jedi; C-3PO rationalizes Vader's behavior by saying he has been under a great deal of stress.
C-3PO accompanies Padmé to Mustafar, and witnesses Vader using the Force to choke her into unconsciousness; whereupon C-3PO and
R2-D2 take her to safety.
When Obi-Wan returns to their spaceship following a duel with Vader, C-3PO pilots it to Polis Massa and witnesses Padmé give birth to the Skywalker twins, Luke and Leia, and die shortly afterward.
C-3PO and R2-D2 become Organa's property, and he gives them to Captain Raymus Antilles (Rohan Nichol) to serve aboard the Tantive IV, and orders C-3PO's memory erased in order to protect the Skywalker children from their father and the newly created Galactic Empire.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens (2015) =====
Anthony Daniels reprised the role of C-3PO in The Force Awakens, the first installment of the sequel trilogy.
C-3PO is seen with a red left arm, but gets a gold arm at the end of the film.
He has been upgraded to seven million forms of communication.
In the film, he is first seen along with Leia and a Resistance team, picking up Han, the stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega), the droid BB-8, the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley), and Chewbacca on the planet Takodana.
During their adventures, C-3PO is reunited with R2-D2, who is reactivated after having been shut off for years.

=====
The Last Jedi (2017) =====
In The Last Jedi,  C-3PO mostly serves as an assistant for Leia and, while she is unconscious, Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac); he spends much of the film voicing his concern over the protagonist's chances in missions such as the evacuation of D'Qar at the start of the film and Finn and Rose Tico's (Kelly Marie Tran) mission on the Supremacy later on.
At the end of the film, C-3PO has a brief reunion with Luke, who winks at him before confronting the film's villain, First Order leader Kylo Ren (Adam Driver).

According to Daniels, "In The Last Jedi I became a table decoration, which I regretted, because Threepio was worth more than that."
=====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) =====
In The Rise of Skywalker, he accompanies Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, and BB-8 to Pasaana to meet with Luke's contact, who knows about a Sith artifact; the contact turns out to be Lando.
During the journey, they discover a Sith dagger and try to translate its inscriptions as they hold a clue to the whereabouts of Palpatine's (Ian McDiarmid) fleet, but it is revealed that C-3PO's programming prevents him translating such a language directly.
The heroes manage to find a hacker on the planet Kijimi who can bypass the protocols preventing C-3PO from translating the message, but at the cost of wiping his memories.
Reactivated after he has provided the translation, C-3PO accompanies the group until they return to the Resistance camp, at which point R2-D2 is able to restore his memory from an earlier back-up created just prior to Rey's first mission.
He celebrates the Sith Eternal's defeat with the rest of the Resistance at the end.
In part of the film, the character appears with red eyes.

===
Anthology films ===
C-3PO makes a brief appearance alongside R2-D2 in Rogue One (2016), accompanying Rebel Alliance troops to Scarif alongside Princess Leia.

===
Other media ===


====
Comics ====
C-3PO appears in Marvel's Star Wars comic series and accompanies Han Solo on a raid on an Imperial outpost in the miniseries Shattered Empire.
The circumstances that caused his left arm to be replaced with a red one is told in Marvel's one-shot Star Wars special, C-3PO: The Phantom Limb.

====
Novels ====
After the events of Return of the Jedi, C-3PO continues to serve Leia Organa in several novels including Bloodline.

In The Truce at Bakura, C-3PO translates Ssi-ruuvi, the language of the Ssi-ruuk, to aid the Alliance.
In The Glove of Darth Vader, C-3PO and R2-D2 are members of the Senate Planetary Intelligence Network (SPIN), and undergo transformation by the Droid Modification Team to be disguised as Kessel droids so that they could infiltrate a gathering of Imperials to find out who is planning to take control of the Empire.
In The Courtship of Princess Leia, C-3PO is led to believe that Han Solo is ancestrally the King of Corellia during Han's competition with Prince Isolder for Leia's hand in marriage.
C-3PO agrees to assist Han as a counselor droid; but is shocked when Han kidnaps Leia and takes her to Dathomir.
Despite this, he continues to present Han in the best possible light and writes a song for him entitled "The Virtues of King Han Solo", which he backs with the sound of a full symphony orchestra.
He later discovers that Han's ancestor was merely "a pretender to the throne", but is present at Han and Leia's wedding.
Following the events of Han and Leia's marriage, C-3PO returns with them to Tatooine in Tatooine Ghost.
There he helps Han and Leia in their search for an Alderaanian moss painting storing a valuable code.
He also reunites with Kitster Banai and Wald, childhood friends of Anakin Skywalker from Episode I. With their help, C-3PO and the others discover Shmi Skywalker's diary, whereof
Leia remarks that the droid described
reminds her of C-3PO.
Due to his memory wipe in Episode III, C-3PO does not mention to Han and Leia his connection to Anakin.
The code is eventually found and destroyed.
In Heir to the Empire, Lando reprograms C-3PO to sound like Leia in order to hide from Imperials on Nkllon; but the Empire, led by Grand Admiral Thrawn, sees through the deception.
In Dark Force Rising, C-3PO goes to Honoghr with Leia during the Thrawn Crisis to discover what had caused the plight of the Noghri.
He is forced to hide with Leia and Chewbacca when Imperial forces arrive overhead, but he later returns with Leia to Coruscant, where she gives birth to Jaina and Jacen Solo.
He serves as caretaker to the twins, and later Anakin Solo as well.
In The Last Command, C-3PO also accompanies Han, Lando, R2-D2, Luke, Chewbacca, and Mara Jade to Wayland on a mission to destroy the Mount Tantiss storehouse.
Thanks to C-3PO and some Noghri, the party recruits aid from the local population and destroys the storehouse.
In Dark Apprentice, the Solo twins escape from Chewbacca's and C-3PO's watch during a trip to a zoo on Coruscant and arrive in the planet's sub-levels.
C-3PO frantically searches for them, but they had been found by King Onibald Daykim and are reunited with their parents.
In Planet of Twilight, C-3PO and R2-D2 accompany Leia on a diplomatic mission to Nam Chorios but are unable to prevent her kidnapping and fail to stop the Death Seed plague unleashed on the crew by Seti Ashgad and Dzym.
Eventually rescued by Han and Lando, the two droids convey their message for help.
In The Crystal Star, C-3PO accompanies Luke and Han to Crseih Station to investigate the possible existence of Jedi trainees; but instead find Waru, a creature from another dimension, from whom they learn of Waru's alliance with Lord Hethrir and of the kidnapping of the Solo children.
Hethrir is destroyed following a confrontation with Leia, Han, and Luke while Waru returns to his dimension.
In The Black Fleet Crisis, C-3PO accompanies Lando, R2-D2, and Lando's associate Lobot to investigate the runaway alien ship Teljkon Vagabond; eventually to discover that the ship contains the last vestiges of the Quella civilization.
In The New Rebellion, C-3PO, along with R2-D2 and a young mechanic named Cole Fardreamer, is instrumental in stopping Kueller from regaining power by disabling the explosive devices he had placed in a large number of droids.
In Ambush at Corellia, during the outbreak of the First Corellian Insurrection, C-3PO and Chewbacca retrieve Jaina, Jacen, and Anakin from the burning Corona House.
In Showdown at Centerpoint, Threepio accompanies Luke, Gaeriel Captison, Belindi Kalenda, and Lando Calrissian to Centerpoint Station, and alerts them to the fact that the temperature inside Hollowtown is increasing to dangerously high levels.
In Vision of the Future, C-3PO participates in Talon Karrde's expedition to the Kathol Sector to find Jorj Car'das, serving as a translator.

====
Legends ====
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.
According to the Star Wars comic strip, C-3PO was activated hundreds of years before the events of the original film on the planet Affa.
A Guide to the Star Wars Universe affirms Affa as the droid's planet of origin, narrowing down his activation date to 112 years before A New Hope.
In The Phantom Menace (1999), it is revealed that C-3PO was built by a young Anakin Skywalker.
In the non-canon Star Wars Tales story "Thank the Maker", Vader remembers finding the defunct droid in Watto's junk heap and guessing it is several decades old.
In Star Wars media involving the Clone Wars, C-3PO serves as Padmé Amidala's personal protocol droid.
In "The New Face of War", a story in Star Wars: Republic, Queen Jamillia appoints the droid to serve as liaison to the Jedi during that campaign following the defense of Naboo and the bio-plague of Ohma-D'un by the Separatists.
He is a reluctant participant in many of Padmé's adventures, including a hazardous mission during the Battle of Ilum, in which his loyalty is essential in helping Jedi Master Yoda rescue fellow Jedi Luminara Unduli and Barriss Offee.
In Expanded Universe material set after Return of the Jedi, C-3PO assists Leia, Luke, and their allies in the Alliance (and later, the New Republic) on many missions.
Due to his function as a protocol droid, he most often stays with Leia Organa-Solo on Coruscant, assisting her political duties, while R2-D2 often stays with Luke at the Jedi Academy.

=====
Animated series =====
During the Droids series, set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope, C-3PO and R2-D2 are traded to various masters.

In Clone Wars, C-3PO's outer plating are upgraded to a shiny bronzium coating due to his tenure as Padmé's servant.
He also disapproves of combat droids, once demanding to "have a serious talk with their programmer".

=====
Comics =====
In 1994, Dark Horse Comics, in its self-titled compilation series, serialized a story titled Droids, which led into a 14-issue comic series continuing the adventures of C-3PO and R2-D2 before the events of A New Hope.
Lucasfilm did not require these to tie into the animated series of the same name.
Anthony Daniels and Ryder Windham also co-wrote a one-shot comic titled The Protocol Offensive (1997), based on a story by Brian Daley and with art by Igor Kordey.
In Empire's End, C-3PO and R2-D2 are nearly destroyed after they spot an Imperial installing a homing beacon on the Millennium Falcon; but are saved by Han Solo and Chewbacca.
The resurrected Palpatine and his fleet discover the Alliance's existence, leading C-3PO and the others to flee to Iziz, a city on the planet of Onderon.
Palpatine eventually finds them, but is mortally wounded by Han and destroyed when Empatojayos Brand sacrifices himself to save the latter's son Anakin.
In the non-canon Star Wars Tales story Storyteller, C-3PO is found partially destroyed and abandoned, years after the events of the original trilogy, by two slave boys.
He tells them stories of Luke Skywalker's adventures, and they imagine the stories played out by members of their own alien race.
As he is finishing his tale, a Vindar slavedriver appears, blasts C-3PO's head off, and kills Otalp.
After the Vindar leave the cave, Remoh finds a lightsaber in the remains of C-3PO's body and in so doing, finds hope for his people's freedom.

=====
Television =====
The US Department of Health and Human Services sponsored an approximately 1 minute long anti smoking television public service announcement.
In the PSA, C3PO finds R2D2 holding a cigarette, and warns R2D2 of the dangerous nature of smoking.

==
Behind the scenes ==
Anthony Daniels did not initially agree to be cast as C-3PO, but changed his mind after reading the character's part in the script and seeing a concept painting by Ralph McQuarrie, who based his early design largely on Walter Schulze-Mittendorff's Maschinenmensch from the Fritz Lang film Metropolis (1927).
The initial costume had to be roughened so it would not reflect too much light.
Daniels tried on the full costume for the first time the day before shooting began, and did not see its final appearance until being shown a Polaroid photograph of it while he wore the suit.
George Lucas originally envisioned the character as "more of a con man" with an American accent, but changed his mind after Daniels' voice performance outshone that of 30 other actors that tested for the role.
Mel Blanc was considered for the role, but according to Daniels, Blanc told Lucas that Daniels was better for the part.
C-3PO has been played by Daniels in 11 Star Wars films—ten live action (every episode of the "Skywalker Saga" and one Anthology film) and one animated.
In The Phantom Menace, a skeletal C-3PO model was puppeteered by Michael Lynch (who was also a chief model maker for all three prequel films), with Daniels providing the voice, and Lynch was removed in post-production.
Daniels attempted to puppeteer the skeletal droid for Episode II, but experienced difficulties; the puppet was replaced in favor of a fully plated C-3PO.
A filmed scene featured Padmé outfitting C-3PO with his plating, but it was cut to improve the pacing.
From Attack of the Clones to The Rise of Skywalker, as well as Rogue One, Daniels both wore the costume and provided the voice.
Daniels also played C-3PO in the live-action segments of Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), and voiced the character in the animated portion.
Daniels appeared as C-3PO at the 50th Academy Awards in 1978 and 88th Academy Awards in 2016.
He also voiced C-3PO in the radio drama adaptations of the original trilogy and five Star Wars animated series: Droids (1985–86), Clone Wars (2003–05),
The Clone Wars (2008–14), Rebels (2014–18) and Resistance (2018–20).
He reprised his role in The Lego Movie, in which C-3PO has a cameo appearance with crew members of the Millennium Falcon, and in the Star Wars Forces of Destiny episode "Beasts of Echo Base", in which his voice can be heard on Leia's comlink.
Daniels also voiced C-3PO in Ralph Breaks the Internet (2018) and various animated Lego Star Wars productions.
Star Wars Galaxy of Adventures features some of C-3PO's dialogue from the Skywalker Saga.

Daniels reprised his role of C-3PO for the Disneyland ride Star Tours, co-created by George Lucas in 1987.
He was videotaped while recording the dialogue, with the tape serving as a reference for the Imagineers to program an audio-animatronic C-3PO in the queue area.
Both it and the audio-animatronic R2-D2 are the original props used in filming.
Daniels also donned the costume for certain video segments played before and after the simulator ride itself, also portraying an electronically disguised Ewok announcer.
Daniels also appeared in the C-3PO costume for various promotional materials for Star Tours, including the electronic press kit, a Disney special on Star Tours hosted by Gil Gerard, and various opening day skits.
When Star Tours opened a bilingual version at Disneyland Paris, Daniels re-recorded C-3PO's dialogue in French.
C-3PO ends up in the pilot's seat of the Starspeeder 1000 in the attraction's successor, Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue, in which he is also played by Daniels.
Daniels made several appearances as C-3PO on numerous TV shows and commercials, notably on a Star Wars-themed episode of The Donny and Marie Show in 1977, Disneyland's 35th Anniversary and a Star Wars-themed episode of The Muppet Show in 1980.
Along with R2-D2, he also has a role as the character on Sesame Street episodes 1364 and 1396.
They also hosted several documentaries including The Making of Star Wars and Star Wars: Connections.
In 1977, a photograph appeared on a Topps Star Wars trading card in which C-3PO appeared to have a prominent phallus.
It was later withdrawn from circulation.
In 2007, the official Star Wars website hypothesized that this was caused by a part of the suit that had fallen into place just as the photograph was taken.
However, in 2019 Daniels clarified that the costume had become compromised during C-3PO's oil bath in A New Hope; the warm liquid had caused the costume to separate, leading to "an over-exposure of plastic in that region".
He further speculated in his 2019 autobiography that an artist had painted in the extended appendage.

==
Cultural influence ==
In 2012, the United States Navy built a robot called the Autonomous Shipboard Humanoid which they claim was modeled on C-3PO.
The robot was built for the purpose of extinguishing fires, but has similar movement abilities to the Star Wars droid by being able to climb ladders and carry hoses.
Also similar to C-3PO, it can respond to human gestures, but at a much more basic level, unlike the Star Wars droid.
One of NASA programs to collaborate with the private sector in the development of commercial space transportation it's named 'C3PO', acronym for Commercial Crew & Cargo Program Office.
Nicolas Ghesquière, creative director of Louis Vuitton, and Rodarte have created fashion designs inspired by C-3PO.

The cover photo of the August 2015 issue of GQ featured comedian Amy Schumer wearing a replica of Princess Leia's bikini and sucking one of C-3PO's fingers.
Lucasfilm and Disney objected to this image and tweeted a public statement that it was unauthorized.
In the Italian version of the original trilogy, C-3PO was named "D-3BO".
Anglicisms were not common in the Italian language during the 1970s and 1980s, and the names of various characters were changed to be easier to pronounce and recognize for Italian speakers.
Some of these changes were reverted in the dubbing of the prequel and sequel trilogies, where the original name C-3PO was used instead.
Other name changes in the Italian version of the original trilogy include R2-D2, Han Solo, Leia Organa and Darth Vader, who were called respectively "C1-P8", "Ian Solo", "Leila Organa" and "Dart Fener" (or "Lord Fener").

==
See also ==
R2-D2
BB-8


== Notes ==
Daniels, Anthony (2019).
I Am C-3PO: The Inside Story.
DK.
ISBN 9781465492562.

Herzfeld, Noreen L. (2002).
In our image: artificial intelligence and the human spirit.
Fortress Press.
ISBN 978-0-8006-3476-6.
Retrieved 4 February 2011.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
C-3PO in the StarWars.com Databank
https://starwars.fandom.com/wiki/C-3PO
C-3PO on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Trek:
The Next Generation is an American science fiction television series which aired in syndication from September 1987 through May 1994.
It is the second live-action series of the Star Trek franchise and comprises a total of 178 episodes over 7 seasons.
The series picks up about 95 years after the original series is said to have taken place.
The television episodes are listed here in chronological order by original air date, which match the episode order in each season's DVD set.

The main cast consisted of Patrick Stewart as captain Jean-Luc Picard, Jonathan Frakes as his second-in-command William Riker, Brent Spiner as chief of operations Data, LeVar Burton as chief engineer Geordi La Forge, Marina Sirtis as counselor Deanna Troi, Michael Dorn as chief of security Worf, and Gates McFadden as Dr. Beverly Crusher.
McFadden left the show after the first season and was replaced for the second season with Diana Muldaur as Dr. Katherine Pulaski, but returned for the third season and remained with the cast thereafter.
Wil Wheaton starred as Wesley Crusher in seasons 1–4, returning for guest appearances in seasons 5 and 7.
Denise Crosby played chief security officer Tasha Yar in the first season but her character was killed in the episode "Skin of Evil".

The Next Generation cast also appears in four feature films: Generations, First Contact, Insurrection, and Nemesis.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==
Both the series' premiere ("Encounter at Farpoint") and finale ("All Good Things...") originally aired as single two-hour presentations, but have since aired as two one-hour episodes.
===
Season 1 (1987–1988) ===


===
Season 2 (1988–1989) ===


===
Season 3 (1989–1990) ===


===
Season 4 (1990–1991) ===


===
Season 5 (1991–1992) ===


===
Season 6 (1992–1993) ===


===
Season 7 (1993–1994) ===


==
Home media ==
TNG was released on VHS cassette tapes, and these usually put two episodes on one tape.
For some releases the credits of both shows on the tape were shown combined at the end of the tape not separately.
===
DVD and Blu-Ray ===
Certain episodes of the series have also been released on eight "best of" collections.
The four Next Generation movies were released together on a Blu-ray set in 2009.
They have subsequently been re-released individually.

Three episodes were released on region-free Blu-ray Disc in January 2012.
The complete series was digitally remastered in 1080p high definition and will be available for Blu-ray releases, syndication on television, and distribution digitally.
There were also five fan collective DVD collections, that released a set of episodes across the Star Trek franchise but included episodes from TNG.
The five sets are Borg, Klingon, Q, Time Travel, and Captain's Log.

===
Streaming ===
The digital distribution of the remastered series has been through services such as iTunes and Amazon Video.
Seasons 1 and 2 were released on the US, Canadian and UK iTunes stores in early 2013, in both high and standard definition.
Seasons 3 and 4 were released on the US and Canadian iTunes stores in the second half of 2013, and on the UK store in March 2014 - again in both high and standard definition.
In early 2014, the first four seasons were added to the Australian iTunes Store in both high and standard definition.
Both high and standard definition versions of Season 5 were released digitally in the US via Amazon Video and iTunes in early May 2014, and later in the UK, Canadian and Australian iTunes stores.
In December 2014, Season 6 was added in both high and standard definition to the US iTunes Store.

The complete series was added to the Netflix streaming service in the US in 2011.
In 2015, the series was updated to the high-definition remastered version of the show.

== See also ==
Lists of Star Trek episodes


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==
Nemecek, Larry (2003).
Star Trek:
The Next Generation Companion (3rd ed.).
New York:
Pocket Books.
ISBN 0-7434-5798-6.
==
External links ==
Memory Alpha – a Star Trek wiki containing detailed episode guides
Episode guide at startrek.com
Star Trek:
The Next Generation – list of episodes at IMDb
"The Gathering" is the sixth episode of the fifth season of the American animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
It aired in the United States on November 3, 2012.
The episode marks the first in the series' Young Jedi arc, the entirety of which was screened at the Star Wars Celebration VI convention on August 25, 2012.
The episode follows six Jedi Younglings, guided by Ahsoka and Yoda, as they fulfill their rite of passage in constructing their own lightsabers, the main weapon used by the mystical Jedi.
The episode also discusses the lightsaber's power source, Kyber crystals, which amplify the power of the Force.

==
Plot ==
Padawan Ahsoka Tano and Jedi Master Yoda lead a group of Jedi Younglings on a trip to the planet Illum to complete their rite of passage in constructing their own lightsabers.
The lightsabers use Kyber crystals as a power source, and the crystals must be gathered from caves on the planet.
The two Jedi lead the Younglings to the cave entrance.
The entryway is blocked by ice, but Yoda uses a crystal to focus sunlight on the ice and melt it, revealing an entrance.
The Younglings are sent on their own into the caves to find their own Kyber crystals, and each Youngling has a flaw in their personality that they must overcome in order to escape the caves with their crystals before the entrance ices over again.

==
Production ==
The episode "The Gathering" and the rest of the episodes in the Young Jedi arc were originally shown at an 80-minute special presentation held at the Star Wars Celebration VI convention on August 25, 2012.
Only adults who had brought children with them to the convention were allowed into the presentation.

== Reception ==
Critics praised the episode's animation and imagery, as well as the introduction of the Young Jedi characters to the series (pictured at top right).
IGN's Eric Goldman wrote, "From the devilish mouth around one crystal to the glowing center of the ice [one of the Younglings] traveled to, it was all amazing to look at."
Bryan Young wrote that his favorite aspect of the episode was its exploration of Jedi mythology and compared the Youngling's rite of passage to the test Luke Skywalker was given inside the pit on Dagobah in the film The Empire Strikes Back.
Jayson Peters of the East Valley Tribune wrote that he appreciated how similar the voice for Yoda in the episode sounded to the original voice-overs done by Frank Oz in Yoda's first appearance in film,
The Empire Strikes Back.
Eric Goldman wrote in his review for IGN that the episode missed a major opportunity to explore the relationship between Ahsoka and Yoda: the two were left outside of the cave together while the Younglings completed their rite of passage, but the two Jedi's interactions during this time are not featured.
Goldman also noted that with six new characters being introduced during the one 22 minute episode, only the very basic aspects of the Younglings' personalities were developed.

==
Further reading ==
Geller, Eric (Nov 3, 2012). "
TFN TCW Review: "
The Gathering"".
TheForce.
Net.

Ury, Andy (Nov 5, 2012).
"
Expanding the Clone Wars – "The Gathering"".
EUCantina.net.

==
References ==
Kylo Ren is a fictional character and a major antagonist in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens, he is portrayed by Adam Driver.
Kylo Ren is the chosen name of Ben Solo, the only child of original Star Wars trilogy characters Han Solo and Princess Leia Organa.
Though trained by his uncle Luke Skywalker as a Jedi, he was seduced to the dark side of the Force by Supreme Leader Snoke, and aspires to be as powerful as his grandfather, the Sith Lord Darth Vader.
Ren is eventually redeemed like his grandfather before him and helps Rey in her fight against her grandfather, the revived Emperor Palpatine.

Ren is also the master of the Knights of Ren, as well as a commander and later the Supreme Leader of the First Order, an organization spawned from the former Galactic Empire.
He appears in The Force Awakens, The Last Jedi (2017), Star Wars Resistance (2018-2020), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), as well as related media and merchandising.
Driver's performance received acclaim from critics and fans.
For his performance in The Force Awakens, Driver won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor, making him the first Star Wars actor since Alec Guinness to win the award.
Driver received a second nomination in the same category for his performance in The Rise of Skywalker.
Kylo Ren is widely regarded as one of the greatest villains of the 2010s 


==
Concept and creation ==
Abrams requested that Ren's mask be designed to be memorable to a child.
As late as March 2014, the film's main antagonist was only known to the production team as "Jedi Killer", and had gone through numerous unapproved design attempts.
The same month, Glyn Dillon's design for the character's costume was finally approved.
According to Abrams, "the design was meant to be a nod to the Vader mask," and concept designer Doug Chiang says that the character "takes on [the] persona of [Vader] to haunt Luke."
According to The Force Awakens costume designer Michael Kaplan,

I don't know if it was the kind of spaghetti type lines on it or what, but the next time J.J. came by that was what we presented to him
and he loved it.
Also the silver in those lines kind of reflects and changes color with the action.
You know, if he's standing in front of fire you see that, so it almost brings you into the mask.

Driver's casting in the film in an unnamed role was first announced on April 29, 2014.
Kylo Ren was first seen from behind, but still not named, in the 88-second
The Force Awakens teaser trailer released by Lucasfilm on November 28, 2014, wielding a jagged red lightsaber with a crossguard.
The name Kylo Ren, as well as the character's design, was revealed by Entertainment Weekly in a Lucasfilm-designed Topps-style trading card mock-up on December 11, 2014.
A May 2015 Vanity Fair photo shoot by Annie Leibovitz confirmed that Driver would be portraying Kylo.
According to other cast members, Driver is a method actor, which meant that he sometimes stayed in character on set as Ren and left his mask on between scenes.
Driver explained that his goal was "to forget you're in Star Wars and treat it like any other job that's filled with moments and problems," because from the perspective of the characters living within the film's universe, "Darth Vader is real."
==
Character ==
Abrams told Empire in August 2015, "Kylo Ren is not a Sith.
He works under Supreme Leader Snoke, who is a powerful figure on the Dark Side of the Force."
Abrams had previously told Entertainment Weekly that the character, "came to the name Kylo Ren when he joined a group called the Knights of Ren."
Robbie Collin of The Telegraph described Ren as "a hot-headed, radicalised Dark Side jihadi, whose red lightsaber splutters and crackles as violently as his temper".
Abrams noted, "The lightsaber is something that he built himself, and is as dangerous and as fierce and as ragged as the character."
The Telegraph also explains that Ren's wild and erratic temper and "angsty" instability make him dangerous.
Melissa Leon of The Daily Beast describes Ren's use of the Force as "formidable", citing his ability to stop a blaster shot mid-air, immobilize victims and probe their minds against their will.
Kasdan told Entertainment Weekly in August 2015, "I've written four Star Wars movies now, and there's never been a character quite like the one that Adam plays.
I think you're going to see something that's brand new to the saga," noting that the character is "full of emotion".
Abrams explained, "I think that what makes Ren so unique is that he isn't as fully formed as when we meet a character such as Darth Vader ...
He is not your prototypical mustache-twirling bad guy.
He is a little bit more complex than that."
Driver said in December 2015 that, despite the visual similarities to Darth Vader, Ren is "unlike any villain the franchise has seen".
He explained:

I feel there's a recklessness about him that's maybe not normally associated with the Dark Side.
You normally think of order, and structure, and full commitment and no hesitation ...
he's just a little bit more unpolished.
It's in his costume, in his lightsaber—how you kind of get the sense that it could just not work at any moment; that it could just blow up.
That’s kind of like a big metaphor for him.

Driver claimed that he was privy to several details of Kylo Ren's backstory during the making of the films.
According to Lev Grossman, who interviewed the actor in the lead-up to The Rise of Skywalker, Driver reported that “both Han Solo and Leia were way too self-absorbed and into this idea of themselves as heroes to really be attentive parents in the way a young and tender Kylo Ren really needed.”
The backstory of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren was elaborated upon in a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren (written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney), which was published and released by Marvel Comics from December 18, 2019 to March 11, 2020.Certain aspects of Kylo Ren's overall arc across the three films of the Sequel Trilogy were also known to Driver from the start of production on the first film.
He claimed that he “had one piece of information of where it was all going...and things were building towards that.”
He later clarified:
J.J. Abrams told me when I met him for the first time that I should imagine a journey of a character completely opposite to Darth Vader...
someone who starts as a child and becomes a man over the course of three movies.
He becomes closer to his convictions, becomes more assured about his choices, but has metaphorically and physically killed his father to become his own person.

When asked by IGN in December 2017 if he believed Kylo Ren was capable of redemption, The Last Jedi writer/director Rian Johnson replied, “Yeah...
Are you kidding?
Vader was worse than Kylo ever was, I think, and Vader got redeemed.”
Citing the complexity of the character, Johnson articulated, “I don’t see the point of trying to get behind his mask and learn more about him if all we’re going to learn is ‘Yeah, he’s just an evil bad guy that needs to be killed.’”
The Rise of Skywalker co-writer Chris Terrio also supported this position through comparing Kylo with Darth Vader.
According to Terrio, “Vader was complicit in genocide and cruelty and depravity.
Yet there is this inherent optimism in Star Wars that the light in you is never truly gone.
That you can still redeem yourself right up until the last minute – which, in Vader’s case, was literally true...
Leia never really gave up hope that Kylo could be redeemed, and she knew that Rey was probably the way that it would happen.”
Abrams further elaborated on this point:
Maybe it’s the optimist in me, but I would like to think that anyone, even someone who does the most horrendous things, is redeemable.
And certainly because his mother, Leia, is a believer that there is still light in him, it was hard to imagine that she would be wrong about him.

The Rise of Skywalker revealed that Kylo Ren and Rey were two halves of a “dyad” in the Force, which Terrio alternatively described as “sort of soulmate[s] in the Force”  and “twins of fate, twins of destiny.”

==
Appearances ==


===
The Force Awakens (2015) ===
Kylo Ren first appears in The Force Awakens as a commander in the First Order, a tyrannical regime that has risen from the remains of the Galactic Empire.
After arriving at Jakku to retrieve a map containing the coordinates where Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) is to be found, Ren kills an old priest named Lor San Tekka (Max von Sydow), and captures Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), who has also been sent to recover the map by General Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher).
Ren soon learns that the pilot had entrusted his astromech droid, BB-8, with the map.
Poe flees with the help of rogue stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega), who later finds BB-8, and the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley).
Finn, Rey, and BB-8 escape Jakku in the Millennium Falcon, and are soon intercepted by the ship's former owner, Han Solo (Harrison Ford), and his co-pilot Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).

It is revealed that Ren is the son of Han and Leia, originally named Ben, and was once one of Luke's Jedi pupils.
He was corrupted to the dark side of the Force by the First Order's Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), and helped destroy Luke's new Jedi Academy.
However, Ren still feels the pull of the light side of the Force and seeks the strength to overcome it from his grandfather Darth Vader, whose burnt helmet is in Ren's possession.
Arriving at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong'o) castle on Takodana, Ren captures Rey, who he senses has seen the map.
While interrogating her, he realizes that she is strong with the Force, though unaware of it.
Rey finds herself able to resist his powers and experience Ren's emotions, and confronts him over his fear that he will never be as powerful as his grandfather.
She later uses the "Jedi mind trick" to compel her stormtrooper guard to let her escape.
Han arrives at the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, as part of the Resistance's plan to destroy it.

After Han plants explosives to destroy the base, he confronts Ren—calling him by his real name, Ben—and implores him to abandon the dark side, warning him that Snoke will kill him once he has control of the galaxy.
Ren tells Han he feels conflicted, and asks his father for help, which Han promises to give; Ren then ignites his lightsaber, impaling and killing Han.
An enraged Chewbacca fires at Ren, wounding him.
As Finn and Rey flee the damaged base, Ren follows and confronts them.
Finn fights Ren with Anakin Skywalker's recovered lightsaber, but Ren overpowers and severely wounds him.
Rey then takes up the lightsaber and, using the Force, begins to overcome Ren, striking him on the face with the lightsaber.
Before the duel is finished, they are separated by a seismic fissure created by the collapsing base.
Rey and the others escape as Snoke orders General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson) to evacuate the base and bring Ren to him to complete his training.

===
The Last Jedi (2017) ===
Ren's inner conflict continues into The Last Jedi, particularly through his conversations with Rey, with whom he connects through the Force.
Rey learns from Luke why Ben Solo turned to the dark side:
Luke had seen a vision of the destruction Ben would cause and was briefly tempted to kill him in his sleep; when Ben awoke to see Luke with his lightsaber drawn, he turned on his uncle and apparently destroyed the Jedi Temple.
Rey believes that there is still good in Ren, and resolves to bring him back to the light side.

Meanwhile, Ren is reproached by Snoke for his failure to defeat Rey, and Ren tries to prove himself by leading an attack on a lead Resistance starship.
He hesitates to destroy it after sensing his mother's presence, but his wingmen destroy the ship's bridge, almost killing Leia.
Upon Rey's arrival, Ren captures her and brings her to Snoke, who tortures her for Luke's location before ordering Ren to kill her.
Instead of complying, Ren uses the Force to ignite Luke's lightsaber at Snoke's side and cut him in half, and subsequently slays Snoke's royal guard with Rey's assistance.
After the guards are slain, Ren reveals to Rey his goal to create a new order in the galaxy, separate from the legacies created by Snoke and Luke, and beseeches Rey to join him.
He gets her to acknowledge that her parents abandoned her, and tells her that despite of her being a nobody that comes from nowhere, he truly cares about her.
Rey hesitates and then refuses to join him, realizing that Ren will not turn back to the light side; the two briefly struggle over Anakin's lightsaber with the Force, resulting in the weapon breaking in half and knocking both warriors unconscious.

After Rey escapes, Ren frames her for Snoke's assassination, uses the Force to choke Hux until he acknowledges Ren as the new Supreme Leader of the First Order, and orders his forces to attack the Resistance base on Crait.
When Luke appears during the attack, Ren orders his men to fire on him, to no effect; Luke remains standing, revealing that he is only present as a Force projection, serving as a distraction to allow the Resistance to escape from the First Order.
After Luke vanishes, the First Order storms the base, but the Resistance has already evacuated.
Ren shares a final look with Rey through the Force before Rey slams the door to the Millennium Falcon and escapes with the Resistance.

===
The Rise of Kylo Ren (2019–2020) ===
Ren's past as Ben Solo is depicted in The Rise of Kylo Ren.
As a child, he is trained as a Jedi by his uncle Luke Skywalker alongside his fellow students Voe, Hennix, and his best friend Tai; Voe grows jealous of Ben for his superior Force capability and Luke's perceived favoritism and nepotism.
On a mission to the planet Elphrona to investigate an ancient Jedi outpost with Luke and Lor San Tekka, Ben telepathically communicates with Snoke, whom Luke had recently fought, for which Ben respects him.
Upon arriving on the planet, the trio encounters the Knights of Ren, a group of Force-wielding mercenaries searching the ruins for artifacts.
After a brief confrontation between the group and Luke, their leader, Ren, stops the proceedings by activating a kill switch on his lightsaber.
After he and Luke agreeing to a truce, Ren unmasks and, placing his mask on the ground, offers Ben an open invitation to the group's ranks if he ever desires in the future, sensing great capability for "the Shadow" within him.

Several years later, after collapsing his hut on his uncle Luke after the latter apparently tried to kill him in his sleep, Ben yells towards the Jedi Temple in outrage at Luke's actions and is terrified when a bolt of lightning strikes, destroying it.
Later that night, Voe, Hennix, Tai return from off-planet to find Ben before the burning Temple.
After they are unable to sense Luke's presence, Ben elaborates on the confrontation, believing himself to have killed Luke, and states that he intends to leave the planet.
Believing Ben to be responsible for the Temple's destruction, Voe attacks Ben only to be easily subdued with Hennix and Tai, and Ben leaves the planet on a nearby shuttle, with the trio in close pursuit.
After considering returning to his mother on Hosnian Prime, Ben instead decides to meet Snoke in person after receiving another message from him.
Scarred from a previous encounter with Luke, Snoke encourages Ben to seek out the Knights of Ren.
Traveling to the outpost on Elphrona, Ben retrieves Ren's mask and puts it on, putting the pair in communication.
After mentioning Snoke, Ren invites Ben to meet the Knights on Vanrak, before he is confronted by Voe, having followed him via a tracker in his ship provided by Hennix.

Refusing to fight, only to defend himself from Voe's attacks, Ben uses the Force to catch her after she falls off of a building, witnessed by Tai.
However, Hennix, believing Ben to have killed her, throws his lightsaber in a lethal spin at Ben; in deflecting it, Hennix is bisected.
Leaving, Ben collapses the outpost around Voe and Tai to subdue them and leaves the planet.
Later, Ben meets with Ren and his Knights, who informs him he will need to provide a "good death" for membership.
After telling him of the encounter with Hennix, Ren states that Ben was not responsible for it, and therefore ineligible for membership, although he offers him another chance due to Snoke having vouched for him.
Providing him a uniform, the group proceeds to the Mine Moon of Mimban, where Ben assists the Knights in stealing an artifact known as the Mindsplinter from miners using a variation of the Jedi mind trick taught to him by Snoke.
Ben is horrified when the Knights subsequently execute the smugglers after Ren had promised Ben to merely release them.
Suddenly, Voe and Tai, having followed Ben from Tai reading his mind, arrive.
Voe attacks the Knights of Ren, while Tai reasons with Ben over his decision to leave, and the pair cease fighting.
Witnessing this, Ren snaps Tai's neck, killing him, telling Ben that Snoke was wrong and that he doesn't wish to "live in the shadow".
Declaring that "I am the Shadow", an enraged Ben takes up Tai's lightsaber and his own and duels Ren.
While doing so, Rey senses Ben from across the galaxy without knowing why, Ben's mother Leia senses his fall, Snoke calls out his praises and Palpatine is revealed to be manipulating both Snoke and Ben, and to have destroyed the Jedi Temple, although Ben remains unaware of this.
The duel culminates in Ben impaling Ren, providing him the "good death" he asked for before sending the Knights and Voe flying.

Shocked at Ben killing Ren, Voe attempts to reach for her lightsaber, only for it to be taken by Ben.
Deriding her role in Hennix's and Tai's deaths and declaring that she is "not a Jedi", Ben knights Voe with Ren's lightsaber, before turning to find the Knights of Ren kneeling before him, having accepted him as their new leader.
Later, on Ren's ship, Ben crushes the Kyber crystal from his own lightsaber in his bare hand and forges himself a new crossguard lightsaber in the image of one he had seen on Elphrona, taking the name Kylo Ren, derived from "Skywalker" and "Solo".
===
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ===
In The Rise of Skywalker, Ren has been ruling as the Supreme Leader of the First Order for a year.
In the film's beginning, Ren searches for a Sith Wayfinder to lead him to the Sith planet Exegol, with the hopes of killing the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) as a show of his power.
When Ren finds the Wayfinder and arrives on Exegol, Palpatine reveals that he has been manipulating Ren and the First Order, having created Snoke as a means of turning Ren to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order, a massive armada of planet-killing Star Destroyers.
Palpatine offers the armada to Ren in a bid to form a new Empire—with Ren as Emperor—on the condition that he kill Rey.

Ren searches the galaxy for Rey and continues corresponding with her through the Force to discern her location.
Rey has been searching for a second Wayfinder; Ren tries to stop her from finding it.
Eventually, Ren informs Rey that she is Palpatine's granddaughter, and furthermore, they are a dyad in the Force with extremely powerful potential when joined together.
He urges her once more to take his hand and to overthrow Palpatine together.
Rey refuses, but Ren is unwilling to kill her and follows her to Kef Bir, the location of the second Wayfinder.
Meeting her on the wreckage of the second Death Star, Ren destroys Rey's Wayfinder and duels her.
The duel ends with Rey impaling Ren, who had been distracted by his dying mother, Leia, reaching out to him through the Force.
A guilt-ridden Rey (also sensing Leia's death) uses the Force to heal Ren and leaves aboard his ship, after telling him that she wanted to take Ben Solo's hand, but not Kylo Ren's.
Alone on the wreckage, Ren converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber, renouncing his role as Supreme Leader and reclaiming his old identity of Ben Solo.

Ben rushes to help Rey defeat Palpatine on Exegol.
Rey senses his presence and uses their Force connection to give him Anakin's lightsaber, which Ben uses to defeat the Knights of Ren.
Palpatine then senses Rey and Ben's connection as a dyad of the Force, and absorbs their energy to restore his full power, before casting Ben into an abyss.
However, Rey manages to defeat and kill Palpatine before dying from the effort.
Ben climbs out of the abyss and finds Rey's inert body.
Ben manages to transfer all of his life essence into her, successfully resuscitating her but sacrificing his own life in the process.
They share a passionate kiss before Ben dies peacefully in Rey's arms.
His body fades away simultaneously as his mother's body becomes one with the Force at the Resistance base.

===
Related works and promotional material ===
Kylo Ren is a point of view character in the 2015, 2017, and 2019 novelizations of the Star Wars sequel trilogy by Alan Dean Foster, Jason Fry, and Rae Carson.

Kylo is a playable character in the 2015
The Force Awakens add-on to the Disney Infinity 3.0 video game, with an Infinity character figurine available separately.
He is also a character in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.
Hasbro has released a 3 3⁄4-inch (9.5 cm)
Kylo Ren action figure, and a 6-inch (15 cm) figure in their Black Series line.
He is also featured in the Lego Star Wars playsets Kylo Ren's Command Shuttle (2015) and Battle on Takodana (2016), as well as a Lego Buildable Figure.
The Lego version of Kylo also appears in the 2016 short form animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises, and as a playable character in Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In January 2016, Driver reprised the role for a Star Wars/Undercover Boss sketch on Saturday Night Live, with Kylo Ren disguising himself as a radar technician named "Matt" to determine what the Starkiller Base employees really think of him.
Driver again reprised the role in January 2020 for a follow-up Saturday Night Live sketch titled “Undercover Boss:
Where Are They Now?”
in which Kylo goes undercover as “Randy,” an entry-level intern on a star destroyer.
In the 2017 Chuck Wendig novel Star Wars: Aftermath: Empire's End, Ben Solo is stated as having been born on the planet Chandrila on the same day as a peace treaty is signed between the remnants of the Empire and the New Galactic Republic (about a year after Return of the Jedi, or 29 years before The Force Awakens).
Kylo Ren is also mentioned in the 2017 novel Star Wars: Phasma, which takes place before The Force Awakens.

Kylo appears in Star Wars Battlefront II, voiced by Matthew Wood and Roger Craig Smith, masked and unmasked respectively.
In the game, Kylo interrogates Del Meeko about Lor San Tekka's location (who possess the map to Luke Skywalker) using his Force abilities.
When Del finally relents and reveals the map and Lor San Tekka's location, Kylo leaves him for Hask, Del's former comrade in Inferno Squad.
Kylo Ren (voiced once again by Matthew Wood) also appears in the Star Wars:
Resistance series finale episode
"The Escape", where he kills Agent Tierny for failing to destroy the Colossus Resistance.

Matthew Wood also portrayed General Grievous in both Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and the TV series
Star Wars: The Clone Wars.

Kylo Ren is also one of the numerous voices heard in the fourth and final season of Star Wars: Rebels in the episode "A World Between Worlds", with an excerpt of Driver's dialogue from The Force Awakens being used.
Kylo Ren appears as a walk-around character within Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios.
The character appears during Star Tours – The Adventures Continue and
Star Wars:
Rise of the Resistance, with the latter featuring the character in audio-animatronic form with Driver providing the voice.
On November 28, 2019, Ichikawa Ebizō XI starred as Kairennosuke in Star Wars Kabuki: Kairennosuke and the Three Shining Swords (スター・ウォーズ歌舞伎〜煉之介光刃三本〜, Sutā Uōzu Kabuki ~Rennosuke
Kōjin San-pon~)
, a kabuki production that re-enacted key events of Kylo Ren in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi.

== Reception ==
The character and Driver's portrayal have received critical acclaim; Driver won the 2016 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal.
In January 2018, Kylo was voted seventh greatest movie villain of all time by the readers of Empire.

Many reviewers commended Ren's conflicted nature and depth, as well as his costume design, and noted there were many places the character could be taken in future installments.
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian praised the character and the actor alike, saying, "He is gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious – and unlike the Vader of old, he is given to petulant temper tantrums, with his lightsaber drawn."
Terri Schwartz of IGN also called Driver's performance "spectacular", noting that "his performance adds great depth to a character who could have come off as one-dimensional, and the implications of his arc leave a viewer with plenty to think about after they leave the theater.
"
Collin wrote, "To describe Kylo Ren as this film's Vader would be accurate in a sense ...
But it would also be to undersell the deep ingenuity with which this astonishing character has been crafted by Abrams, Kasdan and Arndt, and also the wells of emotional tumult Driver invests in him.
"
Comparing the character to the one-note Vader of the 1977 film, Melissa Leon calls Ren "a living battleground between darkness and light, making him a far more resonant and familiar portrayal of that struggle than we've ever seen in Star Wars ...
[which] makes him a far more interesting villain.
"
Abrams told Entertainment Weekly, "it was a great joy to work with Adam Driver on this role, because he threw himself into it in a deep and remarkable way."
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter noted, "Ren is given a pronounced inferiority complex, a clever bad guy twist that could be taken to interesting places both in the writing and performance."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote, "The bald-faced attempt to clone Vader, one of the greatest badasses in film history, is clankingly obvious, but Driver, masked and unmasked, gives him hypnotic and haunting contours."
Kyle Buchanan of Vulture.com was underwhelmed by the reveal of Driver under the mask.
Leon, however, argued:

But that face—that of a normal, vulnerable young man—is the most subversively terrifying thing about J. J. Abrams' reimagining of A New Hope.
Rather than pure evil, Ren is something far more familiar: He is human.
Just like the real-life young men with minds clouded by fear, hate, and anger who commit unspeakable acts in our world every day ...
all the visual cues that leave the character open to criticisms of not being "evil" enough—are all signs of Ren's struggle between the Dark Side and the Light.

Some viewers noted that Ren's character arc shares similarities with that of the Star Wars Expanded Universe character Jacen Solo, the son of Han Solo and Princess Leia who threatens the galaxy as a fallen Jedi.
Additionally, critics have noted a resemblance between Ren's character design and that of Revan, the protagonist of Knights of the Old Republic.

==
Family tree ==


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Szostak, Phil (2015).
The Art of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419717802.

Szostak, Phil (2017).
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419727054.

Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

Wendig, Chuck (2017).
Star Wars:
Aftermath: Empire's End.
Del Rey.
ISBN 9781101966976.

==
Further reading ==
Scoville, Max (December 20, 2017). "
Star Wars:
Hey, What's Up With The Knights of Ren?".
IGN.

==
External links ==
 Media related to Kylo Ren at Wikimedia Commons
Kylo Ren in the StarWars.com Databank
Kylo Ren on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Kylo Ren on IMDb
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch is an upcoming American animated series created by Dave Filoni for the streaming service Disney+.
It is part of the Star Wars franchise, acting as both a sequel to and spin-off from the series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
The Bad Batch is produced by Lucasfilm Animation, with Jennifer Corbett as head writer and Brad Rau as supervising director.

Dee Bradley Baker voices the clone troopers in the series, including the titular squad of elite clones with genetic mutations.
The series was officially ordered by Disney+
in July 2020 as a spin-off from The Clone Wars, with Filoni, Corbett, and Rau attached.

Star Wars:
The Bad Batch is set to premiere on May 4, 2021.

==
Premise ==
Clone Force 99, also known as the Bad Batch—a group of elite clone troopers with genetic mutations that were first introduced in Star Wars: The Clone Wars—take on daring mercenary missions in the aftermath of the Clone Wars.

== Cast and characters ==
Dee Bradley Baker as all of the clone troopers in the series, including the members of Clone Force 99 /
the Bad Batch (Hunter, Wrecker, Tech, Crosshair and Echo) and Captain Rex.
Star Wars creator George Lucas wanted the Bad Batch to be more unique than other clones, with each having special abilities, but he did not want them to be superheroes.

Ming-Na Wen as Fennec Shand:
An elite mercenary and sniper.

Stephen Stanton as Grand Moff Tarkin: A high-ranking Imperial officer.

Andrew Kishino as Saw Gerrera: A freedom fighter with ties to the Rebel Alliance.

==
Production ==


===
Background ===
By September 2016, Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels supervising director Dave Filoni had stepped back from that position on the latter series so he could focus more on the series' writing as well as the development of future animated series for Lucasfilm.
In July 2018, Filoni announced that a final season of The Clone Wars would be released on the streaming service Disney+
in 2020.
The season includes a four episode arc introducing a squad of clone troopers with genetic mutations known as the Bad Batch; the episodes previously existed as story reels for an earlier, unfinished season of the series, and came directly from the plans of Star Wars creator George Lucas.

===
Development ===
Disney+ officially ordered a new series from Lucasfilm Animation in July 2020 titled Star Wars:
The Bad Batch, a spin-off from the final season of The Clone Wars following the Bad Batch clones in the aftermath of the Clone War.
The announcement described the series as Dave Filoni's vision, and he serves as executive producer alongside Lucasfilm's Athena Portillo, supervising director Brad Rau, and head writer Jennifer Corbett, with Lucasfilm's Carrie Beck and Josh Rimes as co-executive producer and producer, respectively.
Filoni described the series as "very much in the vein" of The Clone Wars and said it would stay true to Lucas's vision for that series of telling epic, exciting adventure stories.

===
Casting ===
The first trailer for the series was released in December 2020, and confirmed that Dee Bradley Baker would return from The Clone Wars as the voice of all the clone troopers in the series, including the members of the Bad Batch and Captain Rex.
It also revealed that a younger version of the character Fennec Shand from the series
The Mandalorian would be appearing in the series, and actress Ming-Na Wen soon confirmed that she would reprise her role as Fennec from The Mandalorian.
Additionally, Stephen Stanton and Andrew Kishino reprise their roles as Grand Moff Tarkin and Saw Gerrera, respectively.

===
Music ===
Kevin Kiner was confirmed to be scoring the series in January 2021, after previously scoring The Clone Wars and Rebels.
He wrote the Bad Batch Theme for the final season of The Clone Wars.

==
Marketing ==
Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy promoted the series at Disney's Investor Day event on December 10, 2020, revealing the first trailer for the series.
Jacob Oller of Syfy Wire felt the trailer made the series look like a more action-heavy version of The Clone Wars, and compared it to the 1980s television series The A-Team.

==
Release ==
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch is scheduled to premiere on Disney+
on May 4, 2021, Star Wars day, with a special 70-minute episode.
The second episode will release on May 7, 2021, with subsequent episodes releasing weekly.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Sith are the main antagonists of many works in the fictional universe of the Star Wars franchise.
The Sith Order are depicted as an ancient monastic and kraterocratic cultist organization of supernaturally gifted Force-wielders driven by a machiavellian-imperialist agenda of galactic domination and revenge against their arch-rivals, the Jedi Order.

Sith are ruthless and totalitarian by design, in which a supreme autocratic authority is concentrated in a single individual granted the honorific Dark Lord of the Sith.
Sith culture is of perpetual self-destruction and reinvention; transfer of power is conducted through state-sanctioned assassinations: when a Sith Lord grows complacent, begins to show weakness, and is eventually killed, their property and authority are transferred to the apprentice who killed them.
Robberies, betrayal, and sabotage are commonplace; murder is acceptable so long as the culprit is not caught.
Sith teach their apprentices to revere the dark side of the Force and to believe that the galaxy was theirs to rule by cosmic right.
This kraterocratic system ensures that Sith society nurtures some of the most vicious and competitive individuals in the galaxy and is only governed by those strong enough to seize control.

==
Etymology ==
The word Sith was first used in the 1974 rough draft of Star Wars with the first published use being the 1976 novelization of Star Wars as a title for the key villain Darth Vader, the "Dark Lord of the Sith".
Sith characters had also been portrayed as such in some Star Wars Legends works prior to the release of The Phantom Menace, and in archived footage for the original Star Wars.

The term "Dark Jedi" was sometimes used for characters who would be later identified as Sith, or had goals and practices similar to the Sith.
In his novel series The Thrawn Trilogy, author Timothy Zahn labeled Sith Lord Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine as "Dark Jedi", and the term "Sith" was never mentioned in the series until later reprints of the novels.
"
Dark Jedi" is also the name given in the Star Wars universe to antihero fictional characters attuned to the Force and adept in its dark side.
However, the concept of "Dark Jedi" is not referenced anywhere in any of the theatrical Star Wars films, and they exist by that name only in non-canonical Star Wars Legends media, including video games such as Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and the Star Wars: Jedi Knight series.
The Sith were not mentioned by name in canonical movies until the prequel trilogy used the word on film starting with 1999's The Phantom Menace.

===
Influences ===
George Lucas acknowledged that the Jedi, Sith, and other Force concepts have been inspired by many sources.
These include: knighthood, chivalry, paladinism, samurai bushido, Shaolin Monastery, Feudalism, Hinduism, Qigong, Greek philosophy and mythology, Roman history and mythology, parts of the Abrahamic religions, Confucianism, Shintō, Buddhism and Taoism, and numerous cinematic precursors.
The works of philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche and mythologist Joseph Campbell, especially his book The Hero with a Thousand Faces (1949), directly influenced Lucas, and was what drove him to create the 'modern myth' of Star Wars.

In particular, the contrasting narrative relationship between the dark side-using Sith and light side-using Jedi mirrors several modern and classical literary tropes.

Most prominently, the conflict between the Sith and Jedi employs the classic trope of black and white moral dualism—an elemental contrast between evil (the "darkness") and good (the "light") first postulated and elaborated in Zoroastrianism, from which the core mythos of Star Wars is much influenced.

The ongoing struggle of the humanistic "light side"-affiliated Jedi to permanently defeat the egoistic "dark side"-affiliated Sith is framed not only as a contest of values, but as a deep metaphysical conflict: The dark side of the Force is viewed by the Jedi, and generally represented within Star Wars media, as not only a dangerous expedient but as a form of existential corruption which must be purged for the universe, or a person, to attain spiritual balance.

Jedi are often depicted as imperfect individuals, but their cause of selfless heroism is ultimately on the right side of an inexorable cosmic struggle against evil, embodied in the power-hungry Sith and the dark side of the Force.

The dualistic relationship between the Sith' and the Jedi' concepts of "purity" mirrors the philosophical and literary concept of "Apollonian and Dionysian": the Jedi are portrayed as embracing purity, reason, temperance, altruism and other humanistic virtues; the Sith, by contrast, embrace curiosity, emotion, conflict, power, instincts, unfettered self-interest and other hedonistic vices.
However, whereas the classic Greek concept did not necessarily view the Apollonian and Dyonisian principles as opposed, Star Wars frames the Jedi and Sith as opponents in a dire moral struggle, with the Sith cast as corrupted villains apparently destined to defeat or self-destruction in the end.

Although a path to temporary power, the Sith way inevitably leads to ruin.

Within the Star Wars narrative, the Jedi and Sith naturally have different self-understandings.
In Sith rhetoric, the relationship between the philosophies of the Jedi and Sith closely mirrors Nietzsche's concept of master–slave morality.
Sith value "master" virtues, such as pride and power, whereas the Jedi value altruistic virtues like kindness and empathy.
The goal of the Sith is tangible greatness: the ability to shape and destroy the world according to one's will alone.
The goal of the Jedi is moral goodness: freedom from inner, and outer, turmoil and suffering.
However, the Sith consider the Jedi's aspirations to be either hopeless or pathetic.
To the Sith, greater power is the only authentic goal.

==
Development ==
Originally, George Lucas conceived the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel had served Adolf Hitler.
In developing the history for The Empire Strikes
Back, Lucas condensed this into one character in the form of Darth Vader.

===
Fictional backstory ===


====
Sith Ideology ====
Sith philosophy lionized conflict as a catalyst for growth and as a tool for purging the weak, disloyal, undisciplined and unworthy.
Sith academies were structured with rules, lectures, and classes, with an underlying "kill or be killed" mentality amongst the apprentices.
Sith emphasize "survival of the fittest" and view restraint as a weakness.
Members adhere to master morality, are characterized by the desire to seize power by any means necessary, leveraging force (both physical and supernatural), social maneuvering, and political cunning to their advantage.
The Sith cultivate a connection to the dark side of the Force, which provides them with easy access to superhuman power and arcane knowledge; however, the trade-off is the severe cost of adopting a dark triad personality that corrodes their basic capacity for empathy, kindness, and love.

Throughout Star Wars media and in popular culture, the Sith are infamous as the dualistic antagonists to the Jedi, an affiliation of altruistic warriors who strive to use their own martial training and connection to the "light side" of the Force to promote peace and the common welfare throughout the galaxy.
The Sith have a philosophical framework that "justifies" their ruthless and self-serving actions, but their agenda are considered appalling by society in general, and the Jedi who actively oppose them.
To counteract the Jedi's benevolent influence, the Sith were responsible for secretly instigating many small regional conflicts as part of their larger plan to destabilize the Republic and eventually take control of the galaxy.
Hiding in the shadows, their fingerprints are everywhere, in every conflict in the galaxy, and their subversive influence reaches far and wide.

Over their long storied history, the Sith have established great empires, come close to realizing their ambitions of galactic conquest, and nearly eradicated the Jedi.
Ultimately, however, they are self-defeating, their grand plans undone time and again by internal strife, rebellion inspired by their vicious tactics, and the psychologically noxious effects of their dark arts and philosophy.

====
The Dark Side of the Force ====
The Sith are dedicated to the "Sith Code" and to mastering the dark side of the Force.
The Sith Code identifies conflict as the fundamental dynamic of reality, and holds that the search for lasting peace, within or without, is both quixotic and misguided.
Rather, Sith embrace strife and dark passion as salutary and emancipatory forces, as they believe that violent struggle purges the decadent and weak, and that emotions such as aggression and hate provide the strength and resolve to secure freedom through victory.
Although Sith seek dominion, Sith philosophy stresses that power belongs only to those with the strength, cunning, and ruthlessness to maintain it, and thus "betrayal" among the Sith is not a vice but an endorsed norm.
Accordingly, the Sith reject altruism, self-abnegation and kindness, as they regard such attitudes as founded on delusions that fetter one's perceptions and power.
In connection with their philosophy, the Sith draw on the dark side of the Force through severe negative emotions, a technique antipodal to that of their archenemies, the Jedi, who rely on the Force's "light side," i.e., the Force as experienced through disciplined states of quietude and compassion.
Notably, both the Jedi and Sith shun romantic and familial love, as the Jedi fear such love will lead to attachment, and thus selfishness, and the Sith fear it will compromise their ruthlessness and connection to the dark side of the Force.

Although the Sith are intimately linked to the dark side, not every user of the dark side is a Sith, nor is every user of the light side a Jedi.

Yes, a Jedi’s strength flows from the Force.
But beware of the dark side.
Anger, fear, aggression; the dark side of the Force are they.
Easily they flow, quick to join you in a fight.
If once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your destiny, consume you
it will, as it did Obi-Wan’s apprentice.

The dark side of the Force is stigmatized as seductive, corruptive, and addictive by the Jedi, who view it as evil, whereas the Sith consider the dark side of the Force to be its most powerful manifestation, and regard the abstemious Jedi as blinded by false virtue.
As portrayed in all Star Wars-related media, the dark side provides users with powers similar to those of the light side-using Jedi, but as it leverages passion and violence, its use is enhanced by negative raw and aggressive emotions and instinctual feelings such as anger, greed, hatred, and rage.
By deciding to learn the ways of the dark side of the Force, the Sith may also acquire powers and abilities considered by some in the Star Wars universe to be unnatural.
A notable example is a form of directed dielectric breakdown called "Force lightning," infamously used by the Sith Lord Darth Sidious to torture Jedi-initiate and rebel Luke Skywalker.
Darth Sidious claimed that his own master, Darth Plagueis, could even use the Force to avert the natural deaths of those whose lives he wished to save.
Being uninhibited in their use of the Force, Sith could also repurpose abilities shared with the Jedi, such as telekinesis, to new and terrifying effect: Darth Vader was infamous for his use of telekinetic strangulation, or "Force choke," as a means of execution or intimidation.
Kylo Ren was able to stop blaster bolts mid-air with the Force and also used it to activate lightsabers remotely to kill enemies.

Beneath anger is always fear.
Fear is the path to the dark side.
Fear leads to anger, anger leads to hate, hate leads to suffering.
I sense much fear in you.
Train yourself to let go of everything you fear to lose.

Extended indulgence in the dark side reshapes the user's psychology, resulting in a loss of humanity, morality, empathy, and the ability to love, leaving every Sith, to varying degrees, amoral, cruel, sadistic and violent.
Considering this dark change in personality to be a transformation into a different person altogether, some who turn to the dark side take on a different name, as they regard their former persona as dead and destroyed.
Sith Lords, in particular, adopt a new name upon their initiation into the Order, prefixing it with the title Darth (e.g., "Darth Vader").
Severe saturation in the dark side may even lead to physical degradation.
Although Sith are deeply affected by the Machiavellian methods and dark arts they practice, they are not portrayed as necessarily irredeemable:
Some Sith, most famously Darth Vader in the final moments of his life, have renounced the Order and the dark side of the Force, as has Kylo Ren.

The dark side is generous...
It is patient and it always wins – but in the heart of its strength lies its weakness: one lone candle is enough to hold it back.

Martial arts are a core part of the Sith tradition, and Sith featured in the Star Wars film series have all been highly trained warriors who further augment their abilities with the Force.
Like the Jedi, the Sith's signature armament is an extremely lethal focused energy melee weapon known as a lightsaber, which (generally) only those trained in the ways of the Force can use effectively, although General Grievous, a non-Force user, was able to murder numerous Jedi and seize their lightsabers as weapons.
Sith use lightsabers in combination with Force-derived powers, such as telekinesis, enhanced dexterity and precognition, to achieve superhuman combat prowess.
A fully trained Sith is depicted as being at least a match for a well-trained Jedi Knight, and either can handily defeat multiple ordinary attackers armed with projectile weapons.
In matters of dress, Sith may adopt any attire consistent with their plans or guise; they commonly favor black robes, armor and gis when presenting themselves authentically.

===
Fictional backstory (Legends) ===
In the Legends continuity, the Sith Order began around 6,900 BBY, during a period known as the Hundred Year Darkness.
A series of conflicts began between the rebellious dark Jedi, a faction of the Jedi Order, and the rest of the Order.
The dark Jedi were defeated and cast out, exiled to the unknown regions.
These Exiles came across the planet Korriban, and its native species, the Sith.
The strongest among the Exiles, Ajunta Pall, became the first to hold the title Dark Lord of the Sith.
His contemporaries, such as Karness Muur and XoXaan became Sith Lords.
The human Dark Jedi interbred with the Sith species, who also had an affinity for the Dark Side.
They would become the original Sith Empire.

One of the earliest leaders of this Sith Empire was Tulak Hord.
He expanded the Sith territories and conquered the Dromund System, home to Dromuund Kaas, later the capital of the Sith Empire.
He was eventually followed by Marka Ragnos, the last ruler of a period known as the Golden Age of the Sith.
Upon the passing of Ragnos, two contenders for the throne of Dark Lord, Naga Sadow and Ludo Kressh, dueled at his funeral.
Eventually, after a series of conflicts, Sadow was victorious, and Kressh apparently killed.

Sadow began the Great Hyperspace War, invading the Republic and laying siege to its planets.
Sadow's efforts were initially met with success, his forces amplified by illusions that Sadow projected from his meditation sphere.
Unfortunately, the Dark Lord's concentration was broken when his apprentice turned on him.
With his illusions dispersed, Sadow's forces were forced to retreat.
Upon returning to Sith space, they found that Kressh had not been killed, and engaged him in a space battle.
Sadow was victorious again, but they were soon attacked by Republic forces.
Sadow escaped by causing the Denarii Binary Star to go supernova.

The Sith Empire would eventually rise again, with the rise of Exar Kun and Ulic Qel-Droma.
The spirit of the deceased Dark Lord, Marka Ragnos, declared Kun Dark Lord of the Sith, and made Qel-Droma his apprentice.
Allying themselves with warriors such as the Mandalorians, Kun and Qel-Droma declared war on the Galactic Republic.
During a raid on the Jedi Library at Ossus, Qel-Droma dueled and killed his brother, but was captured.
Qel-Droma was redeemed and was instrumental in Kun's downfall, when the latter retreated to Yavin 4.

At some point following the Mandalorian Wars, the individuals known as Revan and Alek declared themselves Sith Lords, and became Darth Revan and Darth Malak respectively.
Their brutal campaign against the Republic was hugely successful.
Revan was eventually betrayed by Malak, allowing a Jedi strike team to capture him.
Malak continued his conquest without Revan's tactical leadership until a redeemed Revan defeated him, and the Star Forge, the source of the Sith Fleet was destroyed.

Remnants of Revan's Sith Empire, led by the Sith Triumvirate, consisting of Darth Traya, Darth Nihilus, and Darth Sion, began a shadow war against the Jedi.
This First Jedi Purge, brought the Jedi Order to the brink of extinction.
Their downfall came about when Meetra Surik, a Jedi who was exiled after the Mandalorian Wars, returned to known space.
She defeated the three Sith, and without the Sith leadership, and the destruction of their base of operations on Malachor V, the remaining Sith forces faded into obscurity.

Around 300 years later, the original Sith Empire, now under the leadership of Emperor Vitiate, emerged from the Unknown Regions and declared war on the republic.
This war, dubbed the Great Galactic War, was halted when Vitiate, on the cusp of victory, was restrained by the telepathic prowess of Revan.
After a period of non-fighting, called the Galactic Cold War, tensions boiled over, and the Galactic War began.
The Sith empire eventually fell to infighting and mostly disappeared.
Occasionally, a Dark Lord such as Darth Rivan or Darth Ruin, would rise and fall, but the Sith did not become a major threat again until around 2,500 years later.

At this point, the Brotherhood of Darkness arose, led by the Sith Lord Skere Kaan.
They focused on controlling the infighting between the Sith.
This policy allowed them to make great progress in their war against the Republic.
Ironically, one of their own, a Sith Lord by the name of Bane turned on them, because he disapproved of their methods.
He manipulated the Brotherhood into extinction, and they were defeated.
Bane started the Rule of Two, which evolved into the Sith as they are seen in the films.

===
Fictional history ===
The Star Wars saga began with the film Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, which was released in 1977.
Since then, films, books, computer games and comics have been released, all set in the fictional universe of Star Wars, which has expanded the history of the Sith within their stories.

The schemes of the Sith are key to the overarching plot of the Star Wars films and much other fictional material in the franchise.
Their background has varied among depictions, but the Sith have always been insidious archenemies of the Jedi leveraging dark arts in pursuit of power and revenge.
The Sith were first mentioned in A New Hope in a scene ultimately cut from the film.
They were expanded upon heavily in the following years in books, comics, games and other multimedia.
The Sith were formally introduced on-screen with the release of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace in 1999 as a shadowy martial order manipulating the movie's political factions into a galaxy-spanning civil war.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars first aired on Cartoon Network in 2008.
This series took place between Episode II: Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.
During this time, Anakin Skywalker is a full-fledged Jedi Knight and the series shows how he progresses into his fall to the Dark Side of the Force.
Count Dooku is the active Sith Lord and leader of the Separatist Alliance.
The series also explores Dooku's attempts at training secret apprentices like Asajj Ventress and Savage Opress in order to eventually defeat Darth Sidious and become the ruling Sith Lord.

====
Emergence of the Sith Order ====
The origin, agenda, abilities and philosophy of the Sith are intertwined with their relationship to the Force.
With proper training, the Force may be called upon by rare individuals capable of "sensing" or "touching" it to achieve extraordinary feats such as telekinesis, precognition and mental suggestion.
Not all psychological states are conducive to employing the Force; discipline is required.
However, both quietude and focused, intense passion alike can be effective.
The Sith originated in a species of Force-sensitive warriors who discovered the efficacy of passion as a tool to draw on the Force at least 5,000 years prior to the events of the first Star Wars film.
Fully embracing this approach, they became defined and corrupted by it.

The warriors who would become the first Sith were apparently heterodox members of an older martial order of Force-sensitive sapient beings in the Star Wars universe: The Jedi.
The Jedi served as a space-faring knightly order within the Galactic Republic, a representative democracy encompassing most developed worlds.
The Jedi Order sought to use the powers of the Force to help defend the weak and advance the rule of law across the galaxy, in keeping with their ethics of self-sacrifice and service to the common welfare.
The Jedi creed mirrored their method of utilizing the Force, and Jedi doctrine favored states of serenity, detachment, compassion, and humility as the proper means of accessing its power.
When members of the Jedi Order began to experiment with passion as an alternative, controversy emerged.
The Jedi establishment saw these innovations as a threat to the ethos of the Jedi, opening members to the seduction of aggrandizement and cruelty.
Eventually, this controversy led to a sectarian conflict in which the heterodox Jedi were defeated and exiled.
In exile, the dissident Jedi were free to explore the relationship between passion and the Force.
They concluded that the martial and ethical disciplines of the Jedi establishment were foolish and misguided: Passion, not quietude, was the most potent means of accessing the Force, and conflict, not peace, was the natural and healthy state of the universe.
Rejecting the self-abnegation of their forebears, the exiles now embraced ruthless personal ambition, believing that power belonged to those with the cunning and strength to seize it.
In their training, the dissidents would seek to master the Force by cultivating dark passions such as anger and hate, a practice anathematized by the Jedi as taking recourse to the Force's "Dark Side."
Guided by their kratocratic and egoistic philosophy and armed with taboo Dark Side techniques, the former Jedi exiles would reemerge to menace the galaxy as the Sith Order, aiming to conquer the Galactic Republic and exact revenge against the Jedi.

A succession of Sith-led regimes would arise to challenge the Jedi and the Galactic Republic.
However, internal power struggles would prove decisive in thwarting the Sith's designs.
The paradox of reconciling endless personal ambition with corporate action would become a great practical and philosophical concern for the Sith.
Ultimately, this paradox would be “resolved” through a drastic reorganization effected by a leader named Darth Bane, who recast the Sith in an esoteric lineal master-apprentice tradition known as “The Rule of Two.”
Thereafter (at least, as a matter of orthodoxy) there would be only two Sith at a time:
One to embody power, and another to crave it.
While concealing their identity as Sith, a succession of Sith masters and apprentices would work through the centuries to inveigle or force themselves into positions of power and undermine responsible government, preparing the Galactic Republic for eventual usurpation.
The Banite tradition encouraged each apprentice to eventually challenge and slaughter his or her master, and take an apprentice in turn.
In this way, Darth Bane guaranteed the conspiracy remained a secret for a thousand years; he believed that the kratocratic essence of Sith philosophy could be reconciled with a sustained project of galactic domination and revenge against the Jedi.
The first six Star Wars films chronicle the consummation, and eventual undoing, of this ancient scheme.

====
Ascent to power of the Sith ====
Darth Bane's plan would come to fruition through Sheev Palpatine, a Naboo Senator, later Supreme Chancellor, of the Galactic Republic, and secretly a Dark Lord of the Sith (“Darth Sidious”).
By manipulating disgruntled factions within the Galactic Republic, Palpatine orchestrated civil war.
This conflict, known within the Star Wars universe as the "Clone Wars", provided a justification for consolidating power in the Galactic Republic's chief executive and assembling a large army of hastily cloned soldiers—surreptitiously conditioned to obey certain key commands issued by Palpatine.
Although the Jedi eventually discovered Palpatine's identity as a Sith and attempted to arrest him, this action was anticipated by Palpatine, who framed their actions as an attempted coup, providing in turn a pretext for annihilating the Jedi by activating “Order 66,” one of the clone soldiers’ embedded protocols.
In the course of effecting his designs, Palpatine also manipulated the Jedi's most powerful initiate, Anakin Skywalker, into his service, by promising to teach Skywalker dark side techniques that could save the life of Padmé Amidala, a Galactic Senator to whom Skywalker was secretly married in violation of Jedi rules, and whose death in childbirth Skywalker had preternaturally foreseen.
In a tragic irony, Amidala's sheer horror at discovering Skywalker's collaboration with Sidious in destroying the Jedi would itself be the cause of her death during childbirth, though Sidious would trick Skywalker into believing that an episode of Skywalker's physical abuse of Amidala had been the actual cause of her death.
Skywalker's subsequent emotional collapse would lead him to fully embrace the dark side of the Force and assume the persona of Darth Vader, Lord of the Sith.
With Darth Vader at his side, the Emperor would rule the newly styled Galactic Empire for approximately 20 years as its Emperor.
Initially unknown to Vader and Sidious, two children were delivered by Padme before her death.

====
Sith temples ====
The Rebels episode "Twilight of the Apprentice" features a forbidden planet called Malachor, home of an ancient Sith temple.
The temple contains a superweapon, and can only be activated by placing a special Sith Holocron in an obelisk at the summit of the pyramid inside the temple.
Thousands of years prior, a battle was waged on Malachor that resulted in the deaths of its inhabitants.
Somewhere between the events of his last appearance in Solo:
A Star Wars Story and this Rebels episode
, Darth Maul had become stranded on the planet.
When Ahsoka Tano, Kanan Jarrus and Ezra Bridger arrive, Ezra is separated from them.
He is discovered by Maul, and together, they use the Force cooperatively to solve a series of tests, and retrieve a Sith Holocron.
With the help of Kanan and Ahsoka, they fought three Inquisitors, all of whom are killed by Maul.
Maul then betrays his allies, blinding Kanan, and proceeds to activate the superweapon.

Maul is defeated by a sightless Kanan, and Darth Vader arrives with the intention of retrieving the holocron, but is challenged by Ahsoka, his former Padawan.
While the superweapon is preparing to fire, Kanan and Ezra retrieve the holocron and escape, preventing the weapon of mass destruction from being used.
Even though the temple is destabilized, Ahsoka and Vader keep fighting to the death within the rapidly crumbling building, until it eventually explodes, wounding Vader.
The Star Wars Resistance episode "The Relic Raiders" depicts a Sith temple hidden underneath a later Jedi temple.

====
End of the Sith ====
Anakin's children, Leia, and Luke Skywalker would become key members of the Rebel Alliance to restore the Galactic Republic.
Luke would be secretly tutored in the ways of the Force by Vader's own former Jedi master, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and a powerful elder Jedi, Yoda, who also survived Palpatine's purge.
Ironically, during a final confrontation between Luke Skywalker, Darth Vader and the Emperor aboard a mobile battle station known as the Death Star, the Sith lineage would end as Darth Bane prescribed that it proceed.
Darth Sidious offered Skywalker an ultimatum to enter his service or die, and proceeded to use his Force-derived powers to torture and kill Skywalker when the latter refused to embrace the dark side of the Force.
Experiencing a crisis of conscience at the imminent death of Skywalker, whom Vader now knew to be his son, Darth Vader chose to intervene and kill his former master, Sidious, fulfilling the prophecy of the Chosen One.
Vader would die of his own injuries shortly thereafter, thus apparently bringing an end to the Sith and their ancient vendetta.

The 2019 film
The Rise of Skywalker depicts the climax of the conflict between the Sith and the Jedi, and features the group known as the Sith Eternal, led by a resurrected Darth Sidious.
When Sidious meets his final demise at the hands of his granddaughter, Rey, the moment also marks the definitive end of the Sith.

==
Overview ==


===
Timeline of members ===
Before the films - At an unknown point in time, numerous Jedi become disillusioned with the Order and exile themselves, forming the Sith Order.
Thousands of years later, a centuries-long war between the Jedi and the Sith takes place, which culminates with the apparent defeat of all the Sith.
The sole survivor, Darth Bane, takes an apprentice and goes on to create the Rule of Two, allowing the Sith to continue existing in secret for almost a millennium.
Almost 1000 years after Bane's death, Darth Plagueis trains Sidious, who ultimately kills Plagueis in his sleep and takes Darth Maul as his first apprentice.

Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace - Sidious and Maul.
The latter is seemingly killed by Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones - Sidious and Darth Tyranus.
Maul lives, but is still presumed dead and does not appear in the film.

Star Wars: The Clone Wars film and series - Sidious, Tyranus, and Maul.
Tyranus also takes Asajj Ventress as an informal apprentice, before replacing her with Savage Opress.
Opress later betrays Tyranus and becomes the apprentice of his brother Maul, who now operates on his own as a crime lord.
Ventress gives up her Sith ways and becomes a bounty hunter, but gets killed by Tyrannus.
Opress also gets killed by Sidious.

Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith - Sidious and Tyranus.
The latter is killed and replaced by Anakin Skywalker, who becomes Darth Vader.
Maul also lives, but does not appear in the film.

Solo:
A Star Wars Story - Maul.
Sidious and Vader also live, but do not appear.

Star Wars Rebels - Sidious, Vader, and Maul.
The latter no longer sees himself as a Sith and lives in exile; he is later killed in a duel with  his long-time rival, Obi-Wan Kenobi.
The Inquisitors are trained by Vader as Jedi hunters, but none are official Sith; the Grand Inquisitor, the Fifth Brother, the Seventh Sister, and the Eight Brother Inquisitors are all ultimately killed.

Rogue One and Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope - Vader.
Sidious lives, and is only mentioned as "The Emperor".

Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back - Sidious and Vader.

Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi - Sidious and Vader.
The latter gets redeemed by his son, Luke Skywalker, and dies while killing Sidious (who secretly survives by transferring his spirit into a clone body).

Star Wars:
Episode VII –
The Force Awakens - Snoke, Kylo Ren, and the Knights of Ren, although none are official Sith.
Sidious also lives, but does not appear in the film.

Star Wars:
Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi - Snoke and Kylo Ren.
The former gets killed by Ren.
Sidious and the Knights of Ren also live, but do not appear.

Star Wars:
Episode IX –
The Rise of Skywalker - Sidious, Kylo Ren, and the Knights of Ren.
Sidious gets finally killed by Rey, Ren redeems himself and dies to save Rey, and the Knights of Ren get killed by the redeemed Ben Solo.
===
Members ===


====
In film ====


=====
Darth Sidious =====
Darth Sidious (Sheev Palpatine) was a male human Dark Lord of the Sith who appeared in each trilogy of the Skywalker Saga.
Originally the eldest son of an aristocratic family from the planet Naboo, he rose to power within the Galactic Republic's government system starting from Senator of his homeworld, then to Supreme Chancellor of the Republic, and finally to self-proclaimed Emperor of the Galactic Empire.
This was done by cultivating a public image as a humble and competent politician while secretly mastering dark Sith arts studying under Plagueis, and planning the destruction of the Jedi Order and Republic.
Eventually, by manipulating disaffected political groups and using double agents to sow discord, Palpatine fomented a civil war that provided an opportunity for him to seize absolute power.
He had three known Sith apprentices: Darth Maul, Darth Tyranus, and Darth Vader.
He was eventually betrayed and killed by his last, Vader, at the end of Return of the Jedi.
He returned more than 30 years later in The Rise of Skywalker, having managed to cheat death through powerful mastery of the dark side of the Force.
He was finally killed by his granddaughter, Rey, who deflected his Force lightning back at him using the Skywalker lightsabers.
Darth Sidious' death marked what appears to be the definitive end of the Sith.

In Legends continuity, Darth Sidious would return using clones and ancient Sith powers, returning in several clone bodies over the course of several novels and comics.
During this time he would briefly turn Luke Skywalker to the dark side of the Force through sheer power as much as by guile, though Luke would later be redeemed by his sister Leia and restored to the light side of the Force and defeated Palpatine once and for all.
Shortly before his first death, Palpatine had sent a psychic command through the Force to Mara Jade, planting in her the need to kill Luke.
She eventually fulfilled this command by slaying a clone of Luke called Luuke Skywalker, whom Palpatine had made in an attempt to use him against the original, though this plot ultimately would fail due to Mara's fatal attack on the clone.

=====
Darth Maul =====
Darth Maul (Maul) was a male Dathomirian Zabrak Sith Lord who served as the first apprentice of Darth Sidious.
He first appeared in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, where he was ordered by his master to capture Queen Amidala of Naboo in order for her to sign a treaty that would legalize the Trade Federation's invasion of the planet.
After tracking the Queen's personal starship to Tatooine, he briefly attacked Qui-Gon Jinn, the Jedi sent to escort Amidala to Coruscant, but he escaped.
Later, Maul travelled to Naboo to aid the Federation's invasion and again fought Jinn, along with his Padawan Obi-Wan Kenobi in the plasma refinery complex beneath Theed Palace.
Though he managed to kill Jinn, he was then defeated by Kenobi, who sliced him in half, leading to everyone, including Sidious, to believe he had died.
In reality, however, Maul survived his injuries and ended up on the junk planet Lotho Minor, where he would become a cyborg and be driven to insanity.
He was eventually rescued by his brother Savage Opress twelve years later, during the Clone Wars.
After being provided with a pair of new robotic legs by the Nightsisters, led by Maul's mother, Talzin, he sought revenge against Kenobi.
In the process, he recruited several crime syndicates to his cause, forming the Shadow Collective.
He took over Mandalore, only to be defeated and captured by Sidious.
Maul later escaped and managed to rebuild his criminal empire.
Near the end of the war, he engineered a conflict on Mandalore to lure out and kill Anakin Skywalker.
Ahsoka Tano was sent to deal with him instead, and he was captured, only to be freed by Tano when Sidious executed Order 66, causing the clone troopers to turn on their Jedi generals.
During the Galactic Empire era, Maul, having abandoned his Sith persona, led the Crimson Dawn crime syndicate, until being stranded on the Sith world of Malachor for years.
He escaped after meeting Jedi Padawan Ezra Bridger, whom he attempts to turn to the dark side, and later forced to assist in locating Kenobi.
Upon tracking him down to Tatooine, he confronted Kenobi and fought him one final time.
Maul was fatally injured and died in Kenobi's arms, realizing that the latter was looking after the boy he believed to be the Chosen One and would one day avenge those who had suffered because of Sidious and the Sith, including Maul.

=====
Darth Tyranus =====
Darth Tyranus (Count Dooku of Serenno) was a male human Sith Lord and the second apprentice of Darth Sidious, first appearing in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones.
Dooku was a former Jedi Master who was trained by Grandmaster Yoda and took on Qui-Gon Jinn as his apprentice, but later became disillusioned with the Galactic Republic's Senate, realizing that immediate change was needed in order to maintain peace, and turned to the dark side of the Force.
He played an important role in Sidious' plans to take over the galaxy, engineering the Clone Wars by recruiting the bounty hunter Jango Fett as the template for a clone army that would be used by the Republic, and forming the Confederacy of Independent Systems, consisting of numerous planets and systems who wanted to become independent from the Republic.
Dooku served as the figurehead of the Separatist Alliance throughout the Clone Wars until meeting his demise at the hands of Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith, who decapitated him at Chancellor Palpatine's (secretly Darth Sidious) urgings, thus revealing that Sidious never cared about Dooku and merely used him to aid his plans.
Dooku was succeeded by Anakin himself, who fell to the dark side of the Force shortly after and became Sidious' third apprentice, Darth Vader, accomplishing what Dooku couldn't: helping Sidious wipe out the Jedi Order and form the Galactic Empire.
=====
Darth Vader =====
Darth Vader (Anakin Skywalker) was a male human-cyborg Dark Lord of the Sith and the third and final apprentice of Darth Sidious, who first appeared in the Star Wars original trilogy, and later in the prequel trilogy.
As the Jedi hero Anakin Skywalker, he fought alongside his master Obi-Wan Kenobi during the galaxy-wide Clone Wars, but was slowly seduced to the dark side by Darth Sidious.
After helping Sidious kill Jedi Master Mace Windu, he swore allegiance to the Sith and was given the name Darth Vader before setting out to destroy all Jedi left on Coruscant.
After being sent by Sidious to assassinate the Separatist council members on Mustafar, Vader was badly injured in a duel with Kenobi, resulting in the loss of his remaining organic arm, both legs, and severe burn injuries.
He was saved by Sidious, and encased in a black suit of armor with extensive cybernetics which kept him alive.
As the Galactic Empire was established and continued to grow, Vader became the Emperor's immensely feared second-in-command and was given the task of finding surviving Jedi and the Rebel Alliance's base.
After the destruction of the first Death Star, Vader was charged with tracking down the Rebel Alliance and destroying their headquarters.
However, the actions of his son, Luke Skywalker, eventually turned Vader against his master, resulting in both Sidious' and Vader's deaths, as well as the fulfilment of the Chosen One prophecy.

====
In other media ====


===== Darth Andeddu =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Andeddu, also known as the Immortal God-King of Prakith, was an ancient Dark Lord of the Sith who lived prior to the invention of the "Darth" title for the Sith.
He was a paranoid man, who believed that his followers were secretly plotting to overthrow him, which eventually came true, as they betrayed and attacked him, seeking to steal his power.
Forced to flee from Korriban, Andeddu created the world of Prakith, where he would rule as a deity for several centuries until meeting his demise and entombing himself to prevent his followers from stealing his secrets even in death.
Prior to his death, he would also create a Sith holocron to store all his knowledge, including the ability to cheat death by transferring one's essence into another vessel, and his cult, called "the Malevolence", would create a temple in the reverence of the Dark Lord, believing that one day he would return.
The legend of Andeddu and his incredible power remained at large long after his death, despite the Jedi Order's attempt to erase all knowledge and reference about the Sith.

In the Star Wars canon, Andeddu is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though his backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Andeddu thousands of years after his death and had the 5th Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.

=====
Darth Atrius =====
Darth Atrius was an ancient Dark Lord of the Sith who existed long before the Rule of Two was created.
He owned two crossguard lightsabers, which were found and given away by the smuggler Sana Starros after the Battle of Yavin.
The anger possessed by Atrius when wielding both these crossguard lightsabers at the same time, carried over to the weapons themselves, and can transfer over to their new owners.
These lightsabers were eventually destroyed by Darth Vader and Luke Skywalker, thus possibly erasing all knowledge about Atrius himself.

=====
Darth Caldoth =====
Darth Caldoth was a male Duros Dark Lord of the Sith, who is only mentioned in the 2019 novel Myths & Fables.
He lived at an unknown point in time before Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and wrote a book titled The Bestiary of Darth Caldoth, which mentioned various Sith warbeasts.
According to the legend, Caldoth eventually gained a Sith apprentice, the Twi'lek Ry Nymbis, and they were considered the two most powerful individuals in the galaxy at one point.
Caldoth killed his own apprentice with a Sith ritual that turned the person's body into stone when he felt Nymbis was going to betray him.
With the ritual, Nymbis was trapped in an eternal nightmare.

=====
Darth Krall =====
Darth Krall (Radaki) was a male Dark Lord of the Sith, who is only mentioned in the audiobook Dooku:
Jedi Lost.
He lived at an unknown point in time before Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and was seduced to the dark side after losing his faith in the Jedi Order, believing that the Jedi should retain their family ties and wealth.
His most notable feats were taking part in the Battle of Wasted Years, where the Sith emerged victorious, and taming the Nightmare Conjunction.
His lightsaber would later be stored in the Bogan Collection at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.

=====
Darth Skrye =====
Darth Skrye was a female Dark Lord of the Sith, who is only mentioned in the audiobook Dooku:
Lost Jedi.
Shoulde lived at an unknown point in time before Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
Her voice was heard by Count Dooku during his time as a Jedi Padawan, in a Force vision that he had after encountering the Presagers of Hakotei on Asusto.
In this vision, Skrye claimed that the Sith were reborn before activating a superweapon called the Cauldron, which destroyed a planet.
She also owned an artifact called the Hand of Skrye, which would eventually be found by Jedi Lene Kostana and Sifo-Dyas on Rishi.

=====
Darth Wrend =====
Darth Wrend was a Dark Lord of the Sith who is only mentioned in the novel and audiobook Master & Apprentice.
He lived at an unknown point in time before Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, and was best known for coming back to life after being killed by the Jedi Order, in order to fight them once again.
The legend of Darth Wrend would come to Qui-Gon Jinn's mind during his time as a Padawan, who opened the holocron of prophecy, which contained numerous prophecies of which several dated ten thousand years prior.
One of the prophecies said that evil would disappear yet appear again once the righteous had lost its light, which many believed that was referring to the return of the Sith.
At that time, Qui-Gon believed that the prophecy talked about Darth Wrend's return from the dead and that it had already been fulfilled, although it would later be revealed that the prophecy referred to the Jedi learning about Darth Sidious' existence and that the Sith had lived in secret for almost a millennium.

=====
Darth Tanis =====
Darth Tanis was an ancient Dark Lord of the Sith who lived at least 4,000 years before the events of Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope, as Sith accounts from the year
3966 BBY described kyber weaponry developed by him on the planet Malachor.
Darth Tanis is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Tanis thousands of years after his death and had the 17th Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.

=====
Darth Desolous =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Desolous was a male Pau'an Dark Lord of the Sith who was expelled from the Jedi Order due to his violent nature and trained an army of fellow Pau'an warriors to fight them, but ended up falling into a trap set by the Jedi and perished in battle.
His image would later be incorporated in the training simulations at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.

In the Star Wars canon, Darth Desolous is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though his backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Desolous thousands of years after his death and had the 44th Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.

=====
Darth Phobos =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Phobos was a Theelin Dark Lady of the Sith with mind manipulation abilities, who killed many of her fellow Sith in a bid of power and formed a cult to worship her, but was ultimately killed by the combined forces of the Jedi and Sith.
Her image would later be incorporated in the training simulations at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.

In the Star Wars canon, Darth Phobos is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though her backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Phobos thousands of years after her death and had the 39th Legion of Sith Troopers named after her.

=====
Darth Revan =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Revan was both a male Dark Lord of the Sith and Jedi Knight, who served as the main protagonist of the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, and a major character in the Knights of the Old Republic series overall.
He lived approximately 4,000 years before the events of Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope.
Once Jedi heroes who led the Republic to victory in the Mandalorian Wars, Revan and his comrade, Alek, turned to the dark side after stumbling upon the Sith Empire, hidden in the Unknown Reaches of space, and being tortured by the Sith Emperor.
Upon escaping, the pair formed their own Sith Empire to wage war on the Republic, with Revan as the leader and Alek, now Darth Malak, as his Sith Apprentice.
As a Sith, Revan prepared to battle with the Jedi who boarded his flagship, but Malak, in the hopes of destroying both Revan and Bastila Shan, betrayed his master, ordering the ships under his command to fire on Revan's flagship's bridge.
Revan was critically injured and taken by Bastila Shan to the Jedi Council Enclave.
The Council chose to wipe Revan's memory, and imprint him with a false identity.
Revan later awoke on a starship under attack and encountered Malak, who eventually revealed the truth of his identity.
Following this, Revan defeated Malak in a final battle, claiming victory for the Republic.
Revan later married Bastila Shan with the approval of the Jedi Council and eventually departed into the Unknown Regions to confront the Sith Emperor, but was imprisoned for 300 years until his descendant Satele Shan rescued him.
However, due to being imprisoned for centuries, his lighter half had perished and became a Force spirit, leaving only his darker half, which sought to destroy the Sith Emperor once and for all.
Since the Emperor's physical body had already been destroyed, leaving only his spirit, Revan planned to resurrect him so that he could then kill him for good.
However, he was ultimately defeated by the combined forces of the Republic and his lighter half.
The two halves of Revan then merged in peace and died for the final time, although, unbeknownst to everyone, the Sith Emperor had been resurrected and escaped into the galaxy.
Following his death, Revan would be remembered by the galaxy for thousand of years, both as a legendary Jedi hero and one of the most powerful Sith Lords to have ever lived.

In the Star Wars canon, Darth Revan is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though his backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Revan thousands of years after his death and had the 3rd Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.
Revan was also originally set to appear in the episode "Ghosts of Mortis" of The Clone Wars TV show alongside Darth Bane, but they were both ultimately cut.

=====
Darth Momin =====
Darth Momin (Momin) was a male Dark Lord of Sith who appeared in the novel series Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith and the 4th issue of the Lando comic book.
Once a sculptor, he was imprisoned at a young age for his creations, which scared most people who saw them.
Momin was eventually rescued by a woman named Shaa, who trained him in the dark side of the Force and whom he eventually killed after believing that he had become more powerful than his master.
Momin then built a superweapon to destroy an entire city and perished when the Jedi intervened to stop him, losing control over the energy he wielded and causing his physical body to be destroyed, leaving only his mask with his consciousness inside.
Years later, the mask would be retrieved from the Jedi Archive vault by Darth Sidious, who gave it to his apprentice Darth Vader as a gift for his journey to Mustafar, which Vader sought to make his personal stronghold.
After Momin's spirit killed some of his personnel, Vader examined the mask and learned of Momin's past, before letting him possess the body of a Mustafarian and build a fortress for him.
Shortly after Momin finished building of the fortress, Vader was distracted by an invasion of Mustafarians, which Momin took advantage of to open the door to the Dark Side and resurrect himself.
However, after challenging Vader to a duel, Momin met a quick demise by being crushed with a giant rock.
Despite Momin's death, his dark essence would remain in the mask for years to come.
At one point, Momin's mask was located aboard the Imperial yacht Imperialis, when a group of thieves led by Lando Calrissian attempt to rob the ship.
After Momin's spirit possessed the bodies of two thieves, the others abandoned them and destroyed the ship, seemingly ending Momin's legacy.
Luke Skywalker later learned about Momin and his history during his travels across the galaxy, and described the Sith Lord's role in building Vader's fortress in his book, titled The Secrets of the Jedi.

=====
Darth Bane =====
Darth Bane (Dessel) was a male human Dark Lord of the Sith and the sole survivor of Sith Order in the aftermath of the ancient war between the Jedi and the Sith.
He is best known for establishing the Rule of Two, which was considered the beginning of the modern Sith within the Star Wars canon.
This rule stated that there must be only two Sith Lords at a time: a master to embody power, and an apprentice to crave it and eventually overthrow his/her master and adopt an apprentice of his/her own.
He is the main character of the non-canonical Darth Bane Trilogy by Drew Karpyshyn.

In the Star Wars canon, Darth Bane's backstory as the only Sith surivor of the Jedi-Sith war and the creator of the Rule of Two is mostly unchanged, though not much else is known about him.
His only appearance was in the episode "Sacrifice" of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, where his spirit was encountered by Yoda on the Sith homeworld of Moraband.
Bane was also originally set to appear in the episode "Ghosts of Mortis" alongside Darth Revan, but they were both ultimately cut.

=====
Darth Tenebrous =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Tenebrous (Rugess Nome) was a male Bith Dark Lord of the Sith with the power of foreseeing the future, including his own death, and the master of both Darth Plagueis and Darth Venamis, the latter of whom he kept secret as it was a violation of the Rule of Two.
His public persona was Rugess Tome, a legendary artisanal starship designer with a galaxy-spanning reputation, and he was known for being a scientific genius and master planner, as well as for his breathing apparatus.
Tenebrous' secret plan was to possess the Chosen One once he would appear, but he was eventually killed by Plagueis during a mission on the planet Ban'demnic.
However, Tenebrous wasn't too surprised at Plagueis's betrayal and instead congratulated him with his dying breath, because his conscience would soon be able to enter his apprentice's body.
Despite managing to cheat death, Tenebrous' plan failed, because, during his time in Plagueis' body, he foresaw him being killed by his own apprentice before the appearance of the Chosen One, meaning that Tenebrous would never be able to possess him.
Tenebrous then tried to escape from Plagueis' body, but only saw the mummified remains of his original body, as decades had passed since his death.
As such, Tenebrous was cursed to remain a vague spirit for the rest of eternity, unable to gain a physical body ever again.

In the Star Wars canon continuity, Darth Tenebrous is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though his backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Tenebrous many years after his death and had the 26th Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.

=====
Darth Plagueis =====
Darth Plagueis was a male Dark Lord of the Sith and Darth Sidious' master, first referenced in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith.
In the film, Sidious (as Palpatine) uses Plagueis' story to seduce Anakin Skywalker to the dark side, claiming that Plagueis' abilities in the Force grew to such an extent that he could create life by influencing microscopic Force-sensitive entities called "midi-chlorians," and even save people from dying.
According to the Rule of Two, Plagueis was eventually killed by Sidious in his sleep, who subsequently became the new Sith Master and would later take on an apprentice of his own.

In the Legends continuity, Plagueis was a Muun and maintained a public influence as the benevolent Hego Damsk II, a member of the Intergalactic Banking Clan.
He is the main character of the non-canonica novel, Star Wars: Darth Plagueis.

====
Shadow Hands of the Sith ===
=
Although not official Sith, several other dark side users in the service of the Sith were present during the Clone Wars and the initial years of the Galactic Empire.

=====
Asajj Ventress =====
Asajj Ventress was a female Dathomirian Sith Shadow Hand trained under Darth Tyranus and an antagonist of the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars.
She first appeared in the now non-canonical 2003 series Star Wars:
Clone Wars, in which Darth Sidious assigned her to kill the then-Padawan Anakin Skywalker.
After tracking the young war hero to the planet Muunilinst, Ventress engaged Anakin's Republic fighter forces fighting above the Separatist-occupied world and baited him in a chase to Yavin 4, where a fierce battle from the forest to the Massassi temple took place.
Though she initially gained the upper hand in the ensuing lightsaber duel, Anakin called upon his immense connection to the Force to brutally overpower her, causing the Dathomirian to fall over the edge of a cliff.
She luckily survived the landing and continued to serve her master throughout the Clone Wars on several occasions.

In Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Ventress was a recurring antagonist during the first seasons, as she assisted Dooku with several schemes, most of which were thwarted by the Jedi.
After being replaced with Savage Opress for her failures, Ventress returned to the Nightsisters until General Grievous led a massacre against them, which only she and Mother Talzin survived.
From there, she helped Boba Fett's team of bounty hunters on a dangerous mission, which thus marked the start of her own bounty hunting career.
Ventres later appeared in the novel Star Wars: Dark Disciple, which was intended for a story arc in the TV series.
In the novel, she teamed up with Jedi Quinlan Vos to assassinate Count Dooku, and, along the way, the two fell in love.
However, their attempt to kill Dooku failed, and Dooku captured Vos, turning him to the dark side.
Ventress managed to turn Vos back, but died saving him from an angered Dooku and was later buried on Dathomir, amongst her fallen sisters.

=====
Savage Opress =====
Savage Opress was a male Dathomirian Zabrak Sith Shadow Hand first trained under Darth Tyrannus and later under his own brother, Darth Maul, as well as a major antagonist in Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Originally a Nightbrother under Mother Talzin on Dathomir, he was handpicked by Asajj Ventress as part of her scheme to kill Darth Tyrannus for the attempt on her life.
His mind was eventually altered by the Nightsisters, making him more of a berserker on Ventress' call to the point of killing his brother Feral without remorse.
Opress managed to become Tyrannus' new Shadow Hand and learned only a little about the ways of the Sith before Ventress had him help her fight their master due to his actions under him getting unwanted attention from the Jedi.
However, in the heat of the moment and provoked by both of them, Opress tried to kill both Tyrannus and Ventress before escaping back to Dathomir.
There, he was instructed by Mother Talzin to find Maul so that he could complete his training to defend himself against the numerous enemies he had made.
After finding his long-lost brother as a shell of his former self on a junk planet, Opress managed to stir up Maul's grudge with Obi-Wan Kenobi to aid him in his revenge against the Jedi.
From there, the Zabrak duo were able to set up a Confederacy against the Republic separate from the Separatists, and soon took over Mandalore.
However, they received an unexpected visit by Darth Sidious, who considered Maul's sudden rise to power a threat to his rule, and dueled both him and Opress.
The latter met a quick demise after being stabbed with Sidious' two lightsabers, and died in Maul's arms.

=====
Inquisitorius =====
The Inquisitors were an organization of Force-sensitive warriors in the service of the Galactic Empire prior to the events of A New Hope, where it is implied that they all became defunct, as Darth Vader and Darth Sidious were the only known Force-wielders at that time.
Most of them were former Jedi, who had lost their faith in the Jedi Order and succumbed to the dark side, during or shortly after the Clone Wars.
They were all recruited into the Empire and trained by Darth Vader, who tasked them with hunting down other survivors of the Great Jedi Purge, as well as other Force-sensitive individuals, mostly children, to prevent them from becoming future Jedi.
Among the known Inquisitors were: 

The Grand Inquisitor - the individual who would become known as the Grand Inquisitor was a former Pau'an Jedi Temple Guard.
He was one of the several guards who escorted the fallen Jedi Barris Offee for her trial after the bombing of the Jedi Temple in the episode "The Wrong Jedi" of Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
He later lost his faith in the Jedi Order and turned to the dark side, before coming into service of the Empire.
Over the years, the Inquisitor worked his way up the Empire's ranks and eventually became the highest-ranking Inquisitor, being tasked (along with his subordinates) with hunting down Force-sensitive children across the galaxy and preventing them from becoming Jedi.
The Grand Inquisitor first appeared as the main antagonist of the first season of Star Wars: Rebels, where he was assigned to hunt down Kanan Jarrus and Ezra Bridger.
He was eventually defeated by Kanan in combat and chose to commit suicide rather than face the infamous wrath of Darth Vader for his failure.
A vision of the Grand Inquisitor in his old Jedi Temple Guard attire later appeared to Kanan in the Jedi Temple on Lothal and dueled him as part of his final trial to become a Jedi Knight.

The Second Sister - Trilla Suduri was the Padawan of Jedi Knight Cere Junda and one of the few survivors of the Great Jedi Purge.
After Cere was captured and interrogated by the Empire, she betrayed Trilla's location, leading to her being captured and tortured by the Empire as well, until giving into the dark side and becoming the Second Sister Inquisitor.
She initially made a cameo appearance in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, and later served as the main antagonist of the video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, where she was tasked with hunting Jedi Padawan Cal Kestis, as well as a holocron containing a list of Force-sensitive children.
Although she succeeded in securing the holocron, she was eventually defeated by Kestis and Cere at the Inquisitor headquarters on the planet
Nur.
Cere then attempted to make amends with her former Padawan, but Darth Vader appeared and killed Trilla for failing her mission.

The Fifth Brother - the Fifth Brother was a former green-skinned humanoid male member of the Jedi Order who eventually lost his faith in the Order and became an Inquisitor sometime after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Empire.
He was introduced in the second season of Star Wars:
Rebels, where he was shown to be working closely with the Seventh Sister, as they were both tasked with hunting the Ghost crew after the Grand Inquisitor's death, during which they also competed against each other to become the next Grand Inquisitor.
The Fifth Brother was eventually defeated after dueling Kanan Jarrus, Ezra Bridger, Ahsoka Tano and Maul on Malachor, being disarmed by Ahsoka and subsequently killed by Maul.

The Sixth Brother - Bil Valen was a former humanoid Jedi Knight who eventually lost his faith in the Jedi Order and became the Sixth Brother Inquisitor sometime after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Empire.
He was described as tall with unnatural-looking grey skin, piercing ice-blue eyes, broad shoulders, and distinctive scar/tattoo-like marking, and was also shown to have lost an arm to Darth Vader during one of his training sessions.
The Sixth Brother only appeared in novels, most prominently in Ahsoka, where he was tasked with hunting Ahsoka Tano, but was ultimately defeated by her after she caused his lightsaber to overload and explode, killing him.
His lightsaber would later be rebuilt by Ahsoka into two white ones, which she would use for years to come.

The Seventh Sister -
the Seventh Sister was a former female Mirialan member of the Jedi Order who eventually lost her faith in the Order and became an Inquisitor sometime after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Empire.
She was introduced in the second season of Star Wars:
Rebels, where she was shown to be using small droids to help her track down her targets, and was also working closely with the Fifth Brother, as they were both tasked with hunting the Ghost crew after the Grand Inquisitor's death, during which they also competed against each other to become the next Grand Inquisitor.
The Seventh Sister was eventually defeated by Maul on Malachor and subsequently killed by him, after Ezra Bridger refused to do so.

The Eighth Brother -
the Eighth Brother was a former male Terrelian Jango Jumper member of the Jedi Order who eventually lost his faith in the Order and became an Inquisitor sometime after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Empire.
He was introduced in the second-season finale of Star Wars:
Rebels, where he was tasked with hunting the former Sith Darth Maul, eventually tracking him down to Malachor.
He dueled Maul, Kanan Jarrus, Ezra Bridger, and Ahsoka Tano alongside his fellow Inquisitors, the Fifth Brother and the Seventh Sister, but they were both ultimately killed by Maul.
Cornered, the Eighth Brother then attempted to escape, but his lightsaber had been damaged in battle and exploded in his hands when trying to use it to fly away, causing him to fall to his death.

The Ninth Sister - Masana Tide was a former female Dowutin Jedi Knight who eventually succumbed to the dark side and became the Ninth Sister Inquisitor after intense torture at the hands of the Empire.
She first appeared in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, where she assisted Darth Vader, the Sixth Brother and the Tenth Brother in hunting the Jedi Ferren Barr on the planet Mon Cala.
After Barr used the Force to turn the Imperial stormtroopers present against them, the Ninth Sister was betrayed by the Sixth Brother, who severed her right foot and left her behind to die so that he could escape, although she managed to survive the ordeal as well.
She later appeared as an antagonist in the video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, where she joined the Second Sister in the hunt for Cal Kestis.
The Ninth Sister was ultimately defeated by the young Padawan on Kashyyyk, who severed her right hand as well.
However, she survived the ordeal once again.

The Tenth Brother - Prosset Dibs was a former blind human Jedi Master during the Clone Wars who eventually became disillusioned by the Jedi's role as protectors of the galaxy.
He first appeared in the novel Jedi of the Republic - Mace Windu, where he tried to kill Mace Windu during a mission on the planet Hissrich.
He was subsequently put on trial and expelled from the Jedi Order for his actions.
Dibs later became the Tenth Brother Inquisitor in the service of the Empire and appeared in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, where he assisted Darth Vader, the Sixth Brother and the Ninth Sister in hunting the Jedi Ferren Barr on the planet Mon Cala.
After Barr used the Force to turn the Imperial stormtroopers present against them, the Tenth Brother was killed in the ensuing fight.

Unnamed red-skinned Inquisitor - An unnamed red-skinned female Inquisitor appeared in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, where she assisted Darth Vader, the Fifth Brother and another black-skinned Twi'lek Inquisitor in hunting Jedi Master Eeth Koth.
While Vader dueled and killed Koth, the female Inquisitor found his wife and baby daughter, but refused to kill them, instead taking the latter and bringing her to Vader, who then left her in the care of some nursemaids.
Later, the Fifth Brother informed Vader of her actions and, believing it to be an act of treason, he tried to kill her in front of the other Inquisitors.
She managed to escape with the help of her fellow Twi'lek Inquisitor, but they were both eventually caught following a long chase through Coruscant and chose to commit suicide rather than be killed by Vader.

Unnamed Twi'lek Inquisitor
- A black-skinned male Twi'lek Inquisitor appeared in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, where he assisted Darth Vader, the Fifth Brother and another red-skinned female Inquisitor in hunting Jedi Master Eeth Koth.
Later, when Vader tried to kill the female Inquisitor for treason, he helped her escape, but they were both eventually caught following a long chase through Coruscant and chose to commit suicide rather than be killed by Vader.

====
Legends ====
In the Legends Community, the Sith also had Shadow Hands during the Clone Wars and the Age of the Empire.

=====
Starkiller =====
Starkiller was a human male that was briefly the secret apprentice of Darth Vader.
He then turned to the light side, when Vader abandoned him.
He fought Vader twice, on the second turn, defeating his former master.
Then, he confronted Darth Sidious, and sacrificed himself for the Rebellion, so his allies could get to safety.
Starkiller was then cloned, and his clone followed the same actions as his: abandoning the Dark for the Light.
=====
Tol Skorr =====
Tol Skorr was a human male former Jedi Knight that was trained under Darth Tyranus.
He served as Tyranus’s bodyguard.
He very much disliked Quinlan Vos.
When Quinlan Vos revealed that he was spying on Dooku, Skorr and Ventress were sent to kill Vos.
But then Vos was with another Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Ventress was distracted into fighting Obi-Wan, so Skorr had to deal with Vos himself.
Eventually, the 2 Dark Jedi would have to go off-world, with a failed mission.

Skorr met his demise when Quinlan Vos Force-pushed him into lava.

====
New Republic-era dark side wielders ====
Although not official Sith, several dark side users were present in the years following the fall of the Galactic Empire and during the conflict between the Resistance and the First Order.

=====
Snoke =====
Snoke was an artificial being created by Darth Sidious and his Sith Eternal cult on Exegol, and a major antagonist in the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
After Palpatine's death and the fall of the Empire, Snoke became the Supreme Leader of the First Order and seduced Ben Solo to the dark side, training him to become his apprentice, Kylo Ren.
He was also behind the destruction of Luke Skywalker's Jedi Temple and the deaths of most of his students, in an attempt to wipe out the Jedi Order once and for all.
He was ultimately killed by Ren, after failing to foresee his betrayal.
Following Snoke's death, Ren took over as Supreme Leader of the First Order.

=====
Kylo Ren =====
Kylo Ren (Ben Solo) was a former Jedi and powerful dark side wielder, and the central antagonist of the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
He was born as the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, and trained under his uncle, Luke Skywalker, to become a Jedi, but was seduced to the dark side by Snoke.
Adopting the alias Kylo Ren, he helped eliminate his uncle's new generation of Jedi and became the leader of the Knights of Ren and a high-ranking member of the First Order.
He trained under Snoke to become a powerful dark side wielder, and later proved his loyalty by killing his father when he tried to help him get redeemed.
However, Ren eventually betrayed and killed his master after siding with the Jedi Padwan Rey, with whom he shared a unique connection called a "dyad in the Force".
However, instead of turning back to the light side, he took over as the new Supreme Leader of the First Order, and invited Rey to join him, but she refused.
Later, Ren had a confrontation with Luke, only to discover that he was a Force projection, meant to distract him and allow the Resistance to escape; nonetheless, Luke died as a result of the effort to create the projection, leaving Rey the only living Jedi.
Eventually, Ren discovered that the Sith Lord Darth Sidious was still alive and plotted to kill this potential rival, but instead sided to him after he revealed the Final Order, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers equipped with axial superlasers capable of decimating entire planets, which he promised to give Ren control of in exchange for killing Rey, revealed to be his granddaughter.
Secretly, however, Ren planned to have Rey help him kill Sidious, and engaged her in a duel when she refused, which Ren lost after his mother gave her life to reach out to him through the Force.
After a conversation with a memory of his late father, Ben Solo was redeemed and came to Rey's aid in defeating Sidious.
After Rey died to kill the Sith Lord, Ben revived her using the Force, and shared a kiss with her, but then died as a result of using all his life energy to save her, becoming one with the Force.
=====
Knights of Ren =====
The Knights of Ren were an organization of masked Force-wielding warriors, who served as antagonists in the Star Wars
sequel trilogy.
The Knights were neither Sith or Jedi, but a new generation of dark side warriors that emerged to fill the void left by the supposed demise of the last Sith Lords, Darth Sidious and Darth Vader.
They had a code, to which they were flexible in the following: living life the way they wanted, taking what the galaxy gave them, and consuming what the dark side sent them.
Their name came from a lightsaber called "Ren", which was at the base of their code and could only be wielded by their leader.
The Knights consisted of seven individuals named Ren (their leader), Vicrul, Ap'lek, Cardo, Kuruk, Trudgen, and Ushar.
After his fall to the dark side, Ben Solo joined the Knights and eventually killed Ren, becoming their new leader, under the alias Kylo Ren, knighting his former fellow Padawan Voe as a knight through her shoulders, before reforging her lightsaber into one for himself.
After Kylo became the Supreme Leader of the First Order, the Knights became his personal guards, though they ultimately sided with the resurrected Darth Sidious after Ben Solo returned to the light side, which led to their demise at the hands of the redeemed Ben.

====
Sith Eternal ====
The 2019 film Star Wars
: The Rise of Skywalker depicts thousands of Sith cultists and loyalists known as the Sith Eternal.
They are the main antagonistic faction in the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
They are located on the Sith planet Exegol, which is described in the film as the "hidden world of the Sith".
The film depicts the Sith loyalists as having built the Final Order, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers, at the behest of Emperor Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
They are also revealed to have artificially created and cloned Snoke, whom Palpatine used as a puppet to control the First Order and seduce Kylo Ren to the dark side.
At the end of the film, the Sith Eternal cultists are present during Palpatine's rejuvenation through the Force and his demise at the hands of Rey, the last Jedi and Palpatine's granddaughter.
The Sith Eternal cultists are disintegrated in the explosion following Palpatine's death.
The novelization of The Rise of Skywalker goes into more detail about how Palpatine transferred his consciousness into the cloned body the Sith Eternal prepared for him.

====
Legends non-canonical members of the Sith ====
Following the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the licensed Star Wars novels, comics, and other fictional media published since the original 1977 film (previously identified as the Star Wars Expanded Universe) as Star Wars Legends and declared them non-canonical to the franchise in April
2014.The Sith feature heavily in many stories of the Star Wars Expanded Universe (EU),
appearing in a variety of media created prior to the advent of the 2015 feature film Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Future authors and screenwriters are not required to honor all of the events depicted in this material, but the Expanded Universe has remained a source of creative inspiration.
The EU thoroughly details the schism between the dissident “Dark Jedi” and the Jedi establishment that led to the creation of the Sith Order, as well a series of conflicts between the Sith, Jedi and the Galactic Republic spanning the millennia prior to the events of the Star Wars motion picture series, and certain events thereafter.

In the EU, the Sith trace their origins to the followers of a dissident Jedi named Ajunta Pall, who endorsed the use of the Dark Side of the Force, contrary to Jedi orthodoxy.
After Pall and his “Dark Jedi” followers were exiled for their practices, they eventually settled on a planet named Korriban, which was occupied by the "Sith," a red-skinned humanoid race with a high prevalence of Force-sensitives.
Over the course of centuries of intermingling between the ethnic Sith and Dark Jedi, the name "Sith" would come to apply to the martial philosophy and political affiliation created by the former Jedi exiles on Korriban, rather than a specific race.
This Sith regime would strike out at the Galactic Republic and Jedi on numerous occasions.
Notable conflicts between the Sith and the Galactic Republic include the "Great Hyperspace War," in which the Sith would launch a massive invasion of the Republic but succumb to infighting, and the “Sith Holocaust,” in which the Galactic Republic failed in its attempt to exterminate the Sith from known space, leading the Sith survivors to take a vow of eternal vengeance on the Galactic Republic.
The EU also describes the exploits of Sith characters following the collapse of Emperor Palpatine's Galactic Empire and the restoration of the Republic, such as the attempt by “Darth Krayt” to establish a New Sith Order on Korriban.

The first Expanded Universe novel was Splinter of the Mind's Eye, written by Alan Dean Foster and published in 1978.
The setting for the novel takes place between Episode IV:
A New Hope and Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back.
It provides a new adventure that includes Princess Leia, R2-D2, C-3PO, Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader.
In the story, Darth Vader tries to get the Kyber Crystal to use it for his evil schemes.

Other novels that depict Sith characters are Darth Maul:
Saboteur and Cloak of Deception by James Luceno.
Cloak of Deception describes the political background surrounding the Republic in the time period before The Phantom Menace, as well as Darth Sidious' plans to rule the galaxy, starting with the blockade of Naboo.

In Darth Maul: Saboteur, the Sith Lord Darth Sidious sends Darth Maul to destroy InterGalactic Ore and Lommite Limited.
In Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter, by Michael Reaves, Darth Sidious sends his apprentice, Darth Maul, to investigate the traitor who leaked the secret of his plan to take down the Republic.
Shadow Hunter provided insight into the Sith while detailing how Darth Sidious brought his plan of usurpation into action.

Dark Horse Comics purchased the copyrights to several Star Wars stories.
With their publication of Star Wars:
Dark Empire #1 in 1991, they initiated what has become a large line of Star Wars manga and comics.
The Sith appear as major antagonists throughout this story's plot.
Many of the comics that were published helped expand the backstory of the characters and followed the rise and fall of the Dark Lords of the Sith.
Star Wars video games have also been adapted from the plots of the films, novels, and TV shows.
The games follow the basic plot of the story, but they can also include alternative, non-canonical, endings depending on which character is being played.
Some of the video games that have a heavy focus on Sith characters and lore are Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, released in 2003, Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords, released in 2004 and Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, released in 2008.
=====
Darth Caedus =====
Darth Caedus (Jacen Solo) was a Dark Lord of the Sith born as the oldest son of Han Solo and Leia Organa Solo.
A Jedi hero of the Yuuzhan Vong War
, he eventually fell to the Dark Side years later and masterminded the Second Galactic Civil War.
He was eventually killed by his twin sister Jaina for his actions.

=====
Marka Ragnos =====
Marka Ragnos was an ancient Sith-human hybrid Sith Lord, who lived during the time of the first Sith Empire, and seized the title of Dark Lord of the Sith, serving as the ruler of the Empire.
After his death, two Sith Lords, Naga Sadow and Ludo Kressh, fought to occupy his throne, only for Ragnos' spirit to appear before them and claim that only the most worthy should succeed him.
Ragnos lived on as a Force spirit following his death, trapped within his tomb in the Valley of the Dark Lords on Korriban.
A thousand years after the Dark Lord's death, Exar Kun summoned Ragnos from his grave through the use of talismans.
Ragnos crowned Exar Kun as the new Dark Lord, with Ulic Qel-Droma as Kun's apprentice, as an attempt to resurrect the lost empire thousands of years prior.
Several thousands of years after that, in the video game Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy (set during the New Republic era), a cult dedicated to Ragnos, led by the Dark Jedi Tavion Axmis, raised as a new threat to the galaxy, with the intent of resurrecting the Sith Lord using an old artifact called the Scepter of Ragnos.
After absorbing Force energy from numerous locations across the galaxy using the scepter, Tavion and her cult traveled to Korriban and almost succeeded in resurrecting Ragnos, but were stopped by Luke Skywalker's New Jedi Order.
Inside Ragnos' tomb, the Jedi Knight Jaden Korr defeated Tavion, before Ragnos' spirit emerged and possessed her body, attempting to kill the Jedi.
However, Jaden was able to defeat Ragnos, whose spirit left Tavion's body and returned to the depths of the Force, swearing revenge against the Jedi.

=====
Darth Venamis =====
Darth Venamis was a Bith Dark Lord of the Sith who served as Darth Tenebrous' secret apprentice, as it was a violation of the Rule of Two.
After Tenebrous was killed by his other apprentice, Darth Plagueis, he eventually found and defeated Venamis, before capturing him and using him as a test subject for his midi-chlorians experiments over the following years.
After decades of torture and being killed and then brought back to life over and over again, Plaugeis finally allowed Venamis to die, having served his purpose.
However, he later revived again in the presence of his new apprentice, Darth Sidious, until Venamis' organs finally ceased to function, and he died for the final time.

====
=
Knights of the Old Republic series =====


=====
Darth Malak =====
Darth Malak (Alek) is the main antagonist of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
Once a Jedi Knight and Revan's best friend, the two of them fought together in the Mandalorian Wars.
At some point, Alek was injured in battle and had his entire lower jaw cut off, forcing him to don a prosthetic jaw instead.
Later, Alek and Revan unwittingly discovered the Sith Empire in the Unknown Regions and were captured by the Sith Emperor, who, using Sith sorcery, turned them to the dark side, but the two broke free from his control and formed their own Sith Empire to wage war on the Republic, with Revan as the leader and Alek, now Darth Malak, as his Sith Apprentice.
When Revan prepared to battle the Jedi who boarded his flagship, Malak betrayed him, ordering the ships under his command to fire on Revan's flagship's bridge, so that he could take over the Sith Empire for himself.
However, Revan survived the ordeal and was taken to the Jedi Council Enclave, where he had his memory wiped, so that he would become a Jedi once again.
Eventually, Revan faced off against Malak, who revealed the truth of his identity, but was ultimately killed in battle by his former friend and Sith Master, which also led to the downfall of his Empire.

=====
Darth Traya =====
Darth Traya (Kreia) is a mentor to the "Jedi Exile" and the hidden main antagonist of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.
She is revealed to have been a Sith Master at the end of the game, and is ultimately killed in battle.

=====
Darth Sion =====
Darth Sion, also known as the Lord of Pain, is an antagonist in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.
Alongside Darth Nihilus, he served as one of Traya's apprentices, until ultimately betraying her and driving her into exile.
Sion managed to achieve immortality by calling on his pain, anger and hatred every time he was facing certain death, at the expense of all-consuming agony, which also led to his extremely disfigured appearance.
The player's character eventually defeated Sion, and was then given the option to turn him back to the light side.
Regardless, upon being shown the price he paid for immortality, Sion finally let go of his hate and allowed himself to die permanently.
=====
Darth Nihilus =====
Darth Nihilus, also known as the Lord of Hunger, is an antagonist in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.
Alongside Darth Sion, he served as one of Traya's apprentices, until ultimately betraying her and driving her into exile.
Nihilus imbued his dark soul into his mask and robes and had the power to drain the life force out of any living thing.
Following the betrayal of his master, Nihilus used the might of the Sith Armada not to conquer planets, but to contain them so that he could "feed" off the Force energy of each planet's lifeforms, wiping planets of life.
However, Nihilus was later drawn out and tricked into launching an attack on Telos, believing it to contain the last Jedi.
The Exile confronted Nihilus on his ship, and Nihilus was killed either after his former slave Visas sacrificed herself due to their shared link in the Force, or after his attempt to feast on the Exile's connection to the Force backfired and weakened him.
Despite his death, Nihilus' soul would continue to live in his mask and robes for millennia to come, as well as inside his own Sith holocron.

=====
Lord Vitiate =====
Known for much of his 1300-year life as "the Sith Emperor", Lord Vitiate was a sociopathic young lord in one of the earliest iterations of the Sith Empire.
When that empire fell, he led an exodus of survivors to the other side of the galaxy to establish a continuation of it, with himself as Emperor.
It was Vitiate who corrupted Revan and Malak, but Revan's redemption and Malak's defeat seemingly derailed his plans.
Three hundred years after Revan's disappearance, the Emperor launched a surprise attack on the Republic, setting the stage for the video game
Star Wars: The Old Republic.
=====
Darth Malgus =====
Darth Malgus (Veradun) is a major antagonist in Star Wars:
The Old Republic.
A male human Dark Lord of the Sith who trained under Vindican
, Malgus served the Sith Empire during the Great Galactic War against the Republic.
Following the recapture of Korriban from the Jedi, Malgus killed his master and later led a surprise assault on Alderaan, only to be defeated by his nemesis and former opponent from Korriban, Satele Shan.
Malgus was severely injured in the fight against Shan, forcing him to wear a respiratory apparatus for the rest of his life.
Sometime later, Malgus was tasked by his superior, Darth Angral, with leading an assault team on the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, which Malgus and his forces destroyed, disgracing the Jedi Order in the eyes of the Republic.
Although Malgus believed that the Battle of Coruscant was the first step of destroying the Republic, it only served as leverage in the peace negotiations that took place on Alderaan.
While the Alderaanian summit progressed, the Sith settled into an occupation of Coruscant.
Malgus was placed in charge of orbital security, but the Sith Lord defied his orders and traveled back to Coruscant's surface to strike against the renegade Jedi Aryn Leneer, who wanted to avenge her master Ven Zallow, killed by Malgus during the attack on the Jedi Temple.
Although Leneer ultimately failed, the conflict caused Malgus to become disillusioned with the Empire and to kill his lover Eleena Daru, seeing their relationship as a weakness that prevented him from preserving his own power, which he later used to cleanse the Empire of the politicians whom he blamed for allowing the Republic to survive.
During the Cold War years that followed the successful peace negotiations, Malgus led Sith forces into the Unknown Regions, claiming previously-unknown territories for the Empire.
Towards the end of the war, following the presumed death of the Sith Emperor and his service on the Dark Council, Malgus formed his own Empire, free of the infighting of the Dark Council.
However, the Republic and the Sith Empire forces soon teamed up to fight against Malgus' Empire and managed to track him down to his secret base, where they defeated him.
Despite his apparent death, Malgus later resurfaced during the Invasion of Ossus at the start of the Third Galactic War, once again serving as a commander within the Sith Empire.
However, following the Battle of Corellia, Malgus went rogue, determined to expunge all physical and mental restraints used to keep him under control.
Thousands of years after his death, Malgus was still remembered as one of the most powerful Sith Lords to have ever lived.
At one point, Darth Sidious acquired some surviving excerpts of Malgus's journals, which he bounded into his Book of Sith, an anthology of Sith historical writings.

==
In popular culture ==
Prominent Sith Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine have become iconic villains in popular culture.
Their personae are frequently used as exemplars of Machiavelianism, authoritarianism, brutality and evil in serious, humorous and satirical settings.
Palpatine is archetypal as the "Evil Emperor"—a cunning tyrant who rules through deception, propaganda, fear and oppression.

Although usually considered as a villainous "enforcer" of such power, Darth Vader has also been regarded as a tragic figure and cautionary study in the corruption of a hero who loses sight of the greater good and resorts to evil practices out of fear and desperation.

A "turn to the Dark Side" has become a popular idiom to describe an (often misguided) individual or institution's embrace of evil out of a desire for power.

==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Book of Sith:
Secrets from the Dark Side (Chronicle Books, © 2013)
ISBN 1-4521-1815-9


==
External links ==

Sith in the StarWars.com Databank
Sith on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Sith Explained (Howstuffworks.com)
Who's Who of the Sith on SithOrder.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is a computer-animated television series created by George Lucas.
The series began with a theatrical feature film which was released on August 15, 2008, and debuted on Cartoon Network two months later on October 3, 2008.
It is set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy during the three years between the prequel films
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.
Being a reboot of the previous 2D series Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003–2005), each episode had a running time of approximately 22 minutes to fill a half-hour time slot instead of the 3–15 minute episodes that the previous series had.
Dave Filoni was the supervising director of the series.
The Clone Wars was a massive ratings success, becoming one of Cartoon Network's highest rated shows during its initial run.
Throughout its run, the series received mostly positive reception from critics, receiving praise for its writing, action, characters, visuals, voice acting, music, scale and tone.
The series has also garnered a massive fan following and was also nominated for many industry awards, including the Daytime Emmy Awards and the Annie Awards.
In early 2013, Lucasfilm announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down".
Thirteen episodes composing a new sixth season were made available in the U.S. for streaming on Netflix, along with the entirety of the series, beginning March 7, 2014.
A project known as The Clone Wars Legacy adapted unproduced story arcs into other formats, such as comics and novels.
The series was revived for a seventh and final season of 12 new episodes, which premiered on Disney+
on February 21, 2020.A sequel series, Star Wars Rebels, was released during the hiatus between the sixth and seventh seasons of The Clone Wars, featuring several characters from The Clone Wars, including Captain Rex, Ahsoka Tano and Maul.
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch, a spin-off/sequel series centering on the titular clone trooper team introduced in the seventh season, is set to premiere on May 4, 2021.

==
Series overview ==


===
Setting ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is set during the prequel trilogy era, in the period of three years between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
The series focuses on the eponymous conflict between the Galactic Republic, which is supported by the Jedi Order, and the Confederacy of Independent Systems, a movement organized by the Sith Lord Count Dooku to unite numerous planetary systems seeking independence from the Republic against it.
Unbeknownst to the galaxy, Darth Sidious, Dooku's secret master, is the one pulling the strings of both sides, as part of his master plan to eliminate the Jedi and gain enough power to create a new governing state under his rule.

The series was initially conceived as an anthology, with episodes sharing little narrative connections between them, but later seasons feature story arcs that span several episodes.
The protagonists are various characters from the live-action films, including Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Padmé Amidala, Yoda, and Mace Windu, as well as new characters created for the series, such as Anakin's Padawan learner Ahsoka Tano, and various clone troopers who are given distinct personalities, like Captain Rex of the 501st Legion.
The antagonists are typically members of the Separatist Alliance, though numerous episodes also focus on crime lords, bounty hunters, and Force-sensitive characters (Sith or just dark side users) who are not affiliated with the Separatists.

===
Synopsis ===
Season one focuses on various battles fought between the Republic and the Separatists, and their efforts to convince more planets and races to join them.
The main antagonists are Count Dooku, his informal apprentice Asajj Ventress, and the cyborg commander of the Separatists' droid armies, General Grievous.
There are also several episodes that do not focus on the conflict with the Separatists, but rather other aspects of the Clone Wars.

Season two features both one episode-storylines, and a few arcs that span between two and five episodes.
This season focuses heavily on bounty hunter characters, with one story arc featuring Darth Sidious hiring Cad Bane to steal a holocron from the Jedi Temple on Coruscant that will help him locate Force-sensitive children, while another deals with Boba Fett beginning his bounty hunter career and, alongside a group of more experienced mercenaries, seeking revenge against Mace Windu for killing his father.
Other major story arcs focus on the planet Mandalore, which took a neutral stance in the Clone Wars and whose pacifist leader, Duchess Satine Kryze, is targeted by both the Separatists and the Mandalorian terrorist faction Death Watch; and the Jedi leading Republic forces in an assault on the main Separatist battle droid manufacturing facility on Geonosis.

The first half of both season three and four are diplomatic in nature, and focus on the role of the Republic Senate in the Clone Wars, and how different races and planets are affected by the galaxy-wide conflict, as well as the Republic's efforts to help them.
During season three, several story arcs focus on the development of certain characters, such as Anakin, who is led to an ancient Force realm alongside Obi-Wan and Ahsoka, and learns more about the nature of the Force and his role as the Chosen One; Ahsoka, who defies Anakin's orders to join his team in a mission to break a Jedi Master out of a Separatist prison, and must later lead her own team of captured Jedi Padawans when they find themselves hunted by Trandoshans; and Ventress, who is betrayed by Dooku, returns to her Nightsister clan on Dathomir, and tries to exact revenge on her former master through his new apprentice, Savage Opress, who ultimately turns on both Ventress and Dooku to follow his own path.

In season four, one story arc focuses on the 501st Legion, who must act independently for the first time when the Jedi General they have been temporarily assigned to serve under is revealed to be a traitor, and manipulates them into killing each other, forcing the clones to capture and execute him.
Other story arcs feature Obi-Wan faking his death and going undercover as a bounty hunter to thwart a plot to capture Chancellor Palpatine; Ventress abandoning her Sith ways and becoming a bounty hunter after the Separatists' massacre of the Nightsisters; and Savage finding his long-lost brother, Darth Maul, who seeks revenge against Obi-Wan for his defeat over a decade prior.

Season five features five main story arcs.
In the first one, the Republic helps a group of rebels from Onderon, led by siblings Steela and Saw Gerrera, liberate their planet from Separatist occupation.
The second arc focuses on a group of Jedi younglings who, after completing their path to becoming Padawans, have to prove themselves by rescuing Ahsoka from pirates.
The third arc revolves around a team of droids who, while undertaking a mission to intercept an encrypted Separatist message, encounter an amnesiac former clone commando and must help him recover his memories to escape the planet they have been stranded on.
The fourth arc deals with the return of Darth Maul, who joins forces with Death Watch and other criminal syndicates to take over Mandalore and exact revenge on Obi-Wan.
The final arc features Ahsoka being framed for bombing the Jedi Temple, and having to prove her innonence while on the run from the Republic.
Though she is ultimately cleared of the charges against her after Anakin captures the real culprit, Ahsoka elects to abandon the Jedi Order, leaving Anakin devastated.

Season six consists of four story arcs:
clone trooper Fives investigating the premature activation of Order 66 in a fellow trooper's mind, and discovering the truth about the inhibitor chips implanted in each clone's brain, only to be silenced by Palpaine before he can expose it; Padmé trying to help her old flame
Rush Clovis expose the corruption in the Intergalactic Banking Clan, which causes tensions in her and Anakin's relationship when he learns about her secret mission and intervines; Jar Jar Binks and Mace Windu rescuing the captured Queen of Bardotta from a cult headed by the Nightsisters' former leader, Mother Talzin; and Yoda embarking on a journey to learn more about the nature of the Force after he is visited by the spirit of the late Qui-Gon Jinn.

Season seven consists of three story arcs.
The first one is focused on Captain Rex's character, as he, Anakin, and a team of clones with genetic mutations rescue ARC Trooper Echo, previously believed to have been killed in action, and defeat the Separatists on Anaxes with his help.
The second one focuses on Ahsoka, who befriends sisters Trace and Rafa Martez and helps them settle a debt with the Pyke Syndicate, while trying to conceal her Force powers because of the sisters' hatred of Jedi.
The final arc, which is set concurrently with Revenge of the Sith, depicts the Siege of Mandalore, a battle that had been referenced in previous Star Wars media.
Ahsoka reluctantly returns to the Republic to lead an assault alongside Rex and Mandalorian warrior Bo-Katan Kryze against Darth Maul's forces on Mandalore in hopes of capturing him.
Unbeknowst to them, Maul has foreseen the fall of the Republic and the Jedi Order, and Darth Sidious turning Anakin to the dark side, and hopes to prevent these events by killing the latter.
After Maul is captured, Sidious executes Order 66, causing Ahsoka to be attacked by her own clone troopers, whom she is hesitant to kill.
She manages to restore Rex's free will, and releases Maul to cause a distraction, but he ends up disabling the ship they are on.
All three ultimately escape, with Ahsoka and Rex later burying the clones who died in the ship's crash, and going their separate ways.
The final scene of the series shows Darth Vader finding Ahsoka's lightsaber among the ship's wreckage some time later, and leaving with it in silence.

==
Episodes ==
The series started with a theatrically released animated film; this decision were made after the production team watched completed footage of several early episodes for the planned television series, which were ultimately combined into a single feature-length film.
Warner Bros. Pictures distributed the film, while subsequent episodes aired separately on Cartoon Network.
For the film, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Samuel L. Jackson, and Matthew Wood reprised their roles as Count Dooku, C-3PO, Mace Windu, and the B1 Battle Droids, respectively, from the live-action movies, but Lee and Jackson would not return for the television series.

On December 5, 2011, a full-length feature cut of one of the Season 3 trilogies of episodes (the one composed by "Nightsisters," "Monster," and "Witches of the Mist") was released for download on iTunes as an uninterrupted movie that was previously shown at selected screenings in 2010.
The three episodes were written by Katie Lucas, who had previously written the Season 1 episode "Jedi Crash" as well as the Season 3 episodes "Sphere of Influence" and "Assassin."
A repeat of season one aired in "decoded" episode format.
Each installment contained unobtrusive text windows giving supplemental information about the characters and events playing out on screen.
The series was cancelled in March 2013, after the conclusion of its fifth season, as a result of The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm and the decision to remove most Star Wars Expanded Universe works from canon.
Despite this, The Clone Wars was one of the few pieces of Star Wars media to remain part of the new continuity established by Disney, and a sixth season was released on March 7, 2014 on Netflix, along with additional media, such as comic books and novels, based on unfinished story arcs that would have been included in the season.
On July 19, 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes in a seventh season to be released on Disney+.
A trailer for the season was released on April 14, 2019 at Star Wars Celebration Chicago.
On August 23, 2019, series creator Dave Filoni announced at the D23 Expo that it will be the final season.
On March 17, 2014, in recognition of the release of the complete series on Netflix, StarWars.com released the official chronological episode order for the first six seasons; this was later updated to include links to the episodes on Disney+.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, Additional voices
James Arnold Taylor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Plo Koon, Additional voices
Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano,
Additional voices
Dee Bradley Baker as Clone Troopers, Saesee Tiin, Onaconda Farr, Bossk, Arok the Hutt, Admiral Trench,
Additional voices
Tom Kane as Narrator, Yoda, Admiral Wullf Yularen,
Additional voices
Matthew Wood as General Grievous, Battle Droids, Poggle the Lesser, Wat Tambor,
Additional voices


===
Recurring ===
Ian Abercrombie (Seasons 1–6) /
Tim Curry (Seasons 5–6) /
Ian McDiarmid (Season 7) as Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious
B.J. Hughes (Season 1) /
Ahmed Best
(Seasons 1–6) as Jar Jar Binks
Clancy Brown as Savage Opress
Corey Burton as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, Cad Bane, Ziro the Hutt, Chairman Papanoida, Additional voices
Terrence C. Carson as Mace Windu
Jim Cummings as Hondo Ohnaka
Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
Ben Diskin as AZI-3, Krismo Sodi, Morley, Otua Blank, WAC-47
Robin Atkin Downes as Castas, Cham Syndulla, Cin Drallig, Ima-Gun Di, Rush Clovis
Jon Favreau as Pre Vizsla
Nika Futterman as Asajj Ventress, Chi Eekway Papanoida, Gardulla
the Hutt, Sy Snootles, TC-70
Brian George as King Katuunko, Chi Cho, Ki-Adi-Mundi
Barbara Goodson as Mother Talzin
Anna Graves as Duchess Satine, Sugi, Tiplar, Tiplee,
Additional voices
Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura,
Riyo Chuchi
Julian Holloway as Almec, Admiral Killian
Tom Kenny as Greedo, Lt.
Tan Divo, Nute Gunray, Silood
Jaime King as Aurra Sing, Cassie Cryar, Additional Voices
Phil LaMarr as Bail Organa, Kit Fisto,
Orn Free Taa
Daniel Logan as Boba Fett, Clone Cadets
James C. Mathis III as Gregar Typho
Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia, Mama the Hutt
Kevin Michael Richardson as Jabba
the Hutt, Hay-Zu, Xomit Grunseit
Katee Sackhoff as Bo-Katan Kryze
Meredith Salenger as Barriss Offee,
Che Amanwe Papanoida, Ione Marcy, Pluma Sodi
Kath Soucie as Mon Mothma, Jek Lawquane, Mina Bonteri
Jason Spisak as Lux Bonteri, Zinn Paulness
Stephen Stanton as Mas Amedda, Tarkin, Colonel Meebur Gascon, Moralo Eval, Marg Krim, Additional voices
Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala, Additional voices
Tasia Valenza as Shaak Ti
Sam Witwer as Darth Maul,
The Son


===
Notable guests ===
Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker
Clare Grant as Latts Razzi
Seth Green as Todo 360, Ion Papanoida
Mark Hamill as Darth Bane
James Marsters as Faro Argyus
Bobby Moynihan as Pintu Son-El
Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn
Simon Pegg as Dengar
Greg Proops as Tal Merrik
Elizabeth Rodriguez as Rafa Martez
Ray Stevenson as Gar Saxon
George Takei as Lok Durd
David Tennant as Huyang
Adrienne Wilkinson as The Daughter
Michael York as
Dr. Nuvo Vindi


==
Production ==
At April 2005's Star Wars Celebration III, George Lucas stated that "we are working on a 3-D continuation of the pilot series that was on the Cartoon Network; we probably won't start that project for another year.
"
Lucas hired Dave Filoni after having seen episodes of Avatar: The Last Airbender he had worked on.
By July 2005, pre-production had begun on the series, according to Steve Sansweet, head of Lucasfilm fan relations.
Sansweet referred to the series as "the next generation of the Star Wars saga, a cutting edge 30-minute, 3-D computer-animation series based on the Clone Wars that take place between Episode II ... and Episode III."
Sansweet described the look of the new series as "a melding of Asian anime with unique 3-D animation styling.
"
Primary production took place at the Lucasfilm Animation facility in Singapore.
According to another statement by Sansweet, "Lucasfilm Animation will be hiring a total of about 300 digital artists and others in both California and Singapore locations to produce not only the series but animated feature films in the years ahead."
He said about the series, "to get the series underway, Lucasfilm Animation has hired key production and creative talent to lead the development of its first animation project.
"
Sansweet has said that "a large component of the future of Star Wars and Lucasfilm is CGI animation."

Lucasfilm Animation used Autodesk software to animate both the film and the series.
The Maya 3D-modeling program was used to create the highly detailed worlds, characters and creatures.
Character designer Kilian Plunkett referred to the character designs from Genndy Tartakovsky's original 2003 Clone Wars series, and animators reviewed designs from the 2D series when creating the animation style.
Tartakovsky was not involved with the production, and criticized Lucas's decision to revisit the era.
In 2007, Rob Coleman divulged that one episode was complete, with 15 more in production, and that he was going to direct five of the first 22 episodes.
He revealed that the reaction from licensees was very positive, and that the final assembly of shows was done at Skywalker Ranch.

Speaking at PaleyFest on March 3, 2007, Lucas revealed that the series would be episodic, and as such would not focus on Anakin Skywalker's story; with episodes dedicated to clone troopers and other characters.
Lucas revealed further information in a fan interview, including a new character named Ahsoka Tano, over 100 episodes and a possible appearance by Boba Fett.
The first trailer for the series was released on the official Star Wars website on May 8, 2007.
In an interview in the September 24, 2007 issue of TV Guide, Lucas confirmed that 39 episodes of the series had been completed.
On April 8, 2007, Ain't It Cool News reported that musician Eric Rigler had recorded music for the series.
Rigler disclosed that each planet in the Star Wars galaxy would have its own theme music.
The episode Mr. Rigler performed on was based on Bulgarian music and played on Uilleann pipes.
Kevin Kiner composed the original score for each episode.

Stuart Snyder, who oversaw Cartoon Network and other Turner Broadcasting System cable networks from 2007 to 2014, said he became interested in the new Clone Wars series immediately upon starting the job in May 2007.
Snyder flew out to San Francisco, California to screen several episodes, and told Lucas the only place he wanted to see the show was on Cartoon Network.
Snyder wished to create an action/adventure block of shows on Friday night in an attempt to rejuvenate Cartoon Network.
Snyder expressed confidence that the shows would help boost ratings: "You catch me at a time where I have a smile on my face because of our internal results.
I can say there's a little bit of bragging on the third quarter for us.
"The
"Young Padawans" arc from Season 5 was intended to be aired separately from The Clone Wars as a feature-length pilot for a spin-off series that never materialized.
Seasons 6, 7, and 8, were in some form of production at the time of the show's cancellation in March 2013, shortly after Lucasfilm was purchased by Disney.

==
Release ==
An online comic released alongside the series depicts story snippets between episodes.

=== Broadcast ===
The Clone Wars premiered on October 3, 2008 at 9 p.m. on Cartoon Network.
The Clone Wars on Cartoon Network is shown in a 16:9 (1.77:1) aspect ratio, cropped from its original aspect ratio (OAR) of 2.35:1 (as seen in the UK Sky Premiere screenings).
The show began airing on their Adult Swim block on March 14, 2009, making the series the first Cartoon Network series to simultaneously air on both Cartoon Network and Adult Swim.
The series also aired from January 15 to March 26, 2009 on TNT, making it the first form of animation to air on that channel in over a decade.
The show entered an off-network syndication in 2012, and in the fall of that year Trifecta Entertainment & Media put it into barter syndication.
on Weekends It aired on many affiliates on the Independent Stations as well as an affiliates of Fox MyNetworkTV and The CW
(the latter network's CW Plus service also carries the program as part of its national schedule).
The show has been taken off the air in off-network syndication since fall 2013 due to low costs and was not renewed for Season 2 in the 2013-2014 TV Season due to Disney's completed acquisitions of Lucasfilm Ltd In December 2012.

On March 11, 2013, it was announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down" to focus on the Star Wars sequel trilogy and a new series, Star Wars Rebels.
On February 13, 2014, Netflix announced that starting on March 7, 2014 they would begin the US distribution of the entire TV series, including some previously unreleased director's cuts, and the previously unaired new season dubbed "The Lost Missions".
The latter also became available for purchase on digital video stores, such as iTunes, in mid-2014.
The Netflix distribution of the series, along with the Blu-rays, included versions of some episodes with previously censored material deemed too inappropriate for the demographic of Cartoon Network.
One of the most well-known edits was the removal of the character Ventress kissing a clone after she had stabbed him with her lightsaber.
The show was removed from Netflix on April 7, 2019.
For the revival and final season, the remaining episodes of the series are exclusively available on Disney+.
The first episode for Season 7 was released on February 21, 2020, with the final episode being released on May 4 of the same year.

===
Home media ===
Warner Home Video distributed the videodisc releases of the first five seasons, while Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment handled the videodisc release of the sixth season as Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – The Lost Missions.

Apart from the season-by-season videodisc sets, there were also three special DVD releases consisting of four episodes from a particular season that reflected a certain story arc or theme:

A Galaxy Divided, an early DVD release of the series which included the four season 1 episodes ("Ambush", "Shadow of Malevolence", "Destroy Malevolence", "Downfall of a Droid")
Clone Commandos, another DVD compilation that includes episode five "Rookies" as well as episodes 19 through 21 ("Storm over Ryloth", "Innocents of Ryloth" and "Liberty on Ryloth").

Darth Maul Returns, a feature-length "director's cut" edited together from Season 4 episodes "Massacre", "Bounty", "Brothers" and "Revenge" and was initially available exclusively at Target.
==
Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
Although it began with mixed-to-positive reviews, the series achieved critical acclaim over time.
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 67% of critics have given the first season a positive review based on 15 reviews, with an average rating of 5.73/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "With an agreeably entertaining first season, Star Wars: The Clone Wars opens a fun, kid-friendly chapter of the franchise's sprawling mythology.
"
100% of critics have given the third and fifth seasons a positive review based on 5 reviews each, with an average rating of 8/10 and 7.85/10 respectively.
100% of critics have given the sixth season a positive review based on 12 reviews, with an average rating of 8.92/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "Sophisticated storytelling and quality animation make the sixth season of Star Wars
: The Clone Wars a fitting end to the series.
"
100% of critics have given the seventh season a positive review based on 24 reviews, with an average rating of 8.43/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "
Thanks to its beautifully animated action-sequences and its impressively layered storytelling, The Clone Wars' final chapter affirms its place as one of Star Wars' greatest entries.
"
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average score of 64 out of 100 based on 9 critic reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
On July 11, 2008, television critics were shown a completed episode of the series.
The Hollywood Reporter's Live Feed blog called the footage "likely the most photo-realistic animated TV series ever produced."
On August 31, 2008, a sneak peek of the new series was shown on Cartoon Network.
IGN named it the 89th best animated series.
They specifically praised the episodes "Rookies", "Cloak of Darkness", and "Lair of Grievous" saying that their storylines stood out as some of the best in the Star Wars expanded universe.

===
Ratings ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars became the most-watched series premiere in Cartoon Network history.
The series averaged 3 million total viewers in its debut, according to Nielsen Media Research.
Cartoon Network said the Star Wars spin-off ranked as the number one channel among all major animated networks in the time slot among total viewers (the largest in the demographic for any premiere telecast of an original Cartoon series).
On July 23, 2010, at the San Diego Comic-Con, Craig Glenday, editor of the Guinness World Records, presented Star Wars: The Clone Wars supervising director Dave Filoni, CG supervisor Joel Aron, and lead designer Kilian Plunkett a certificate proclaiming the cartoon series "the highest rated sci-fi animation currently on television".
Tech Times said that, "while the Star Wars prequel films fail to make audiences care about characters like Anakin Skywalker, The Clone Wars succeeds.
"
During May 2020, following the release of the seventh season on Disney+, The Clone Wars became the most streamed digital original show in the United States.

=== Accolades ===


==
The Clone Wars Legacy ==
At the time of cancellation in March 2013, 65 more episodes were in development.
Thirteen of these episodes were finished to become part of Season 6: The Lost Missions, but there were still additional arcs that were never released.
In September 2014, StarWars.com released details of three story arcs from the unfinished episodes.

===
Literature ===


====
Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir ====
A four-episode arc continued the story of Darth Maul following the events from the season 5 episode "The Lawless", detailing his escape from Sidious; Maul regains control of the criminal Shadow Collective, and battles Dooku, Grievous, and Sidious.
The arc was adapted into a four-part limited comic book series, Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir, which debuted in May 2014.

====
Dark Disciple ====
An eight-episode arc with Nightsister Asajj Ventress and Jedi Quinlan Vos was adapted into Dark Disciple, a novel by Christie Golden released on July 7, 2015.
The story follows Vos partnering up with Ventress, hoping to execute Count Dooku.

===
Story reels ===
Two arcs consisting each of four episodes were released on the official Star Wars website for free in the form of complete animatics, albeit with unfinished animation as those episodes only went through the earliest stages of production.
Both were fully voiced by the cast.

====
Crystal Crisis on Utapau ===
=
In September 2014, four unfinished episodes were released on the official Star Wars website.
The arc took place on Utapau with Obi-Wan and Anakin investigating an arms deal involving the Separatists and a Kyber crystal.
The arc also dealt with Anakin's feelings after the departure of Ahsoka.
It was also included in the season 6 Blu-ray.

====
The Bad Batch ====
The unfinished animatics for The Bad Batch, a four-episode arc, were screened at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Anaheim, California on April 17, 2015.
Scripted by Brent Friedman, it is a four-part story arc focusing on a ragtag unit of clone commandos of the same name.
The arc was subsequently released on StarWars.com for free shortly after on April 29, 2015.
The completed episodes were aired as the first part of the seventh season.
On July 13, 2020, a spin-off sequel series titled Star Wars: The Bad Batch was announced; it will follow the titular group of clones working as mercenaries in the immediate aftermath of the Clone War.

==
Video games ==
Seven video games have been released, which are based on the style and character designs of the series.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels, a fighting game released on November 11, 2008 for Wii.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance, an action-adventure game released on November 11, 2008 for Nintendo DS.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes, another action-adventure game taking place between Season 1 and Season 2, released on October 9, 2009 for Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 2 and Nintendo DS.

Clone Wars Adventures, an online PC game launched on September 15, 2010 online by Sony Online Entertainment and shut down on March 31, 2014.

Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars, released in March 2011 by TT Games for PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, Wii, Nintendo DS, PC, Mac, and Nintendo 3DS, which further stylizes the characters as part of the Lego Star Wars theme and is mostly based on the first two seasons.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars Pinball, a virtual pinball adaptation of the series' original run, released in 2013 as a purchaseable add-on for Zen Studios' Star Wars Pinball collection for most seventh- and eighth-generation home video game systems, computers and mobile devices.

Disney Infinity 3.0, released in September 2015 by Disney Interactive for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U, Microsoft Windows, iOS and Android, which stylizes select major characters from the show as action figures that become playable only via a toys-to-life NFC system.
Each copy of the game comes with the playset, "Twilight of the Republic", which is an alternate storyline set during the Clone Wars era, along with two starting characters, Anakin and Ahsoka.
Other characters from the show also appear, although most of them are not playable or are fought as bosses.
Characters and/or locations from the show have also appeared in the following Star Wars games listed below:
Star Wars: Galactic Defense, a now-defunct tower defense game released on iOS and Android by DeNA, in which a number of playable champions include characters from the show.
Several levels in the main campaign also take place on the planet Felucia, a major Clone Wars hotspot featured in some episodes.

Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, a turn-based RPG also released on iOS and Android by Electronic Arts, where some levels take place on planets depicted in the show (such as Dathomir) and a number of collectible, playable characters are from the show.

Star Wars:
Force Arena, an online MOBA game released on iOS and Android by Netmarble, where an August 2017 update allowed players to recruit characters, vehicles and battle units from the series, as well as battle on planets like Felucia.

Star Wars Battlefront II, a video game available on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, in which players can battle on or directly above planets like Ryloth and Kamino, where some battles in the series were fought.
Wood, Taylor, Lanter and Burton also reprise their voice roles for four new playable heroes (General Grievous, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker and Count Dooku, respectively) being added to the game's third season in late 2018, themed after the Clone Wars.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at StarWars.com
The Clone Wars Legacy at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at TV.com
The cù-sìth(e)
(Scottish Gaelic pronunciation:
[kʰuː ˈʃiː]), plural coin-shìth(e)
(Scottish Gaelic pronunciation:
[kʰɔɲ ˈhiː]) is a mythological hound found in the folklore of Scotland.
A similar creature exists in Irish folklore (spelled cú sídhe), and it also bears some resemblance to the Welsh Cŵn Annwn.

The cù-sìth is thought to make its home in the clefts of rocks and to roam the moors of the Highlands.

It is usually described as having a shaggy, dark green coat and being as large as a small cow.
According to legend, the creature was capable of hunting silently, but would occasionally let out three terrifying barks, and only three, that could be heard for miles by those listening for it, even far out at sea.

Those who hear the barking of the Cù-Sìth must reach safety by the third bark or be overcome with terror to the point of death.

== See also ==


==
References ==
Asajj Ventress () is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
She first appeared as a supporting antagonist in the 2003 Clone Wars micro-series, voiced by Grey DeLisle.
Ventress returned as a major antagonist in the canonical 2008 animated film The Clone Wars and the follow-up television series of the same name, now voiced by Nika Futterman, though she eventually redeemed herself, becoming an anti-heroine.

A powerful Dark Jedi with exceptional lightsaber combat abilities, Ventress wields dual lightsabers with curved handles that can attach together and form a double bladed weapon with a curve in the middle.
Originally a Nightsister of Dathomir who was sold as a slave
, she later became a Jedi Padawan, and eventually an informal Sith apprentice to Count Dooku after falling to the dark side of the Force as a result of her Jedi Master's death in battle.
Trained as Dooku's personal assassin, Ventress was assigned various missions during the first years of the Clone Wars and came into conflict with the Jedi, primarily Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, and Ahsoka Tano.
However, after being betrayed and left for dead by Dooku on the orders of his master, Darth Sidious, Ventress rejoined the Nightsisters and attempted to exact revenge on Dooku, before settling on becoming a bounty hunter.
She later began to slowly redeem herself, helping her former Jedi enemies on several occasions, and was eventually completely redeemed in the 2015 novel Star Wars: Dark Disciple, but met her death at the hand of her former master, Dooku.

Aside from the television series, the character appears in several other forms of Star Wars media, both canon and non-canon, including books, comics, and video games.
Ventress became a favorite among fans, regularly placing in fan polls and Star Wars character ranking lists.

==
Characterization ==


===
Creation ===
Before the character of Count Dooku was developed, the art department for Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones developed a villainess as a potential main antagonist.
When the Star Wars expanded universe resurrected this female Sith idea as one of Dooku's underlings who could appear more frequently throughout the Clone Wars, this nameless Separatist Commander was dubbed Juno Eclipse
but the name was rejected as "not villainous enough", and she was renamed Asajj Ventress.
The name Juno Eclipse was later given to a character featured in the video game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, with no relation to Ventress.
LucasArts's Leland Chee suggested using "Asajj" as the character's first name, naming her after the character Asaji from Akira Kurosawa's Throne of Blood.

===
Portrayal ===
Asajj Ventress was voiced by Grey DeLisle in the 2003 Clone Wars micro-series, and by Nika Futterman in the 2008 animated film Star Wars: The Clone and its subsequent TV series, as well most of her video game and other animated appearances.

==
Appearances ==


===
The Clone Wars ===
Ventress is an antagonist in the 2008
The Clone Wars film.
As the disciple of Count Dooku, she helps him with his plan to turn Jabba the Hutt against the Galactic Republic by kidnapping his son Rotta.
Ventress fights Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker and apprentice Ahsoka Tano, who rescue Rotta, and later also battles Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi, who defeats her, forcing her to flee.

Ventress is a lead character in all five broadcast seasons of the subsequent The Clone Wars animated series.
In season one, Ventress travels to the moon of Rugosa as Dooku's emissary to form an alliance between the planet Toydaria and the Separatists.
The king of Toydaria is reluctant, but allows her forces to face Yoda in battle to prove which side is superior.
When the king decides to side with the Republic, Dooku gives his assassin permission to kill the king so they may have a better chance with the successor.
Yoda thwarts her attempt, however, and she is forced to flee.
Dooku orders Ventress to spy on the planet Kamino for the Separatist forces, planning an invasion with General Grievous to destroy the clone production facilities while stealing Jango Fett's DNA template from the production facility.
Ventress then frees Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray from the custody of Luminara Unduli and Ahsoka, fighting the two Jedi before ultimately succeeding in her mission.

In season three, Ventress' back story is explained: she hails from the planet Dathomir and was sold by the Nightsisters to criminals.
She would have likely been killed in a pirate raid if not for Jedi Ky Narec, who had crashed on Rattatak.
Narec sensed her potential and trained her in the ways of the Force.
However, warlord Osika Kirske killed Narec before Ventress could become a full-fledged Jedi.
She developed an implacable hatred of the Jedi Order, which she believes abandoned her master and ignored the bloodshed on her planet.

Eventually, Darth Sidious comes to see Ventress as a liability, and orders Dooku to eliminate her.
Dooku attempts, unsuccessfully, to kill her, as she engages Anakin and Obi-Wan in one final duel, in which she is wounded.
She turns to the Nightsisters of Dathomir for help, and they engineer Savage Opress to serve as Dooku's new apprentice in order to earn his trust, before ultimately killing him on Ventress' behalf.
The scheme fails, however, when Opress turns on both Dooku and Ventress and attempts to kill them both.

In season four, Ventress returns to the Nightsisters.
She undergoes the ritual to become a full-fledged Nightsister, but is thwarted when Grievous' droid army slaughter the Nightsisters while their matriarch Mother Talzin is rendered incorporeal.
Told by Talzin to find her own path, Ventress later helps Boba Fett's team of bounty hunters in a dangerous but profitable mission.
She then finally makes peace with her past with an ideal future as a bounty hunter.
While still haunted by Opress, she tracks him to Raydonia to collect a bounty on him.
When she arrives on Opress’ spaceship, she confronts him and Darth Maul as they are about to kill Obi-Wan.
Ventress teams up with her old nemesis to fight Maul and Opress, but they are ultimately forced to escape in their shuttle.

In season five's final arc, Ventress nearly apprehends Ahsoka, who has been framed for attempting to destroy the Jedi Temple.
She ultimately helps Ahsoka escape on the condition that she would be exonerated.
Ventress later helps Anakin to find out that Barriss Offee framed Ahsoka.

In the 2015 novel Dark Disciple, based on unfinished episodes from The Clone Wars, Ventress teams up with undercover Jedi Master Quinlan Vos in an "un-Jedi like" mission to kill Dooku.
Ventress falls in love with Vos.
After Vos is turned to the dark side by Dooku, Ventress ultimately manages to redeem him, but she is killed by Dooku with Force lightning shortly after.
Vos later returns Ventress' body to Dathomir so that she may rejoin her fallen sisters in spirit.

===
Legends works ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

====
Clone Wars ====
Asajj Ventress first appeared as a supporting villain in the 2003 micro-series Star Wars: Clone Wars.
When Sith Lord Count Dooku arrives to add the planet Rattatak to his Separatist movement, he witnesses Ventress fighting several opponents in a large arena, defeating them all before claiming to be a Sith warrior.
When Dooku laughs aside the notion that she could be a Sith, Ventress tries to attack him, but the Sith Lord renders her unconscious with Force lightning.
After she awakens, Dooku attacks her again, but she jumps backwards and ignites her lightsabers.
In her quarters, a short duel takes place to which Dooku cuts her two lightsabers in half, rendering her defenseless.
Although Ventress is defeated, Dooku is impressed by her abilities and recruits her to be his apprentice by appealing to her hatred of the Jedi.

Darth Sidious later personally assigns Ventress to kill Anakin Skywalker, and Dooku presents the Dark Jedi with a new pair of lightsabers with curved hilts.
After Ventress leaves, Sidious remarks that she is certain to fail, but that she will serve as a useful test for Anakin.
Ventress then engages the Republic fighter forces in orbit of the planet Muunilinst and lures Anakin into a chase.
Ventress and Anakin go to Yavin IV, and a fierce battle from the forest to the Massassi temple takes place.
Though she initially gains the upper hand in their duel, Anakin calls upon his immense connection to the Force and brutally overpowers her, causing her to fall over the edge of a cliff.

====
Novels ====
As portrayed in the novel The Cestus Deception, Ventress appears on Ord Cestus during the Bio-Droid Crisis.
She is behind the X'Ting criminal Trillot's dealings with Obi-Wan.
Ventress also destroys the Republic Cruiser carrying Barrister Doolb Snoil returning to the Republic; however, Snoil survives.
Ventress later challenges Kenobi and his fellow Jedi Master Kit Fisto to a duel.
Ventress disarms Fisto but is then engaged by Kenobi.
Their duel leads them into an underwater chamber and Ventress is forced to escape after Kenobi slices her across her abdomen.
She lets loose a smoke bomb and flees back to the Confederacy and Dooku.

====
Comic books ====
In the Star Wars: Republic story "
The New Face of War", Ventress joins forces with the bounty hunter Durge on the invasion of Naboo's moon, Ohma-D'un.
Together they use swamp gas to wipe out the Gungan colony and prepare to launch a biological attack on Naboo.
In the ensuing battle with Republic forces, Ventress makes her first public appearance in the war (in the chronological timeline).
Ventress kills Jedi Master Glaive in the battle and cuts off his apprentice Zule's left arm.
She engages Obi-Wan and the pair are evenly matched.
Ventress escapes with Durge after ARC Trooper Alpha destroys their fueling station.

In Star Wars: Jedi - Mace Windu, Dooku sends Ventress to Ruul to help frame Mace Windu.
Ventress briefly confronts Sora Bulq, who had been secretly corrupted by Dooku, as a ruse.
Ventress kills Mira in the battle and then engages Jedi Masters Sian Jeisel, K' Kruhk and Rhad Tarn all of whom she defeats singlehandedly.
After framing Windu for the crime, Ventress corrupts Tarn.
While Tarn fights against Jeisel, Ventress defeats K'Kruhk in combat.
Windu's timely arrival saves the Jedi; Ventress finds that she is no match for Windu's power and is forced to flee.

In the Republic story "Blast Radius", Ventress and Durge again engage the Jedi taskforce in a facility on the planet Queyta.
Ventress briefly fights against Kenobi and Fay.
Durge kills Jon Antilles and Knol Ven'Nari.
After Ven'nari is killed in an explosion, Durge pushes Antilles into a lava pit.
Ventress uses her lightsabers to collapse the ceiling, sending a shower of lava onto Diath's head.
Although the Separatists claim a victory, Ventress spares Obi-Wan's life under Dooku's orders, though she impales Fay in the chest with her lightsabers.
Fay gives Obi-Wan the last of her strength to escape the facility.

In "The Battle of Jabiim", Ventress captures Obi-Wan and Alpha from Jabiim and transports them to Rattatak for torture and interrogation.
Obi-Wan and Alpha escape in the following story, "Hate & Fear", and the Jedi Master takes Ky Narec's lightsaber, making the animosity between him and Ventress deeply personal.

In "Dreadnoughts of Rendili", Ventress and fellow Dark Jedi Tol Skorr fight Obi-Wan and Quinlan Vos on Titavian IV.
Obi-Wan unleashes a rancor to distract Ventress, but she manipulates it via the dark side.
Obi-Wan fights Ventress after killing the rancor but he escapes with Vos before the duel is settled.
Grievous arrives to rescue the two Dark Jedi, shaming Ventress in their master Dooku's eyes.

Ventress then travels to Coruscant to kill Vos and Obi-Wan.
During the mission, she discovers Anakin's secret marriage to Senator Padmé Amidala.
Enraged, Anakin engages Ventress.
During the duel, Ventress scars Skywalker's face
but she is once again overpowered and suffers another huge fall.
Republic Intelligence assumes that she is dead.

"Obsession" marks the character's final appearance in Republic.
Ventress survives her encounter with Anakin on Coruscant but is badly injured.
She is sent to Boz Pity where Dooku places her in a bacta tank and fits her with cybernetic modifications.
One month later, Obi-Wan infiltrates the facility.
Ventress wakes up and subsequently attacks him.
She fights against both Obi-Wan and Anakin but is abandoned when Dooku orders an IG-100 MagnaGuard to kill her as she runs towards Dooku's shuttle.
Enraged and badly wounded, Ventress tries to kill Obi-Wan as he tries to help her.
Anakin slashes her from behind, mortally wounding her.
As she lies dying, she tells him the location of the Separatists' next target.
Believing Ventress to be dead, Obi-Wan puts her on a ship bound for Coruscant.
However, Ventress survives by placing herself in a Sith trance.
While on the shuttle, she emerges from her trance and orders the pilots to take her as far away as possible from Dooku, the Jedi, and the war.

==
Other media ==


===
Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron ===
Ventress is also a villain in Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron who can be used if the player is a Separatist and earns enough points to use her.
She is available as a character on the Saleucami and Sullust level.

===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars video games ===
Ventress appears in the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars video game spin-offs:
She is a supporting villain in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars - Jedi Alliance where she is seen on Coruscant holding Ziro the Hutt hostage.
The Jedi have to defeat her in order to gain more information on the Nightsisters.

She also appears in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars - Republic Heroes also as a supporting villain to the game's plot.
She is fought in a boss battle with the Jedi characters Luminara Unduli and Aayla Secura.

Ventress appears in the game
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars - Lightsaber Duels as a playable character.

===
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed
duology ===
Ventress has a non-canon appearance in the PlayStation 2, Wii, and PlayStation Portable versions of Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed as a costume skin that can be used on Starkiller, the main character of the game.
In the Wii version, she is also a playable character in the 2-player fighting game mode called Duel Mode.

She is also a playable multiplayable character for the Wii version of the sequel, Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II.
===
Other Star Wars video games ===
The character is featured in several Star Wars games that were released after Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm:

Ventress appears in the tower defense game
Star Wars: Galactic Defense as a playable character for the Dark Side campaign, and a boss for the Light Side campaign.

Ventress is a playable character in Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, a turn-based RPG.
She is classified as a Nightsister and a Separatist support, armed with powerful area of effect moves, and can grow stronger when characters are defeated.

Ventress is a playable character in Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens via downloadable content.

Ventress is mentioned in the 2017 reboot of Star Wars: Battlefront II.

Ventress is indirectly mentioned in the 2019 video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, when Nightsister survivor Merrin talks about the Nightsisters killed during the Clone Wars.
==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Asajj Ventress in the StarWars.com Databank
Asajj Ventress on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Star Wars franchise has spawned multiple live-action and animated films.
The franchise started with a film trilogy set in medias res—beginning in the middle of the story—which was later expanded to a trilogy of trilogies, better known as the "Skywalker saga".
The original trilogy was released between 1977 and 1983, the prequel trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a sequel trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
The original eponymous film, later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope, was followed by the sequels Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983), forming what is collectively referred to as the original trilogy.

Years later, a prequel trilogy was released, consisting of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
After Lucasfilm was sold to Disney, a sequel trilogy began with Episode VII – The Force Awakens (2015), continued with Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi (2017), and concluded with Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
In between the sequel films, two anthology films were released, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016) and Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018), both set between the prequel and original trilogies.
The combined box office revenue of the films equates to over US$10 billion, and it is currently the second-highest-grossing film franchise.
All the major theatrical live-action films were nominated for Academy Awards.
The original film was nominated for most of the major categories, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, while all sequels have been nominated for technical categories.

The first spin-off film produced was the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
In 1984 and 1985, two live-action films featuring the Ewoks were televised in the United States and released theatrically in Europe.
Several Star Wars television series have also been released.

==
Skywalker saga ==
The main Star Wars film series is a trilogy of trilogies; as it neared completion, it began to be referred to as the "Skywalker saga".
It was released beginning with the original trilogy (Episodes IV, V and VI, 1977–1983), followed by the prequel trilogy (Episodes I, II and III, 1999–2005) and the sequel trilogy (Episodes VII, VIII and IX, 2015–2019).
The first film released, Star Wars (1977), is the fourth film chronologically and was later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope.
The saga begins with Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999) and concludes with Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

The story follows each generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family and their struggle against the evil Sith lord Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
The prequel trilogy focuses on Anakin Skywalker, his training as a Jedi, and eventual fall to the dark side as Darth Vader.
The original trilogy follows his children, Luke and Leia, as they join the Rebel Alliance and battle Vader, Palpatine and his Galactic Empire.
The sequel trilogy features Ben Solo a.k.a Kylo Ren—the son of Leia and Han Solo, nephew of Luke, and grandson of Anakin—who seeks to rule the galaxy with Rey, the granddaughter of Palpatine and the last Jedi apprentice of Luke and Leia.

Each episodic film begins with an opening crawl, accompanied by the main Star Wars theme by John Williams, who composes the scores for each film.
The first six films—most notably the original trilogy—have had retroactive changes made after their initial theatrical releases.

==
Standalone films ==
As Lucas was outlining a trilogy of trilogies, he also imagined making additional movies unrelated to the Skywalker saga.
The first theatrical films set outside the main episodic series were the Ewok spin-off films Caravan of Courage: An Ewok Adventure (1984) and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985), the first of which was screened internationally after being produced for television.
After the conclusion of his then six-episode saga in 2005, Lucas returned to spin-offs in the form of television series.

An animated film, The Clone Wars (2008), was released as a pilot to a TV series of the same name.
An anthology series set between the main episodes entered development in parallel to the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney CFO Jay Rasulo as origin stories.
The first entry, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016), tells the story of the rebels who steal the Death Star plans directly before Episode IV.
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) focuses on Han's backstory, also featuring Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian.

===
Animated film ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Preceding the airing of the animated TV series in late 2008, the theatrical feature Star Wars: The Clone Wars was compiled from episodes "almost [as] an afterthought.
"
It reveals that Anakin trained an apprentice between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith; the series explains Padawan Ahsoka Tano's absence from the latter film.
The character was originally criticized by fans, but by the end of the series the character had become a fan favorite.
The film and series exist in the same level of canon as the episodic and anthology films.

===
Anthology films ===
|}Before selling Lucasfilm to Disney in 2012, and parallel to his development of a sequel trilogy, George Lucas and original trilogy co-screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan started development on a standalone film about a young Han Solo.
In February 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger made public the development of a Kasdan film and Entertainment Weekly reported that it would focus on Han Solo.
Disney CFO Jay Rasulo has described the standalone films as origin stories.
Kathleen Kennedy confirmed that there was "no attempt being made to carry characters (from the standalone films) in and out of the saga episodes.
"
The standalone films released so far are subtitled "A Star Wars Story".
====
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016) ====
Rogue One is set directly before Episode IV: A New Hope and focuses on the eponymous group of rebels who obtain the plans to the Death Star.
Its laser was developed by scientist Galen Erso (played by Mads Mikkelsen) after the Empire forcibly abducted him, separating him from his daughter Jyn.
Galen secretly sends a defecting Imperial pilot, Bodhi Rook, to deliver a message warning of the weapon's existence and revealing its weakness to his rebel friend Saw Gerrera.
Under the false promise of her father's liberation, Jyn agrees to help Rebel Alliance intelligence officer Cassian Andor and his droid K-2SO retrieve the message from Saw, now the paranoid leader of an extremist cell of rebels.

The idea for the movie came from John Knoll, the chief creative officer of Industrial Light & Magic.
In May 2014, Lucasfilm announced Gareth Edwards as the director of an anthology film, with Gary Whitta writing the first draft for a release on December 16, 2016.
The film's title was revealed to be Rogue One, with Chris Weitz rewriting the script, and Felicity Jones in the starring role.
Ben Mendelsohn and Diego Luna also play new characters, with James Earl Jones returning to voice Darth Vader.
Edwards stated, "It comes down to a group of individuals who don't have magical powers that have to somehow bring hope to the galaxy."
The film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated Star Wars TV series, namely The Clone Wars' Saw Gerrera, portrayed by Forest Whitaker in the film.
The movie received generally positive reviews, with its performances, action sequences, soundtrack, visual effects and darker tone being praised.
The film grossed over US$500 million worldwide within a week of its release.

====
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) ====
Solo, the second anthology film, focuses on Han Solo about 10 years before A New Hope.
After an escape attempt from his Imperial-occupied home planet of Corellia goes wrong, a young Han vows to return to rescue his girlfriend Qi'ra.
Han "Solo" joins the Imperial Academy; however, he is expelled for his reckless behavior.
Han and his newfound Wookiee friend Chewbacca resort to a criminal life, mentored by veteran smuggler Beckett.
After angering gangster Dryden Vos, Han and his company's lives depend on pulling a heist for him.
Without a ship to travel, they hire Lando Calrissian, the captain and owner of the Millennium Falcon.

Before selling Lucasfilm to Disney, George Lucas had hired Star Wars original trilogy veteran Lawrence Kasdan to write a film about a young Han Solo.
The film stars Alden Ehrenreich as a young Han Solo, Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca (after serving as a double for the character in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi), Donald Glover as Lando Calrissian, Emilia Clarke as Qi'ra, and Woody Harrelson as Beckett.
Lucasfilm originally hired Phil Lord and Christopher Miller to direct, but they were fired during principal photography, and replaced by Ron Howard.
A twist ending acknowledges one of the major story arcs of The Clone Wars and Rebels animated series, while leaving the story open ended for sequels.
====
Rogue Squadron (2023) ====
During Disney Investor Day 2020, it was announced that Patty Jenkins would direct a film titled Rogue Squadron, set to be released on December 22, 2023.
The film will be the first film in the franchise directed by a woman, and according to StarWars.com, "will introduce a new generation of starfighter pilots as they earn their wings and risk their lives in a boundary-pushing, high-speed thrill-ride, and move the saga into the future era of the galaxy."
According to Jenkins, the film will be "something original with great influence from the games and the books.
There's a lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the greatness of all of those things, but yes, it's an original story
and I'm so psyched to do it.
"
When asked who was writing the Script for Rogue Squadron, Patty Jenkins said, "I want him to have his own proper announcement, so I'm going to wait until that comes out."
==
Unspecified future films ==
Rian Johnson, the writer/director of The Last Jedi, is confirmed to write and direct the first film of a new trilogy he was outlining as of early 2019.
Though the project is still active as of February 2021, no release date has been set due to Johnson's involvement with other projects.
The trilogy will differ from the Skywalker-focused films in favor of focusing on new characters and possibly a different era than the main film franchise.
The status of the Johnson trilogy remains uncertain.

In mid-2018, Lucasfilm confirmed that multiple anthology films were in development, with their release following a hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker.
In addition to Rogue Squadron (2023), two untitled films are scheduled for mid-December 2025, and 2027.On May 7, 2019, Disney released its 2020–2027 theatrical release schedule, which revealed that Star Wars films are scheduled to hit theaters in 2023, 2025, and 2027.On September 25, 2019, it was announced that Marvel Cinematic Universe producer Kevin Feige was developing a Star Wars film with Kathleen Kennedy, with Michael Waldron set to write the screenplay.
On February 21, 2020, Variety reported that a Star Wars film from Sleight director J. D. Dillard and Luke Cage writer Matt Owens was in the early stages of development.
On May 4, it was officially announced that Taika Waititi (who directed the first-season finale of The Mandalorian) will direct a Star Wars film from a screenplay he is co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.

== Produced for television ==
The first spin-off film (also the first sequel to be released) was a holiday TV special aired in 1978.
Two live-action TV films created in the mid-1980s feature the Ewoks.

===
Star Wars Holiday Special (1978) ===
Produced for CBS in 1978, the Star Wars Holiday Special was a two-hour television special, in the format of a variety show.
Stars of the original film and archive footage from the original Star Wars film appeared alongside celebrity guest stars in plot-related skits, musical numbers, and an animated segment, all loosely tied together by the premise of Chewbacca's family waiting for his arrival for the "Life Day" celebration on his home planet, Kashyyyk.
The special was aired only once and had a widely negative reception.
The 11-minute animated sequence, which features the debut of bounty hunter Boba Fett, was positively received.
===
Ewok films ===
The Ewoks from Return of the Jedi were featured in two spin-off television films, The Ewok Adventure and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor.
Both aired on ABC on the Thanksgiving weekends of 1984 and 1985, respectively, with at least the first also being given a limited international theatrical release.
Warwick Davis reprised his debut role as the main Ewok, Wicket, in both.
They are set between the events of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Both films were released on VHS, Laser Disc, and on a double-feature DVD.
Although based on story ideas from Lucas, they do not bear Star Wars in their titles, and were considered to exist in a lower level of canon than the episodic films.
Following Disney's acquisition of the franchise, they were excluded from the canon.
The Battle for Endor would be the last live-action Star Wars television project produced by Lucasfilm until 2019's The Mandalorian.

====
The Ewok Adventure (1984) ====
In a story by Lucas and a screenplay by Bob Carrau, the Towani family spaceship shipwrecks on the forest moon of Endor.
While trying to repair their ship, the castaway family is split, when a giant creature known as the Gorax kidnaps the parents.
Taking pity on the kids, a group of native Ewoks led by Wicket decides to help little Cindel Towani and her older brother Mace, rescue their parents.
Among other stylistic choices making the film unique from the Star Wars episodes is the inclusion of a narrator.

====
Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985) ====
The sequel focuses on the Ewoks protecting their village from marauders led by the evil Lord Terak, who killed all the members of the Towani family except for Cindel, in search of a power battery.

===
A Droid Story ===
In December 2020, A Droid Story, an animated adventure film for Disney+ was announced.
According to the official Star Wars Twitter, the "epic journey will introduce us to a new hero guided by R2-D2 and C-3PO.
"

== Reception ==


===
Box office performance ===
The Star Wars films are the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time worldwide, behind the Marvel Cinematic Universe, having grossed over $10 billion at the global box office.

===
Critical response ===


===
Accolades ===


====
Academy Awards ====
The eleven live-action films together have been nominated for 37 Academy Awards, of which they have won seven.
The films were also awarded a total of three Special Achievement Awards.
The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
received Special Achievement Awards for their visual effects, and Star Wars received a Special Achievement Award for its alien, creature and robot voices.
====
Grammy Awards ====
The franchise has received a total of fifteen Grammy Award nominations, winning six.

Notes
==== Library of Congress ====
In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.
By 2015, Star Wars had been transferred to a 2K scan which can be viewed by appointment.

====
Emmy Awards ====
Caravan of Courage:
An Ewok Adventure was one of four films to be juried-awarded Emmys for Outstanding Special Visual Effects at the 37th Primetime Emmy Awards.
The film was additionally nominated for Outstanding Children's Program but lost in this category to an episode of American Playhouse.
At the 38th Primetime Emmy Awards, Ewoks: The Battle for Endor and the CBS documentary Dinosaur!
were both juried-awarded Emmys for Outstanding Special Visual Effects.
The film additionally received two nominations for Outstanding Children's Program and Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Miniseries or a Special.

==
Unproduced and rumored films ==
In early 2013, Bob Iger announced the development of a spin-off film written by Simon Kinberg, reported by Entertainment Weekly to focus on bounty hunter Boba Fett during the original trilogy.
In mid-2014, Josh Trank was officially announced as the director of an undisclosed spin-off film, but had left the project a year later due to creative differences, causing a teaser for the film to be scrapped from Star Wars Celebration.
In May 2018, it was reported that James Mangold had signed on to write and direct a Fett film, with Kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
By October, the Fett film was reportedly no longer in production, with the studio instead focusing on The Mandalorian, which utilizes a similar character design.
In August 2017, it was rumored that films focused on Jabba the Hutt, and Jedi Masters Obi-Wan and Yoda were being considered or were in development.
Stephen Daldry was reportedly in early negotiations to co-write and direct the Obi-Wan movie.
At D23 Expo in August 2019, it was announced that a streaming series about the character would be produced instead.
Felicity Jones, who played Jyn Erso in Rogue One, has the option of another Star Wars film in her contract; notwithstanding her character's fate in Rogue One, it has been speculated that she could return in other anthology films.
In 2018, critics noted that Solo was intentionally left open for sequels.
Alden Ehrenreich and Emilia Clarke confirmed that their contracts to play Han Solo and Q'ira extended for additional films, if required.
An unannounced film centered around the Mos Eisley Spaceport was reportedly put on hold or cancelled in mid-2018, leading to rumors of the cancellation or postponement of the anthology series.
Lucasfilm swiftly denied the rumors as "inaccurate", confirming that multiple unannounced films were in development.
Game of Thrones creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss were to write and produce a trilogy of Star Wars films scheduled to be released in December 2022, 2024, and 2026, which were first announced to be in development in February 2018.
However, citing their commitment to a Netflix deal, the duo stepped away from the project in October 2019.
Kennedy stated her openness to their returning when their schedules allow.
Additionally, though unconfirmed by Lucasfilm, BuzzFeed reported in May 2019 that Laeta Kalogridis was writing the script for the first film in a potential Knights of the Old Republic trilogy.
In January 2020, a film set in the era of The High Republic was rumored to be in development.

== See also ==
Book:
Star Wars episodes
Book:
Star Wars
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters


===
Parodies ===
Hardware Wars
Spaceballs
Thumb Wars
Robot Chicken Star Wars
Laugh
It Up
, Fuzzball:
The Family Guy Trilogy
Ice Pirates


==
Footnotes ==


==
References ==
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Trek:
The Animated Series (TAS), originally airing as Star Trek and as The Animated Adventures of Gene Roddenberry's Star Trek, is an American animated science fiction television series created by Gene Roddenberry.
It originally aired from September 8, 1973, to October 12, 1974, on NBC, spanning 22 episodes over two seasons.
The second series in the Star Trek franchise, it is the first sequel to Star Trek: The Original Series, featuring the same characters.
Set in the 23rd century, when Earth is part of a United Federation of Planets, it follows the adventures of the Starfleet vessel USS Enterprise as it explores the Milky Way galaxy.

After the cancellation of The Original Series in 1969, the live action show proved popular in syndication and generated significant fan enthusiasm.
This resulted in Roddenberry's decision to continue the series in animated form.
Much of the original cast returned to provide voice-overs for their characters.
Show writers David Gerrold and D. C. Fontana characterized The Animated Series as effectively a fourth season of The Original Series.
After the conclusion of The Animated Series, the adventures of the characters continued in live-action theatrical films, the first being the 1979 film Star Trek:
The Motion Picture.

The Animated Series was the original cast's last episodic portrayal of the characters until the "cartoon-like" graphics of the Star Trek: 25th Anniversary computer game in 1992 as well as its sequel Star Trek: Judgment Rites in 1993.
Both appeared after the cast's final film together,
Star Trek VI:
The Undiscovered Country, released in December 1991.
The Animated Series was critically acclaimed and was the first Star Trek series to win an Emmy Award when its second season won the 1975 Emmy for Outstanding Entertainment – Children's Series.

==
Initial proposal ==
Lou Scheimer of Filmation was in talks with Star Trek producer Paramount Television, TV network NBC, and creator Gene Roddenberry to create an animated spin-off series while The Original Series was still on the air, during its third season (1968–69).
Paramount's director of special programming Philip Mayer and Filmation writer/animator Don R. Christensen worked together to create a proposal for a series which would target a young audience and have an educational spin.
The main cast of Star Trek:
The Original Series would train the teenage crew of a ship called Excalibur about space exploration; the new teenage crew included a Vulcan named Steve, an African-American boy named Bob, and a Chinese boy named Stick.
However, due to the bitter relationship between Roddenberry and Paramount at the time, Scheimer was not able to get the two parties talking to each other in order to agree on a deal for several years.
During this time, the project in its original form was phased out.

==
Production ==
A deal was finally reached in early 1973, and publicly announced in early March 1973.
Because of NBC's strong interest in the series, Roddenberry and Filmation were allotted very generous terms: a guaranteed minimum of two seasons with a combined 22 episodes, a budget of $75,000 per episode, and full creative control in Gene Roddenberry's hands.
Roddenberry and Filmation agreed that the series should be for all ages, rather than the children-oriented approach of the original proposal, and at Roddenberry's suggestion The Original Series script editor D. C. Fontana was hired as the series' story editor and associate producer.
Despite the meager payment for writers ($1,300 per script, with no residuals), the opportunity to write a Star Trek episode without the special effects limitations of live action proved appealing, and many of The Original Series writers joined the staff.
Fontana steered the series away from the romantic and sexual elements of The Original Series, as she felt children would not be interested in them
and she wanted The Animated Series to appeal to children as well as adults.
The Animated Series featured most of the original cast voicing their characters.
The major exception was the character of Pavel Chekov (Walter Koenig), who did not appear in the series because the series' budget could not afford the complete cast.
He was replaced by Lieutenant Arex, whose Edosian species had three arms and three legs; Lieutenant M'Ress, a female Caitian, sometimes stood in for Uhura as communications officer.
Besides performing their characters Montgomery Scott and Christine Chapel, James Doohan and Majel Barrett also performed the voices of Arex and M'Ress, respectively.

Initially, Filmation was only going to use the voices of William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy, DeForest Kelley, Doohan and Barrett.
Doohan and Barrett would also perform the voices of Sulu and Uhura.
Nimoy refused to voice Spock in the series unless Nichelle Nichols and George Takei were added to the cast, claiming that Sulu and Uhura were proof of the ethnic diversity of the 23rd century and should not be recast.
Nimoy also took this stand as a matter of principle, as he knew of the financial troubles many of his Star Trek co-stars were facing after cancellation of the series.
According to Scheimer, when Nimoy pointed out that the casting would cut the only two minority actors from the series, "We were horrified at our unintended slight, made all the worse because we were the one studio who had been championing diversity in its output."
Koenig was not forgotten, as Filmation were able to assuage Nimoy's complaints on his account by buying a script from Koenig for one episode ("The Infinite Vulcan").Voice recording began in June 1973, with the first three episodes recorded as an ensemble, i.e. all the voice actors for the episode in the room at the same time.
Later episodes used the more typical model of recording the voice actors separately to work around their other commitments.
William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy, who were both touring in plays at the time, recorded their lines in whatever city they happened to be performing in and had the tapes shipped to the studio.
Doohan and Barrett, besides providing the voices of their Original Series characters and newcomers Arex and M'Ress, performed virtually all of the "guest star" characters in the series, with exceptions such as Sarek, Cyrano Jones and Harry Mudd, who were performed by the original actors from The Original Series.
Other guest voice actors included Ed Bishop, who voiced the Megan Prosecutor in "The Magicks of Megas-tu", and Ted Knight, who voiced Carter Winston in "The Survivor".
Nichelle Nichols performed character voices in addition to Uhura in several episodes, including "The Time Trap" and "The Lorelei Signal".

Don Christensen, creator of the original proposal, remained involved as art director.
Other animation staff included Reuben Timmins (who oversaw all shots involving the Enterprise) and a young Bob Kline.
The animators rotoscoped the animations for the Enterprise and the original cast from 35 mm film footage of The Original Series.
The chevrons were enlarged to make them easier to animate, but otherwise the crew's uniforms were unaltered from The Original Series.
Due to the hiring of nearly the entire regular cast of the original show, little money was left in the budget for the animation, so Filmation cut costs by using stock footage and shortcuts such as having a character put a hand to their mouth while speaking (thus eliminating the need to animate the lips) and silhouetting characters in action.
The animated series dispensed with the original series' theme music, composed by Alexander Courage, in favor of a new theme credited to Yvette Blais and Jeff Michael, but actually written by Filmation composer Ray Ellis.
Ellis used the pseudonym Yvette Blais (the maiden name of his wife) due to complications with royalties and publishing companies, while Jeff Michael is a pseudonym for producer Norm Prescott, who received a pseudonymous credit and a cut of the royalties on all of Filmation's music as part of a standard deal for the time.
Writing on Facebook's Starlog Magazine official page in March 2021, Gerrold revealed that the reason for this was a longstanding feud between Courage and Roddenberry over residual payments for airings of Star Trek:
TOS episodes using the original theme: "
When Courage turned in the original music, Roddenberry added his own lyrics to it, thereby depriving Courage of half his residuals.
Courage never forgave Roddenberry and refused to give permission for the reuse of the theme.
That's why new music was written for the animated series and again for the movies."

==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (1973–74) ===


===
Season 2 (1974) ===
Similar to most animated series of the era, the 22 episodes of TAS were spread out over two brief seasons, with copious reruns of each episode.
The director of the first season (16 episodes) was Hal Sutherland and Bill Reed directed the six episodes of season two, though the first four episodes of season two erroneously credit Sutherland.
All of this series' episodes were novelized by Alan Dean Foster and released in ten volumes under the Star Trek Logs banner.
Initially, Foster adapted three episodes per book, but later editions saw the half-hour scripts expanded into full, novel-length stories.

Star Trek:
The Animated Series was the only Star Trek series not to be produced with a cold open ("teaser"), instead starting directly with the title credits sequence.
However, some overseas versions of the original live action series, such as those aired by the BBC in the United Kingdom in the 1960s and 1970s, were edited to run the teaser after the credits.

The series' writing benefited from a Writers Guild of America, East strike in 1973, which did not apply to animation.

A few episodes were written by well-known science fiction authors:

"More Tribbles, More Troubles" was written by David Gerrold as a sequel to his episode "The Trouble with Tribbles" from the original series.
Here Cyrano Jones is rescued from the Klingons, bringing with him a genetically altered breed of tribbles which do not reproduce but do grow extremely large.
(
It is later discovered that these are really clusters of tribbles who function as a single tribble, and it is decided that the large numbers of smaller tribbles are preferable to the larger ones.)
The Klingons, because of their hatred of tribbles, are eager to get Jones back because he stole a creature they created: a predator called a "glommer" that feeds on tribbles.

"Yesteryear" is a time-travel episode in which Mr. Spock uses "The Guardian of Forever", a time gateway from the original series episode "The City on the Edge of Forever", to travel back to his own childhood.
This is the only animated Trek episode written by original series and later Next Generation writer D. C. Fontana.
This was the first actual appearance of Spock's pet sehlat, first mentioned in "Journey to Babel" and finally named I-Chaya in this episode.
One element from Yesteryear that has become canon by depiction within Star Trek:
The Original Series is the Vulcan city of ShiKahr, depicted in a background scene wherein Kirk, Spock and McCoy walk across a natural stone bridge (first depicted in Star Trek III:
The Search for Spock)
in the remastered "Amok Time".
Elements of Spock's childhood from "Yesteryear" are also referenced in the Star Trek:
The Next Generation episode "Unification" as well as the 2009 Star Trek feature film.

Larry Niven's "The Slaver Weapon", adapted from his own short story "The Soft Weapon".
It includes some elements from his Known Space mythos such as the Kzinti and the Slavers.
This is the only Kirk-era television or movie story in which Kirk did not appear.
This episode is also the only animated one in which characters are shown dying or being killed.

== Novelties in the series ==
In the original Star Trek series, the title character was given the name James T. Kirk.
It was not until the animated series that writer David Gerrold expanded on the "T", giving us Captain James Tiberius Kirk.
It was purely coincidental that he chose "Tiberius" (on Gene Roddenberry's first series
The Lieutenant, the principal character was William Tiberius Rice).
According to Gerrold, he had been influenced by I, Claudius, and had approached Roddenberry with his choice of middle name, but it was not until 2014 that he learned of its earlier use.
The animated series introduced a three-armed, three-legged alien member of the bridge crew with a long neck named Arex and a cat-like alien crew member named M'Ress.
According to Roddenberry, budget limitations would have made it impossible for either alien species to appear in a live action series of the time.
The USS Enterprise in this series, while supposedly the same ship as from the original series, had a holodeck similar to the one later seen in Star Trek: The Next Generation, which was set about eighty years later.
It only appeared once, in Chuck Menville's "The Practical Joker", and was known as the "Rec Room".
This feature was originally proposed for the original series but was never used.

A personal force field technology known as the life support belt was seen only in Star Trek: The Animated Series.
In addition to supplying the wearer with the appropriate atmosphere and environmental protection, it permitted the animators to simply draw the belt and yellow glow around the existing characters, instead of having to redraw them with an environmental suit.
A version of the life support belt later appeared in an early Star Trek:
The Next Generation novel, The Peacekeepers, where they were referred to as "field-effect suits".

The episode "The Lorelei Signal" provides a rare instance in early Star Trek in which a female took temporary command of a starship.
Due to the male crew members being incapacitated, Uhura assumes command of the Enterprise from Scotty.
Other instances occurred on the first and last adventures filmed in the original series:
"The Cage", in which Number One took command after the abduction of Captain Christopher Pike, and
"Turnabout Intruder", in which Dr. Janice Lester took over the body of Captain Kirk and assumed command.
"The Lorelei Signal" and "The Infinite Vulcan", the latter written by Walter Koenig, are rare occurrences where Captain Kirk comes close to actually saying, "Beam me up, Scotty" (long erroneously believed to be a Star Trek catchphrase), when he commands "Beam us up, Scotty".
Star Trek IV:
The Voyage Home arguably comes closer to it by having Kirk say "Scotty, beam me up".

An anti-pollution public service announcement was created for non-profit Keep America Beautiful featuring the ST: TAS characters and original cast voices.
In the ad, the Enterprise encounters the "Rhombian Pollution Belt".
The ad ran during Saturday morning network programming during the series' run.

==
Canon issues ==
At the end of the first season of Star Trek:
The Next Generation, all licenses for Star Trek spin-off fiction were renegotiated, and the animated series was essentially "decanonized" by Gene Roddenberry's office.
Writers of the novels, comics and role-playing games were prohibited from using concepts from the animated series in their works.
Among the facts established within the animated series that were called into question by the "official canon" issue was its identification of Robert April as the first captain of the USS Enterprise in the episode "The Counter-Clock Incident".

The Star Trek Chronology by production staffers Michael Okuda and Denise Okuda does not include the animated series, but does include certain events from "Yesteryear" and acknowledges Robert April as first captain of the Enterprise.
The timeline in Voyages of the Imagination dates the events of the series to 2269–2270, assuming the events of the show represented the final part of Kirk's five-year mission, and using revised Alan Dean Foster stardates.
In the updated October 1999 edition of their book: The Star Trek Encyclopedia:
A Reference Guide to the Future, Michael and Denise Okuda state
that:

In a related vein, this work (i.e. book) adheres to Paramount studio policy that regards the animated Star Trek series as not being part of the "official" Star Trek universe, even though we count ourselves among that series' fans.
Of course, the final decision as to the "authenticity" of the animated episodes, as with all elements of the show, must clearly be the choice of each individual reader.'

David Gerrold, who contributed two stories to TAS, stated in an interview his views on the canon issue:

Arguments about "canon" are silly.
I always felt that Star Trek Animated was part of Star Trek because Gene Roddenberry accepted the paycheck for it and put his name on the credits.
And D. C. Fontana—and all the other writers involved—busted their butts to make it the best Star Trek they could.
But this whole business of "canon" really originated with Gene's errand boy.
Gene liked giving people titles instead of raises, so the errand boy got named "archivist" and apparently it went to his head.
Gene handed him the responsibility of answering all fan questions, silly or otherwise, and he apparently let that go to his head.

Writer-producer D. C. Fontana discussed the TAS Canon issue in 2007:
I suppose "canon" means what Gene Roddenberry decided it was.
Remember, we were making it up as we went along on the original series (and on the animated one, too).
We had a research company to keep us on the straight and narrow as to science, projected science based on known science, science fiction references (we didn’t want to step on anyone's exclusive ideas in movies, other TV shows, or printed work).
They also helped prevent contradictions and common reference errors.
So the so-called canon evolved in its own way and its own time.
For whatever reason, Gene Roddenberry apparently didn’t take the animated series seriously (no pun intended), although we worked very hard to do original STAR TREK stories and concepts at all times in the animated series.

Since Roddenberry's death in 1991, and the subsequent exit of Richard H. Arnold (who vetted the licensed tie-ins for Roddenberry's Star Trek office at Paramount during its later years), there have been several references to the animated series in the various live-action series.
In the Star Trek: Deep Space Nine episode "
Once More Unto the Breach", Kor referred to his ship, the Klothos, which was first named in the TAS episode "The Time Trap".
Other DS9 episodes to make reference to the animated series include "Broken Link", where Elim Garak mentions Edosian orchids (Arex is an Edosian) and "Tears of the Prophets" where a Miranda-class starship is called the USS ShirKahr (sic) after ShiKahr, the city from "Yesteryear".
In the episode "Prophet Motive" the title of healer is resurrected from "Yesteryear" as well.
Vulcan's Forge is also mentioned in "Change of Heart", in which Worf wants to honeymoon there with Jadzia Dax, as well as in episodes "The Forge", "Awakening" and "Kir'Shara" from Star Trek: Enterprise.

The Star Trek:
Enterprise episodes "The Catwalk" and "The Forge" included references to "Yesteryear", the latter featuring a CGI rendition of a wild sehlat.
The remastered Original Series episode "Amok Time" featured ShiKahr in the background as Spock beams up at the episode's ending, and the remastered version of "The Ultimate Computer" replaced the Botany Bay-style Woden with an automated grain carrier from "More Tribbles, More Troubles".

The 2009 film Star Trek also references "Yesteryear", featuring a nearly identical scene in which a young Spock is confronted by several other Vulcan children, who bully and provoke him for being part human.

The 2017 series Star Trek:
Discovery episode "
Context Is for Kings" has Spock's foster sister Michael Burnham state that their mother Amanda read Alice in Wonderland to them as children, as in the episode "
Once Upon a Planet.
"
The second season episode "Light and Shadows" expands on Amanda's reasons for doing so.

Carter Winston, from "The Survivor", has a small but important role late in the 1984 tie-in novel
The Final Reflection by John M. Ford.
In recent years, references to The Animated Series have also cropped up again in the licensed books and comics.
M'Ress and Arex, characters from the animated series, appear in the Star Trek:
New Frontier novels by Peter David, in which M'Ress and Arex are transported through time to the 24th Century, and are made officers on board the USS Trident.
(
David's previous use of these characters, in TOS movie-era comics published by DC Comics, had been ended by Gene Roddenberry's office.)A race introduced in the episode "The Jihad", represented by a character named M3 Green, is named the Nasat in the Starfleet Corps of Engineers e-book novellas.
These stories feature a regular Nasat character, P8 Blue.
The Vulcan city of ShiKahr also appears in many books.
Paula Block, then of CBS Consumer Products, was responsible for approving proposals and all completed manuscripts for the licensed media tie-ins and granted many such uses of TAS material since Roddenberry's death.

Amarillo Design Bureau has—as part of its license for the Star Fleet Universe series of games—incorporated many aspects of The Animated Series into its works, not least being the inclusion of the Kzinti, although in a modified form.
In addition FASA used elements from The Animated Series in its sourcebooks and modules for its Star Trek role-playing game.

Star Trek:
Enterprise producer Manny Coto has commented that had the show been renewed for a fifth season, the Kzinti would have been introduced.
Starship designs were produced which closely resemble the Kzinti/Mirak ships from the Star Fleet Universe, a gaming universe that includes the boardgame Star Fleet Battles and its PC analogue Star Fleet Command.
The Kzinti were referenced in dialog in the Star Trek: Picard episode "Nepenthe", which marked their first canon on-screen mention since The Animated Series.

On June 27, 2007, Star Trek's official site incorporated information from The Animated Series into its library section, with many pointing to this as evidence that the animated series is canon, though this has not been officially confirmed.
Both David Gerrold and D. C. Fontana have stated that the animated series is essentially the fourth season that fans wanted originally.

==
Home media ==
The complete series was first released in the United States on eleven volumes of VHS tapes in 1989.
In the United Kingdom, CIC Video released the complete series on seven volumes (1x4 episodes and 6x3 episodes) on PAL VHS in 1992.
Although CIC-Taft Australia negotiated an Australasian release, they did not proceed with their plans.

A boxed set of the complete series on LaserDisc was released for the US market in 1990, then re-released in 1997.

A Region 1 DVD box set of the series was released on November 21, 2006, and has since been released internationally for other Regions.
Each episode on CBS DVD/Paramount Home Entertainment’s Complete Series DVD release of Star Trek:
The Animated Series (aka The Animated Adventures of Gene Roddenberry’s Star Trek) was presented in its original network television format and original airdate order - uncut and unedited - and also remastered and restored in 1080p HD and full-color with remastered and remixed 5.1 surround sound and restored original mono audio.
It was also the last series of Paramount's Star Trek television franchise to be released to DVD.

A Blu-ray release in HD was released as part of the STAR TREK 50th Anniversary TV and Movie Collection in the United States on September 6, 2016.

A stand-alone Blu-ray release was released on November 15, 2016.

== Reception ==
In 1975, Star Trek:
The Animated Series won an Emmy.
The series is noted for the voice acting of actress Majel Barrett, who voiced various characters and the main computer.
Majel also had roles in the live-action series for voice acting, but also as Number One, Nurse Christine Chapel, and Lwaxana Troi.

Through both seasons, Star Trek:
The Animated Series faced the reverse situation of The Original Series with regard to its popularity: ratings were high, but skewed away from the young children which Saturday morning advertisers were trying to reach, being more popular with adults and older children.
Star Trek:
The Animated Series was named the 96th best animated series by IGN.
They declared that although the series suffered from technical limitations, its format allowed the writers far greater freedom and creativity than was possible in the original live-action series.
In 2019, CBR ranked all 31 seasons of Star Trek television shows, placing season 1 of TAS at 23rd, and season 2 at 24th.
Similarly to IGN, they commented that "The animation is definitely limited by today's standards, but the idea of an animated Star Trek makes perfect sense, since concerns over budget and scope would be very different.
Although only two seasons long, we were given some memorable moments.
"The
comic Star Trek vs Transformers was inspired by The Animated Series, and takes place in a similar universe.
In 2016, in a listing that included each Star Trek films and TV series separately, The Animated Series was ranked 11th by the L.A. Times.
In 2019, Moviefone ranked The Animated Series the seventh best out of seven Star Trek TV series.

== See also ==
List of animated spin-offs from prime time shows


==
References ==


===
Bibliography ===


==
External links ==
Star Trek:
The Animated Series at IMDb
Star Trek:
The Animated Series at the Big Cartoon DataBase
Star Trek:
The Animated Series at TV.com
Star Trek:
The Animated Series at Memory Alpha (a Star Trek wiki)
Star Trek:
The Animated Series at Memory Beta
Star Trek:
The Animated Series at StarTrek.com
StarTrekAnimated.com
Star Trek:
The Animated Series at TrekCore.com
Star Trek, the Forgotten Frontier:
1970s Animation, The New York Times DVD review
Star Wars has been expanded to media other than the original films.
This spin-off material is licensed and moderated by Disney+
, though during his involvement with the franchise George Lucas reserved the right to both draw from and contradict it in his own works.
Such derivative works have been produced concurrently with, between, and after the original, prequel, and sequel trilogies, as well as the spin-off films and television series.
Commonly explored media include books, comic books, and video games, though other forms such as audio dramas have also been produced.

With the exception of the CGI-animated The Clone Wars TV series, non-film material produced prior to April 2014 was collectively known as the Star Wars Expanded Universe (EU).
Lucasfilm later rebranded the Expanded Universe as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canonical to the franchise.
Most works produced after April 25, 2014, are part of the official canon as defined by Lucasfilm, although a handful of Legends media has been released after that date.

==
Publication history ==


=== 1976–1987
: Early films and television series ===
The first Star Wars spinoff material was Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker (1976), the novelization of the 1977 film.
Lucas later commissioned Alan Dean Foster, who ghostwrote the novelization, to write a sequel, which resulted in Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978).
Lucas originally intended to use this as the basis for a potential low-budget sequel to Star Wars, but when it became one of the most successful films of all time, Lucas decided to write his own story for the film sequel, The Empire Strikes Back (1980).
While this was in production, Lucas approved the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), with which he had limited involvement.

Running from April 1977 to May 1986, the Star Wars comic book series from Marvel Comics met with such strong sales that former Marvel editor-in-chief Jim Shooter credited it with saving Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
The series became one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.
An adaptation of the third theatrical film, Return of the Jedi, was released as a separate four-issue limited series (1983–1984).Two novel trilogies with original storylines were written, The Han Solo Adventures by Brian Daley (1979–1980), and 1983's The Adventures of Lando Calrissian by L. Neil Smith.
Daley also wrote radio dramatizations of the original trilogy, which aired in 1981, 1983, and 1996.

The first Star Wars electronic game was released in 1979 by Kenner, followed by a handful of Atari and Parker Brothers video games in the early 1980s, mainly adaptations of film scenes.

Two spin-off television films focusing on the life of the Ewoks, introduced in Return of the Jedi, aired in 1984 and 1985.
The furry creatures were also the subject of an American/Canadian animated television series produced by Nelvana, which ran for two seasons between 1985 and 1986.
A sister series, Droids, features the further adventures of R2-D2 and C-3PO.
In 1985, Marvel Comics' Star Comics imprint published a bi-monthly Ewoks tie-in comic, which ran for two years, and in 1986, published an eight-issue Droids series.
The two series featured a crossover storyline.
The Star Tours ride was opened at Disney Parks in 1987 to commemorate the saga's 10th anniversary.

=== 1987–1991: "The Dark Times" ===
Following the series' 10th anniversary, the release of Star Wars spin-off media was largely halted.
In 1987, the fan newsletter Bantha Tracks was absorbed by the official Lucasfilm magazine, which focused on the company's projects outside of Star Wars.
Some fans feared that the franchise had come to an end, and the period between 1987 and 1991 has been called the "Dark Times.
"There were some bright spots in this era, however.
In 1987, West End Games began publishing Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, and the subsequent ancillary role-playing game material such as sourcebooks, gamebooks, and adventure modules.
These have been called "the first publications to expand greatly beyond what was known from the vintage era of the movies," and would serve as a resource for a number of franchise novelists.

===
1991–1996:
Thrawn novels and Dark Empire comics ===
The lack of new Star Wars material ended with the 1991 release of Timothy Zahn's novel Heir to the Empire.
Heir to the Empire, which reached #1 on the New York Times Best Seller list, began what would become a large collection of works set before, between, and especially after the original films.
StarWars.com wrote in 2014 that the novel "jumpstarted a publishing program that endures to this day and formalized the Expanded Universe".
It introduced, among others, the popular characters Grand Admiral Thrawn and Mara Jade, and was followed by the sequels Dark Force Rising (1992) and The Last Command (1993).
The Thrawn trilogy is widely credited with revitalizing the Star Wars franchise.
In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski suggests this renewed interest was a factor in Lucas's decision to create the prequel trilogy.
Around this same time, the comics license was transferred to Dark Horse Comics, who launched a number of series set after the original film trilogy, including the popular Dark Empire sequence (1991–1995) by Tom Veitch and Cam Kennedy.
The comic launched months after the first Thrawn novel and was a sequel to those novels; it notably resurrected the film characters Emperor Palpatine and Boba Fett.
Zahn was critical of the concept of resurrecting Emperor Palpatine through cloned bodies, feeling it undermined and contradicted the meaning of the ending of Return of the Jedi.
The Jedi Prince series of young-reader novels, released between 1992 and 1993, depicts Luke, Leia, and Han about a year after Return of the Jedi.
The Truce at Bakura (1993) depicts the immediate aftermath of the aforementioned film.
In 1993, Dark Horse published Tales of the Jedi, expanding the fictional universe to the time of the Old Republic, approximately 4,000 years before the films.
The series spawned many other productions, including books, further comics, and eventually the Knights of the Old Republic computer roleplaying games.
In 1994, Lucas Licensing's Allan Kausch and Sue Rostoni discussed the relationship between Lucas' creations and the derivative works by other authors:

Gospel, or canon as we refer to it, includes the screenplays, the films, the radio dramas and the novelizations.
These works spin out of George Lucas' original stories, the rest are written by other writers.
However, between us, we've read everything, and much of it is taken into account in the overall continuity.
The entire catalog of published works comprises a vast history—with many off-shoots, variations and tangents—like any other well-developed mythology.

=== 1996–1999
:
Special Editions and Shadows of the Empire ===
The 1996 Steve Perry novel Shadows of the Empire, set in the as-yet-unexplored time period between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, was part of a multimedia campaign that also included a comic book series and video game.
The multimedia project was largely meant to reinvigorate the franchise ahead of the prequel trilogy, along with Lucas's 1997 Special Editions of the original trilogy.
Lucas incorporated elements of the Expanded Universe into the Special Editions; for example, Coruscant, the New Republic capital planet created by Zahn in the Thrawn trilogy, made its film debut in the Special Edition of Return of the Jedi, before being featured more heavily in the prequel trilogy.
An eponymous comic book series, later subtitled Republic, launched in 1998 and introduced Ki-Adi-Mundi ahead of his appearance in the films.
In 1999, Star Wars book publishing moved from Bantam Spectra to Del Rey Books.
A new series set between 25 and 30 years after the original films, The New Jedi Order (1999–2003), was written by multiple authors and introduced a new threat: the Yuuzhan Vong, a powerful alien race attempting to invade and conquer the entire galaxy.
The first novel in the series, R. A. Salvatore's Vector Prime, killed off popular character Chewbacca.

=== 1999–2014
:
Prequel film trilogy and The Clone Wars ===
Before 1999, the bulk of Expanded Universe storytelling explored the time periods either after Return of the Jedi or long before A New Hope (e.g. the Tales of the Jedi series).
The time period shortly before the original trilogy (including the rise of the Galactic Empire and the personal histories of Anakin Skywalker and Emperor Palpatine) was left open for Lucas to develop in the form of a prequel trilogy, which begin with Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999).

The character Aayla Secura, introduced in 2000 in the Republic comic book series, appears in Episode II:
Attack of the Clones (2002).
The 2003 animated series Clone Wars and various spin-off books, comics, and video games explore the titular conflict in more detail leading up to Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Ahead of the film's release, Lucas announced a 3D "continuation" of Clone Wars, which was released as the animated film The Clone Wars (2008) and a television series of the same name (2008–2014).
These reveal that Anakin had a Padawan learner, Ahsoka Tano, during this period.
Various characters seen only briefly in the films or in other spin-off material are featured in more depth.
At this time, Lucas denied any plans to ever make a Star Wars sequel trilogy.
As of 2004, over 1,100 Star Wars titles had been published, including novels, comics, non-fiction, and magazines.
Then-president of Lucas Licensing, Howard Roffman, estimated that there were more than 65 million Star Wars books in print.
He said, "The books are a way of extending the fantasy of Star Wars.
The movies have had a really profound effect on a couple of generations.
Star Wars has become a cultural touchpoint, and our fans are avidly interested in exploring more stories."

====
Holocron database and canonicity ====
Originally, Lucasfilm tracked the narrative content of the Expanded Universe in story bibles, alongside official reference books such as A Guide to the Star Wars Universe (1984/1994) and the Star Wars Encyclopedia (1998).
In 2000, LucasArts lead tester Leland Chee was hired as Continuity Database Administrator for Lucas Licensing, and developed a database of franchise continuity based in part on 1998's encyclopedic Star Wars: Behind the Magic CD-ROM.
The database came to be known as the Holocron, a term used within the Star Wars universe for "ancient repositories of knowledge and wisdom".
The Holocron consists of over 55,000 entries for franchise characters, locations, species, and vehicles.
Lucas Licensing's managing editor Sue Rostoni said in 2001, "Our goal is to present a continuous and unified history of the Star Wars galaxy, insofar as that history does not conflict with, or undermine the meaning of Mr. Lucas's Star Wars saga of films and screenplays.
"
Lucasfilm's director of fan relations Steve Sansweet clarified:

When it comes to absolute canon, the real story of Star Wars, you must turn to the films themselves—and only the films.
Even novelizations are interpretations of the film, and while they are largely true to George Lucas' vision (he works quite closely with the novel authors), the method in which they are written does allow for some minor differences ...
The further one branches away from the movies, the more interpretation and speculation come into play.
LucasBooks works diligently to keep the continuing Star Wars expanded universe cohesive and uniform, but stylistically, there is always room for variation.

In August 2005, Lucas said of the Expanded Universe:
I don't read that stuff.
I haven't read any of the novels.
I don't know anything about that world.
That's a different world than my world.
But I do try to keep it consistent.
The way I do it now is they have a Star Wars Encyclopedia.
So if I come up with a name or something else, I look it up and see if it has already been used.
When I said [other people] could make their own Star Wars stories, we decided that, like Star Trek, we would have two universes:
My universe and then this other one.
They try to make their universe as consistent with mine as possible, but obviously they get enthusiastic and want to go off in other directions.

Regarding the Holocron database in 2012, Chee said: "What sets Star Wars apart from other franchises is that we develop a singular continuity across all forms of media, whether it be the films, TV series, video games, novels and comics, and the Holocron is a key component to Lucasfilm being able to do this."
The Holocron was divided into five levels of canon (in order of precedence):
G-canon was "George Lucas canon":
Episodes I–VI (the released films at that time) overrode the lower levels of canonicity, even when referring to elements introduced in other media.
In the words of Leland Chee: "George's view of the universe is his view.
He's not beholden to what's gone before."

T-canon was Television canon:
The canonicity level comprising The Clone Wars, which Lucas co-created.

C-canon was Continuity canon: Most of the material from the Expanded Universe including books, comics, and video games.
The creation of stories that introduced radical changes in the continuity, like The Force Unleashed video game (which introduced Darth Vader's secret apprentice), required Lucas's approval, and he spent hours explaining the character relationships to the developers.

S-canon was Secondary canon:
Any element introduced in Continuity canon that was contradicted by other material.
The Holiday Special is an example, except for elements referenced in higher levels of canon.

D-canon was Detours canon: Elements of the unreleased show Detours, though primarily intended as a parody of the franchise, were to follow a serial storyline that existed in a low level of canonicity.

N-canon was Non-canon: "What if" stories (such as the first 20 issues of the Star Wars Tales comic anthology), crossover appearances (such as Star Wars character appearances in Soulcalibur IV), game statistics, and anything else directly contradicted by higher levels of canon.

====
2012–2014:
Disney acquisition and canon restructuring ====
In October 2012, The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm for US$4.06 billion (equivalent to about $4.52B in 2019).
Subsequently, Lucasfilm formed the "Lucasfilm Story Group", which was established to keep track of and define the canon and unify the films, comics, and other media.
Among its members are Chee, Kiri Hart, and Pablo Hidalgo.
To prevent the planned sequel trilogy from being beholden to and restrained by the plotlines of the Expanded Universe works, the choice was made to discard that continuity.
In particular, Chee said the death of Chewbacca in Vector Prime was a key factor in the decision.
On April 25, 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded the Expanded Universe material as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canonical to the franchise.
Chee said in a 2014 Twitter post that a "primary goal" of the story group would be to replace the previous hierarchical canon (of the Holocron) with one cohesive one.
The company's focus would be shifted towards a restructured Star Wars canon based on new material.

===
2014–2020:
Sequel trilogy and anthology films ===
Lucasfilm explained that the only preexisting works to be considered canonical within the franchise would be the primary episodic films and the 2008 The Clone Wars film and TV series.
The announcement called these works "the immovable objects of Star Wars history, the characters and events to which all other tales must align.
"
It was also made clear that a planned Star Wars sequel trilogy, and subsequent works developed within the restructured canon, would not be based on Legends material but could possibly draw from it.
The first new canonical novel was A New Dawn by John Jackson Miller, published in September 2014, acting as a prologue to the CGI-animated television series Star Wars Rebels, which was released a month later.
Marvel began publishing new Star Wars comic book series in January 2015, and the Journey to Star Wars publishing initiative included books and comics tying in to the sequel trilogy films.

The first sequel trilogy film, The Force Awakens, was released in December 2015.
There was some minor fan backlash against the restructured canon, with one group successfully campaigning to buy a billboard pleading for Lucasfilm to continue the original non-canonical Expanded Universe separately from the canon.
Rebels supervising director Dave Filoni reintroduced popular Legends character Thrawn into the canon in the 2016 third season of Rebels.
Timothy Zahn was hired to write new canonical novels about the character.
Since co-creating The Clone Wars, Filoni has followed Lucas (who incorporated Expanded Universe elements into the Special Editions, prequels, and The Clone Wars) in incorporating multiple spin-off elements into his series.
Some cancelled The Clone Wars episodes were adapted into books and comics in The Clone Wars Legacy multimedia project.

After The Force Awakens, multiple films were released, including the anthology films Rogue One (2016)
and Solo (2018), as well as the second and third sequel trilogy films, The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
Dozens of novels, comics published by Marvel and IDW, and games like Battlefront II (2017) were released.
Additionally, the animated series Resistance, set in the sequel trilogy era, premiered in late 2018 and ran until early 2020.
The Mandalorian, a post-Return of the Jedi live-action series written by Jon Favreau premiered in late 2019 on the Disney streaming service Disney+; a final season of The Clone Wars animated series also debuted on the streaming service.

=== 2020–present:
The High Republic and further titles ==
=
In February 2020, it was announced that a new line of books and comics, labeled The High Republic, would begin publishing starting in August.
The line takes place 200 years prior to the events of The Phantom Menace and will not overlap any films or series currently planned for production.
In December 2020, multiple live-action series were announced for Disney+, including Obi-Wan Kenobi, Andor, Lando, three Mandalorian spin-offs, and The Acolyte, set during the High Republic.
On April 2, 2021, several legacy Star Wars films and series were added to Disney+.Multiple Marvel comics rebooted in 2020, moving to the era between The Empire Strikes
Back and Return of the Jedi.

== Legends fictional timeline ==


==
See also ==
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars Legends characters


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Official website (Archived)
Star Wars Legends on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The aos sí (pronounced [eːsˠ ˈʃiː]; older form aes sídhe
[eːsˠ ˈʃiːə]) is the Irish term for a supernatural race in Irish mythology and Scottish mythology (where it is usually spelled Sìth, but pronounced the same), comparable to the fairies or elves.

They are said to live underground in fairy mounds, across the western sea, or in an invisible world that coexists with the world of humans.
This world is described in the Lebor Gabála Érenn as a parallel universe in which the aos sí walk amongst the living.
In the Irish language, aos sí means "people of the mounds" (the mounds are known in Irish as "the sídhe").
In modern Irish the people of the mounds are also called daoine sídhe [ˈd̪ˠiːnʲə ˈʃiːə]; in Scottish mythology they are daoine sìth.
They are variously said to be the ancestors, the spirits of nature, or goddesses and gods.
Some secondary and tertiary sources in English, including well-known and influential authors such as W. B. Yeats, refer to aos sí simply as "the sídhe" (lit. "
mounds").

==
In Gaelic folklore ==
In many Gaelic tales, the aos sí are later, literary versions of the Tuatha Dé Danann ("People of the Goddess Danu")—the deities and deified ancestors of Irish mythology.
Some sources describe them as the survivors of the Tuatha Dé Danann who retreated into the Otherworld when fleeing the mortal Sons of Míl Espáine who, like many other early invaders of Ireland, came from Iberia.
As part of the terms of their surrender to the Milesians, the Tuatha Dé Danann agreed to retreat and dwell underground.
(
In later interpretations, each tribe of the Tuatha Dé Danann was given its own mound.)
Geoffrey Keating, an Irish historian of the early 17th century, equates Iberia with the Land of the Dead, providing a possible connection to the aos sí.

In folk belief and practice, the aos sí are often appeased with offerings, and care is taken to avoid angering or insulting them.
Often they are not named directly, but rather spoken of as "The Good Neighbors", "The Fair Folk", or simply "The Folk".
The most common names for them, aos sí, aes sídhe, daoine sídhe (singular duine sídhe) and daoine sìth mean, literally, "people of the mounds" (referring to the sídhe).
The aos sí are generally described as stunningly beautiful, though they can also be terrible and hideous.

Aos sí are seen as fierce guardians of their abodes—whether a fairy hill, a fairy ring, a special tree (often a hawthorn) or a particular loch or wood.
It is believed that infringing on these spaces will cause the aos sí to retaliate in an effort to remove the people or objects that invaded their homes.
Many of these tales contribute to the changeling myth in west European folklore, with the aos sí kidnapping trespassers or replacing their children with changelings as a punishment for transgressing.
The aos sí are often connected to certain times of year and hours; as the Gaelic Otherworld is believed to come closer to the mortal world at the times of dusk and dawn, the aos sí correspondingly become easier to encounter.
Some festivals such as Samhain, Beltane and Midsummer are also associated with the aos sí.

==
The sídhe ==
Sídhe are the hills or tumuli that dot the Irish landscape.
In modern Irish the word is sí; in Scottish Gaelic, sìth; in Old Irish síde
and the singular is síd.
In a number of later, English-language texts, the word sídhe is incorrectly used both for the mounds and the people of the mounds.
However sidh in older texts refers specifically to "the palaces, courts, halls or residences" of the otherworldly beings that supposedly inhabit them.
The fact that many of these sídhe have been found to be ancient burial mounds has contributed to the theory that the aos sí were the pre-Celtic occupants of Ireland.

Others present these stories as mythology deriving from Greek cultural influence, deriving arguments mainly from Hesiod's Works and Days, which portrays the basic moral foundation and plantation techniques of the citizens of Greece and describes the races of men, created by the Greek deities.
However, many of these views have been deemed unlikely, and the influence can be explained by the similar moral foundations stemming from the two cultures' Indo-European background.

==
Daoine maithe ==
Daoine maithe is Irish for "the good people", which is a popular term used to refer to the fairies in Irish folklore.
Due to the oral nature of Irish folklore the exact origins of the fairies is not well defined.
There are stories enough to support two possible origins.
The fairies could either be fallen angels or the descendants of the Tuatha Dé Danann; in the latter case this is equivalent with Aos Sí.
In the former case, it is said that the fairies are angels who have fallen from heaven, but whose sins were not great enough to warrant hell.
They are generally human-like, though there are exceptions such as the Puca or Mermaid.
The defining features of the Irish fairies are their supernatural abilities and their temperament.
If treated with respect and kindness, Irish fairies can be quite benevolent; however, if they are mistreated they will react cruelly.

== Types ==
The banshee or bean sídhe (from Old Irish: ban síde), which means "woman of the sídhe", has come to indicate any supernatural woman of Ireland who announces a coming death by wailing and keening.
Her counterpart in Scottish mythology is the bean sìth (sometimes spelled bean-sìdh).
Other varieties of aos sí and daoine sìth include the Scottish bean nighe: the washerwoman who is seen washing the bloody clothing or armour of the person who is doomed to die; the leanan sídhe: the "fairy lover"; the cat sìth: a fairy cat; and the Cù Sìth: fairy dog.

The sluagh
sídhe—"the fairy host"—is sometimes depicted in Irish and Scottish lore as a crowd of airborne spirits, perhaps the cursed, evil or restless dead.
The siabhra (anglicised as "sheevra"), may be a type of these lesser spirits, prone to evil and mischief.
However, an Ulster folk song also uses "sheevra" simply to mean "spirit" or "fairy".
===
List ===


==
Creideamh Sí ==
Creideamh Sí is Irish for the "Fairy Faith", a collection of beliefs and practices observed by those who wish to keep good relationships with the aos sí and avoid angering them.
The custom of offering milk and traditional foods—such as baked goods, apples or berries—to the aos sí have survived through the Christian era into the present day in parts of Ireland, Scotland and the diaspora.
Those who maintain some degree of belief in the aos sí also are aware to leave their sacred places alone and protect them from damage through road or housing construction.

== See also ==
Enchanted Moura
Edmund Lenihan
Fairy riding
Fir Bolg
Jinn - Islamo-Arabian mythology
Otherworld
Strontian


==
References ==


===
Primary sources ===
Lebor Gabála Érenn (The Book of Invasions) in Lebor Laignech (The Book of Leinster)
Annála na gCeithre Máistrí
(The Annals of the Four Masters)
Leabhar Bhaile
an Mhóta (The Book of Ballymote)
Lebor na hUidre
(The Book of the Dun Cow)
Leabhar Buidhe Lecain (The Yellow Book of Lecan)
Leabhar (Mór) Leacain (The Great Book of Lecan)


===
Secondary sources ===
Briggs, Katharine (1978).
The Vanishing People: Fairy Lore and Legends.
New York: Pantheon.

Briody, Mícheál (2008, 2016)
The Irish Folklore Commission 1935–1970: History, Ideology, Methodology Helsinki
Finnish Literature Society ISBN
978-951-746-947-0 and Studia Fennica Foloristica
17 urn:
ISSN:1235-1946 Retrieved on 10 April 2018
Colum, Padraic (1967)
A Treasury of Irish Folklore: The Stories, Traditions, Legends, Humor, Wisdom, Ballads, and Songs of the Irish People.
New York Crown Publishers ISBN 0517420465 Retrieved from Opensource via Archive.org 10 April 2018
De Jubainville, M. H. D'Arbois and Richard Irvine
Best (1903).
The Irish Mythological Cycle and Celtic Mythology.
Dublin Hodges, Figgis, and Company.
Retrieved from Indiana University Library via Archive.org 12 October 2017
Evans-Wentz, W. Y. (1911).
The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries.
London: Oxford University Press.
Retrieved from University of California Library via Archive.org 12 October 2017
Gantz, Jeffrey (1981)
Early Irish Myths and Sagas London, Penguin ISBN 0140443975; ISBN 9780140443974
Keating, Geoffrey ( 1866)
Foras Feasa ar Éirinn:
The History of Ireland O'Mahony John (Trans) New York.
James B. Kirker Retrieved from Boston College Libraries via Archive.org
12 October 2017 also republished as Keating, Geoffrey ( 1902–14)
Foras Feasa ar Éirinn:
The History of Ireland Comyn, David and Dinneen, Patrick S. (eds.)
4 vols.
London David Nutt for the Irish Texts Society.
Retrieved from University of Toronto Library via Archive.org
12 October 2017
Keightley, Thomas.
(
1892) Fairy Mythology.
London: George Bell & Sons, Retrieved from Project Gutenberg 15 October 2017
Koch, John T. (2005).
Celtic Culture:
A Historical Encyclopedia Vol.
1
A-Celti.

Oxford.
ABC-Clio.
ISBN 9781851094400 Retrieved on 14 March 2018
MacKillop, James (1986).
Fionn Mac Cumhail: Celtic Myth in English Literature New York Syracuse University Press ISBN 0-8156-2344-5 Retrieved on 14 March 2018
MacKillop, James (1998).
Dictionary of Celtic Mythology.
London: Oxford.
ISBN 0-19-860967-1.

MacKillop, James (2005).
Myths and Legends of the Celts.
London.
Penguin Books ISBN 9780141017945.Retrieved on 14 March 2018
McAnally, David Russell (1888).Irish Wonders:
The Ghosts, Giants, Pookas, Demons, Leprechawns, Banshees, Fairies, Witches, Widows, Old Maids, and Other Marvels of the Emerald Isle Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, & Company Retrieved from United States Library of Congress via Archive.org 20 November 2017
Monaghan, Patricia (2004)The Encyclopedia of Celtic Mythology and Folklore New York Facts on File ISBN 0-8160-4524-0 Retrieved on 10 April 2018
Ó Danachair, Caoimhín (1978).
A Bibliography of Irish Ethnology and Folk Tradition.
Dublin Mercier Press ISBN 085342490X
Ó
Súilleabháin, Seán (1942)
A Handbook of Irish Folklore Dublin Educational Company of Ireland Limited ISBN
9780810335615
Ó
Súilleabháin, Seán & Christiansen, Reidar Th.(1963).
The Types of the Irish Folktale.
Folklore Fellows' Communications No.
188.
Helsinki 1963.

Rolleston, T.W. (1911).
Myths and Legends of the Celtic Race.
London.
George Harrap and Company.
Retrieved from Public Library of India via Archive.org 14 March 2018
Zipes, Jack (2015)
The Oxford Companion to
Fairy Tales 2nd Ed.
Oxford University Press ISBN 978-0 -19-968982-8 Retrieved  10 April 2018
White, Carolyn (2005)
[1st pub.1976], A History of Irish Fairies New York.
Avalon Publishing Group.
ISBN 0786715391
Irish folklore archive inscribed into UNESCO register Rte News
6 December 2017 Retrieved 10 April 2018


===
Tertiary Sources ===
Anonymous
[C.J.T.] (1889).
Folk-Lore and Legends: Ireland.
London:
W.W. Gibbings.
Retrieved from Harvard University Library via Archive.org 21 November 2017  also republished as Anonymous [C.J.T.] (1904).
Irish Fairy Tales Folklore and Legends.
London:
W.W. Gibbings.
Retrieved via Archive.org 21 November 2017
Anonymous, The Royal Hibernian Tales; Being 4 Collections of the Most Entertaining Stories Now Extant, Dublin,
C.M. Warren, Retrieved from Google Books on 4 November 2017
Browne, Frances.
(
1904).
Granny's Wonderful Chair New York: McClure, Phillips and Company, Retrieved from United States Library of Congress via Archive.org 22 November 2017
Carleton, William (1830).
Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry, First Series Vol.
1.
Dublin:
William Curry, Jun, and Company Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 11 November 2017
Carleton, William (1830).
Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry, First Series Vol.
2.
Dublin:
William Curry, Jun, and Company Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 11 November 2017
Carleton, William (1834).
Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry, Second Series Vol.
1.
Dublin:
William Frederick Wakeman Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 11 November 2017
Carleton, William (1834).
Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry, Second Series Vol.
2.
Dublin:
William Frederick Wakeman Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 11 November 2017
Carleton, William (1834).
Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry, Second Series Vol.
3.
Dublin:
William Frederick Wakeman Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 11 November 2017
Carleton, William (1845).
Tales and Sketches Illustrating the Character, Usages, Traditions, Sports, and Pastimes of the Irish Peasantry.
Dublin:
James Duffy Retrieved from University of California Library via Archive.org
11 November 2017
Colum, Padraic (1916).
The King of Ireland's Son.
New York:
H. Holt and Company Retrieved from Project Gutenberg via [1] 24 November 2017
Colum, Padraic (1918).
The Boy Who Knew How to Speak to Birds.
New York:
The MacMillan Company Retrieved from New York Public Library via Archive.org
24 November 2017
Colum, Padraic (1929)
[First Pub.
1919).
The Girl Who Sat by the Ashes.
New York:
The MacMillan Company Retrieved from New York Public Library via Archive.org 24 November 2017
Croker, Thomas Crofton (1825).Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland vol.
1
London:
John Murray, Retrieved from Oxford University Library via Archive.org 6 November 2017
Croker, Thomas Crofton (1828).Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland vol.
2 London: John Murray, Retrieved from Oxford University Library via Archive.org 6 November 2017
Croker, Thomas Crofton (1828).Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland vol.
3 London: John Murray, Retrieved from Oxford University Library via Archive.org 6 November 2017
Curtin, Jeremiah (1890).
Myths and Folk-Lore of Ireland London:
Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, & Rivington Retrieved from University of Toronto Library via Archive.org 8 November 2017
Curtin, Jeremiah (1894).
Hero-Tales of Ireland.
London:
MacMillan and Company Retrieved from University of Toronto Library via Archive.org 8 November 2017
Curtin, Jeremiah (1895).
Tales of the Fairies and of the Ghost World:
Collected from Oral Tradition in South-West Munster.
Boston:
Little Brown Company Retrieved from University of Wisconsin Library via Archive.org 8 November 2017
De Valera, Sinéad (1927).
Irish Fairy Stories, London:
MacMillan Children's Books.
ISBN 9780330235044 Retrieved 27 November 2017 .

Dixon Hardy, Phillip.
(
1837).Legends, Tales, and Stories of Ireland Dublin:
P.J. John Cumming, Retrieved from Harvard University Library via Archive.org 23 November 2017
Frost, William Henry.
(
1900).Fairies and Folk of Ireland New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, Retrieved from New York Public Library via Archive.org 6 November 2017
Graves, Alfred Perceval.
(
1909).The Irish Fairy Book London: T. Fisher Unwin, Retrieved from University of California Library via Archive.org 22 November 2017
Griffin, Gerald (1842)
Tales of the Jury-Room in Three Volumes.
Vol.1
London Maxwell and Co. Publishers Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 10 April 2018
Griffin, Gerald (1842)
Tales of the Jury-Room in Three Volumes.
Vol.2 London Maxwell and Co. Publishers Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 10 April 2018
Griffin, Gerald (1842)
Tales of the Jury-Room in Three Volumes.
Vol.3
London Maxwell and Co. Publishers Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 10 April 2018
Griffin, Gerald
(1827) Tales of the Munster Festivals in Three Volumes.
Vol.1 London Saunders and Otley Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 10 April 2018
Griffin, Gerald
(1827) Tales of the Munster Festivals in Three Volumes.
Vol.2 London Saunders and Otley Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 10 April 2018
Griffin, Gerald
(1827) Tales of the Munster Festivals in Three Volumes.
Vol.3
London Saunders and Otley Retrieved from University of Illinois Library via Archive.org 10 April 2018
Hyde, Douglas (1890).
Beside the Fire: A Collection of Irish Gaelic Folk Stories.
London:
David Nutt Retrieved from National Library of Scotland via Archive.org
9 November 2017
Hyde, Douglas (1896).
Five Irish Stories: Translated from the Irish of the "Sgeuluidhe Gaodhalach".
Dublin:
Gill & Son Retrieved from University of California Library via Archive.org 9 November 2017
Hyde, Douglas (1915).
Legends of Saints and Sinners (Every Irishman's Library).
London: T. Fisher Unwin Retrieved from University of Connecticut Library via Archive.org 9 November 2017
Jacobs, Joseph (1892)
Celtic Fairy Tales London : D. Nutt.
Retrieved from Wikisource 17 October 2017
Joyce, Patrick Weston.
(
1879).Old Celtic Romances London: C. Kegan Paul and Co., Retrieved from Harvard University Library via Archive.org 22 November 2017
Kennedy, Patrick (1866)
Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts, London:
MacMillan and Company Retrieved from National Library of Scotland via Archive.org
15 November 2017
Kennedy, Patrick (1870).
Fireside Stories of Ireland, London: M'Glashan and Gill and Patrick Kennedy.
Retrieved from University of California Library via Archive.org
18 November 2017
Kiely, Benedict (2011).
The Penguin Book of Irish Short Stories London: Penguin Books, ISBN 978-0-241-95545-1.
Retrieved 27 November 2017 .
(
Traditional Irish story translated from "The Stories of Johnny Shemisin" (no Date), Ulster Council of the Gaelic League
Leamy, Edmund.
(
1906).Irish Fairy Tales Dublin:
M.A. Gill & Son.
Ltd, Retrieved from University of Toronto Library via Archive.org
6 November 2017
Lover, Samuel (1831).Legends and Stories of Ireland vol.
1
Dublin:
W.F. Wakeman, Retrieved from University of Pittsburgh Library via Archive.org
6 November 2017
Lover, Samuel (1831).Legends and Stories of Ireland vol.
2 London:
Baldwin and Cradock, Retrieved from Oxford University Library via Archive.org
7 November 2017
MacManus, Anna (Ethna Carbery).
(
1904).In
The Celtic Past New York:
Funk and Wagnalls, Retrieved from University of California Library via Archive.org
22 November 2017
MacManus, Seumas.
(
1899).In the Chimney Corners:
Merry Tales of Irish Folk Lore New York:
Doubleday and McClure Company, Retrieved from New York Public Library via Archive.org
24 November 2017
MacManus, Seumas (1900).
Donegal Fairy Stories New York:
Doubleday, Page & and Company, Retrieved from Harvard University Library via Archive.org 22 November 2017
McClintock, Letitia (1876).
Folklore of the County Donegal, Dublin University Magazine 88.
Retrieved from National Library of Ireland on 15 October 2017
O'Faolain, Eileen (1954).
Irish sagas and Folk Tales
London: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 0192741047; ISBN 978-0192741042.

O'Flaherty, Liam (1927).
The Fairy Goose and Two Other Stories, London: Crosby Gaige.
Retrieved 27 November 2017 .

Scott, Michael (1988)
Green and Golden Tales: Irish Hero Tales Dublin:
Sphere Books Limited ISBN 0-85342-868-9; ISBN 978-0-85342-868-8
Scott, Michael (1989)
Green and Golden Tales:
Irish Animal Tales Dublin:
Sphere Books Limited ISBN 0-85342-867-0; ISBN 978-0-85342-867-1
Scott, Michael (1989).
Irish Folk and Fairy Tales Omnibus.
London Sphere Books ISBN 0-7515-0886-1;
ISBN 978-0-7515-0886-4
Scott, Michael (1995)
Magical Irish Folk Tales Dublin:
Sphere Books Limited ISBN 1-85635-110-6; ISBN 978-1-85635-110-2
Scott, Michael (1988).
Green and Golden Tales:
Irish Fairy Tales, Dublin:
Sphere Books Limited,ISBN 0-85342-866-2; ISBN 978-0-85342-866-4.

Sheridan Le Fanu, Joseph, (5 February 1870)
The Child That Went with the Fairies
All the Year Round pp.
228–233 Retrieved from Prelinger Library via Archive.org 10 April 2018 Republished in Sheridan Le Fanu, Joseph (1923)
Madam Crowl's Ghost and Other Tales of Mystery James, Montague Rhodes (ed.)
London: George Bell & Sons, Retrieved from Project Gutenberg 10 April 2018
Stephens, James (1920)
Irish Fairy Tales.
London, MacMillan & Company, Retrieved from Project Gutenberg 5 November 2017
Wilde, Lady Francesca Speranza (1888).Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland London: Ward and Downey, Retrieved from Cornell University Library via Archive.org 5 November 2017
Yeats, William Butler.
(
1888).Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry London: Walter Scott, Retrieved from University of Toronto Library via Archive.org
20 November 2017
Yeats, William Butler.
(
1888).Irish Fairy Tales London: T. Fisher Unwin, Retrieved from University of California Library via Archive.org 20 November 2017
Young, Ella.
(
1910).Celtic Wonder Tales Book Dublin: Maunsel & Company LTD, Retrieved from University of California Library via Archive.org 22 November 2017
Star Trek: Enterprise, titled simply Enterprise for its first two seasons, is an American science fiction television series created by Rick Berman and Brannon Braga.
It originally aired from September 26, 2001, to May 13, 2005, on UPN (see list of Star Trek: Enterprise episodes).
The sixth series in the Star Trek franchise, it is a prequel to Star Trek: The Original Series, set in the 22nd century, a hundred years before the events of The Original Series and just prior to the formation of the United Federation of Planets.
It follows the adventures of the Enterprise, Earth's first starship capable of traveling at warp five, as it explores the galaxy and encounters various alien species.

Following the culmination of Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine and with Star Trek: Voyager scheduled to end
, UPN asked Braga and Berman to create a new series to continue the franchise.
Rather than setting it in the 24th century alongside Deep Space Nine and Voyager, the duo decided to set Enterprise in an earlier period, allowing them to explore new parts of the Star Trek fictional universe.
Wanting a more basic, relatable, character-driven series, Berman and Braga concentrated on a core trio of characters: Captain Jonathan Archer (played by Scott Bakula), Commander Trip Tucker (Connor Trinneer) and Sub-commander T'Pol (Jolene Blalock).

The show broke with Star Trek convention in several respects.
In addition to dropping the Star Trek prefix, Enterprise used the pop-influenced song "Faith of the Heart" (performed by Russell Watson) as its theme.
It was filmed on the Paramount lot in Los Angeles, California, on the same stages that housed the Star Trek series and films since the abandoned Star Trek:
Phase II in the late 1970s.

The first two seasons were characterized by stand-alone episodes that explored topics like humanity's early relations with the Vulcans, and first encounters with the Klingons and Andorians, aliens already familiar to the Star Trek franchise.
Seeking to attract a wider audience, UPN called for changes for its third season.
The series was renamed (from simply Enterprise to Star Trek: Enterprise) and reconceived to focus on action-driven plots and a single, serialized storyline: the crew's mission to prevent the Earth being destroyed by a newly introduced alien species, the Xindi.
In 2005, UPN cancelled the series after its fourth season, despite a fan-led campaign to continue it.
The cancellation marked the first time in 18 years that no new Star Trek episodes would be produced, the beginning of a hiatus that lasted until the launch of Star Trek: Discovery in 2017.

==
Series overview ==


===
General ===
Star Trek:
Enterprise follows the adventures of the crew of the first starship Enterprise, designation NX-01.
They are the first deep space explorers in Starfleet, using the first warp-five-capable vessel.
The Vulcans have withheld advanced technology from humanity since their first contact, concerned that humans were not ready for it.
This has delayed human space exploration and caused resentment in Starfleet test pilot Jonathan Archer, whose father developed the Warp 5 engine but did not live to see it used.
Enterprise was intentionally equipped with less-advanced technologies than those seen in previous series (which occurred later on the Star Trek timeline).
It had no tractor beam, but utilized grappler cables; and used missiles instead of particle weapons (see Weapons in Star Trek); in Season 1, phaser cannons were added, similar to those on Enterprise in The Original Series.
It had only limited means of synthesizing foods and other consumable items.
Communications Officer Linguist Hoshi Sato's expertise in linguistics helps compensate for the lack of the advanced universal translator.
The series also showed the crew making first contacts with a number of races previously seen in the franchise.
The Klingon, who appear in the pilot "Broken Bow", have the ridged makeup seen in the movie franchise and from Star Trek:
The Next Generation onwards (excluding Star Trek: Discovery), rather than the smooth-headed versions seen in Star Trek: The Original Series.
Berman and Braga attributed this change to advancements in makeup, and felt that such contradictions in continuity were unavoidable.
The change in the Klingons' appearance was eventually justified by attributing it to a plague caused by genetic experimentation.
Electronics in Enterprise were also more compact than those of previous (future) series, as advances in real-world technology made devices seen in The Original Series and Voyager seem anachronistically oversized.
The series's first season emphasized a core trio of characters: Jonathan Archer, T'Pol, and Trip Tucker.
Other main characters had primary roles in particular episodes, such as "Dear Doctor" and "Fight or Flight".
The second season saw deepening relationships between characters—for example, the friendship between Tucker and Reed, seen in episodes such as "Two Days and Two Nights"; and the relationship between Tucker and T'Pol, which begins contentiously but leads to romance in later seasons.

===
Temporal Cold War ===
The addition of a futuristic Temporal Cold War element was seen as a "nod to mystery" by Rick Berman, who sought to add an element of The X-Files to the series.
Berman decided that the full story of the war would be revealed over the course of several years.
At the start of the second season, Braga said that the Temporal Cold War storyline would continue to be included if viewers were still interested, but later described it as "strangulating".
Initially featured in the pilot episode, "Broken Bow", it featured the Suliban being manipulated by an unknown humanoid figure from the future, nicknamed "Future Guy" by viewers—
a moniker later adopted by the series's writers.
At the start of the series, Braga said that they did not have a plan for who the character would turn out to be.
Ten years after the end of the series, Braga stated that Future Guy was Archer manipulating his own timeline; he and Berman had previously stated that the character was intended to be a Romulan.
Crewman Daniels (Matt Winston), introduced in the episode "Cold Front", was revealed as an operative from 900 years in the future who was fighting against the forces which included the Suliban.
Archer found that he was being manipulated by those forces, as Enterprise was blamed for the destruction of a mining colony in "Shockwave".
In the third season, an escalation of the Temporal Cold War introduced the Xindi and dealt with the repercussions of their attack on Earth.
Daniels explained Archer's importance in history during a trip to the future in "Azati Prime" to witness the final battle against the Sphere Builders—aliens who were also manipulating the Xindi into attacking Earth during Archer's time period.
In the closing phase of the Temporal Cold War, Daniels sent the Enterprise back to the 1940s, following a temporal incursion by aliens who had altered the outcome of World War II, permitting Nazi Germany to invade the United States.
Once Vosk, the leader of the aliens, was killed, the timeline corrected itself.
Vosk's actions had turned the Cold War into an actual war raging through time, but the Enterprise killed Vosk before he could initiate the wars and all of the damage done throughout history was undone.
Afterwards, Daniels believed that the Temporal Cold War was finally coming to an end as a result.
In Star Trek: Discovery season 3, it's mentioned that after the Temporal Wars all time travel was outlawed and all existing time travel devices were destroyed.
The Guardian of Forever states in "Terra Firma" that the various factions used him to mess with his history and to kill people
so he moved planets and went into hiding.

===
The Xindi ===
Braga and Berman created the season-long Xindi story arc, which began with the second-season finale, "The Expanse", and ran throughout the third season until it was resolved in the episode "Zero Hour".
It opens with an attack on Earth by a mysterious space probe that killed seven million people in a destructive swath stretching through Florida to Venezuela.
As a result, the Enterprise is re-directed to unexplored regions of space to find the Xindi and stop a further attack that will destroy Earth.
Although certain elements were preplanned, including the success of the mission against the Xindi,  others, such as the details of the actual enemy race, were not.
At the time of the initial development, Berman and Braga were uncertain if the storyline would last for a whole season or for just half a season.
The Xindi themselves were developed from on-set discussions with the writers and the actors who portrayed them.
Six species that make up the Xindi were created in this manner.
One was originally called "humanoid Xindi", but after further discussions they were renamed "primate Xindi".
The first part of the third season saw the crew searching the Delphic Expanse, attempting to find clues that would lead them to the Xindi.
In order to complete this mission, they took on additional crew members in the form of Military Assault Command Operations (abbreviated as MACO) soldiers, due to the increased military nature of the task.

===
Founding of the Federation ===
The birth of the Federation was first hinted at during part two of "Shockwave", which opened the second season.
When Manny Coto was made showrunner for the fourth season, he decided that the focus of the series should be to link to that event.
With this in mind, his intention was for this season to move towards that goal.
Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens were hired as writers on Enterprise because they wrote the non-canon novel Federation and after it was suggested by producer Mike Sussman.
The episodes for the fourth season were intended to lay the framework for the later creation of the Federation.
This was something that the cast said that they would have liked to see more of, with Scott Bakula later saying "I would have loved to have been able to explore that journey to the Federation and their creation of it ... to a greater extent.
And I think that would have been, um, just more fun for the audience ...
just better, longer storytelling.
"In
"United", the founding races of the Federation, the humans, the Vulcans, the Andorians and the Tellarites worked together for the first time to defeat a Romulan plot.
In "Demons", the xenophobic Terra Prime movement is introduced, which Coto felt was the final element of human nature that must be defeated before the Federation could be formed.
The foundation of the Federation was shown on screen in the final episode of the series, "These Are the Voyages...", which was set several years after the rest of the season.

== Cast and characters ==
Jonathan Archer, played by Scott Bakula, is Captain of Earth's first Warp 5 starship, Enterprise.
His father, Henry, designed its engine, giving Archer a personal connection to his ship.
He was envisaged as being a cross between Chuck Yeager and Han Solo by executive producer Rick Berman, while Brannon Braga said that he was more "laidback and relatable".
The character was initially openly prejudiced against the Vulcans, but this softens over time.

T'Pol, played by Jolene Blalock, is Science Officer of Enterprise, originally attached to Enterprise by the Vulcan High Command to keep the humans out of trouble.
She becomes loyal to Archer, leaving her position in the High Command to accompany him to find the Xindi, and later joins Starfleet.

In later seasons, she forms a romantic relationship with Tucker.

Trip Tucker, played by Connor Trinneer, is Chief Engineer of Enterprise and a longtime friend of Captain Archer.
He starts the series as a conservatively modest personality, but becomes more seasoned and outspoken as the series runs.
In later seasons, he forms a romantic relationship with T'Pol.

Malcolm Reed, played by Dominic Keating, is Tactical Officer of Enterprise, also in charge of ship security.
Reed comes from a long line of Royal Navy men, but joined Starfleet because of his fear of drowning.
An extremely taciturn man, his own family, when asked, could not name his favorite food (pineapple).

Hoshi Sato, played by Linda Park, is Communications Officer of Enterprise and linguistic genius.
Capable of learning alien languages extremely quickly, Hoshi serves as the interpreter between the crew of  Enterprise and new alien species, even after the universal translator is on-line.
She suffered anxiety about her place on board originally, but exposure to frequent danger helped her realize her value to the ship.
Her confidence increases to the point Archer leaves her in command of Enterprise and she faces down the President of United Earth in "
These Are The Voyages ..."
Travis Mayweather, played by Anthony Montgomery, is the Helmsman of Enterprise.
A "space boomer"
, Travis is unique on Enterprise, having been born in space.
Son of a freighter captain, Travis knows many of the alien species as well as locations that Earth traders frequent.
As Enterprise moves farther and farther from Earth, his value in this area lessens, but his skill at the helm is constantly appreciated, making him the pilot of choice for many missions.

Phlox, played by John Billingsley, is Chief Medical Officer of Enterprise.
A Denobulan member of the Inter-Species Medical Exchange, Phlox is brought aboard Enterprise to care for the Klingon passenger during the ship's first mission.
Afterward, he volunteers to stay on, delighting in the experience of humanity taking its first steps onto the galactic stage.
An exceedingly cheerful alien, Dr. Phlox uses many animals and naturalistic cures in practising medicine, in addition to the usual technological methods.

==
Production ==


===
Conception ===
Prior to the end of Star Trek: Voyager and following the end of Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine
in June 1999, UPN approached Rick Berman and Brannon Braga about the production of a fifth Star Trek series, either to overlap with the final season of Voyager or to immediately follow.
Berman had previously created Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine along with Michael Piller, Voyager with Piller and Jeri Taylor, and had been wanting to work with Braga on a series concept.
While the fans online were suggesting that it could either be based on Starfleet Academy or the adventures of Hikaru Sulu, the producers took care that no information was leaked to reveal what the concept was going to be.
They later revealed that the Academy idea was never properly considered.
Instead, they opted to create a prequel to The Original Series set after the events in the film Star Trek:
First Contact, as Braga and Berman felt it was a period in the Star Trek universe which was unexplored.
The idea was for the series to portray the first deep space explorers in the Star Trek universe, with Braga explaining that everything would be new to the crew and that since the setting was closer in the timeframe to the modern day, their reactions to situations would be more contemporary.
As part of this, they sought feedback from members of the submarine service of the United States Navy, which was reflected in certain design work on the series such as the Star Trek uniforms.
The network executives needed to be convinced of the viability of a prequel series, as they had assumed that the series would take the franchise further into the future.
The initial idea was for the first season to be almost entirely set on Earth as the Enterprise was rushed to completion to respond to first contact with the Klingon, and the crew being put together.
This idea was rejected by the studio executives, and these story elements were instead restricted to the pilot, "Broken Bow".
They sought to make Enterprise more character-driven than the previous series in the Star Trek franchise, and hoped that this would gain viewers who had watched The Next Generation but had lost interest with Deep Space Nine and Voyager.
It was intended to link the series directly into The Original Series by having T'Pau, who had previously appeared in the episode "Amok Time", as a main character.
Instead, this character was developed into an original Vulcan character, T'Pol.
Berman explained his vision for the series at launch, saying, "We'll be seeing humanity when they truly are going where no man has gone before.
We are seeing people who don't take meeting aliens as just another part of the job.
It's not routine.
Nothing is routine.
Also, by bringing it back 200 years from Voyager, we're making the characters closer to the present, and by doing that they can be a little bit more accessible and a little bit more flawed and a little bit more familiar to you and me.
"He said that this setting would combine elements of The Original Series while having "a lot of fresh and new elements in it".
It was initially considered whether or not to have Enterprise overlap with the final season of Voyager, but it was decided that there would be a gap in broadcasting between the two series, as Berman was concerned with the "oversaturation" of the franchise.
But he hoped that the "dramatic change" in Enterprise would mean that new viewers were drawn in to watch it.
As part of this change, the decision was made to drop "Star Trek" from the title, but Berman explained that "if there's any one word that says Star Trek without actually saying Star Trek, that word is Enterprise".
This title lasted until the third episode of season three, "Extinction", when the series was renamed Star Trek: Enterprise as demanded by Paramount Television executives in an effort to reconnect the series with the fans of the franchise.

===
Crew ===
In addition to the executive producers, a number of former Star Trek crew members joined the new series at launch.
Herman F. Zimmerman was recruited as Production Designer/Illustrator, having worked on Trek projects throughout The Next Generation, Deep Space Nine and the feature films.
Marvin V. Rush resumed his role as Director of Photography, having been involved with Trek since the third season of The Next Generation.
Working with him were Douglas Knapp and William Peets as Camera Operator and Chief Lighting Technician respectively.
Both had previously worked on Voyager.
Another alumna from the previous series was Louise Dorton, who had started in the first season of that show as Set Designer, but joined Enterprise as Art Director.
Andre Bormanis, who had served as science consultant as well as a writer on The Next Generation, Deep Space Nine, and Voyager, was brought on as a staff writer.

John Eaves, who had previously worked on Star Trek:
First Contact, became the Senior Illustrator for the show, while Doug Drexler worked under him as Junior Illustrator.
Michael Westmore was once again the Head of Make-up for the series, and was joined by his daughter-in-law Suzanne Westmore, who had previously been credited on Voyager as Suzanne Diaz.
Ronald B. Moore returned once again as Visual Effectors Supervisor, a veteran of Trek productions since The Next Generation and also worked on the feature film Star Trek Generations.
Carol Kuntz was the Costume Supervisor, a position she had held since the production of The Next Generation, while Charlotte A. Parker was Enterprise's Hair Stylist, and had been previously credited as Charlotte A. Gravenor on Voyager.

A number of directors who had previously worked on episodes in other Star Trek series returned once more to work on Enterprise.
These included former Star Trek alumni, such as LeVar Burton, aka Geordi La Forge from The Next Generation, and Robert Duncan McNeill, who played Tom Paris on Voyager.
Roxann Dawson was also announced to direct at the start of the series, having previously played B'Elanna Torres, also on Voyager.
Dawson went on to direct ten episodes of the series.
Following the first season, the majority of the writers on the series were fired by Braga with the exception of Chris Black.
He was promoted for the second season to co-executive producer, and former The X-Files and The Lone Gunmen writer John Shiban joined the writing team and was also named co-executive producer.
Berman called the recruitment of Shiban a "coup" for the series.
Shiban stayed for the second season, while Black left after the third.
The fourth season of Enterprise saw a change to the leadership for the crew, with Manny Coto taking over as executive producer and showrunner from Braga and Berman.
He had previously come onto the writing staff during the third season, and wrote the well received episode "Similitude".
Coto was a fan of The Original Series and sought to link Enterprise more closely to that earlier show.
He brought Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens onto Enterprise as writers; they had previously written books on the production of the franchise, as well as working with William Shatner on his Shatnerverse series of Star Trek novels.
Braga and Berman remained on staff, with Coto describing the situation as having "three showrunners".
Coto set the direction for the final season, while the other two gave notes and feedback.
===
Casting ===
The crew issued a casting call for the main roles in the series, and Keating and Billingsley made immediate impressions on the casting director and staff.
Braga said that they knew they were right for those roles "right off the bat".
Keating had previously auditioned for a role on Voyager two years prior, but Berman wanted to keep him for a future main role, saying that when he auditioned for Reed the actor had "nailed it", although there were discussions about the accent he should be using, with Keating suggesting one from the North of England which the producers mistook for Scottish.
In the end, they chose to go with Keating's natural voice.
He also praised the casting processes involving Trinneer, Park and Billingsley, calling the latter "perfect" in his role as Doctor Phlox.
Park was not required to audition, but instead was hired on the basis of her performance in a scene she appeared in The WB series Popular alongside Anthony Montgomery – despite that the character was intended to be older until Park was cast.
Montgomery had previously auditioned to play Tuvok's son in Voyager, and after being chosen for the part of Travis Mayweather, he elected to take the part instead of a role in a low budget movie he had been offered.
The longest casting process was that of Bakula as Archer, due to the extended contract negotiations that took place, which added to a delay in production.
He had been sought for the part by the executive producers, and although Bakula wanted to do the show, he "wanted to feel that [he] was making a good deal and that everyone was going to work together to make this a good experience.
"
He had signed up for a pilot for CBS called Late Bloomers before agreeing to appear on Enterprise.
One of the reasons he agreed to join the cast of Enterprise was that he had previously worked with Kerry McCluggage, one of the co-founders of UPN, on Quantum Leap.
Berman later admitted that they did not have an alternative in mind if Bakula decided to turn down the role.

Braga explained that the most difficult casting was that for T'Pol, as they were seeking a Kim Cattrall type.
Blalock and Marjorie Monaghan were among the final three to be considered for the part, with Blalock gaining the role, despite her agents rejecting requests for her to attend auditions early in the casting process.
By the time that Blalock auditioned in the final group, the crew had seen hundreds of actresses, according to Berman.
His main issue at the time was to find a "beautiful woman who can act and doesn't want to go right into feature films".
Blalock was excited about the casting as she had been a lifelong Star Trek fan, with her favourite character being Spock.
Bakula's casting as Archer was announced via press release on May 10, 2001.
However, some of the British media mistook the announcement for Bakula taking over from Patrick Stewart.
Details of the rest of the main cast were released on May 15, with the rest of the character details publicised the following day.
Some recurring characters were played by actors who had previously appeared in Star Trek productions, with Jeffrey Combs portraying the Andorian Shran, making his first appearance in the season one episode "The Andorian Incident".
He had previously portrayed the Vorta Weyoun as well as the Ferengi Brunt on Deep Space Nine.
Vaughn Armstrong, who played Admiral Maxwell Forest, had previously appeared in a number of roles in various Trek productions since his first part as a Klingon in The Next Generation episode "Heart of Glory"; by the end of the Enterprise run, he had appeared as 13 different characters in total.
Randy Oglesby, Rick Worthy and Scott MacDonald had also appeared in a variety of roles within the franchise before taking on the recurring parts of Xindi council members throughout season three.
Throughout the production on Enterprise, there were rumours that William Shatner would make a guest appearance.
During season four, this idea was raised once again with the Reeves-Stevens suggesting that the tantalus field (previously thought to be a raygun seen in The Original Series episode "Mirror, Mirror" actually sent its victims back in time to a penal colony in the regular universe.
This in turn would allow Shatner to reprise his role as the Mirror Universe version of Captain James T. Kirk.
He pitched this to Braga and Berman, but instead they pitched another idea back to the actor in which he could play the chef of the Enterprise, who was taken to the future by Daniels and required to impersonate Kirk.
After they could not settle on an idea, the Mirror Universe concept was reworked into the two-part episode "In a Mirror, Darkly".
===
Sets and filming ===
The majority of the filming took place on the Paramount Pictures lot in Los Angeles, California.
The temporary sets for the show were housed on stages 8 and 9; while the permanent sets including the bridge, engine room and the arsenal were located on stage 18.
The engineering set itself was built across two levels with the large warp drive taking up the majority of the space.
Stages 8 and 9 had housed sets for the earlier Star Trek series since production was started on the abandoned Star Trek:
Phase II during the late 1970s.
They were subsequently used for the films Star Trek:
The Motion Picture, Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan, Star Trek III:
The Search for Spock and Star Trek IV:
The Voyage Home before being used for The Next Generation and Voyager.
Stage 18 had not been previously used for the production of any Star Trek series or films.
During the course of filming the pilot, between 130 and 150 members of staff worked on constructing the sets; this reduced to 20 to 25 crew members when the show went to series.
These teams were led by construction coordinator Tom Arp, who had previously worked on Deep Space Nine and a number of Star Trek films in the same capacity.
Although a number of episodes required specific sets to be built from scratch, the team would save certain elements to enable them to be reused in later episodes.
The production had a warehouse in Burbank to store those pieces while they were not being used.
Midway through the third season, from "Exile" onwards, the series started to be broadcast in 1080i high-definition television.
Alongside Jake 2.0, it was one of the first two series on UPN to be broadcast in high-definition.
The show contains over 4,214 minutes of special effects, dialogue, and other scenes.
Although it was broadcast in high definition at 1080i, it was not released on 1080p blu-ray until later.

An example of high definition is the 2017 Blu-ray collection of the full series called Enterprise: The Full Journey.
Until the start of the fourth season, the series was shot on traditional film stock.
It (the first three seasons) were shot on wide screen 35mm film with and an aspect ratio of 1.78:1, and it was 3-perf
Super 35mm film.
After Rush began testing a Sony digital camera on the standing sets for two days prior to production on "Storm Front" and demonstrated the footage to Braga and Berman, the decision was made to switch to digital production.
Rush felt that the audience would not see a great deal of difference as the footage can be shot in a way to look the same as the earlier seasons, but felt that the filming in high-definition video would be a benefit because of the additional detail that could be seen on screen.
At the time this was cutting edge for a TV show, with allowing the production team improved low-light performance and it enabled shooting more compared to chemical films.
The actual camera used was the Sony HDW-F900 CineAlta High-Definition camera, and the recording technology also used Sony' CineAlta 24P, a trademarked name of that company.
The decision to move to Sony's technology was a triple agreement of the three executive producers of the show, and also supported by the Directory of Photography.
Season four's Blu-ray release of Enterprise in 1080p has been praised as sharp and with satisfying color, and the best looking of the seasons.
The fourth season has been released multiple times, with latest as a combined full-series set in January 2017.

===
Music ===
Dennis McCarthy was recruited by the production team to score the pilot, "Broken Bow".
He had scored other episodes of the franchise, including the pilot of The Next Generation, "Encounter at Farpoint", and won an Emmy Award for his work on the Voyager episode "Heroes and Demons".
His work on "Broken Bow" was subsequently released in the United States on CD by Decca Records.
Other composers who worked on Enterprise included Paul Ballinger, David Bell, Jay Chattaway, John Frizzell, Kevin Kiner, Mark McKenzie, Velton Ray Bunch and Brian Tyler.

===
Opening sequence and theme song ===
The franchise was known for typically using orchestral themes, but Berman said that the theme tune would be more "contemporary" than heard in previous series and a "little hipper".
The theme was revealed to be a cover of the Rod Stewart single "Faith of the Heart", by British tenor Russell Watson.
Stewart's song had originally appeared on the soundtrack to the 1998 film Patch Adams.
For the use in Enterprise, it was retitled to "Where My Heart Will Take Me", but prompted a negative reaction from existing Star Trek fans.
These included an online petition to have the song removed, and there was a protest held outside of Paramount Studios.
Executive producers Braga and Berman both defended the choice, with Berman saying that the fan response was split over the song while Braga said that some people found the song "uplifting".
Illustrator John Eaves created a drawing of a number of real-world and Star Trek vessels leaving Earth, which was subsequently turned into a poster by Dan Madsen at the Star Trek Communicator magazine.
Eaves gave copies of this poster to Braga and Berman, with Berman suggesting the possibility that this could be a good concept for an opening sequence.
The aim of the sequence was to follow the evolution of exploration, flight and space flight.
As suggested by Eaves' poster, it included real-world vessels such as HMS Enterprise, Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-1, the Space Shuttle Enterprise amongst others in addition to the Mars rover Sojourner and the International Space Station.
Star Trek vessels featured included two new designs by Eaves as well as the first warp vessel, the Phoenix, and the Enterprise (NX-01).
The Phoenix spacecraft was presented in the 1996 feature film Star Trek:
First Contact as Earth's first warp vessel, whose inaugural warp flight triggered first contact with the Vulcans.

The two-part episode In a Mirror
, Darkly utilizes a different opening sequence than the remainder of the series, reflecting themes of war and conquest in the Mirror Universe.
===
Cancellation ===
The series was considered for cancellation at the end of the second season, with Paramount executives instead requesting a number of changes to Enterprise in order to renew it following a letter writing campaign from fans.
These included a change of name to Star Trek: Enterprise early in the third season and a new action-oriented plot, which resulted in the development of the Xindi.
There was a major turn over of staff at Paramount in June 2004, with Jonathan Dolgen, the head of entertainment at parent company Viacom, quitting following the departure of Viacom President Mel Karmazin.
Dolgen was described by Bakula as being the "huge Star Trek guy" at Paramount, and his departure was followed by several other staff members leaving.
During these departures, UPN was purchased by CBS.
Fans were resigned to cancellation at the end of the third season, but were surprised when the series was renewed, which was due in part to a reduction in the fees Paramount was charging UPN on a per-episode basis.
However Enterprise was moved to a slot on Friday evening, the same night on which The Original Series was broadcast during its own third season before it was cancelled.
On February 3, 2005, it was announced that Enterprise had been cancelled.
This news was passed to the cast and crew during the sixth day of production on "In a Mirror, Darkly".
The end of the series marked the first time in 18 years that no new Star Trek episodes were scheduled for broadcast, and Enterprise was the first live-action series of the franchise since The Original Series to last less than seven years.
Braga said at a talk to students in Los Angeles shortly after the news of the cancellation was released that "After 18 straight years on the air and 750-some episodes
the current run of Star Trek is over.
Which is a good thing.
It needs a rest".
He added that he was not sure how long Star Trek would be off the air, but called it a "gestation" instead of a "cancellation".
Fan myth suggests that Russell T Davies, showrunner of the then-upcoming revived series of Doctor Who, was in talks about producing a crossover episode in which the Ninth Doctor lands the TARDIS on board the NX-01, but these plans were abandoned with the cancellation of Enterprise.
This was based on a misunderstanding of the quote - the "we" reported to have been discussing a crossover
is a reference to Davies talking to the Doctor
Who production team about his desire to write a crossover, not to any discussions between the BBC and Paramount.

The cancellation resulted in protests by fans, both at Paramount Pictures and around the world as well as online.
A website entitled TrekUnited.com was set up to raise funds for a fifth season, but failed to do so with the money refunded after the unsuccessful campaign.
A total of $32 million had been raised.
Several years later, the possibility of a fifth season was still being discussed with Braga suggesting that fans could prompt Netflix into producing a new season of Enterprise by watching the existing four seasons on the service.
This resulted in a Facebook campaign set up to promote the idea of a fifth season.

====
Season five ====
At the time of the cancellation, Coto had hoped for renewal and had already started to make plans for the fifth season.
These included the expectation that the show would begin to cover the buildup to the Romulan War, as well as continue to link to The Original Series with references to things such as the cloud city of Stratos as seen in "The Cloud Minders".
Another feature that Coto planned was to have a "miniseries within a series" with four or five episodes devoted to following up on events from the Mirror Universe episode "
In a Mirror, Darkly".
The producers had also intended to bring Jeffrey Combs onto the series as a regular by placing his recurring Andorian character Shran onto the bridge of the Enterprise in an advisory capacity.
Work had already begun on an episode referred to by Coto as "Kilkenny Cats", which would have seen the return of Larry Niven's Kzinti, usually seen in his Known Space novels, and which had previously appeared in the Star Trek:
The Animated Series episode "The Slaver Weapon".
At the same time that Enterprise was broadcast, writer Jimmy Diggs was pursuing the idea of a CGI animated film called Star Trek: Lions of the Night, in which Captain Hikaru Sulu would lead the Starship Enterprise in attempting to prevent a Kzinti invasion of the Federation.
Coto's episode was based on a similar premise, with Diggs brought onto the Enterprise team to work on the episode.
Production had begun on the new Kzinti ships for "Kilkenny Cats", with Josh Finney commissioned.

== Broadcast and release ==


===
Episodes ===


===
Time slots ===
The pilot, "Broken Bow", was watched by 12.5 million viewers on the first broadcast on UPN.
This was during the first full week of the new season on American television, and it was felt at the time that the combination of Enterprise alongside Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Roswell would help to cross-promote each other due to the science fiction and fantasy genre links.
This even included a cross-over episode of Roswell with a character from that series auditioning before Jonathan Frakes for a role on Enterprise.
After the first few weeks of episodes of Enterprise, the ratings were considered to be solid enough and the expectation was that the series would run for seven seasons in the same manner as The Next Generation, Deep Space Nine and Voyager.
However, the viewing figures began to decrease towards the end of the season.
Changes were made for the third season, with the introduction of the season-long Xindi storyline.
This improved the reviews that the series was receiving, and the viewers in the 18 to 35 demographics but the overall ratings continued to decrease.
UPN cut the 26 episode order for the third season to 24, meaning that if 24 episodes were created for the fourth season as well then they would have the 100 episodes needed for syndication.
As well as a move to Friday nights, the fourth season was shortened further to 22 episodes, meaning that at cancellation there were 98 episodes produced in total.
At the time of cancellation, Enterprise remained the highest rated drama series on UPN.
The series went immediately into broadcast syndication; the arrangements having been made by UPN prior to the cancellation.
It is distributed by CBS Television Distribution.
===
Syndication and foreign broadcast ===
In the UK, the series was first broadcast on satellite TV channel
Sky One, before airing on Channel 4 during July 2002, becoming the first Star Trek series not to be broadcast terrestrially by the BBC.
In Australia, the series was broadcast on the Nine Network.
All four seasons of Enterprise entered broadcast syndication in the United States during the week of September 17, 2005.
The episodes were initially aired out of sequence, with episodes from the third and fourth season being broadcast directly after episodes from the first.
Episodes from the second season were not planned to air until September 2006.

===
Home media ===
The first season of Enterprise was released on VHS cassette in both the United Kingdom and Ireland, during 2002.
In each of the thirteen volumes, there were two episodes on each tape.
The first home media release of Enterprise in the United States was of the full first season on DVD, which was released on May 3, 2005.
The remaining seasons were released over the course of the next months, with season four brought out in November of that year.
In addition, 2005 saw the release of the complete series as a DVD box-set.
Enterprise was the third Star Trek series to be released in high definition on Blu-ray following the earlier releases of Star Trek:
The Original Series and Star Trek: The Next Generation, with season one delivered on March 26, 2013.
The fans of the franchise were asked for feedback on potential covers for the first season release, but as there was no clear winner, a new design was created based on the feedback received.
The second season was released on August 20, 2013, the third season was on January 7, 2014, and the final season on April 29, 2014.
The Blu-ray releases featured both the same additional features as the DVD release, in addition to new features exclusive to these releases.
In January 2017 a new 24 disc Blu-ray set of the whole series was released.
This set includes the whole series in 1080p with a screen size ratio of 1.78:1 (widescreen) and with the sound in DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1 (5 channels plus subwoofer).
The set includes 97 episodes from its original broadcast run at the dawn of the 21st century and features like a cast reunion.
Note that the Blu-ray release in 1080p is actually higher than its original broadcast resolution which ranged from 720p to 1080i.

==
Other appearances ==


===
Novelizations ===
The first novel released based on the series was Broken Bow, authored by Diane Carey for Pocket Books and released in October 2001 in the United States.
It also contained an additional chapter of production material on the series at the back of the novel, written by Paul Ruditis.
The first original novel was By the Book, published in January 2002 and written by Dean Wesley Smith and Kristine Katheryn Rusch.
The duo had not seen any episodes of the series at the time of writing, instead basing the book on the first three scripts and the initial trailer.
Other books expanded on the backgrounds of specific characters, with What Price Honor?
concentrating on Reed and Daedalus describing Tucker's work on a previous warp vessel.
A further novelization was written by Paul Ruditis of the two-part episode "Shockwave" which closed the first season and opened the second.
The final novelization of Enterprise episodes was contained within The Expanse by Jeanne Kalogridis which covered the second-season finale, "The Expanse" and the first episode of the third season, "The Xindi".
Margaret Clark, an editor at Pocket Books explained on TrekNation that the reason for the low numbers of Enterprise related books was not due to poor sales, but instead because the fourth season of the show addressed topics that had been previously intended for novelizations.
Books released subsequent to the end of the series as part of the Star Trek:
Enterprise relaunch covered topics such as the Earth-Romulan War, and the initial years of the Federation.
===
Other ===
In the video games Star Trek: Encounters and Star Trek:
Legacy, both released in 2006, the first vessel controlled by the player in each storyline is the Enterprise (NX-01).
As both games progress chronologically, the gamer then moves onto the USS Enterprise seen in The Original Series and later depictions afterwards.
The film Star Trek Into Darkness (2013) references Enterprise with a model of the NX-01 in a collection depicting the history of flight in Fleet Admiral Alexander Marcus'
(Peter Weller) office.
It was placed next to other historical vessels such as the Wright Flyer, the Space Shuttle, and the First Flight.
Events and elements of the series, including the MACOs and the Xindi war, are also referenced in the 2016 film Star Trek Beyond.
The long-lost vessel featured in the film, the USS Franklin (NX-326), is similar in design and said to be a precursor to the NX-01.
The Earth-Romulan War, which occurred after the events of the series in the official timeline but was seeded during the series, is also mentioned in Beyond.

==
Influence ==


===
Critical reception ===
The pilot episode of Enterprise, "Broken Bow", was well received by critics, with Ed Bark for the Knight Ridder/Tribune News Service saying that it all came together in an "impressive fashion", while Brandon Easton said in The Boston Herald that the cast was "impeccable" and the writing was "strong" despite the "limitations of a questionable premise".
In a differing opinion, Charlie McCollum for Knight Ridder said that the premise was "great", although at the time had yet to see the episode.
Dan Snierson, while writing for Entertainment Weekly, praised the series, saying "It's hot, it's sexy, it's kinda funny" and called it the savior of UPN.Following the pilot, the critical reaction became mixed.
David Segal said in The Washington Post that the series "has a bargain basement feel that lands this side of camp."
During the course of the second season, mainstream media publications began publishing that the show was "broken".
Tom Russo proclaimed in Entertainment Weekly that "It's dead Jim – almost", attributing the lack of appeal of Star Trek: Nemesis and the dwindling ratings received by Enterprise as demonstrating that the franchise was tired.
The frequency of stand-alone episodes broadcast during the second season resulted in a negative fan reaction.
The reception for the third and fourth seasons improved overall, but with some negative reviews being received.
One such criticism was from Gareth Wigmore in TV Zone who said that "Enterprise isn't so much reacting to current events as it is lazily picking items from the news to produce stories."
Coto felt that the critics "dumped on the show", and despite his feelings that the final season marked an improvement, he was disappointed that the critics did not change their minds.
Critics received the news of the cancellation with mixed opinions, with Ted Cox in The Daily Herald saying that it was "good riddance to space rubbish", while an article in the Lethbridge Herald blamed the cancellation on the poor ratings despite the improved quality of the series.
The series finale, "These Are the Voyages...", was poorly received, with Cox adding that Enterprise ended "with a whimper", while Kevin Williamson stated in the Calgary Sun that it was the worst series finale since "Turnabout Intruder" and criticised the concentration on characters from The Next Generation instead of Enterprise.
Mark Perigard held a similar opinion in The Boston Herald, saying that William Riker "has no business walking the ship", and that the death of Tucker was "for no other reason than the show's creators realized at least one dramatic thing had to happen in the hour".
Braga later admitted that killing Tucker "wasn't a great idea", and called making the finale TNG-centric his biggest regret of the series.
Others found the conclusion a comforting reminder of the Star Trek:
The Next Generation episode "The Pegasus", which aired about 11 years prior in real-time.
In 2016, in a listing that included every Star Trek film and TV series, Enterprise was ranked 12th by the L.A. Times, ahead of the 1994 film Star Trek: Generations.
===
Accolades ===
Star Trek:
Enterprise was nominated for seventeen awards over the course of the four seasons at the Creative Arts Emmy Award.
It won on four occasions, for Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series for "Broken Bow", Outstanding Hairstyling for a Series for "Two Days and Two Nights", Outstanding Music Composition for a Series (Dramatic Underscore) for "Similitude", and Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series for "Countdown".
It also received sixteen nominations at the Saturn Awards, with the only wins coming following the first season, both being for Jolene Blalock in the Best Supporting Actress on Television and Faces of the Future categories.
The series won an ASCAP Film and Television Music Award in 2002 for Top Television Series, and won twice at the Visual Effects Society Awards: once for "Dead Stop" in the category Best Models and Miniatures in a Televised Program, Music Video, or Commercial and once for the second part of "Stormfront" in the category Outstanding Visual Effects in a Broadcast Series, with a further two nominations received.
==
Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Star Trek: Enterprise at IMDb
Star Trek: Enterprise at StarTrek.com
Star Trek: Enterprise at Memory Alpha (a Star Trek wiki)
Star Trek: Enterprise at Memory Beta
Star Trek: Enterprise at CBS.com
Star Trek is an American science-fiction television series created by Gene Roddenberry that follows the adventures of the starship USS Enterprise (NCC-1701) and its crew.
It later acquired the retronym of Star Trek:
The Original Series (TOS) to distinguish the show within the media franchise that it began.

The show is set in the Milky Way galaxy, roughly during the 2260s.
The ship and crew are led by Captain James T. Kirk (William Shatner), First Officer and Science Officer Spock (Leonard Nimoy), and Chief Medical Officer Leonard 'Bones' McCoy (DeForest Kelley).
Shatner's voice-over introduction during each episode's opening credits stated the starship's purpose:
Space: the final frontier.
These are the voyages of the starship Enterprise.
Its five-year mission: to explore strange new worlds, to seek out new life and new civilizations, to boldly go where no man has gone before.

The series was produced from September 1966 to December 1967 by Norway Productions and Desilu Productions, and by Paramount Television from January 1968 to June 1969.
Star Trek aired on NBC from September 8, 1966, to June 3, 1969, and was actually seen first on September 6, 1966, on Canada's CTV network.
Star Trek's Nielsen ratings while on NBC were low, and the network cancelled it after three seasons and 79 episodes.
Several years later, the series became a hit in broadcast syndication, remaining so throughout the 1970s, achieving cult classic status and a developing influence on popular culture.
Star Trek eventually spawned a franchise, consisting of eight television series, 13 feature films, and numerous books, games, and toys, and is now widely considered one of the most popular and influential television series of all time.
The series contains significant elements of Space Western, as described by Roddenberry and the general audience.

== Creation ==
On March 11, 1964, Gene Roddenberry, a long-time fan of science fiction, drafted a short treatment for a science-fiction television series that he called Star Trek.
This was to be set on board a large interstellar spaceship named S.S. Yorktown in the 23rd century bearing a crew dedicated to exploring the Milky Way galaxy.

Roddenberry noted a number of influences on his idea, some of which includes A. E. van Vogt's tales of the spaceship Space Beagle, Eric Frank Russell's Marathon series of stories, and the film Forbidden Planet (1956).
Some have also drawn parallels with the television series Rocky Jones, Space Ranger (1954), a space opera that included many of the elements integral to Star Trek—the organization, crew relationships, missions, part of the bridge layout, and some technology.
Roddenberry also drew heavily from C. S. Forester's Horatio Hornblower novels that depict a daring sea captain who exercises broad discretionary authority on distant sea missions of noble purpose.
He often humorously referred to Captain Kirk as "Horatio Hornblower in Space".
Roddenberry had extensive experience in writing for series about the Old West that had been popular television fare in the 1950s and 1960s.
Armed with this background, the first draft characterized the new show as "Wagon Train to the stars."
Like the familiar Wagon Train, each episode was to be a self-contained adventure story, set within the structure of a continuing voyage through space.
Most future television and movie realizations of the franchise adhered to the "Wagon Train" paradigm of the continuing journey, with the notable exception of the serialized Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, Star Trek: Discovery, Star Trek: Picard, and the third season of Star Trek: Enterprise.

In Roddenberry's original concept, the protagonist was Captain Robert April of the starship S.S. Yorktown.
This character was developed into Captain Christopher Pike, first portrayed by Jeffrey Hunter.
April is listed in the Star Trek Chronology, The Star Trek Encyclopedia, and at startrek.com as the Enterprise's first commanding officer, preceding Captain Pike.
The character's only television/movie appearance is in the Star Trek:
The Animated Series episode "The Counter-Clock Incident".
==
Development ==
In April 1964, Roddenberry presented the Star Trek draft to Desilu Productions, a leading independent television production company.
He met with Herbert F. Solow, Desilu's director of production.
Solow saw promise in the idea and signed a three-year program-development contract with Roddenberry.
Lucille Ball, head of Desilu, was not familiar with the nature of the project, but she was instrumental in getting the pilot produced.
The idea was extensively revised and fleshed out during this time—"The Cage" pilot filmed in late 1964 differs in many respects from the March 1964 treatment.
Solow, for example, added the "stardate" concept.
Desilu Productions had a first-look deal with CBS.
Oscar Katz, Desilu's Vice President of Production, went with Roddenberry to pitch the series to the network.
They refused to purchase the show, as they already had a similar show in development, the 1965 Irwin Allen series Lost in Space.
In May 1964, Solow, who had previously worked at NBC, met with Grant Tinker, then head of the network's West Coast programming department.
Tinker commissioned the first pilot—which became "The Cage".
NBC turned down the resulting pilot, stating that it was "too cerebral".
However, the NBC executives were still impressed with the concept, and they understood that its perceived faults had been partly because of the script that they had selected themselves.
NBC made the unusual decision to pay for a second pilot, using the script called "Where No Man Has Gone Before".
Only the character of Spock, played by Leonard Nimoy, was retained from the first pilot, and only two cast members, Majel Barrett and Nimoy, were carried forward into the series.
This second pilot proved to be satisfactory to NBC, and the network selected Star Trek to be in its upcoming television schedule for the fall of 1966.

The second pilot introduced most of the other main characters: Captain Kirk (William Shatner), Chief Engineer Lt.
Commander Scott (James Doohan) and Lt.
Sulu (George Takei), who served as a physicist on the ship in the second pilot, but subsequently became a helmsman throughout the rest of the series.
Paul Fix played Dr. Mark Piper in the second pilot; ship's doctor Leonard McCoy (DeForest Kelley) joined the cast when filming began for the first season, and he remained for the rest of the series, achieving billing as the third star of the series.
Also joining the ship's permanent crew during the first season were the communications officer, Lt.
Nyota Uhura (Nichelle Nichols), the first African-American woman to hold such an important role in an American television series; the captain's yeoman, Janice Rand (Grace Lee Whitney), who departed midway through the first season; and Christine Chapel (Majel Barrett), the ship's nurse and assistant to McCoy.
Walter Koenig joined the cast as Ensign Pavel Chekov in the series' second season.

In February 1966, before the first episode was aired, Star Trek was nearly cancelled by Desilu Productions.
Desilu had gone from making just one half-hour show (The Lucy Show) to deficit-financing a portion of two expensive hour-long shows, Mission: Impossible and Star Trek.
Solow was able to convince Lucille Ball that both shows should continue.

==
Production ==
Once the series had been picked up by NBC, the production moved to what was then Desilu Productions' Gower Street location.
It had previously been the main studio complex used by RKO Pictures, and is now part of the Paramount Pictures lot.
The series used what are now stages 31 and 32.
The show's production staff included art director Matt Jefferies, who designed the starship Enterprise and most of its interiors.
His contributions to the series were honored in the name of the "Jefferies tube", an equipment shaft depicted in various Star Trek series.
In addition to working with his brother, John Jefferies, to create the hand-held phaser weapons of Star Trek, Jefferies also developed the set design for the bridge of the Enterprise (which was based on an earlier design by Pato Guzman).
Jefferies used his practical experience as an airman during World War II and his knowledge of aircraft design to devise a sleek, functional, and ergonomic bridge layout.

The costume designer for Star Trek, Bill Theiss, created the striking look of the Starfleet uniforms for the Enterprise, the costumes for female guest stars, and for various aliens, including the Klingons, Vulcans, Romulans, Tellarites, Andorians, and Gideonites, among others.

Artist and sculptor Wah Chang, who had worked for Walt Disney Productions, was hired to design and manufacture props: he created the flip-open communicator, often credited as having influenced the configuration of the portable version of the cellular telephone.
Chang also designed the portable sensing-recording-computing "tricorder" device, and various fictitious devices for the starship's engineering crew and its sick bay.
As the series progressed, he helped to create various memorable aliens, such as the Gorn and the Horta.

===
Season 1 (1966–1967) ===
NBC ordered 16 episodes of Star Trek, besides "Where No Man Has Gone Before".
The first regular episode of Star Trek, "The Man Trap", aired on Thursday, September 8, 1966, from 8:30 to 9:30 as part of an NBC "sneak preview" block.
Reviews were mixed; while The Philadelphia Inquirer and San Francisco Chronicle liked the new show, The New York Times and The Boston Globe were less favorable, and Variety predicted that it "won't work", calling it "an incredible and dreary mess of confusion and complexities".
Debuting against mostly reruns, Star Trek easily won its time slot with a 40.6 share.
The following week against all-new programming, however, the show fell to second (29.4 share) behind CBS.
It ranked 33rd (out of 94 programs) over the next two weeks, then the following two episodes ranked 51st in the ratings.

Frederik Pohl, editor of Galaxy Science Fiction, wrote in February 1967 of his amazement that Star Trek's "regular shows were just as good" as the early episodes that won an award at Tricon in September.
Believing that the show would soon be cancelled because of low ratings, he lamented that it "made the mistake of appealing to a comparatively literate group", and urged readers to write letters to help save the show.
Star Trek's first-season ratings would in earlier years likely have caused NBC to cancel the show.
The network had pioneered research into viewers' demographic profiles in the early 1960s, however, and by 1967, it and other networks increasingly considered such data when making decisions; for example, CBS temporarily cancelled Gunsmoke that year because it had too many older and too few younger viewers.
Although Roddenberry later claimed that NBC was unaware of Star Trek's favorable demographics, awareness of Star Trek's "quality" audience is what likely caused the network to retain the show after the first and second seasons.
NBC instead decided to order 10 more new episodes for the first season, and order a second season in March 1967.
The network originally announced that the show would air at 7:30–8:30 pm Tuesday, but it was instead given an 8:30–9:30 pm Friday slot when the 1967–68 NBC schedule was released, making watching it difficult for the young viewers that the show most attracted.
===
Season 2 (1967–1968) ===
Star Trek's ratings continued to decline during the second season.
Although Shatner expected the show to end after two seasons and began to prepare for other projects, NBC nonetheless may have never seriously considered cancelling the show.
As early as January 1968, the Associated Press reported that Star Trek's chances for renewal for a third season were "excellent".
The show had better ratings for NBC than ABC's competing Hondo, and the competing CBS programs (number-three Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C. and the first half-hour of the number-12 CBS Friday Night Movie) were in the top 15 in the Nielsen ratings.
Again, demographics helped Star Trek survive.
Contrary to popular belief among its fans, the show did not have a larger audience of young viewers than its competition while on NBC.
The network's research did indicate that Star Trek had a "quality audience" including "upper-income, better-educated males", however, and other NBC shows had lower overall ratings.

The enthusiasm of Star Trek's viewers surprised NBC.
The show was unusual in its serious discussion of contemporary societal issues in a futuristic context, unlike Lost in Space which was more campy in nature.
The network had already received 29,000 fan letters for the show during its first season, more than for any other except The Monkees.
When rumors spread in late 1967 that Star Trek was at risk of cancellation, Roddenberry secretly began and funded an effort by Bjo Trimble, her husband John, and other fans to persuade tens of thousands of viewers to write letters of support to save the program.
Using the 4,000 names on a mailing list for a science-fiction convention, the Trimbles asked fans to write to NBC and ask 10 others to also do so.
NBC received almost 116,000 letters for the show between December 1967 and March 1968, including more than 52,000 in February alone; according to an NBC executive, the network received more than one million pieces of mail but only disclosed the 116,000 figure.
Newspaper columnists encouraged readers to write letters to help save what one called "the best science-fiction show on the air".
More than 200 Caltech students marched to NBC's Burbank, California studio to support Star Trek in January 1968, carrying signs such as "Draft Spock" and "Vulcan Power".
Berkeley and MIT students organized similar protests in San Francisco and New York City.
The letters supporting Star Trek, whose authors included New York State Governor Nelson Rockefeller, were different in both quantity and quality from most mail that television networks receive:
The show, according to the 6,000 letters it draws a week (more than any other in television), is watched by scientists, museum curators, psychiatrists, doctors, university professors, and other highbrows.
The Smithsonian Institution asked for a print of the show for its archives, the only show so honored.

In addition:

Much of the mail came from doctors, scientists, teachers, and other professional people, and was for the most part literate–and written on good stationery.
And if there is anything a network wants almost as much as a high Nielsen ratings, it is the prestige of a show that appeals to the upper middle class and high-brow audiences.

NBC—which used such anecdotes in much of its publicity for the show—made the unusual decision to announce on television, after the episode "The Omega Glory" on March 1, 1968, that the series had been renewed.
The announcement implied a request to stop writing—NBC's policy of replying to each viewer mail meant that the campaign cost the network millions of dollars—but instead caused fans to send letters of thanks in similar numbers.

===
Season 3 (1968–1969) ===
NBC at first planned to move Star Trek to Mondays for the show's third season, likely in hopes of increasing its audience after the enormous letter campaign that surprised the network.
In March 1968, though, NBC instead moved the show to 10:00 pm Friday night, an hour undesirable for its younger audience, so as not to conflict with the highly successful Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In on Monday evenings, from whose time slot
Laugh-
In producer George Schlatter had angrily demanded it not be rescheduled.
In addition to the undesirable time slot, Star Trek was now being seen on only 181 of NBC's 210 affiliates.
Roddenberry was frustrated, and complained, "If the network wants to kill us, it couldn't make a better move."
He attempted to persuade NBC to give Star Trek a better day and hour, but was not successful.
As a result of this and his own growing exhaustion, he chose to withdraw from the stress of the daily production of Star Trek, though he remained nominally in charge as its "executive producer".
Roddenberry reduced his direct involvement in Star Trek before the start of the 1968–69 television season, and was replaced by Fred Freiberger as the producer of the television series.
NBC next reduced Star Trek's budget by a significant amount per episode, as the per-minute commercial price had dropped from $39,000 to $36,000 compared to the season-two time slot.
This caused what many perceive as a significant decline in quality for the 1968–69 season.
William Shatner felt that the main characters became increasingly compromised or exaggerated while being involved in increasingly improbable story lines.
Leonard Nimoy added that mercenary concerns came to predominate.
Associate Producer Bob Justman, who left during the third season, says that the budget cuts caused the crew to become necessarily limited in the type of filming that could be done, such as outdoor work, with only one episode, "The Paradise Syndrome", shot largely outdoors.
Nichelle Nichols described the budget-cutting during the final year as an intentional effort to kill off Star Trek:

While NBC paid lip service to expanding Star Trek's audience, it [now] slashed our production budget until it was actually 10% lower than it had been in our first season ...
This is why in the third season you saw fewer outdoor location shots, for example.
Top writers, top guest stars, top anything you needed was harder to come by.
Thus, Star Trek's demise became a self-fulfilling prophecy.
And I can assure you, that is exactly as it was meant to be.

The last day of filming for Star Trek was January 9, 1969, and after 79 episodes NBC cancelled the show in February despite fans' attempt at another letter-writing campaign.
One newspaper columnist advised a protesting viewer:
You Star Trek fans have fought the "good fight," but the show has been cancelled and there's nothing to be done now.

In 2011, the decision to cancel Star Trek by NBC was ranked number four on the TV Guide Network special, 25 Biggest TV Blunders 2.
===
Syndication ===
Although many of the third season's episodes were considered of poor quality, it gave Star Trek enough episodes for television syndication.
Most shows require at least four seasons for syndication, because otherwise not enough episodes are available for daily stripping.
Kaiser Broadcasting, however, purchased syndication rights for Star Trek during the first season for its stations in several large cities.
The company arranged the unusual deal because it saw the show as effective counterprogramming against the Big Three networks' 6 pm evening news programs.
Paramount began advertising the reruns in trade press in March 1969; as Kaiser's ratings were good, other stations, such as WPIX in New York City and WKBS in Philadelphia, also purchased the episodes for similar counterprogramming.
Through syndication, Star Trek found a larger audience than it had on NBC, becoming a cult classic.
Airing the show in the late afternoon or early evening attracted many new viewers, often young.
By 1970, Paramount's trade advertisements claimed that the show had significantly improved its stations' ratings, and the Los Angeles Times commented on Star Trek's ability to "acquire the most enviable ratings in the syndication field".
By 1972, what the Associated Press described as "the show that won't die" aired in more than 100 American cities and 60 other countries; and more than 3,000 fans attended the first Star Trek convention in New York City in January 1972.

Fans of the show became increasingly organized, gathering at conventions to trade merchandise, meet actors from the show, and watch screenings of old episodes.
Such fans came to be known as "trekkies", who were noted (and often ridiculed) for their extreme devotion to the show and their encyclopedic knowledge of every episode.
Because fans enjoyed re-watching each episode many times, prices for Star Trek rose over time, instead of falling like other syndicated reruns.
People magazine commented in 1977 that the show "threatens to rerun until the universe crawls back into its little black hole".
By 1986, 17 years after entering syndication, Star Trek was the most popular syndicated series; by 1987, Paramount made $1 million from each episode; and by 1994, the reruns still aired in 94% of the United States.
From September 1 to December 24, 1998, the Sci-Fi Channel broadcast a "Special Edition" of all the original series episodes in an expanded 90-minute format hosted by William Shatner.
Now titled Star Trek: The Original Series, these broadcasts restored scenes that had been edited out of the syndicated episodes.
In addition to introductory and post-episode commentary by Shatner, the episodes included interviews with members of the regular production team and cast, writers, guest stars, and critics (titled as "Star Trek Insights").
The episodes were broadcast in the original broadcast sequence, followed by "The Cage", to which a full 105-minute segment was devoted.
(
For details on each episode's original airdate, see List of Star Trek: The Original Series episodes.)
Leonard Nimoy hosted a second run from December 28, 1998 to March 24, 1999, but
not all the episodes were broadcast because the show was abruptly cancelled before completion.

=== Remastered edition ===
In September 2006, CBS Paramount Domestic Television (now known as CBS Television Distribution, the current rights holders for the Star Trek television franchises) began syndication of an enhanced version of Star Trek:
The Original Series in high definition with new CGI visual effects.
Under the direction of Star Trek producer David Rossi, who consulted with Mike and Denise Okuda, the visual and special effects were recreated to give Star Trek:
The Original Series a more modern look.
Special attention was given to such elements as the Enterprise, alien planets and their images depicted from space, planets seen from orbit, alien spacecraft, and technology such as computer readouts, viewscreen images, and phaser beams.

The restoration and enhancement was performed by CBS Digital.
All live-action footage was scanned in high definition from its first-generation 35 mm film elements.
While it was possible to retouch and remaster some visual effects, all new exterior ship, space, and planet shots were recreated under the supervision of Emmy-nominated visual-effects supervisor Niel Wray.

As noted in the "making of" DVD feature, first-generation "original camera negatives" were used for all live-action footage, but not for external shots of the ship and planets.
Notable changes include new space shots with a CGI Enterprise, and other new models (for example, a Gorn ship is shown in "Arena"), redone matte background shots, and other minor touches such as tidying up viewscreens.

A small number of scenes were also recomposed, and sometimes new actors were placed into the background of shots.
The opening theme music was also re-recorded in digital stereo.

The first episode to be released to syndication was "Balance of Terror" on the weekend of September 16, 2006.
Episodes were released at the rate of about one a week and broadcast in a 4:3 aspect ratio.
Despite the HD remastering, CBS chose to deliver the broadcast syndication package in Standard Definition (SD TV).
The HD format was made commercially available through Blu-ray, or by streaming and download such as iTunes, Netflix, and Xbox Live.
While the CGI shots were mastered in a 16:9 aspect ratio for future applications, they were initially broadcast in the U.S. and Canada—along with the live-action footage—in a 4:3 aspect ratio to respect the show's original composition.
If the producers were to choose to reformat the entire show for the 16:9 ratio, live-action footage would be cropped, significantly reducing the height of the original image.

On July 26, 2007, CBS Home Entertainment (with distribution by Paramount Home Entertainment) announced that the remastered episodes of TOS would be released on an HD DVD/DVD hybrid format.
Season one was released on November 20, 2007.
Season two had been scheduled for release in the summer of 2008, but it was cancelled when Toshiba (which had been helping finance the remastering of the show) pulled out of the HD DVD business.
On August 5, 2008, the remastered season two was released on DVD only.
For this release, CBS and Paramount used discs without any disc art, making them look like the "Season 1 Remastered" HD DVD/DVD combo discs, despite having content only on one side.
Season 3 was released on DVD only on November 18, 2008.
On February 17, 2009, Paramount announced the season one of TOS on Blu-ray Disc for a May release to coincide with the new feature film coming from Paramount.
The second season was released in a seven disc set on Blu-ray in the U.S. on September 22, 2009.
The third season was released on Blu-ray in the U.S. on December 15.
With the release of the "Alternate Realities" box set, remastered Original Series episodes were included in a multi-series compilation for the first time.
If future compilation releases would exclusively use the remastered episodes or not was unknown.
In regions two and four, all three seasons of the remastered Original Series became available on DVD in the slimline edition (in the UK and Germany in steelbook editions) on April 27, 2009, as well as the first season in Blu-ray.

== Cast ==
While still casting the roles, Gene Roddenberry did not mandate Bones McCoy and Spock be male.
According to Nichelle Nichols, "They gave me a three-page script to read from that had three characters named Bones, Kirk and somebody called Spock, and they asked me if I would read for the role of Spock.
When I looked at this great text, I said to myself, 'I'll take any one of these roles,' but I found the Spock character to be very interesting, and I asked them to tell me what she [Spock] was like.
"It was intended that Sulu's role be expanded in the second season, but owing to Takei's part in John Wayne's The Green Berets, he appeared in only half the season, his role being filled by Walter Koenig as the relatively young, mop-topped Russian navigator Ensign Pavel Chekov.
When Takei returned, the two had to share a dressing room.
The two appeared together at the Enterprise helm for the remainder of the series.
There may be some truth to the unofficial story that the Soviet Union's newspaper Pravda complained that among the culturally diverse characters there were no Russians, seen as a personal slight to that country since the Soviet Russian Yuri Gagarin had been the first man to make a spaceflight.
Gene Roddenberry said in response that "The Chekov thing was a major error on our part, and I'm still embarrassed by the fact we didn't include a Russian right from the beginning."
However, documentation from Desilu suggests that the intention was to introduce a character into Star Trek with more sex appeal to teenaged girls.
Walter Koenig noted in the 2006 40th anniversary special of Star Trek:
The Original Series that he doubted the rumor about Pravda, since Star Trek had never been shown on Soviet television.
It has also been claimed that the former member of The Monkees, Davy Jones, was the model for Mr. Chekov.
In addition, the series frequently included characters (usually security personnel wearing red uniforms) who are killed or injured soon after their introduction.
So prevalent was this plot device that it inspired the term "redshirt" to denote a stock character whose sole purpose is to die violently in order to show the danger facing the main characters.

===
Characterizations ===
Star Trek made celebrities of its cast of largely unknown actors.
Kelley had appeared in many films and television shows, but mostly in smaller roles that showcased him as a villain.
Nimoy also had previous television and film experience but was not well known either.
Nimoy had partnered previously with Shatner in a 1964 episode of The Man from U.N.C.L.E., "The Project Strigas Affair," and with Kelley (as a doctor) in a 1963 episode of The Virginian, "Man of Violence," both more than two years before Star Trek first aired.
Before Star Trek, Shatner was well known in the trade, having appeared in several notable films, played Cyrano de Bergerac on Broadway, and even turned down the part of Dr. Kildare.
However, when roles became sparse he took the regular job after Jeffrey Hunter's contract was not renewed.

After the original series ended, cast members found themselves typecast because of their defining roles in the show.
(
Star Trek:
The Next Generation actor Michael Dorn stated in 1991, however: "If what happened to the first cast is called being typecast, then I want to be typecast.
Of course, they didn't get the jobs after Trek.
But they are making their sixth movie.
Name me someone else in television who has made six movies!")The three main characters were Kirk, Spock, and McCoy, with writers often playing the different personalities off each other:
Kirk was passionate and often aggressive, but with a sly sense of humor; Spock was coolly logical; and McCoy was sardonic, emotional, and illogical, but always compassionate.
In many stories the three clashed, with Kirk forced to make a tough decision while Spock advocated the logical but sometimes callous path and McCoy (or "Bones", as Kirk nicknamed him) insisted on doing whatever would cause the least harm.
McCoy and Spock had a sparring relationship that masked their true affection and respect for each other, and their constant arguments became popular with viewers.
The show so emphasized dialogue that writer and director Nicholas Meyer (involved with the Star Trek films) called it a radio drama, playing an episode for a film class without video to prove that the plot was still comprehensible.
The Spock character was at first rejected by network executives, who were apprehensive that his vaguely "Satanic" appearance (with pointed ears and eyebrows) might prove upsetting to some viewers, and (according to Leonard Nimoy)
they repeatedly urged Roddenberry to "drop the Martian."
Roddenberry was also dismayed to discover that NBC's publicity department deliberately airbrushed out Spock's pointed ears and eyebrows from early publicity stills sent to network affiliates, because they feared that his "demonic" appearance might offend potential buyers in the religiously conservative southern states.
Spock, however, went on to become one of the most popular characters on the show, as did McCoy's impassioned country-doctor personality.
Spock, in fact, became a sex symbol of sorts—something no one connected with the show had expected.
Leonard Nimoy noted that the question of Spock's extraordinary sex appeal emerged "almost any time I talked to someone in the press ...
I never give it a thought ...
to try to deal with the question of Mr. Spock as a sex symbol is silly."

===
Characters' cameo appearances in later series ===
The sequel to the original series, Star Trek: The Next Generation, which premiered in 1987, was set about 100 years after the events of TOS.
As that show and its spin-offs progressed, several TOS actors made appearances reprising their original characters:
James Kirk disappears in 2293 during the maiden voyage of the Enterprise-B as seen in the film Star Trek: Generations.
However, now chronologically 138 years old, but still only physically 60 years old Kirk is recovered after spending 78 years in The Nexus, an alternative plane of existence, by Enterprise-D Captain Jean-Luc Picard in the same film.
Kirk's time in the 24th century is short however; he is killed while helping to defeat Dr. Tolian Soran.

Spock, now a Vulcan ambassador, goes underground in the Romulan Empire in hopes of fostering peaceful coexistence with the Federation and reunification with Vulcan society ("Unification, Parts I and II").
He also appears in the 2009 reboot film where his science vessel originated from the 24th century–era of TNG.
He ends up stranded in the 23rd century of the film series, where he settles on new Vulcan; in the sequel film Star Trek Into Darkness, he is contacted by his younger self regarding the villainous Khan Noonien Singh.
While not appearing in Star Trek Beyond, it is mentioned in the film that the character has died, as an homage to the real-life passing of actor Leonard Nimoy.

Leonard "Bones" McCoy, now a crusty 137-year-old admiral and head of Starfleet's Medical Division, inspects the Enterprise-D before her first mission in "Encounter at Farpoint," briefly meeting the android officer Lt.
Cdr.
Data, telling him, "Well, this is a new ship.
But she's got the right name.
Now, you remember that, you hear? ...
You treat her like a lady, and she'll always bring you home."

Montgomery Scott, now chronologically 147 years old, but still only physically 72 years old after spending 75 years trapped in a transporter buffer, is rescued by the Enterprise-D crew and resumes his life in "Relics."
Working along with Chief Engineer Geordi La Forge, Scotty uses some creative engineering to save the Enterprise.
A grateful Captain Picard lends him a shuttlecraft indefinitely.

Sarek, Spock's father, continues to be an ambassador for the next century until his final mission during which he and Captain Picard mind-meld together because Sarek shows signs of Bendii Syndrome ("Sarek").
He later dies suffering from this affliction, but not before giving Captain Picard key information for locating his missing son ("Unification").

Kang, Koloth, and Kor, the three Klingons featured in "Day of the Dove" (Kang), "The Trouble with Tribbles" (Koloth) and "Errand of Mercy" (Kor), continue to serve the Empire well into the 24th century.
They appear in the Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine episode "Blood Oath" in which Kang and Koloth are killed.
Kor later appears in two more episodes: "The Sword of Kahless" and finally in "
Once More Unto the Breach" where, fighting in the Dominion War, he dies honorably in battle.
A younger version of Kang, from the era of Star Trek VI:
The Undiscovered Country, later appears in the Star Trek: Voyager episode "Flashback".

Hikaru Sulu, promoted to captain of the USS Excelsior in Star Trek VI:
The Undiscovered Country, reprises his role from that performance in the Star Trek: Voyager episode "Flashback".
Janice Rand also appears in that same episode.

Arne Darvin, the Klingon disguised as a human in "The Trouble with Tribbles", appears in the Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine episode "Trials and Tribble-ations" with the intent to return to Deep Space Station K7 in 2267 and assassinate Kirk, whom Darvin blamed for his disgrace in the Klingon Empire.
Besides the above examples, numerous non-canon novels and comic books have been published over the years in which The Original Series era crew are depicted in The Next Generation era, either through time-travel or other means.
In addition, many actors who appeared on The Original Series later made guest appearances as different characters in later series, most notably Majel Barrett, who not only provided the voice for most Starfleet computers in episodes of every spin-off series (including a single appearance on Star Trek: Enterprise, where the computers normally did not speak at all), but also had the recurring role of Lwaxana Troi in The Next Generation and Deep Space Nine.
Diana Muldaur, a guest star in the episodes "Return to Tomorrow" and "Is There in Truth No Beauty?"
of the original Star Trek series, played series regular Dr. Katherine Pulaski in the second season of Star Trek: The Next Generation.
===
Notable guest appearances ===
Guest roles on the series have featured actors such as:

Gary Lockwood and Sally Kellerman in "Where No Man Has Gone Before";
Diana Muldaur in "Return to Tomorrow" and "Is There in Truth No Beauty?"
(
Muldaur also appeared throughout the second season of Star Trek:
The Next Generation as the Enterprise-D's chief medical officer, Dr. Pulaski);
Ricardo Montalbán as Khan Noonien Singh in "Space Seed".
He then reprised the role in the film Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan;
Madlyn Rhue as Lieutenant Marla McGivers in "Space Seed".
An early draft of the script for Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan included her role, but she was wheelchair-bound due to multiple sclerosis (from which she eventually died) and unable to play the role, and director Nicolas Meyer didn't wish to re-cast;
Michael Ansara as Klingon commander Kang
in "Day of the Dove", reprising the role in the Deep Space Nine episode "Blood Oath" and the Voyager episode "Flashback";
William Marshall in "The Ultimate Computer";
Julie Newmar in "Friday's Child";
Kim Darby and Michael J. Pollard in "Miri";
Robert Lansing and Teri Garr in "Assignment: Earth";
William Windom in "The Doomsday Machine";
John Colicos as the Klingon Commander Kor in "Errand of Mercy," reprising the role in three episodes of Deep Space Nine;
Robert Walker Jr. in "Charlie X";
Lee Meriwether in "That Which Survives";
Roger C. Carmel and Karen Steele in "Mudd's Women" and "I, Mudd";
France Nuyen in "Elaan of Troyius," possibly the first Vietnamese actress to appear on American television;
Mark Lenard, the only actor to play members of three major non-human races, as the Romulan commander in "Balance of Terror," the Klingon Commander in Star Trek:
The Motion Picture, and most notably as Spock's father Sarek in "Journey to Babel," reprising this role in the films Star Trek III:
The Search for Spock, Star Trek IV:
The Voyage Home, and Star Trek VI:
The Undiscovered Country, as well as in the TNG episodes "Sarek" and "Unification, Part 1";
Jane Wyatt as Spock's mother Amanda Grayson in "Journey to Babel," reprising the role in the film Star Trek IV:
The Voyage Home;
Glenn Corbett and Elinor Donahue in "Metamorphosis";
Elisha Cook Jr. and Joan Marshall in "Court Martial";
Nancy Kovack in "A Private Little War";
Vic Tayback in "A Piece of the Action";
Jeff Corey and Fred Williamson in "The Cloud Minders";
Barbara Bouchet and Warren Stevens in "By Any Other Name";
Michael Forest and Leslie Parrish in "Who Mourns for Adonais?";

Charles Napier in "The Way to Eden";
Frank Gorshin and Lou Antonio
in "Let That Be Your Last Battlefield";
Ted Cassidy and Sherry Jackson in "What Are Little Girls Made Of?";
Cassidy also appeared as the barbarian warrior in the original pilot The Cage, voiced the Balok mannequin in The Corbomite Maneuver, and voiced the Gorn in Arena;
Mariette Hartley in "All Our Yesterdays";
Joan Collins in "The City on the Edge of Forever";
Celia Lovsky and Arlene Martel in "Amok Time";
David Soul in "The Apple";
James Gregory in "Dagger of the Mind";
Barbara Anderson in "The Conscience of the King";
James Daly in "Requiem for Methuselah";
Jill Ireland in "This Side of Paradise";
Melvin Belli and Pamelyn Ferdin in "
And the Children Shall Lead";
Keye Luke, Yvonne Craig and Steve Ihnat in "
Whom Gods Destroy";
Michael Dunn and Barbara Babcock in "Plato's Stepchildren";
Clint Howard in "The Corbomite Maneuver";
Barbara Luna in "Mirror, Mirror";
David Opatoshu in "A Taste of Armageddon";
Barbara Babcock in "A Taste of Armageddon" and "Plato's Stepchildren".
Her voice was also heard in "The Squire of Gothos", "Assignment: Earth", "The Tholian Web" and "The Lights of Zetar".

Morgan Woodward in "Dagger of the Mind" and "The Omega Glory";
Arnold Moss as mysterious actor Anton Karidian, who proves to have originally been the tyrannical Governor Kodos of Tarsus IV in "The Conscience of the King";
Marianna Hill in "Dagger of the Mind";
Joanne Linville in "The Enterprise Incident";
Louise Sorel in "Requiem for Methuselah";
John Fiedler in "Wolf in the Fold;"
Vic Perrin in "Mirror, Mirror.
"
His voice was also heard in "The Menagerie", "Arena" and "The Changeling".

Susan Oliver, Jeffrey Hunter and Malachi Throne in "The Menagerie".
Malachi Throne also voiced the main Talosian Keeper, with the voice modified so as not to be heard to be the same as the other character he played, Commodore Mendez.

Antoinette Bower in "Catspaw".

Angelique Pettyjohn in "Gamesters of Triskelion".
==
Season and episodes ==


===
Seasons ===


=== Broadcast history ===


===
Episode analysis ===
In its writing, Star Trek is notable as one of the earliest science-fiction TV series to use the services of leading contemporary science fiction writers, such as Robert Bloch, Norman Spinrad, Harlan Ellison, and Theodore Sturgeon, as well as established television writers.

Roddenberry often used the setting of a space vessel set many years in the future to comment on social issues of 1960s America, including sexism, racism, nationalism, and global war.
In November 1968, just a few months after the first televised interracial touch, the episode "Plato's Stepchildren" went incorrectly down in history as the first American television show to feature a scripted interracial kiss between characters (Capt.
Kirk and Lt.
Uhura), although the kiss was only mimed (obscured by the back of a character's head) and depicted as involuntary.
Though there is some dispute to this being the first interracial kiss of the series because the 1967 episode, "Space Seed" – introducing reoccurring villain Khan (Ricardo Montalbán) – has him seducing and kissing Lt.
Marla McGivers (Madlyn Rhue)
as part of his malicious machinations.
"
Let That Be Your Last Battlefield" presented a direct allegory about the irrationality and futility of racism.
Anti-war themes appear in episodes such as "The Doomsday Machine", depicting a planet-destroying weapon as an analogy to nuclear weapons deployed under the principle of mutually assured destruction, and "A Taste of Armageddon" about a society which has "civilized" war to the point that they no longer see it as something to avoid.

Episodes such as "The Apple", "Who Mourns for Adonais?", "
The Mark of Gideon" and "The Return of the Archons" display subtle anti-religious (owing mainly to Roddenberry's own secular humanism) and anti-establishment themes.
"
Bread and Circuses" and "The Omega Glory" have themes that are more pro-Christian or patriotic.
The show experienced network and/or sponsor interference, up to and including wholesale censorship of scripts and film footage.
This was a regular occurrence in the 1960s and Star Trek suffered from its fair share of tampering.
Scripts were routinely vetted and censored by the staff of NBC's Broadcast Standards Department, which copiously annotated every script with demands for cuts or changes (e.g. "Page 4: Please delete McCoy's expletive, 'Good Lord'" or "Page 43: Caution on the embrace; avoid open-mouthed kiss").The series was noted for its sense of humor, such as Spock and McCoy's pointed, yet friendly, bickering.
Certain episodes, such as "The Trouble with Tribbles", "I, Mudd" and "A Piece of the Action", were written and staged as comedies with dramatic elements.
Most episodes were presented as action/adventure dramas, frequently including space battles or fist fights between the ship's crew and guest antagonists.

Several episodes used the concept of planets developing parallel to Earth, allowing reuse of stock props, costumes and sets. "
Bread and Circuses", "Miri" and "The Omega Glory" depict such worlds; "A Piece of the Action", "Patterns of Force" and "Plato's Stepchildren" are based on alien planets that have adopted period Earth cultures
(Prohibition-era Chicago, Nazi Germany and ancient Greece, respectively).
Two episodes depicting time travel ("Tomorrow Is Yesterday" and "Assignment: Earth") conveniently place Enterprise in orbit above 1960s Earth; a third ("The City on the Edge of Forever") places members of the crew on 1930s Earth.

===
Top ranked episodes ===
Several publications have ranked the ten best episodes of Star Trek:

Of the sixteen episodes listed above, ten – "Where No Man Has Gone Before", "The Enemy Within", "The Naked Time", "Balance of Terror", "The Galileo Seven", "Arena", "Space Seed", "
This Side of Paradise", "The Devil in the Dark", and "The City on the Edge of Forever" – are from the first season and five – "Amok Time", "The Doomsday Machine", "Mirror, Mirror", "
The Trouble with Tribbles", and "Journey to Babel" – are from the second season.
Only one – "The Enterprise Incident" – derives from the third season.

===
Episodes ===


===
Leonard Nimoy:
Star Trek Memories ===
In 1983, Leonard Nimoy hosted a one-hour special as a promotional tie-in with the film Star Trek III:
The Search for Spock, in which he recounted his memories of working on the original series and explained the origins of things such as the Vulcan nerve pinch and the Vulcan salute, as well as a re-airing of the TOS episode "Space Seed".
==
Music ==


===
Theme tune ===
The show's theme tune, immediately recognizable by many, was written by Alexander Courage, and has been featured in several Star Trek spin-off episodes and motion pictures.
Gene Roddenberry subsequently wrote a set of accompanying lyrics, even though the lyrics were never used in the series, nor did Roddenberry ever intend them to be; this allowed him to claim co-composer credit and hence 50% of the theme's performance royalties.
Courage considered Roddenberry's actions, while entirely legal, to be unethical.
Series producer Robert Justman noted in the book Inside Star Trek The Real Story, that work on the film
Doctor Dolittle kept Courage from working on more than two episodes of the first season.
However, Justman also believed that Courage lost enthusiasm for the series because of the "royalty" issue.
Courage did not score any episodes of the second season; however, he did conduct a recording session for about 30 minutes of "library cues" for the second season, on June 16, 1967.
Courage returned to score two episodes of the third season.

Later episodes used stock recordings from Courage's earlier work.
Jazz trumpeter Maynard Ferguson recorded a jazz fusion version of the tune with his band during the late 1970s, and Nichelle Nichols performed the song live complete with lyrics.

The lyrics for the song are:

Beyond the rim of the starlight
My love is wandering in star flight
I know he'll find
In star clustered reaches
Love,
strange love
A starwoman teaches
I know his journey ends never
His Star Trek will go on forever
But tell him while
He wanders his starry sea
Remember
Remember me


===
Dramatic underscore ===
For budgetary reasons, this series made significant use of "tracked" music, or music written for other episodes that was reused in later episodes.
Of the 79 episodes that were broadcast, only 31 had complete or partial original dramatic underscores created specifically for them.
The remainder of the music in any episode was tracked from other episodes and from cues recorded for the music library.
Which episodes would have new music was mostly the decision of Robert H. Justman, the Associate Producer during the first two seasons.

Screen credits for the composers were given based on the amount of music composed for, or composed and reused in, the episode.
Some of these final music credits were occasionally incorrect.

Beyond the short works of "source" music (music whose source is seen or acknowledged onscreen) created for specific episodes, eight composers were contracted to create original dramatic underscore during the series run: Alexander Courage, George Duning, Jerry Fielding, Gerald Fried, Sol Kaplan, Samuel Matlovsky, Joseph Mullendore, and Fred Steiner.
The composers conducted their own music.
Of these composers, Steiner composed the original music for thirteen episodes and it is his instrumental arrangement of Alexander Courage's main theme that is heard over many of the end title credits of the series.

The tracked musical underscores were chosen and edited to the episode by the music editors, principal of whom were Robert Raff (most of Season One), Jim Henrikson (Season One and Two), and Richard Lapham (Season Three).Some of the original recordings of the music were released in the United States commercially on the GNP Crescendo Record Co. label.
Music for a number of the episodes was re-recorded by Fred Steiner and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra for the Varèse Sarabande label; and by Tony Bremner with the Royal Philharmonic for the Label X label.
Finally in December 2012, the complete original recordings were released by La-La Land Records as a 15-CD box set, with liner notes by Jeff Bond.
===
Episodes with original music ===
Listed in production order.
Episodes that were only partially scored are in italics.
Season 1:
"The Cage" (Alexander Courage)
"Where No Man Has Gone Before" (Alexander Courage)
"The Corbomite Maneuver" (Fred Steiner)
"Mudd's Women" (Fred Steiner)
"
The Enemy Within" (Sol Kaplan)
"The Man Trap" (Alexander Courage)
"The Naked Time" (Alexander Courage)
"Charlie X" (Fred Steiner)
"
Balance of Terror" (Fred Steiner)
"What Are Little Girls Made Of?"
(
Fred Steiner)
"The Conscience of the King" (Joseph Mullendore)
"Shore Leave" (Gerald Fried)
"
The City on the Edge of Forever" (Fred Steiner)Season 2:
"Catspaw" (Gerald Fried)
"Metamorphosis" (George Duning)
"Friday's Child" (Gerald Fried)
"
Who Mourns for Adonais?"
(
Fred Steiner)
"Amok Time" (Gerald Fried)
"The Doomsday Machine" (Sol Kaplan)
"
Mirror, Mirror" (Fred Steiner)
"I, Mudd" (Samuel Matlovsky)
"The Trouble with Tribbles" (Jerry Fielding)
"
By Any Other Name" (Fred Steiner)
"Patterns of Force" (George Duning)
"
The Omega Glory" (Fred Steiner)
"Return to Tomorrow"
(George Duning)Season 3:
"Spectre of the Gun" (Jerry Fielding)
"
Elaan of Troyius" (Fred Steiner)
"The Paradise Syndrome" (Gerald Fried)
"
The Enterprise Incident" (Alexander Courage)
"
And the Children Shall Lead" (George Duning)
"Spock's Brain" (Fred Steiner)
"Is There in Truth No Beauty?"
(
George Duning)
"The Empath" (George Duning)
"Plato's Stepchildren" (Alexander Courage)Note:
Although "The Way to Eden" had no original score, the episode had special musical material by Arthur Heinemann (the episode's writer), guest star Charles Napier and Craig Robertson.
"
Requiem for Methuselah" contains a Johannes Brahms interpretation by Ivan Ditmars.

==
Awards ==
Although this series never won any Emmys, Star Trek was nominated for the following Emmy Awards:

Outstanding Dramatic Series (Gene Roddenberry and Gene L. Coon), 1967
Outstanding Dramatic Series (Gene Roddenberry), 1968
Outstanding Supporting Actor (Leonard Nimoy as Mr. Spock), 1967, 1968, 1969
Individual Achievement in Art Direction and Allied Crafts (Jim Rugg), 1967
Individual Achievement in Cinematography
(Darrell Anderson, Linwood G. Dunn, and Joseph Westheimer), 1967
Individual Achievement in Film and Sound Editing (Douglas Grindstaff), 1967
Outstanding Achievement in Film Editing (Donald R. Rode), 1968
Special Classification of Individual Achievement for Photographic Effects (The Westheimer Company), 1968
Outstanding Achievement in Art Direction and Scenic Design (John Dwyer and Walter M. Jefferies), 1969
Outstanding Achievement in Film Editing (Donald R. Rode), 1969
Special Classification Achievements for Photographic Effects
(The Howard A. Anderson Company, The Westheimer Company, Van der Veer Photo Effects, Cinema Research), 1969.Eight of its episodes were nominated for one of science-fiction's top awards, the Hugo Award, in the category "Best Dramatic Presentation".
In 1967, the nominated episodes were "The Naked Time", "The Corbomite Maneuver", and "The Menagerie".
In 1968, all nominees were Star Trek episodes: "Amok Time", "Mirror, Mirror", "The Doomsday Machine", "The Trouble with Tribbles", and "The City on the Edge of Forever".
Star Trek won both years for the episodes "The Menagerie" and "The City on the Edge of Forever", respectively.
In 1968, Star Trek (the T.V. show) won a special Hugo Award for Dramatic Presentation.
No episode was named.
This was the show's 3rd Hugo Award.

In 1967, Star Trek was also one of the first television programs to receive an NAACP Image Award.

In 1968, Star Trek's most critically acclaimed episode, "The City on the Edge of Forever," written by Harlan Ellison, won the prestigious Writers Guild of America Award for Best Original Teleplay, although this was for Ellison's original draft script, and not for the screenplay of the episode as it aired.

In 1997, "The City on the Edge of Forever" was ranked #92 on TV Guide's 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time.
In 2004 and 2007, TV Guide ranked Star Trek as the greatest cult show ever.
In 2013, TV Guide ranked Star Trek as the greatest sci-fi show (along with Star Trek: The Next Generation) and the #12 greatest show of all time.

==
Distribution ==


===
Home media ===
Episodes of the Original Series were among the first television series to be released on the VHS and laserdisc formats in North America.
The first episode on VHS for sale to the public was Space Seed released in June 1982 (to celebrate the release of the second Star Trek film, The Wrath of Khan) at a price of $29.95, as prior to this titles were rental only.
In 1985, the first 10 episodes went on sale on video at a price of $14.95 with further batches of 10 during 1985 and 1986, making it the first long-running TV series to be released on home video in its entirety, with all episodes eventually being released on both formats.
By 1986, sales had reached 1 million units.
With the advent of DVD in the mid-1990s, single DVDs featuring two episodes each in production order were released.
In the early 2000s, Paramount Home Video reissued the series to DVD in a series of three deluxe season boxes with added featurettes and documentaries.
In February 2009 CBS and Paramount announced that they would release the Original Series on Blu-ray.
Season one, two, and three were released on April 28, September 22, and December 15, respectively.
The Blu-ray releases let the user choose between "Enhanced Effects" or "Original Effects" via a technique called multi-angle.
All 79 episodes of the series have been digitally remastered by CBS Home Entertainment (distributed by Paramount) and have since been released on DVD.

CBS Home Entertainment released season one of The Original Series on Blu-ray on April 28, 2009.
The Blu-ray release contains both Original and Remastered episodes by seamless branching.

===
Online distribution ===
CBS Interactive is presenting all 3 seasons of the series via the tv.com iPhone app.
The full-length episodes, without the new CGI but digitally processed to remove the original celluloid artifacts, are available to users in the US at no charge but with embedded ads.
Short clips from the shows are also viewable at their web site.

The company has recently presented all 3 seasons of the series via its Paramount+ premium streaming service.
It has all full-length episodes, without the new CGI, like the tv.com app, and is available to users in the US with subscription without ad interruptions.

In January 2007, the first season of Star Trek: The Original Series became available for download from Apple's iTunes Store.
Although consumer reviews indicate that some of the episodes on iTunes are the newly "remastered" editions, iTunes editors had not indicated such, and if so, which are which.
All first-season episodes that had been remastered and aired were available from iTunes, except "Where No Man Has Gone Before", which remains in its original form.
On March 20, 2007, the first season was again added to the iTunes Store, with separate downloads for the original and remastered versions of the show, though according to the customer reviews, the original version contains minor revisions such as special effect enhancements.
Netflix began online streaming of five of the six Star Trek television series on July 1, 2011; Deep Space Nine followed on October 1, 2011.

== Films ==
The Original Series films
Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry first suggested the idea of a Star Trek feature in 1969.
When the original television series was canceled, he lobbied to continue the franchise through a film.
The success of the series in syndication convinced the studio to begin work on a feature film in 1975.
A series of writers attempted to craft a suitably epic screenplay, but the attempts did not satisfy Paramount, so the studio scrapped the project in 1977.
Paramount instead planned on returning the franchise to its roots with a new television series (Phase II).
The massive worldwide box office success of Star Wars in mid-1977 sent Hollywood studios to their vaults in search of similar sci-fi properties that could be adapted or re-launched to the big screen.
Following the huge opening of Columbia's Close Encounters of the Third Kind in late December 1977, production of Phase II was cancelled in favor of making a Star Trek film.
Beginning with Star Trek:
The Motion Picture in 1979, it was proceeded by five sequels, Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan (1982), Star Trek III:
The Search for Spock (1984), Star Trek IV:
The Voyage Home (1986), Star Trek V:
The Final Frontier (1989) and Star Trek VI:
The Undiscovered Country (1991).
Leonard Nimoy directed Star Treks III and IV, while William Shatner directed Star Trek V.
Reboot films (The Kelvin Timeline)

After the poor reception of the final Next Generation film Nemesis and the cancellation of the television series Enterprise, the franchise's executive producer Rick Berman and screenwriter Erik Jendresen began developing a new film, titled Star Trek: The Beginning, which would take place after Enterprise but before The Original Series.
In February 2007, J. J. Abrams accepted Paramount's offer to direct the new film, having been previously attached as producer.
Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman wrote a screenplay that impressed Abrams, featuring new actors portraying younger versions of the original series' cast.
The Enterprise, its interior, and the original uniforms were redesigned.

This revival of the franchise is often considered to be a reboot, but is also a continuation of the franchise, with Nimoy reprising his role of the elderly Spock.
This route was taken to free the new films from the restrictions of established continuity without completely discarding it, which the writers felt would have been "disrespectful".
This new reality was informally referred to by several names, including the "Abramsverse", "JJ Trek" and "NuTrek", before it was named the "Kelvin Timeline" (versus the "Prime Timeline" of the original series and films) by Michael and Denise Okuda for use in official Star Trek reference guides and encyclopedias.
The name Kelvin comes from the USS Kelvin, a starship involved in the event that creates the new reality in Star Trek (2009).
Abrams named the starship after his grandfather Henry Kelvin, whom he also pays tribute to in Into Darkness with the Kelvin Memorial Archive.
The three films in the Kelvin Timeline include Star Trek (2009), Star Trek Into Darkness (2013) and Star Trek: Beyond (2016).
The last was dedicated to Nimoy, who died in 2015 and Anton Yelchin, who died in a car crash in the Summer it was released.

==
Merchandising ==
Star Trek:
The Original Series has inspired many commercial products, including toys, comic books, and many other materials.
The comics are generally considered non-canon.

===
Action figures ===
In the early 1970s the Mego Corporation acquired the license to produce Star Trek action figures, which the company successfully marketed from 1974 to 1976.
During this period, the company produced a line of 8" figures featuring Captain Kirk, Mr. Spock, Leonard McCoy, Mr. Scott, Lt.
Uhura, "Aliens" (a Klingon, a Neptunian, the Keeper, a Gorn, a Cheron, a Romulan, a Talosian, an Andorian, and a Mugato), and numerous playsets.
(
Mego also produced a "life-size" toy tricorder.)

In the mid-2000s, Paul "Dr. Mego" Clarke and Joe Sena founded EMCE Toys (pronounced "MC") to bring Mego toys back to the marketplace.
(
Mego went out of business in 1983.)
Working with Diamond Select Toys, current holders of the Star Trek license, these figures have been selling in comics shops.
New characters are currently being produced that Mego did not originally make, such as Lt.
Sulu, Ensign Chekov, and "Space Seed" villain Khan Noonien Singh.
The Gorn that Mego produced had a brown Lizard head (identical to the Marvel Comics villain) on a brown body wearing a Klingon outfit.
Star Trek fans had frequently wished that Mego had made a "TV-accurate" Gorn; EMCE Toys and DST produced a new green Gorn based on the TV episode "Arena".
EMCE Toys hired original Mego packaging artist Harold Schull to illustrate new artwork for Sulu, Chekov, Khan, and the Gorn.
EMCE Toys is continuing the Mego revival with the production of more Star Trek figures, including Captain Pike and the Salt Vampire.

===
Comic books ===
The first Star Trek comics were published by Gold Key Comics between 1967 and 1978.
These comics were highly stylized and diverged wildly from the TV series continuity.
Most storylines used in the Gold Key series featured original characters and concepts, although later issues did include sequels to the original series episodes "The City on the Edge of Forever", "Metamorphosis" and "I, Mudd".
Writers included George Kashdan, Arnold Drake and Len Wein.
Originally they were illustrated by Alberto Giolitti, an Italian artist who had never seen the series and only had publicity photos to use as references.
Since Giolitti didn't have a publicity photo of James Doohan, early issues of the series had Mr. Scott drawn differently.
The original issues, most of which featured photographic covers showing images from the series, are highly collectable.
They are fondly remembered by fans, and a series of reprints ("The Key Collection") of these original titles began to appear in 2004, published by Checker.
The Gold Key series had a run of 61 issues.
Gold Key lost the Star Trek license to Marvel Comics in 1979 (although Marvel's license from Paramount prohibited them from utilizing concepts introduced in the original series).From 1969 to 1973, a series of weekly Star Trek comic strips ran in the British comics magazine eventually known as TV Century 21.
A total of 258 issues were produced, as well as various annuals and specials.
All were original stories.
Two more annuals, under the Mighty TV Comic banner, also produced original Star Trek materials.
In addition, the weekly TV Comic reprinted serialized versions of the U.S. Gold Key comics.
In 1977–1978, before home video was widely available, Mandala Productions and Bantam Books published FotoNovels of TOS that included direct adaptations of actual color television episode frames (with word balloons) in comics format.

From February 1984 through February 1996, DC Comics held the license to publish comic books based upon the Star Trek franchise, including Star Trek: The Original Series.
The main DC Comics Star Trek title was published in two series, comprising 136 issues, 9 annuals, and a number of special issues, plus several mini-series that linked TOS and the subsequent series Star Trek: The Next Generation (TNG).

Marvel Comics again obtained the Star Trek license in 1996.
Marvel (under the "Marvel/Paramount comics" imprint) published various one-shots and the quarterly Star Trek Unlimited series, which covered TOS as well as TNG.
They also introduced the new series Star Trek: Early Voyages, which dealt with Christopher Pike's adventures as captain of the Enterprise (as depicted in the rejected TOS pilot "The Cage").
Fan acceptance of these comics got off to a shaky start when Marvel's inaugural publication of its new Star Trek line turned out to be a crossover between TOS and Marvel's popular superhero team, the X-Men.
However, the series turned out to be relatively popular, registering strong sales.

Beginning in 2006, Tokyopop published two projects based upon the original series.
The new comic anthologies, produced by Joshua Ortega, were released annually in September 2006 (Shinsei Shinsei) and 2007
(Kakan ni Shinkou).
Five artists and writer teams presented five new stories, per volume, based on the original series.

==
Cultural influence ==
Roddenberry was "committed to a liberalism that believed in prosperity, technological progress, and universal humanity" and at odds with the New Left, which "saw the evils of society as the consequence not merely of capitalism but of technology and reason itself."

===
Parodies ===
The Original Series has been parodied many times in other television series.
Saturday Night Live produced two famous sketches parodying The Original Series, "The Last Voyage of the Starship Enterprise" in 1976 and William Shatner's own "Get a life" sketch in 1986 (which parodied the show's "trekkie" followers).
"
The Last Voyage of the Starship Enterprise" is a twelve-minute sketch, written by Michael O'Donoghue.
It was described by TrekMovie.com as "one of the best Star Trek parody sketches of all time".
TVSquad ranked Shatner's "Get a life" sketch alongside "The Last Voyage ..." as one of the most famous parodies of the show.
The Canadian comedy duo Wayne and Shuster parodied Star Trek as Star Schtick in the late 1970s.
An entire Finnish parody series Star Wreck was produced starting in 1992, culminating with Star Wreck:
In the Pirkinning in 2005, all available as legal downloads on the web.
The series has also been parodied on The Simpsons, Family Guy and notably in the Futurama episode "Where No Fan Has Gone Before", which was described by Wired magazine as a "touchstone" for fans.
The 1999 film Galaxy Quest portrays the lives of a once-popular television space-drama crew who are kidnapped by real aliens who have mistaken the fictional series for reality.
The main characters are parodies of Star Trek characters, and many of the plot elements refer to or parody popular 1960s TV-series customs.
On Adult Swim's FishCenter Live, a parody of the USS Enterprise was featured called
the "USS FishCenterprise NCC-1065."The series was also parodied in print as "Star Blecch" in the December, 1967 issue of Mad Magazine (Issue #115)John Scalzi's novel Redshirts, winner of the 2013 Hugo Award for Best Novel, uses the theme of red-shirted Star Fleet officers as cannon fodder.

(T)raumschiff Surprise – Periode 1 (2004) is a movie directed by Michael Herbig which parodies Star Trek and Star Wars.

===
Fan productions ===
Star Trek has inspired many fans to produce stories for free Internet distribution.
Many of these are set in the time of The Original Series, including Star Trek: Phase II which was nominated for a Hugo Award and received support from actors and writers who were involved with The Original Series.

"
Star Trek: Continues" chronicles the last year of the 5-year voyage of The Enterprise.
Gene Roddenberry's son, "Rod" announced after a showing in 2014 that this series would have been considered canon by his father.
Comprising 11 full episodes and numerous additional materials, Star Trek: Continues was produced from 2013 to 2017 and funded by a kickstarter.

===
Series sequels ===
The original Star Trek was followed in 1973 and beyond with more shows filling in its legacy, including the equally successful, yet ever-popular The Next Generation, starring Patrick Stewart as Captain Jean-Luc Picard.
The following series include:
The Animated Series (1973 - 1974)
The Next Generation (1987 - 1994, films)
Deep Space Nine
(1993 - 1999)
Voyager (1995 - 2001)
Enterprise (
2001 - 2005)
Discovery (2017 - present)
Star Trek:
Short Treks (2018 - 2020)
Picard (2020 - present)
Lower Decks (2020 - present)
Prodigy (TBA)
Strange New Worlds (TBA)


==
Reception ==
Rod Serling said of the series that "Star Trek was again a very inconsistent show which at times sparkled with true ingenuity and pure science fiction approaches.
At other times it was more carnival-like, and very much more
the creature of television than the creature of a legitimate literary form.
"Isaac
Asimov and Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry developed a unique relationship during Star Trek's initial run in the late 1960s.
Asimov wrote a critical essay on Star Trek's scientific accuracy for TV Guide magazine.
Roddenberry retorted respectfully with a personal letter explaining the limitations of accuracy when writing a weekly series.
Asimov corrected himself with a follow-up essay to TV Guide claiming despite its inaccuracies, that Star Trek was a fresh and intellectually challenging science fiction television show.
The two remained friends to the point where Asimov even served as an adviser on a number of Star Trek projects.
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, Season 1 received an approval rating of 92% based on 24 reviews, with an average rating of 9/10.
The critical consensus reads, "An optimistic ode to humanity
, Star Trek may look dated, but its gadgetry and solid storytelling solidify its place as one of pop culture's most enduring franchises.
"
Season 2 received an approval rating of 100% based on 6 reviews, with an average rating of 7.33/10.
Season 3 received an approval rating of 50% based on 10 reviews, with an average rating of 5.5/10.
The critical consensus reads, "Budget cuts leave the stars of Star Trek stranded among shoddy set pieces and clunky writing – though even at its worst fans may still enjoy its campy delights.
"In
2016, in a listing that included each Star Trek film and TV series together, this series was ranked first by the L.A. Times, ahead of the 1982 film Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan and Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine, in third place.
In 2017, Vulture ranked the original Star Trek the third best live-action Star Trek television show, while at the same time praising it for "laying down the foundation".
In 2018, IndieWire ranked Star Trek the original series as the 8th best space science fiction show set in outer space, including 18 overall shows from this genre.
In 2018, Io9/Gizmodo ranked the fictional spacecraft design shown in this television series, the Enterprise, as the number one best version of starship Enterprise of the Star Trek franchise.
They felt that the original design was still superior to almost a dozen different later versions.
In 2019, Nerdist ranked the original series number one best out of seven Star Trek franchise television series, including up to the second season of Star Trek: Discovery.
In 2019, Popular Mechanics ranked Star Trek
the 6th best science fiction television show ever.
In 2021, Empire magazine ranked it the 36th greatest television show ever.

==
See also ==
"Beam me up, Scotty"
Outline of Star Trek
Timeline of Star Trek


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Trek:
The Original Series at CBS
Star Trek:
The Original Series at IMDb
Star Trek:
The Original Series at TV.com
Star Trek:
The Original Series collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Star Trek: The Original Series at Memory Alpha
Star Trek:
Discovery is an American television series created by Bryan Fuller and Alex Kurtzman for the streaming service CBS All Access (later rebranded as Paramount+).
Launched in 2017, it is the seventh Star Trek series and was the first since Star Trek:
Enterprise concluded in 2005.
It begins a decade before Star Trek:
The Original Series and follows the crew of the USS Discovery.

Sonequa Martin-Green stars as Michael Burnham, a science specialist on Discovery who eventually becomes captain.
Doug Jones, Shazad Latif, Anthony Rapp, Mary Wiseman, Jason Isaacs, Wilson Cruz, Anson Mount, David Ajala, Rachael Ancheril, Blu del Barrio, and Ian Alexander also star.
The series was announced in November 2015, with Fuller set as showrunner.
He left due to creative differences with CBS and was replaced by Gretchen J. Berg and Aaron Harberts, with producing support from Akiva Goldsman for the first season.
Berg and Harberts were fired by CBS during the second, and Kurtzman took over as showrunner.
He was joined by Michelle Paradise beginning with the third season, which moved the series more than 900 years into the future.

Star Trek:
Discovery is produced by CBS Television Studios in association with Secret Hideout, Roddenberry Entertainment, and Living Dead Guy Productions.
It is filmed at Pinewood Toronto Studios in Toronto, Canada, as well as on location around the world.
Designs from the Star Trek franchise were reinvented for the series to take advantage of modern techniques and visual effects.
The series premiered on September 24, 2017, on CBS and CBS All Access.
The rest of the 15-episode first season was streamed weekly on All Access, ending in February 2018.
The 14-episode second season was released on All Access from January to April 2019, and the 13-episode third season ran from October 2020 to January 2021.
The fourth season is set to premiere on Paramount+
in 2021.

The series' release led to record subscriptions for All Access, and positive reviews from critics who have highlighted Martin-Green's performance.
It has received several accolades, including winning a Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Award.
The series began an expansion of the Star Trek franchise by CBS and Kurtzman, leading to multiple other series being produced.
These include the companion series Star Trek: Short Treks and the spin-off series Star Trek: Strange New Worlds.

==
Premise ==
Beginning roughly ten years before the events of Star Trek:
The Original Series, the show sees the Klingon houses become united in a war with the United Federation of Planets that heavily involves the crew of the USS Discovery (NCC-1031).
In the second season, after the war has ended, Discovery investigates seven mysterious signals and a strange figure known as the "Red Angel".
This conflict ends with the Discovery traveling to the 32nd century, more than 900 years into their future.

==
Episodes ==


== Cast and characters ==
Sonequa Martin-Green as Michael Burnham: A science specialist on the USS Discovery who is promoted to captain at the end of the third season.
Burnham is a human who was raised following Vulcan culture and traditions by Sarek.
A non-captain protagonist was chosen to give the series a different perspective from previous Star Trek series, but the writers always knew that she would become captain eventually.
Co-creator Bryan Fuller gave her a traditionally male name, which he had done with the female leads on three of his previous series.

Doug Jones as Saru:
First officer of the USS Discovery who becomes captain for the third season.
Saru is the first Kelpien to enter Starfleet.
A new species created for Discovery, Kelpiens were hunted as prey on their home planet and thus evolved the ability to sense the coming of danger.
Jones based Saru's walk on that of a supermodel, out of necessity due to the boots he had to wear to portray the character's hooved feet.
The producers compared Saru to the characters Spock and Data from previous series.

Shazad Latif as Voq / Ash Tyler:
Voq, an albino Klingon, undergoes extensive surgery to pose as the human Ash Tyler, who becomes chief of security for Discovery.
Voq was credited as being portrayed by "Javid Iqbal", an invented actor named for Latif's father, to hide the connection between the characters.
Latif described his character as "complex and painful", and noted that he has a relationship with Burnham.
Voq's accent is Arabic-inspired, and Latif tried to maintain "a kind of pharyngealness" to Tyler's American accent.
For the second season, Latif felt that he was playing a third character that melded Voq and Tyler, comparing this relationship to that of Bruce Banner and the Hulk in Marvel Comics.

Anthony Rapp as Paul Stamets: Chief engineer aboard Discovery and a science officer specializing in astromycology (the study of fungi in space) whose research led to the development of Discovery's experimental organic propulsion system.
The character is inspired by a real-life mycologist of the same name.
He is the first openly gay character in a Star Trek series.
Rapp acknowledged that Hikaru Sulu was portrayed as gay in the film Star Trek
Beyond (2016), calling that "a nice nod", but said the series would actually explore Stamets and his partner "in conversation, in our living quarters; you get to see our relationship over time, treated as any other relationship would be treated".

Mary Wiseman as Sylvia Tilly
: An ensign aboard Discovery.
She works under Stamets and is Burnham's roommate.
The character represents people at the bottom of the Starfleet hierarchy.
Season one co-showrunner Aaron Harberts described her as optimistic and "sort of the soul of our show."

Jason Isaacs as Gabriel Lorca: Captain of the Discovery in the first season, a "brilliant military tactician".
Isaacs described the character as "probably more f-ked up than any of" the previously seen Star Trek captains.
He plays the character with a slight southern U.S. accent, and had initially wanted to ad-lib a catchphrase for the character, feeling that all Star Trek captains should have one, coming up with "git'r done" which the writers turned down due to it being widely used and trademarked by Larry the Cable Guy.

Wilson Cruz as Hugh Culber:
Medical officer aboard Discovery and Stamets' husband.
Cruz said portraying the first openly gay couple in Star Trek was "a long time coming" and praised the way the series did not go out of its way to focus on their relationship.
The character is killed in the first season, but returns from the dead in the second season in a larger role.

Anson Mount as Christopher Pike: Captain of the Enterprise who takes temporary command of the Discovery in the second season.
The character was first portrayed by Jeffrey Hunter in "The Cage".
Mount described Pike as "very by-the-book, usually, and a good person", while executive producers Heather Kadin and Alex Kurtzman described him as being the opposite of Lorca with a "very captain-like" presence and "enough confidence and authority to apologize when he is wrong".
Mount did not try to imitate Hunter's performance.

David Ajala as Cleveland "Book" Booker: A courier in the 32nd Century who works with Burnham.

Rachael Ancheril as Nhan: Former Enterprise crewmember who became security chief aboard Discovery.
Nhan left in the third season during the 32nd Century.

Blu del Barrio as Adira Tal:
The first human to bond with a Trill symbiont.
They are also the first non-binary character in a Star Trek series.

Ian Alexander as Gray Tal: Adira's Trill boyfriend and previous host for the Tal symbiont until his death.
He is the first transgender character in a Star Trek series.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===


====
Announcement ====
On November 2, 2015, CBS announced a new Star Trek television series to premiere in January 2017, "on the heels" of the 50th anniversary of Star Trek:
The Original Series in 2016.
This was the first Star Trek series since Star Trek: Enterprise concluded in 2005, and the first show to be developed specifically for the CBS All Access streaming service.
Alex Kurtzman, co-writer of the films Star Trek (2009) and Star Trek Into Darkness (2013), and Heather Kadin were set as executive producers on the series, which would not be related to the 2016 film Star Trek Beyond.
The January 2017 date was the earliest that CBS could release a new Star Trek series after an agreement the company made when it split from Viacom in 2005.
Showtime, Netflix, and Amazon Video all offered "a lot of money" for the rights to release the series, but after heavily investing in the new All Access service, CBS believed that a returning Star Trek could be "the franchise that really puts All Access on the map".
In January, CBS president Glenn Geller said the CBS network were not creatively involved in the series, despite plans for the network to broadcast the pilot episode, saying, "It really is for All Access."

====
Bryan Fuller ====
After beginning his career writing for the series Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine and Star Trek: Voyager, Bryan Fuller was announced as the new series' showrunner and co-creator alongside Kurtzman in February 2016.
Nicholas Meyer, writer and director of Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan (1982) and Star Trek VI:
The Undiscovered Country (1991), also joined the series as a consulting producer.
In March, Rod Roddenberry (the son of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry) and Trevor Roth of Roddenberry Entertainment also joined the series as executive producers.
Fuller said that working with people previously involved with Star Trek was "really about making sure that we maintain authenticity", and said that Meyer—who is widely considered to have made the best Star Trek film in The Wrath of Khan—brings "a clarity and a cleanliness to the storytelling.
"Fuller had publicly called for Star Trek to return to television for years, particularly because of its impact on minority groups, as he explained, "I couldn't stop thinking about how many black people were inspired by seeing Nichelle Nichols on the bridge of a ship.
I couldn't stop thinking about how many Asian people were inspired by seeing George Takei and feeling that gave them hope for their place in the future.
I wanted to be part of that representation for a new era.
"
When Fuller first met with CBS about the series, the company did not have a plan for what the new show would be.
He proposed an anthology series, with each season being a standalone, serialized story set in a different era.
This would begin with a prequel to The Original Series, followed by stories set during The Original Series, during Star Trek: The Next Generation, and then "beyond to a time in Trek that's never been seen before".
Fuller compared this to what American Horror Story did for horror, and described the proposal as a platform for "a universe of Trek shows".
CBS instead suggested he create a single serialized show to see how that performed first, and Fuller began further developing the concept of a prequel to The Original Series.
Fuller announced in June 2016 that the first season would consist of 13 episodes, though he would prefer to produce 10 episodes a season moving forward.
A month later, Fuller announced the series' title to be Star Trek: Discovery, and revealed that it would be set in the "Prime Timeline" (which includes the previous Star Trek series, but not the modern reboot films) to keep the concurrent series and films separate, so
"we don't have to track anything [happening in the films] and they don't have to track what we're doing".
Also in July, CBS Studios International licensed the series to Netflix for release outside the United States and Canada, a "blockbuster" deal that paid for the show's entire budget (around US$6–7 million per episode).
During pre-production on the series, Fuller and CBS had further disagreements on the direction of the show.
The production was starting to overrun its per-episode budget, and was falling behind schedule due to Fuller supervising all aspects of the series while also serving as showrunner on another new show, American Gods.
This caused frustration among CBS executives who felt Fuller should be focused on having Discovery ready for release by the January 2017 premiere date.
By August 2016, Fuller had hired Gretchen J. Berg and Aaron Harberts, whom he had worked with on Pushing Daisies, to serve as co-showrunners with him.
A month later, he and Kurtzman asked CBS to delay the series' release so they could meet the high expectations for it, and the studio pushed the series premiere back to May 2017.
"
At the end of October, CBS asked Fuller to step down as showrunner, and announced a restructuring of the production: Berg and Harberts were made sole showrunners, working from a broad story arc and overall mythology established by Fuller; Kurtzman and Fuller would continue as executive producers, but with Fuller moving his attention fully to American Gods; and Akiva Goldsman would join the series in a supporting producer role, similar to the role he held on Fringe alongside Kurtzman.
CBS reiterated that they were "extremely happy with [Fuller's] creative direction" for the series, though some elements of the series that came directly from Fuller were dropped, including some designs and "more heavily allegorical and complex story" points.
Fuller later confirmed that he was no longer involved with the series, but expressed interest in returning for future seasons if he was asked.

====
Gretchen J. Berg and Aaron Harberts ====
With production set to finally begin on the series in January 2017
, "a lot of careful deliberation [was] continuing to go into making Discovery special, from the choice of directors, to set design, to the special effects."
Ted Sullivan joined the series to serve as supervising writing producer.
At CBS's 2017 upfront presentation, CBS Interactive president Marc DeBevoise confirmed a "fall" release date for the series, and announced that the episode order had been expanded to 15 episodes.
In June, CBS announced a new premiere date of September 24, 2017, with the season airing through November 2017, and then beginning again in January 2018.
This break gave more time to complete post-production on the second half of the season.
Also that month, Kurtzman said that he and Fuller had discussed future seasons before the latter's departure, and promised that "what's there in terms of story and certainly in terms of set-up, character, big ideas, the big movement of the season, that's all stuff that Bryan and I talked about" and would not be altered.
Goldsman said in August that future seasons would have "a hybridized [anthology] approach" with "arcs which will have characters that we know and characters that we don't know."
Kurtzman added that the success of Discovery could lead to other new Star Trek series that could potentially use the anthology format.
By the end of August, Berg and Harberts had developed a "road map" for a second season and "the beginnings of one" for a third.
It was also revealed that an average episode of the first season had ultimately cost US$8–8.5 million each, making it one of the most expensive television series ever created.
This exceeded the original Netflix deal, but CBS still considered the series paid for due to the number of new All Access subscribers that it was expected to draw.
After the series premiere, Kurtzman said the producers wanted to avoid announcing release dates for any future seasons, due to the external pressure that having to delay them caused with the first season.
Despite this, he hoped a second season would be available in early 2019.
The second season was officially ordered in October 2017, consisting of 13 episodes.
Goldsman did not return for the season after clashing with the series writing staff during production on the first, while Meyer was not asked to return for the second season.
In June 2018, when production on the second season was underway, CBS fired Berg and Harberts.
This was due to the first episode of the season going significantly over budget, as well as alleged abusive behavior by the pair directed at the series' writing staff.
Kurtzman was made sole showrunner and was set to "regroup" the writers without causing any delay to the season's production timeline.

====
Alex Kurtzman and Michelle Paradise ====
After Kurtzman took over, the second season was confirmed to be on track for a January 2019 premiere, though there ultimately was enough of a delay in production that CBS extended the season's episode count to 14 as a way to amortize the cost of the delays.
Shortly after the season premiere, in February, the series was renewed for a third season with writer Michelle Paradise promoted to co-showrunner alongside Kurtzman.
In October 2019, Kurtzman said the third season would consist of 13 episodes.
Active development on a fourth season had begun by January 2020, and it was officially announced in October.
Also in October, Kurtzman was asked how long he intended for Discovery to continue, especially with other streaming series being cancelled during the COVID-19 pandemic.
He said "there are years and years left on Discovery", adding that the series' jump into the future with the third season had opened up new variables and storytelling opportunities that were preventing the series from feeling stale.
He also noted the precedent of several previous Star Trek series running for seven seasons each, and later added that the series would remain in its new future setting for the rest of its run.

===
Writing ===
The series' writers room is based at Kurtzman's Secret Hideout offices in Santa Monica, and includes "fans who all have very different relationships to Trek," which Kurtzman said is "a healthy thing".
Fuller wanted to differentiate the series from the previous 700+ episodes of Star Trek by taking advantage of the streaming format of All Access and telling a single story arc across the entire first season.
He and Kurtzman developed this story from the "DNA" of certain The Original Series episodes to find "the spirit of what Star Trek offers, both in terms of high-concept science fiction storytelling and really wonderful metaphors for the human condition".
Berg said that the series' writers "are so in love with" The Original Series, The Next Generation, and the family aspect of those series, while Harberts added that Meyer's Star Trek films were an especial influence on Discovery because "his storytelling is complex and intellectual and yet there's a lot of room for character voices".
The titular ship was named after Discovery One from 2001: A Space Odyssey, NASA's Space Shuttle Discovery, and "the sense of discovery ...
what [that] means to Star Trek audiences who have been promised a future by Gene Roddenberry where we come together as a planet and seek new worlds and new alien races to explore and understand and collaborate with".
Fuller saw the series as a bridge between Enterprise and The Original Series—which are set around 150 years apart—but set much closer to the latter to allow the series to "play with all the iconography of those ships and those uniforms".
In May 2017, Sullivan described the series as "a genuine prequel" to The Original Series, with Goldsman later adding that there were many classic Star Trek elements that fans among the writers wished to include in the series, but couldn't because they were included in The Original Series as something being discovered by Starfleet for the first time then.
The choice to feature a single serialized story throughout the first season was inspired by the general change in television to tell more realistic and serialized stories rather than
the "new destination-based adventure each week" format mostly used in previous Star Trek series.
Fuller had been one of several writers during the 1990s pushing for Deep Space Nine and Voyager to move towards this style.
Also inspired by modern, "peak television" series such as Game of Thrones was a willingness to kill off major characters for dramatic reasons, though the writers wanted to avoid doing so gratuitously or for "shock value".
Fuller said the series could "push the content envelope since it won't be constrained by broadcast standards", but "it's still Star Trek.
It will probably be slightly more graphic content ...
I imagine we're going to shoot scenes a couple of ways and see what feels more authentic in the editing room.
"
Harberts ultimately described the series as a "hard PG-13", saying the series could include "some violent things or [a] tiny bit of language" but they still wanted the show to be for families and to "honor what the franchise is."
On using time travel in the series, a plot device used in at least two episodes of every previous live-action Star Trek season, Fuller said that it had not yet been used for any episode by the end of August 2016, and, "You never know when you want to pull out that device
but I am not anticipating an over-reliance on time travel to tell this season's stories.
"
The series' writers also chose to ignore Gene Roddenberry's longstanding rule that Starfleet crew members not have any significant conflict with one another or be depicted negatively (a rule that Roddenberry himself did not always strictly follow).
Harberts explained, "We're trying to do stories that are complicated, with characters with strong points of view and strong passions.
People have to make mistakes—mistakes are still going to be made in the future.
We're still going to argue in the future ...
the thing we're taking from Roddenberry is how we solve those conflicts."
Because of the show's position as a prequel to The Original Series, the producers felt it was more important for Discovery to build towards Roddenberry's ideals, and to show that "you can't simply be accepting and tolerant without working for it, and so this show is about that struggle."

===
Casting ===
By June 2016, Fuller had met with several actors, and said that "we want to carry on what Star Trek does best, which is being progressive.
So it's fascinating to look at all of these roles through a colorblind prism and a gender-blind prism".
A month later, Kadin clarified that the series would feature minority, female, and LGBTQ characters.
In August, Fuller said the series would feature "about seven" lead characters, and unlike previous Star Trek series would star a lieutenant commander to be played by a non-white actress.
He said the series would also include more alien characters than other Star Trek series, and would feature at least one openly gay character.
Fuller, who is gay himself, had been determined to see this happen since receiving hate mail while working on Voyager when a character on that show was rumored to be coming out as gay.
By August, Fuller had discussed the series' casting with Mae Jemison, the first black woman in space who made a cameo appearance in an episode of The Next Generation.
He anticipated casting announcements in October, but none had been made by the end of that month.
The majority of the series main characters were believed to have been cast by then, but no actress had been cast for the series' lead role.
This was a source of "some internal stress" at CBS.
Several African American and Latina actresses were being looked at for the role, with CBS "not seeking a huge star and [preferring] a fresh face for the part.
"
In October, the cast was believed to include "a female admiral, a male Klingon captain, a male admiral, a male adviser and a British male doctor", with one of those male leads played by an openly gay actor.
In November 2016, Doug Jones and Anthony Rapp were revealed to be cast, as science officers Saru and Stamets, respectively.
The former is a Kelpien, an alien race created for the series, while the latter is the first Star Trek character to be conceived and announced as gay.
Sonequa Martin-Green was cast in the lead role in December, which was officially confirmed in April 2017, with the character's name revealed to be Michael Burnham.
Also in December, Shazad Latif was cast as the Klingon Kol.
In March 2017, Jason Isaacs was cast as Captain Lorca of the USS Discovery, and Mary Wiseman joined as Tilly, a cadet.
At the end of April, Latif was revealed to have been recast in the role of Starfleet Lieutenant Tyler.
In the series, this role is shown to be an undercover persona used by the Klingon Voq, who was initially credited as being portrayed by the invented actor Javid Iqbal to hide the fact that Latif was portraying both Voq and Tyler.
Rapp revealed in July 2017 that Wilson Cruz, whom Rapp had previously worked with on the musical Rent, would portray Stamets' love interest Hugh Culber.
The character is killed off during the first season, which was criticized by some as following the "bury your gays" trope.
However, the executive producers of the series, Cruz, and GLAAD immediately released a statement saying "death is not always final in the Star Trek universe" and that the relationship between Culber and Stamets would continue to be explored.
Harberts described it as one of the most important relationships in the series.
Cruz was subsequently promoted from his recurring guest role to the series' main cast for the second season, in which Culber is brought back to life.
After the first season concluded with the Discovery receiving a distress call from the USS Enterprise, specifically from Captain Christopher Pike, Harberts expressed interest in exploring that character; Anson Mount was cast in the role in April 2018, and stars for the second season.
Casting had begun by June 2019 for the new role of Adira, a non-binary character described as "incredibly intelligent and self-confident" with the potential to become a recurring guest throughout the third season.
The next month, David Ajala joined the cast as new series regular Cleveland "Book" Booker for the third season.
Rachael Ancheril is also credited as starring for her appearances in the season, reprising her recurring guest role as Nhan from the second season.
She is written out of the series in the third season's fifth episode.
In September 2020, non-binary newcomer Blu del Barrio was revealed to be portraying Adira, while transgender actor Ian Alexander was announced as cast in another guest role for the third season, the Trill character Gray.
Both Adira and Gray were noted as being the first explicitly non-binary and transgender characters within the Star Trek franchise, respectively.
The two actors reprised their roles for the fourth season, and were promoted to the series' main cast.

=== Design ===
Mark Worthington and Todd Cherniawsky served as initial production designers for the series, with Tamara Deverell taking over during production on the first season; Gersha Phillips and Suttirat Anne Larlarb designed the costumes for the series; veteran Star Trek designer John Eaves designed starships with Scott Schneider; Glenn Hetrick and Neville Page of Alchemy Studios provided prosthetics and armor, with Page having previously designed for the "Kelvin Timeline" Star Trek films; and Mario Moreira served as prop master for the series.
The series also employed seven art directors, over nine illustrators, more than thirty-five set designers, and over four hundred and fifty painters, carpenters, sculptors, model makers, welders, set dressers, and prop builders.
The designers consult with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory for scientific accuracy.
Fuller said on the general approach to design on the show, "we're producing the show in 2016.
We have to update the style of the effects, the style of the sets, the style of the makeup ...
all of the other series have been produced [at a time that] isn't as sophisticated as we are now with what we can do production-wise, we're going to be reestablishing an entire look for the series" and for Star Trek moving forward.
Fuller had wanted the series' uniforms to reflect the primary colors of The Original Series, but this was discarded after his departure.
However, Fuller's designs for the Klingons, which he "really, really wanted" to redesign, were retained.
3D Systems' "cutting edge" 3D printing techniques were widely used in the making of the series.
For the prosthetics, Page and Hetrick took detailed laser scans of the actors
so they could simulate make-up and prosthetics in a virtual environment before creating the practical version.
Fabric for the Starfleet uniforms seen in the series was custom-dyed in Switzerland; the costumes were cut and assembled in Toronto by Phillips and her department.
The main uniforms seen in the series are a navy blue specifically mixed for the show, with gold or silver embellishments depending on the division of the officer.
Medical officers wear a "hospital white" variant, also custom-dyed in Switzerland, while the captain's uniform is the standard navy blue but with additional gold piping on the shoulders.
Starfleet insignia badges were molded from silicon bronze, and then polished and plated by a jeweler to create custom colors for the series, based on the division of the officer wearing the uniform:
gold for command, silver for sciences and medical, and copper for operations.
Props such as tricorders and hand scanners, communicators, and phasers were produced with 3D printing and heavily inspired by their designs in The Original Series.
The design of the USS Discovery is based on an unused Ralph McQuarrie design for the USS Enterprise from the unproduced film Star Trek: Planet of the Titans, which Fuller had noted in July 2016 was "to a point that we can't legally comment on it until [our legal team] figures out some things".
McQuarrie's designs were based on the concepts created by Ken Adam to feature a vessel with a flattened secondary hull.
Fuller wanted "something distinct about what our Star Trek was going to look like", and after seeing McQuarrie's design "saw sort of harder lines of a ship and started talking about race cars and Lamborghinis in the '70s and James Bond cars and started working on the designs, taking those inspirations and coming up with something completely unique to us."
The design for the Discovery went through several revisions and refinements before the final version was approved in December 2016.
The sickbay on the Discovery was inspired by that of the Enterprise from The Original Series.
Other Federation starships created for the show include the USS Shenzhou and the USS Europa.
Sets for the Discovery's interiors were described as a "tangle of corridors and rooms", and were designed to match with the exterior design of the ship, so "the rooms [could believably] fit inside the house", but there was some artistic license taken in places.
The graphics used for the Starfleet computer systems were designed to be believably more advanced than modern technology, but to also "honor the look and feel" of the designs used in previous series.
The initial colors allowed for the graphics were mostly restricted to blues, with the intention of these becoming more colorful the closer the series gets to the time period of The Original Series.
The opening title sequence for the show was created by Prologue using 2D motion graphics.
The sequence, which uses a "vivid, sepia-soaked palette", depicts elements from throughout the history of Star Trek—such as phasers, communicators, and the Vulcan salute—and deconstructs them.
Prologue creative director Ana Criado "wasn't all that versed" in Star Trek before beginning work on the sequence, which proved to be an advantage when the series' producers asked for the sequence to be unlike any previous Star Trek titles sequence.
A theme of "blueprints" was decided for the sequence to acknowledge that it is a prequel, "literally deconstructing Trek iconography".
Criado explained that original plans were for the sequence to be in black and white, but this was found to be too "cold" and was replaced with a Renaissance-inspired sepia look "to make it look like we are designing everything from scratch".
The sequence was completed before the theme music for the series was finalized.
When updating the sequence for the second season to deconstruct new elements specific to that story—including the Captain's chair and the "Red Angel"—Prologue was able to match the rhythm of the music more closely than they were for the first season.
The sequence was updated again for the third season.
The third season also introduces a new logo for the series to reflect its move to the far future.
Kurtzman felt this was especially important since the series' initial logo had been reflective of the first season's Klingon storyline, which the series had now moved on from.
===
Filming ===
Star Trek:
Discovery is filmed at Pinewood Toronto Studios.
Some of the series' sets took over six weeks to create, and new sets were being built up until the end of production of the season.
Discovery took advantage of multiple soundstages at the studio, including the largest soundstage in North America.
Some episodes for the show were filmed solely on existing sets, making them bottle episodes, though Harberts said the series would not do anything "as bottle-y as 'everyone is stuck in the mess hall!'"
Various scenes from the show have been filmed on locations around Toronto, including the Aga Khan Museum and the Scarborough Bluffs.
For the visual scope of the series, Kurtzman felt that the show had to "justify being on a premium cable service".
The showrunners were particularly inspired by Star Trek:
The Motion Picture and its "wider scope", with Harberts explaining that the series is shot in a 2:1 aspect ratio which "just lends itself to a very lyrical way of telling the story."
He added that some of the series' visuals were influenced by the modern Star Trek films from J. J. Abrams.
Some of these influences, per Goldsman, are "the ability to be creative cinematically...
the intimate discourse, the humanistic storytelling with the giant canvas that is Star Trek.
A more kinetic camera, a more dynamic way of existing".
The producers worked closely with pilot director David Semel to make the series look as cinematic as possible, including filming the bridge of Starfleet's ships in such a way as "not to shoot in a sort of proscenium box...to be able to get the camera into spaces where, you know, to shoot it in interesting ways, which is a combination of choreographing a scene to motivate the camera moving, and also lighting.
"
The cinematographers wanted to emphasize on-set sourcing, with lighting built in wherever it would naturally appear to help create a more realistic feel, and distance the series from the "stage" feel of The Original Series.
The lighting could also be controlled to create completely different situations, such as the lighting of a Starfleet red alert.
Harberts said that the cinematographers wanted the series to have a "Rembrandt texture".
The second season used a 2.39:1 aspect ratio.

===
Visual effects ===
Visual effects producers were hired to begin work on the series during the initial writing period, with Fuller explaining that the series would require such things as "digital augmentation on certain alien species" and "the transporter beams".
He said, "We're trying to cultivate distinct looks for all of those things that are unique to our version of Star Trek and carry through the themes we love seeing in fifty years of Star Trek, but doing a slightly different approach.
"
Pixomondo is the primary visual effects vendor for the series, with Spin VFX and Crafty Apes also working on the show.
Kurtzman noted that the series utilizes multiple CG environments which take several months to properly render.
The shuttle bay of the Discovery is completely computer-generated, with actors performing in front of a green screen for scenes in that environment; using the digital set is more expensive than any other set created for the series, including the practically-built ones.

===
Music ===
The first teaser for the series featured music composed by Fil Eisler, which he "threw together as an audition" within three weeks.
Before production on the series began, Charles Henri Avelange had also composed and recorded music as "a showcase for CBS", while both Cliff Eidelman and Austin Wintory were considered for the series' composer.
In July 2017, Jeff Russo was announced as composer for the series.
Russo recorded the series' score with a 60-piece orchestra, at the Eastwood Scoring Stage at
Warner Bros. Studios in California.
The show's main theme incorporates elements from the original Star Trek theme by Alexander Courage.
Russo acknowledged that not all existing Star Trek fans were going to appreciate the new theme, but felt that regardless of how some felt it compared to previous themes in the franchise it still accurately represented this series.
Individual soundtrack albums for the two chapters of the first season were respectively released on December 15, 2017, and April 6, 2018.
A soundtrack album for the second season was released on July 19, 2019.

==
Marketing ==
The first full trailer for the series was released in May 2017.
Forbes's Merrill Barr said the trailer was a good sign for many who believed the series would never be released following the many production setbacks and delays, saying, "Having a legitimate trailer that can be watched over and over again brings signs of hope ...
Star Trek:
Discovery is real, and now we have proof."
Chris Harnick of E!
News described the trailer as "gorgeous" and "truly cinematic", and because of the appearances of Sarek and the Klingons in the footage, "this is the Star Trek you know and love."
Aja Romano at Vox called the trailer's visuals "sumptuous" and "modern, but still very much in keeping with the aesthetic of previous Trek series".
She continued, "What gets short shrift in this trailer is the series' overarching plot ...
In any case, seeing the Klingons in all their combative glory feels a bit like coming home for Trek fans.
"
Also in May, McFarlane Toys signed a toy license deal with CBS to produce "figures, role play weapons and accessories" for Discovery.
CBS Consumer Products senior vice president Veronica Hart explained that McFarlane was chosen as the first licensee for the series because of its "commitment to quality and dedication to fans".
The deal will also see the company "create merchandise from the entire Star Trek universe, ranging from the classic The Original Series to its popular movie franchise.
"
The first merchandise produced under the deal were released in mid-2018.
In 2019, Round 2 released a model kit based on Discovery.

==
Release ==
The first episode of Star Trek: Discovery aired in a "preview broadcast" on CBS in the United States and was made available with the second episode on CBS All Access.
The rest of the series' episodes for the first three seasons were released weekly on All Access.
CBS Studios International licensed the series to Bell Media for broadcast in Canada, and to Netflix for another 188 countries.
In Canada, the premiere was simulcast with CBS on both the CTV Television Network and on the specialty channel CTV Sci-Fi Channel before being streamed on Crave; it was also broadcast in French on the specialty channel
Z. Subsequent episodes are released through CTV Sci-Fi Channel, Z, and Crave, with CTV Sci-Fi airing each episode
30 minutes before it's streamed on All Access.
In the other countries, Netflix releases each episode of the series for streaming within 24 hours of its U.S. debut.
This agreement also saw Bell Media and Netflix acquire all previous Star Trek series to stream and broadcast in their entirety.
In September 2020, ViacomCBS announced that CBS All Access would be expanded and rebranded as Paramount+
in March 2021.
Existing episodes of Discovery's first three seasons will remain on Paramount+
along with future seasons of the series.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings and viewership ===
According to Nielsen Media Research, the CBS broadcast of the first episode was watched by a "decent" audience of 9.5 million viewers.
The premiere of the series led to record subscriptions for All Access, with the service having its biggest day of signups, as well as its biggest week and month of signups thanks to the series.
According to "app analytics specialist" App Annie, the premiere of the series also caused the number of downloads of the All Access mobile app to more than double, with revenue from the app for CBS doubling compared to the average in-app revenue during the previous 30 days.

===
Critical response ===
Star Trek:
Discovery has an 84% approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, while Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, has assigned a score of 73 out of 100 based on reviews from 38 critics.
For the first season, Rotten Tomatoes reported 82% approval with an average rating of 7.07/10, based on 72 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "
Although it takes an episode to achieve liftoff, Star Trek:
Discovery delivers a solid franchise installment for the next generation—boldly led by the charismatic Sonequa Martin-Green.
"
The season's average episode rating is 87%.
Metacritic assigned a score of 72 out of 100 based on reviews from 20 critics.
Rotten Tomatoes reported 81% approval for the second season, with an average rating of 7.32/10 based on 30 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "
The second season of Discovery successfully—if stubbornly—cleans up the problematic storylines of Trek past while still effectively dramatizing new takes on the lore.
"
The average episode rating for the season is 82%.
Metacritic assigned a score of 72 out of 100 for the second season, based on reviews from 10 critics.
For the third season, Rotten Tomatoes reported 91% approval with an average rating of 7.72/10 based on 32 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "
With less canonical baggage and a welcome dose of character development, Discovery continues to forge its own path and is narratively all the better for it."
Metacritic assigned a score of 75 out of 100 based on reviews from 8 critics.

===
Accolades ===
===
Lawsuit ===
In August 2018, Egyptian video game developer Anas Abdin announced that he would be suing CBS for allegedly infringing his creative property by copying elements of his unreleased video game Tardigrades, including large tardigrades that help humans travel through the universe instantly, and similar characters.
The lawsuit was dismissed by Judge Lorna G. Schofield in September 2019, finding that the series and video game were not "substantially similar as a matter of law", and that the only similarities were the space setting and the use of alien tardigrades.
Abdin appealed this dismissal, but the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld Schofield's decision in August 2020.

==
Franchise expansion and spin-offs ==
In June 2018, after becoming sole showrunner of Discovery, Kurtzman signed a five-year overall deal with CBS Television Studios to expand the Star Trek franchise beyond Discovery to several new series, miniseries, and animated series.
Kurtzman wanted to "open this world up" and create multiple series set in the same universe but with their own distinct identities, an approach that he compared to the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU).
He added that he would "weigh in meaningfully and significantly at all the critical junctures" for each new series.
CBS and Kurtzman began referring to the expanded franchise as the Star Trek Universe at the 2019 San Diego Comic-Con, and monthly meetings with the showrunners of each new series were being held by April 2021 to allow coordination between the different series and ensure that "they're not stepping on each other's toes" by using the same elements of the universe, according to Kurtzman.
The expanded franchise includes several direct spin-offs from Star Trek
: Discovery:


===
Star Trek:
Short Treks ===
Kurtzman announced in July 2018 that a companion series of shorts would be released between the seasons of Discovery to "deliver closed-ended stories while revealing clues about what's to come in future Star Trek:
Discovery episodes.
They'll also introduce audiences to new characters who may inhabit the larger world of Star Trek."
===
Star Trek:
Strange New Worlds ===
After Anson Mount left Discovery following the second-season finale, fans of the series began calling for him to reprise his role of Christopher Pike in a spin-off set on the USS Enterprise, alongside Rebecca Romijn as Number One and Ethan Peck as Spock.
Kurtzman confirmed that development on such a series had begun in January 2020.
Paramount+ officially ordered the spin-off, titled Star Trek:
Strange New Worlds, in May 2020, with Mount, Peck, and Romijn confirmed to be starring.

===
Star Trek: Section 31 ===
By November 2018, Michelle Yeoh was in talks with CBS to star in a spin-off series as her character Philippa Georgiou, with the series expected to follow her adventures as a member of the secretive organization Section 31.
Discovery writers Bo Yeon Kim and Erika Lippoldt were set as writers and showrunners of the new series in January 2019.
Kurtzman said filming on the spin-off would begin once filming on the third season of Discovery was completed, but production on the spin-off was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Georgiou is written out of Discovery in the third season to set-up the spin-off.
In February 2021, Kurtzman said there was still conversations taking place about making the series, but it was unlikely to be added to Paramount+'s Star Trek Universe slate until one of the existing five series came to an end.

==
Tie-in media ==
In September 2016, Discovery writer Kirsten Beyer announced that CBS was working with IDW and Simon & Schuster to produce more content revolving around the setting of the series, starting with at least one novel and a comic book tied to the television series.
Beyer, the writer of many Star Trek:
Voyager novels, explained that she would work with fellow Star Trek novelist David Mack and Star Trek comic writer Mike Johnson to ensure that all three media "are coming from the same place".
The release of the books and comics was set to coincide with the series' premiere.
Mack described writing around the continuity of Discovery as "tricky to get right", as the time period "is light on detail and almost unique within the Star Trek continuity.
That made it a challenge to represent that era faithfully while also staying true to the new elements being introduced" in the new series.
Beyer explained in August 2017 that the intention of the series' writers was to take story opportunities that the series did not have time to address and let them be told through other media.
She said the novels and comic books would not be required reading to understand the series, but would enhance the overall story for fans.
She said the writers of the tie-in works and the series' writers room would work together to not contradict each other, but if an idea was developed for the series that did not work with something established in a tie-in then the series would take priority.
Beyer's hope was that parts of the universe could be "carve[d] out" specifically for the tie-ins
so the series would not interfere with them.

===
Novels ===
The first tie-in novel was Desperate Hours, a prequel set one year before Discovery and one year after "The Cage".
Written by David Mack, the novel follows Burnham aboard the Shenzhou.
Fuller had asked for a book to be written based on that premise, and Mack worked with the Discovery writers to remain "in the loop" with the series' backstory.
Drastic Measures was written by Dayton Ward and is set 10 years before the show, following the characters Georgiou and Lorca as they hunt for "the man whom history will one day brand 'Kodos the Executioner'".
Fear Itself, was written by veteran Star Trek author James Swallow and focuses on Saru's attempts to overcome his fears as a Kelpien and to become a successful Starfleet officer.
The Way to the Stars follows Tilly at age 16 and shows the events that inspired her to join Starfleet.
The Enterprise War is set before the end of Discovery's first season and follows the crew of the USS Enterprise led by Captain Pike during a mission in the Pergamum Nebula.
In Dead Endless, the Discovery crew responds to a distress call originating from within the mycelial network, and find themselves trapped and have found a seemingly human living in the network.
In Die Standing, Philippa Georgiou, agent of Section 31, has found a superweapon that she recognizes from her universe.

===
Comics ===
In July 2017, IDW announced a new tie-in miniseries based on Discovery, described as "Klingon-centric".
It is written by Johnson and Beyer, with art by Tony Shasteen.
Johnson compared working with Beyer to his work on the Star Trek: Countdown comic—a tie-in to the 2009 Star Trek film co-written by Kurtzman—saying that her position as a staff writer on Discovery meant "we have all the inside access that we need.
So the story in the comic will really matter and not just feel like a one-off.
"
In August 2017, it was clarified that the first comic would be a four-issue miniseries focused on T'Kuvma and his followers and that IDW intended to create a series of comic miniseries based on different aspects of the series to create "targeted stories on some different subjects".
Johnson stated that they were "building out the characters in the Klingon world with these comics, and we can't wait to show you."
He added that discussions were being held regarding the subject of the next miniseries.
IDW editor Sarah Gaydos said, "The access we're getting to the show to create these comics that are integral to fleshing out the backstories of the characters is unheard of, and I do a lot of licensed comics.
"IDW published as the Star Trek:
Discovery Annual on March 28, 2018, written by Kirsten Beyer and Mike Johnson.
The Annual focused on Stamets' mycelial network research.
The second four-issue miniseries, Succession, was also written by Beyer and Johnson and began its release in April 2018.
It is set in the Mirror Universe and expands on the Mirror Universe story arc from the second chapter of the first season A one-shot issue, exploring events aboard Discovery with Saru acting as Captain on a one-time mission, was announced in November 2018.

In September 2019, a three-issue miniseries called Aftermath began its release.
It covers the time after the Discovery travels to the future at the end of the second season and before Spock goes back to duty aboard the Enterprise.
===
Video games ===
By August 2017, "hours" of Discovery-based content were set to be added to the video game Star Trek Timelines, including introducing Michael Burnham and Saru as new crew members for the game and new ships from the show, Federation and otherwise.
A month-long "Mega-Event" based on the series was run to coincide with the launch of the series.
In July 2018, a tie-in for the game
Star Trek Online was announced titled Age of Discovery.
Set during the first season of the series following the Battle at the Binary Stars, the event introduces a story set on the USS Glenn and includes the character Sylvia Tilly.
Wiseman returned to voice the character.
Other elements inspired by the series included new starship and Klingon designs.
In January 2020, Martin-Green was set to voice Burnham for Star Trek Online's "Legacy" expansion celebrating 10 years of the game.

===
Aftershows ===


====
After Trek ====
Before July 2016, CBS began developing an aftershow companion series to Discovery, similar to AMC's Talking Dead, a companion to The Walking Dead.
The companion series was confirmed in 2017, with the title After Trek and host Matt Mira.
The series aired after each episode of Discovery, and featured a rotating panel of guests, including celebrity Trekkies, former Star Trek actors, cast members and crew from Discovery.
It was produced by Embassy Row in association with Roddenberry Entertainment.

====
The Ready Room ====
CBS announced in June 2018 that After Trek would be re-imagined for the second season of Discovery.
In January 2019, After Trek was officially canceled and replaced by weekly Facebook Live events to be streamed the day after each second season
Discovery episode was released.
These Facebook Live events were soon revealed to be a new interview-style aftershow named The Ready Room, hosted by Naomi Kyle.
Wil Wheaton took over as host of The Ready Room for Discovery's third season.

==
References ==


===
Sources ===
McQuarrie, Ralph; Stice, Same; Scoleri, John David (2007).
The Art of Ralph McQuarrie.
Santa Clara, California: Dreams & Visions Press.
ISBN 0979158001.

Reeves-Stevens, Judith; Reeves-Stevens, Garfield (1997).
Star Trek:
Phase II:
The Lost Series (2nd ed.).
New York City:
Pocket Books.
ISBN 0671568396.

==
Further reading ==
Star Trek Discovery: Official Collector's Edition.
Bankside, London, England: Titan Books.
November 14, 2017.
ISBN 1785861905.

Star Trek Discovery:
Designing Starships.
Eaglemoss Publications Ltd. September 4, 2019.
ISBN 1858755743.

==
External links ==
Official website
Star Trek:
Discovery at IMDb
Star Trek: Discovery at Memory Alpha (a Star Trek wiki)
Star Wars is an American epic space opera media franchise created by George Lucas, which began with the eponymous 1977 film and quickly became a worldwide pop-culture phenomenon.
The franchise has been expanded into various films and other media, including television series, video games, novels, comic books, theme park attractions, and themed areas, comprising an all-encompassing fictional universe.
In 2020, its total value was estimated at US$70 billion, and it is currently the fifth-highest-grossing media franchise of all time.

The original film (Star Wars), retroactively subtitled Episode IV: A New Hope (1977), was followed by the sequels Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (1983), forming the original Star Wars trilogy.
Lucas later returned to filmmaking to direct a prequel trilogy, consisting of Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005).
In 2012, Lucas sold his production company to Disney, relinquishing his ownership of the franchise.
The subsequently produced sequel trilogy consists of Episode VII:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi (2017), and Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

All nine films of the 'Skywalker saga' were nominated for Academy Awards with wins going to the first two releases.
Together with the theatrical live action spin-off films Rogue One (2016) and Solo (2018), the combined box office revenue of the films equated to over US$10 billion and is currently the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time.

==
Premise ==
The Star Wars franchise depicts the adventures of characters "A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away", in which humans and many species of aliens (often humanoid) co-exist with robots, or 'droids', who may assist them in their daily routines; space travel between planets is common due to lightspeed hyperspace technology.
Spacecraft range from small starfighters, to huge capital ships such as the Star Destroyers, to space stations such as the moon-sized Death Stars.
Telecommunication includes two-way audio and audiovisual screens, and holographic projections.

A mystical power known as the Force is described in the original film as "an energy field created by all living things ...
[that] binds the galaxy together".
Through training and meditation, those whom "the Force is strong with" are able to perform various superpowers (such as telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and manipulation of physical energy).
The Force is wielded by two major knightly orders at conflict with each other: the Jedi, peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who act on the light side of the Force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the Sith, who use the dark side by manipulating fear and aggression.
While Jedi Knights can be numerous, the Dark Lords of the Sith (or 'Darths') are intended to be limited to two: a master and their apprentice.
Force-wielders are very limited in numbers in comparison to the average population.
The Jedi and Sith prefer the use of a weapon called a lightsaber, a blade of energy that can cut through virtually any surface and deflect energy bolts.
The rest of the population, as well as renegades and soldiers, use laser-powered blaster firearms.
In the outer reaches of the galaxy, crime syndicates such as the Hutt cartel are dominant.
Bounty hunters are often employed by both gangsters and governments.
Illicit activities include smuggling and slavery.

==
Film ==
The Star Wars film series centers around three sets of trilogies, which are collectively referred to as the "Skywalker saga".
They were produced non-chronologically, with Episodes IV–VI (the original trilogy) being released between 1977 and 1983, Episodes I–III (the prequel trilogy) being released between 1999 and 2005, and Episodes VII–IX (the sequel trilogy), being released between 2015 and 2019.
Each trilogy focuses on a generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family.
The original trilogy depicts the heroic development of Luke Skywalker, the prequels tell the backstory of his father Anakin, while the sequels star Luke's nephew, Kylo Ren.

An anthology series set between the main episodes entered development in parallel to the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney chief financial officer Jay Rasulo as origin stories.
The first entry, Rogue One (2016), tells the story of the rebels who steal the Death Star plans just before Episode IV.
Solo (2018) focuses on Han Solo's backstory, also featuring original trilogy co-protagonists Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian and involving prequel trilogy villain Darth Maul.

Lucasfilm has a number of Star Wars films in development, two of which were confirmed during Disney Investor Day 2020.
The first will be a film titled Rogue Squadron, which is being directed by Patty Jenkins, and is scheduled for release on December 25, 2023.
The second is an unspecified film from Taika Waititi, who in May 2020 was announced to be directing a Star Wars film
he was co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.
Additionally, a trilogy independent from the Skywalker saga is being written by The Last Jedi writer/director Rian Johnson.
In September 2019, it was announced that Kathleen Kennedy and Kevin Feige would collaborate to develop a Star Wars film.
In February 2020, a film was announced to be in development from director J. D. Dillard and writer Matt Owens.

===
The Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
In 1971, George Lucas wanted to film an adaptation of the Flash Gordon serial, but could not obtain the rights, so he began developing his own space opera.
After directing American Graffiti (1973), he wrote a two-page synopsis, which 20th Century Fox decided to invest in.
By 1974, he had expanded the story into the first draft of a screenplay.
The 1977 movie's success led Lucas to make it the basis of an elaborate film serial.
With the backstory he created for the sequel, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies.
Most of the main cast would return for the two additional installments of the original trilogy, which were self-financed by Lucasfilm.

Star Wars was released on May 25, 1977, and first subtitled Episode IV:
A New Hope in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars.
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back was released on May 21, 1980, also achieving wide financial and critical success.
The final film in the trilogy, Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi was released on May 25, 1983.
The story of the original trilogy focuses on Luke Skywalker's quest to become a Jedi, his struggle with the evil Imperial agent Darth Vader, and the struggle of the Rebel Alliance to free the galaxy from the clutches of the Galactic Empire.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
According to producer Gary Kurtz, loose plans for a prequel trilogy were developed during the outlining of the original two films.
In 1980, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine-film series plotted, but due to the stress of producing the original trilogy, he had decided to cancel further sequels by 1981.
In 1983, Lucas explained that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now ...
As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ...
I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday.
"Technical
advances in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the ability to create computer-generated imagery (CGI), inspired Lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit his saga.
In 1989, Lucas stated that the prequels would be "unbelievably expensive."
In 1992, he acknowledged that he had plans to create the prequel trilogy.
A theatrical rerelease of the original trilogy in 1997 "updated" the 20-year-old films with the style of CGI envisioned for the new trilogy.

Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace was released on May 19, 1999, and Episode II:
Attack of the Clones on May 16, 2002.
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, the first PG-13 film in the franchise, was released on May 19, 2005.
The first two movies were met with mixed reviews, with the third being received somewhat more positively.
The trilogy begins 32 years before Episode IV and follows the Jedi training of Anakin Skywalker, Luke's father, and his eventual fall from grace and transformation into the Sith lord Darth Vader, as well as the corruption of the Galactic Republic and rise of the Empire led by Darth Sidious.
Together with the original trilogy, Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Prior to releasing the original film, and made possible by its success, Lucas planned "three trilogies of nine films."
He announced this to Time in 1978, and confirmed that he had outlined them in 1981.
At various stages of development, the sequel trilogy was to focus on the rebuilding of the Republic, the return of Luke in a role similar to that of Obi-Wan in the original trilogy, Luke's sister (not yet determined to be Leia), Han, Leia, R2-D2 and C-3PO.
However, after beginning work on the prequel trilogy, Lucas insisted that Star Wars was meant to be a six-part series and that there would be no sequel trilogy.
Lucas decided to leave the franchise in the hands of other filmmakers, announcing in January 2012 that he would make no more Star Wars films.
In October of that year, the Walt Disney Company agreed to buy Lucasfilm and announced that Episode VII would be released in 2015.
The co-chairman of Lucasfilm, Kathleen Kennedy, became president of the company and served as executive producer of new Star Wars feature films.
Lucas provided Kennedy his story treatments for the sequels during the 2012 sale, but in 2015 it was revealed Lucas's sequel outline had been discarded.
The sequel trilogy also meant the end of the existing Star Wars Expanded Universe, which was discarded from canon to give "maximum creative freedom to the filmmakers and also preserve an element of surprise and discovery for the audience.
"Episode
VII:
The Force Awakens was released on December 16, 2015, Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi on December 13, 2017, and Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker on December 18, 2019, in many countries.
The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi were both a critical and box office successes.
Episode IX received a mixed reception from critics and audiences.
The sequel trilogy starts 30 years after Episode VI and focuses on the journey of the Force-sensitive orphan Rey, guided by Luke Skywalker.
Along with ex-stormtrooper Finn and ace X-Wing pilot Poe Dameron, Rey helps the Resistance, led by Leia, fight the First Order, commanded by Han and Leia's son (and Luke's nephew), Kylo Ren.
===
Anthology films ===
Lucasfilm and Kennedy have stated that the standalone films would be referred to as the Star Wars anthology series (though the word anthology has not been used in any of the titles, instead carrying the promotional "A Star Wars Story" subtitle).
Focused on how the Rebels obtained the Death Star plans introduced in the 1977 film, the first anthology film, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, was released on December 16, 2016, to favorable reviews and box office success.
The second, Solo:
A Star Wars Story, centered on a young Han Solo with Chewbacca and Lando as supporting characters, was released on May 25, 2018, to generally favorable reviews and underperformance at the box office.
Despite this, more anthology films are expected to be released, following a hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker.

==
Television ==
The Star Wars franchise has been spun off to various television productions, including two animated series released in the mid-1980s.
Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the Clone Wars.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only the later one remained canon.
Eight live-action Star Wars series will be released on Disney+.
The first, The Mandalorian, premiered on November 12, 2019.
Star Wars won the 2020 Webby Award for Television & Film in the category Social.
Disney+
later released the Ewoks movies and animated series, along the animated first appearance of Boba Fett, and the Clone Wars animated micro-series in a section called Star Wars Vintage, that section will also include the Droids animated series in the future.
Certain aspects of the original Clone Wars micro-series are considered to not contradict the canon, while others do.

=== Series ===


===
Films ===


===
Television special ===


==
Fictional timeline ==
The Star Wars canon fictional universe spans multiple eras, of which three are focused around each of the film trilogies.
The following eras were defined in January 2021:
The High Republic:
The era of the "High Republic", set 200 years before the prequel trilogy.
It includes the media released in The High Republic and the upcoming The Acolyte.

Fall of the Jedi: The era of the prequel trilogy, in which the democratic Galactic Republic is corrupted by its ruler, Palpatine—secretly the Sith lord Darth Sidious.
After orchestrating the Clone Wars between the Republic and a Separatist confederation, Palpatine exterminates the Jedi Order, overthrows the Republic, and establishes the totalitarian Galactic Empire.
It includes the prequel trilogy films and the animated The Clone Wars.
This era was previously defined as The Age of Republic in August 2019.

Reign of the Empire:
The era after the prequel trilogy, exploring the reign of the Empire.
It includes the animated The Bad Batch and Solo: A Star Wars Story.

The Age of Rebellion:
The era of the original trilogy, in which the Empire is fought by the Rebel Alliance in a Galactic Civil War that spans several years, climaxing with the death of the Emperor and eventually resulting in the fall of the Empire.
It includes the animated Star Wars Rebels, Rogue One, and the original trilogy films.

The New Republic:
The era after the original trilogy, set during the formative years of the New Republic following the fall of the Empire.
It includes The Mandalorian and its spin-off series, The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic, and Ahsoka.

Rise of the First Order:
The era of the sequel trilogy, in which the remnants of the Empire reform as the First Order.
Heroes of the former Rebellion, aided by the New Republic, lead the Resistance against the oppressive regime and its rulers, the mysterious being known as Snoke and his puppet master, the revived Palpatine.
It includes the animated Star Wars Resistance and the sequel trilogy films.
This era was previously defined as The Age of Resistance in August 2019.The
Expanded Universe of spin-off media depicts different levels of continuity, which were deemed non-canonical and rebranded as Legends on April 25, 2014, to make most subsequent works align to the episodic films, The Clone Wars film, and television series.

==
In other media ==
From 1976 to 2014, the term Expanded Universe (EU) was an umbrella term for all officially licensed Star Wars storytelling material set outside the events depicted within the theatrical films, including novels, comics, and video games.
Lucasfilm maintained internal continuity between the films and television content and the EU material until April 25, 2014, when the company announced all of the EU works would cease production.
Existing works would no longer be considered canon to the franchise and subsequent reprints would be rebranded under the Star Wars Legends label, with downloadable content for the massively multiplayer online game
The Old Republic the only Legends material to still be produced.
The Star Wars canon was subsequently restructured to only include the existing six feature films, the animated film The Clone Wars (2008), and its companion animated series.
All future projects and creative developments across all types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the story group, announced as a division of Lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a cohesive vision on the storytelling of the franchise.
Multiple comics series from Marvel and novels published by Del Rey were produced after the announcement.

===
Print media ===
Star Wars in print predates the release of the first film, with the December 1976 novelization of Star Wars, initially subtitled "From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker".
Credited to Lucas, it was ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster.
The first "Expanded Universe" story appeared in Marvel Comics' Star Wars #7 in January 1978 (the first six issues being an adaptation of the film), followed by Foster's sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye the following month.

====
Novels ====
After penning the novelization of the original film, Foster followed it with the sequel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978).
The novelizations of The Empire Strikes Back (1980) by Donald F. Glut and Return of the Jedi (1983) by James Kahn followed, as well as The Han Solo Adventures trilogy (1979–1980) by Brian Daley, and The Adventures of Lando Calrissian trilogy (1983) by L. Neil Smith.
Timothy Zahn's bestselling Thrawn trilogy (1991–1993) reignited interest in the franchise and introduced the popular characters Grand Admiral Thrawn, Mara Jade, Talon Karrde, and Gilad Pellaeon.
The first novel, Heir to the Empire, reached #1 on the New York Times Best Seller list, and the series finds Luke, Leia, and Han facing off against tactical genius Thrawn, who is plotting to retake the galaxy for the Empire.
In The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994) by Dave Wolverton, set immediately before the Thrawn trilogy, Leia considers an advantageous political marriage to Prince Isolder of the planet Hapes,  but she and Han ultimately marry.
Steve Perry's Shadows of the Empire (1996), set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, was part of a multimedia campaign that included a comic book series and video game.
The novel introduced the crime lord Prince Xizor, another popular character who would appear in multiple other works.
Other notable series from Bantam include the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, the 14-book Young Jedi Knights series (1995–1998) by Anderson and Rebecca Moesta, and the X-wing series (1996–2012) by Michael A. Stackpole and Aaron Allston.
Del Rey took over Star Wars book publishing in 1999, releasing what would become a 19-installment novel series called The New Jedi Order (1999–2003).
Written by multiple authors, the series was set 25 to 30 years after the original films and introduced the Yuuzhan Vong, a powerful alien race attempting to invade and conquer the entire galaxy.
The bestselling multi-author series Legacy of the Force (2006–2008) chronicles the crossover of Han and Leia's son Jacen Solo to the dark side of the Force; among his evil deeds, he kills Luke's wife Mara Jade as a sacrifice to join the Sith.
Although no longer canon, the story is paralleled in The Force Awakens with Han and Leia's son Ben Solo, who has become the dark Kylo Ren.
Three series set in the prequel era were introduced for younger audiences: the 18-book Jedi Apprentice (1999–2002) chronicles the adventures of Obi-Wan Kenobi and his master Qui-Gon Jinn in the years before The Phantom Menace; the 11-book Jedi Quest (2001–2004) follows Obi-Wan and his own apprentice, Anakin Skywalker in between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones; and the 10-book
The Last of the Jedi (2005–2008), set almost immediately after Revenge of the Sith, features Obi-Wan and the last few surviving Jedi.

Although Thrawn had been designated a Legends character in 2014, he was reintroduced into the canon in the 2016 third season of Rebels, with Zahn returning to write more novels based in the character, and set in the new canon.

====
Comics ====
Marvel Comics published a Star Wars comic book series from 1977 to 1986.
Original Star Wars comics were serialized in the Marvel magazine Pizzazz between 1977 and 1979.
The 1977 installments were the first original Star Wars stories not directly adapted from the films to appear in print form, as they preceded those of the Star Wars comic series.
From 1985 to 1987, the animated children's series Ewoks and Droids inspired comic series from Marvel's Star Comics line.
According to Marvel comics former Editor-In-Chief Jim Shooter, the strong sales of Star Wars comics saved Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
Marvel's Star Wars series was one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.
The only downside for Marvel was that the 100,000 copy sales quota was surpassed quickly, allowing Lippincott to renegotiate the royalty arrangements from a position of strength.
In the late 1980s, Marvel dropped a new Star Wars comic it had in development, which was picked up by Dark Horse Comics and published as the popular Dark Empire series (1991–1995).
Dark Horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after the original film trilogy, including Tales of the Jedi (1993–1998), X-wing Rogue Squadron (1995–1998), Star Wars: Republic (1998–2006),
Star Wars Tales (1999–2005),
Star Wars: Empire (2002–2006), and Knights of the Old Republic (2006–2010).After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, it was announced in January 2014 that in 2015 the Star Wars comics license would return to Marvel Comics, whose parent company, Marvel Entertainment, Disney had purchased in 2009.
Launched in 2015, the first three publications were titled Star Wars, Darth Vader, and the limited series Princess Leia.
First announced as Project Luminous at Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, full details of a publishing initiative called Star Wars: The High Republic were revealed in a press conference in February 2020.
Involving the majority of the current officially licensed publishers, a new era set 200 years before the Skywalker Saga will be explored in various books and comics.
These include ongoing titles by Marvel and IDW Publishing, written by Cavan Scott and Daniel José Older respectively, that will both premiere in August 2020.

===
Audio ===
====
Soundtracks and singles ====
John Williams composed the soundtracks for the nine episodic films; he has stated that he will retire from the franchise with The Rise of Skywalker.
He also composed Han Solo's theme for Solo: A Star Wars Story; John Powell adapted and composed the rest of the score.
Michael Giacchino composed the score of Rogue One.
Ludwig Göransson scored and composed the music of The Mandalorian.
Williams also created the main theme for Galaxy's Edge.
====
Audio novels ====
The first Star Wars audio work is The Story of Star Wars, an LP using audio samples from the original film and a new narration to retell the story, released in 1977.
Most later printed novels were adapted into audio novels, usually released on cassette tape and re-released on CD.
As of 2019, audio-only novels have been released not directly based on printed media.

====
Radio ====
Radio adaptations of the films were also produced.
Lucas, a fan of the NPR-affiliated campus radio station of his alma mater the University of Southern California, licensed the Star Wars radio rights to KUSC-FM for US$1.
The production used John Williams's original film score, along with Ben Burtt's sound effects.
The first was written by science-fiction author Brian Daley and directed by John Madden.
It was broadcast on National Public Radio in 1981, adapting the original 1977 film into 13 episodes.
Mark Hamill and Anthony Daniels reprised their film roles.
The overwhelming success, led to a 10-episode adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back debuted in 1983.
Billy Dee Williams joined the other two stars, reprising his role as Lando Calrissian.
In 1983, Buena Vista Records released an original, 30-minute Star Wars audio drama titled Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell, written by Daley.
In the 1990s, Time Warner Audio Publishing adapted several Star Wars series from Dark Horse Comics into audio dramas: the three-part Dark Empire saga, Tales of the Jedi, Dark Lords of the Sith, the Dark Forces trilogy, and Crimson Empire (1998).
Return of the Jedi was adapted into 6-episodes in 1996, featuring Daniels.

===
Video games ===
The Star Wars franchise has spawned over one hundred computer, video, and board games, dating back to some of the earliest home consoles.
Some are based directly on the movie material, while others rely heavily on the non-canonical Expanded Universe (rebranded as Star Wars Legends and removed from the canon in 2014).
Star Wars games have gone through three significant development eras, marked by a change in leadership among the developers: the early licensed games, those developed after the creation of LucasArts, and those created after the closure of the Lucasfilm division by Disney and the transfer of the license to Electronic Arts.

====
Early licensed games (1979–1993) ====
The first officially licensed electronic Star Wars game was Kenner's 1979 table-top Star Wars Electronic Battle Command.
In 1982, Parker Brothers published the first Star Wars video game for the Atari 2600, Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back, followed soon the year later by Star Wars: Jedi Arena, the first video game to depict lightsaber combat.
They were followed in 1983 by Atari's rail shooter arcade game Star Wars, with vector graphics to replicate the Death Star trench run scene from the 1977 film.
The next game, Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984), has more traditional raster graphics, while the following Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back (1985) has vector graphics.
Platform games were made for the Nintendo Entertainment System, including the Japan-exclusive Star Wars (1987), an international Star Wars (1991), and Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992).
Super Star Wars (1992) was released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, with two sequels over the next two years.

====
LucasArts and modern self-published games (1993–2014) ====
Lucasfilm founded its own video game company in 1982, becoming best known for adventure games and World War II flight combat games, but as George Lucas took more interest in the increasing success of the video game market, he wanted to have more creative control over the games and founded his own development company, LucasArts.
Improved graphics allowed games to tell complex narratives, which allowed for the retelling of the films, and eventually original narratives set in the same continuity, with voice-overs and CGI cutscenes.
In 1993, LucasArts released Star Wars: X-Wing, the first self-published Star Wars video game and the first space flight simulator based on the franchise.
It was one of the best-selling video games of 1993 and established its own series of games.
The Rogue Squadron series was released between 1998 and 2003, also focusing on space battles set during the films.

Dark Forces (1995), a hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy, was the first Star Wars first-person shooter.
It featured gameplay and graphical features not then common in other games, made possible by LucasArts' custom-designed game engine, the Jedi.
The game was well received, and it was followed by four sequels.
The series introduced Kyle Katarn, who would appear in multiple games, novels, and comics.
Katarn is a former stormtrooper who joins the Rebellion and becomes a Jedi, a plot arc similar to that of Finn in the sequel trilogy films.
A massively multiplayer online role-playing game, Star Wars Galaxies, was in operation from 2003 until 2011.
After Disney bought Lucasfilm, LucasArts ceased its role as a developer in 2013, although it still operates as a licensor.

====
EA Star Wars (2014–present) ====
Following its acquisition of the franchise, Disney reassigned video game rights to Electronic Arts.
Games made during this era are considered canonical, and feature more influence from the Star Wars filmmakers.
Disney partnered with Lenovo to create the augmented reality video game Jedi Challenges, released in November 2017.
In August 2018, it was announced that Zynga would publish free-to-play Star Wars mobile games.
The Battlefront games received a canonical reboot in 2017.
Jedi:
Fallen Order was released in November 2019 and Star Wars:
Squadrons was released in October 2020.

===
Theme park attractions ===
In addition to the Disneyland ride Star Tours (1987) and its successor, Star Tours: The Adventures Continue (2011), many live attractions have been held at Disney parks, including the travelling exhibition Where Science Meets Imagination, the Space Mountain spin-off Hyperspace Mountain, a walkthrough Launch Bay, and the night-time A Galactic Spectacular.
An immersive themed area called Galaxy's Edge (2019) opened at Disneyland and opened at Walt Disney World in mid-2019.

A themed hotel, Star Wars:
Galactic Starcruiser, is currently under construction at Walt Disney World.

===
Multimedia projects ===
A multimedia project involves works released across multiple types of media.
Shadows of the Empire (1996) was a multimedia project set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi that included a novel by Steve Perry, a comic book series, a video game, and action figures.
The Force Unleashed (2008–2010) was a similar project set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope that included a novel, a 2008 video game and its 2010 sequel, a graphic novel, a role-playing game supplement, and toys.

===
Merchandising ===
The success of the Star Wars films led the franchise to become one of the most merchandised franchises in the world.
While filming the original 1977 film, George Lucas decided to take a $500,000 pay cut to his salary as director in exchange for full ownership of the franchise's merchandising rights.
By 1987, the first three films have made US$2.6 billion in merchandising revenue.
By 2012, the first six films produced approximately US$20 billion in merchandising revenue.
Kenner made the first Star Wars action figures to coincide with the release of the original film, and today the original figures are highly valuable.
Since the 1990s, Hasbro holds the rights to create action figures based on the saga.
Pez dispensers began to be produced in 1997.
Star Wars was the first intellectual property to be licensed in Lego history.
Lego has produced animated parody short films and mini-series to promote their Star Wars sets.
The Lego Star Wars video games are critically acclaimed bestsellers.
In 1977, the board game Star Wars: Escape from the Death Star was released.
A Star Wars Monopoly and themed versions of Trivial Pursuit and Battleship were released in 1997, with updated versions released in subsequent years.
The board game Risk has been adapted in two editions by Hasbro:
The Clone Wars Edition (2005) and the Original Trilogy Edition (2006).
Three Star Wars tabletop role-playing games have been developed: a version by West End Games in the 1980s and 1990s, one by Wizards of the Coast in the 2000s, and one by Fantasy Flight Games in the 2010s.

Star Wars Trading Cards have been published since the first "blue" series, by Topps, in 1977.
Dozens of series have been produced, with Topps being the licensed creator in the United States.
Each card series are of film stills or original art.
Many of the cards have become highly collectible with some very rare "promos", such as the 1993 Galaxy Series II "floating Yoda" P3 card often commanding US$1,000 or more.
While most "base" or "common card" sets are plentiful, many "insert" or "chase cards" are very rare.
From 1995 until 2001, Decipher, Inc. had the license for, created, and produced the Star Wars Customizable Card Game.

==
Themes ==
Star Wars features elements such as knighthood, chivalry, and Jungian archetypes such as "the shadow".

There are also many references to Christianity, such as in the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil.
Anakin was conceived of a virgin birth, and is assumed to be the "Chosen One", a messianic individual.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin falls from grace, remaining evil as Darth Vader until Return of the Jedi.
According to Adam Driver, sequel
trilogy villain Kylo Ren, who idolizes Vader, believes he is "doing what he thinks is right".
George Lucas has said that the theme of the saga is redemption.
The saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
Each character—primarily Anakin, Luke, and Rey—follows the steps of the cycle or undergoes its reversal, becoming the villain.
A defining step of the journey is "Atonement with the Father".
Obi-Wan's loss of a father figure could have impacted his relationship with Anakin, whom both Obi-Wan and Palpatine are fatherlike mentors to.
Luke's discovery that Vader is his father has strong repurcussions on the saga and is regarded as one of the most influential plot twists in cinema.
Supreme Leader Snoke encourages Kylo Ren to kill his father, Han Solo.
Kylo uses the fact that Rey is an orphan to tempt her into joining the dark side.
According to Inverse, the final scene in The Last Jedi, which depicts servant children playing with a toy of Luke and one boy using the Force, symbolizes that "the Force can be found in people with humble beginnings."
===
Historical influences ===
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
Battles featuring the Ewoks and Gungans against the Empire and Trade Federation, respectively, represent the clash between a primitive society and a more advanced one, similar to the Vietnam-American War.
Darth Vader's design was initially inspired by Samurai armor, and also incorporated a German military helmet.
Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler; this was condensed into one character in the form of Vader.
Stormtroopers borrow the name of World War I German "shock" troopers.
Imperial officers wear uniforms resembling those of German forces during World War II, and political and security officers resemble the black-clad SS down to the stylized silver death's head on their caps.
World War II terms were used for names in the films; e.g. the planets Kessel (a term that refers to a group of encircled forces) and Hoth (after a German general who served on the snow-laden Eastern Front).
Shots of the commanders looking through AT-AT walker viewscreens in The Empire Strikes Back resemble tank interiors, and space battles in the original film were based on World War I and World War II dogfights.
Palpatine being a chancellor before becoming the Emperor in the prequel
trilogy alludes to Hitler's role before appointing himself Führer.
Lucas has also drawn parallels to historical dictators such as Julius Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and politicians like Richard Nixon.
The Great Jedi Purge mirrors the events of the Night of the Long Knives.
The corruption of the Galactic Republic is modeled after the fall of the democratic Roman Republic and the formation of an empire.
On the inspiration for the First Order formed "from the ashes of the Empire", The Force Awakens
director J. J. Abrams spoke of conversations the writers had about how the Nazis could have escaped to Argentina after WWII and "started working together again."

==
Cultural impact ==
The Star Wars saga has had a significant impact on popular culture, with references to its fictional universe deeply embedded in everyday life.
Phrases like "evil empire" and
"May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon.
The first Star Wars film in 1977 was a cultural unifier, enjoyed by a wide spectrum of people.
The film can be said to have helped launch the science-fiction boom of the late 1970s and early 1980s, making science-fiction films a mainstream genre.
The widespread impact made it a prime target for parody works and homages, with popular examples including Hardware Wars, Spaceballs, The Family Guy Trilogy and Robot Chicken: Star Wars.

In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back, was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possesses a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.

===
Industry ===
The original Star Wars film was a huge success for 20th Century Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company.
Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price doubled to a record high.
Prior to 1977, 20th Century Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.
The franchise helped Fox to change from an almost bankrupt production company to a thriving media conglomerate.
Star Wars fundamentally changed the aesthetics and narratives of Hollywood films, switching the focus of Hollywood-made films from deep, meaningful stories based on dramatic conflict, themes and irony to sprawling special-effects-laden blockbusters, as well as changing the Hollywood film industry in fundamental ways.
Before Star Wars, special effects in films had not appreciably advanced since the 1950s.
The commercial success of Star Wars created a boom in state-of-the-art special effects in the late 1970s.
Along with Jaws, Star Wars started the tradition of the summer blockbuster film in the entertainment industry, where films open on many screens at the same time and profitable franchises are important.
It created the model for the major film trilogy and showed that merchandising rights on a film could generate more money than the film itself did.
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.
"
It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures.
The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.
Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.
Some critics have blamed Star Wars and Jaws for "ruining" Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy, and for the industry shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster franchises with multiple sequels and prequels.
One such critic, Peter Biskind, complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies...
They marched backward through the looking-glass.
"
In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth".
The original Star Wars trilogy is widely considered one of the best film trilogies in history.
Numerous filmmakers have been influenced by Star Wars, including Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Joss Whedon, John Singleton, Kevin Smith, and later Star Wars directors J. J. Abrams and Gareth Edwards.
Lucas's concept of a "used universe" particularly influenced Ridley Scott's Blade Runner (1982) and Alien (1979), James Cameron's Aliens (1986) as well as The Terminator (1984), George Miller's Mad Max 2 (1981), and Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings trilogy (2001–2003).
Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film Inception.

====
Fan works ====
The Star Wars saga has inspired many fans to create their own non-canon material set in the Star Wars galaxy.
In recent years, this has ranged from writing fan fiction to creating fan films.
In 2002, Lucasfilm sponsored the first annual Official Star Wars Fan Film Awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the genre.
Because of concerns over potential copyright and trademark issues, however, the contest was initially open only to parodies, mockumentaries, and documentaries.
Fan fiction films set in the Star Wars universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007, Lucasfilm changed the submission standards to allow in-universe fiction entries.
Lucasfilm has allowed but not endorsed the creation of fan fiction, as long as it does not attempt to make a profit.

===
Academia ===
As the characters and the storyline of the original trilogy are so well known, educators have used the films in the classroom as a learning resource.

For example, a project in Western Australia honed elementary school students storytelling skills by role-playing action scenes from the movies and later creating props and audio/visual scenery to enhance their performance.

Others have used the films to encourage second-level students to integrate technology in the science classroom by making prototype lightsabers.
Similarly, psychiatrists in New Zealand and the US have advocated their use in the university classroom to explain different types of psychopathology.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==
Decker, Kevin S. (2005).
Star Wars and Philosophy.
Open Court.
ISBN 978-0-8126-9583-0.

Campbell, Joseph (1991).
The Power of Myth.
Anchor.
ISBN 978-0-385-41886-7.

Henderson, Mary (1997).
Star Wars: The Magic of Myth.
Bantam.
ISBN 978-0-553-10206-2.

Cavlelos, Jeanne (1999).
The Science of Star Wars.
St. Martin's Press.
ISBN 978-0-312-20958-2.

Nancy R. Reagin, Janice Liedl, ed.
(
2012).
Star Wars and History.
John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 978-0-470-60200-3.

Star Wars:
Where Science Meets Imagination.
National Geographic & Boston Museum of Science.
October 2005.
ISBN 978-0-7922-6200-8.
==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Map - 2020 official; HiRez; WebSite
A hulder (or huldra) is a seductive forest creature found in Scandinavian folklore.
Her name derives from a root meaning "covered" or "secret".
In Norwegian folklore, she is known as huldra ("the [archetypal] hulder", though folklore presupposes that there is an entire Hulder race and not just a single individual).
She is known as the skogsrå "forest spirit" or Tallemaja "pine tree Mary" in Swedish folklore, and ulda in Sámi folklore.
Her name suggests that she is originally the same being as the völva divine figure
Huld and the German Holda.
The word hulder is only used of a female; a "male hulder" is called a huldrekall and also appears in Norwegian folklore.
This being is closely related to other underground dwellers, usually called tusser (sg.,
tusse).
Whereas the female hulder is almost invariably described as incredible, seductive and beautiful, the males of the same race are sometimes said to be hideous, with grotesquely long noses.

==
Folklore ==
The hulder is one of several rå (keeper, warden), including the aquatic sjörå or havsfru, later identified with a mermaid, and the bergsrå in caves and mines who made life tough for the poor miners.
More information can be found in the collected Norwegian folktales of Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe.
===
Relations with humans ===
The hulders were held to be kind to charcoal burners, watching their charcoal kilns while they rested.
Knowing that she would wake them if there were any problems, they were able to sleep, and in exchange they left provisions for her in a special place.
A tale from Närke illustrates further how kind a hulder could be, especially if treated with respect (Hellström 1985:15).

===
Origins ===
A tale recounts how a woman had washed only half of her children when God came to her cottage; ashamed of the dirty ones, she hid them.

God decreed that those she had hidden from him would be hidden from humanity; they became the hulders.

==
Toponyms ==
A multitude of places in Scandinavia are named after the Hulders, often places by legend associated with the presence of the "hidden folk".
Here are some examples showing the wide distribution of Hulder-related toponyms between the northern and southern reaches of Scandinavia, and the terms usage in different language groups' toponyms.

===
Danish ===
Huldremose (Hulder Bog) is a bog on Djursland, Denmark famous for the discovery of the Huldremose Woman, a bog body from 55BC.
===
Norwegian ===
Hulderheim is southeast on the island Karlsøya, Troms, Norway.
The name means "Home of the Hulder".

Hulderhusan is an area on the southwest of Norway's largest island Hinnøya, whose name means "Houses of the Hulders".

===
Sámi ===
Ulddaidvárri in Kvænangen, Troms (Norway) means "Mountain of the Hulders" in North Sámi.

Ulddašvággi is a valley southwest of Alta in Finnmark, Norway.
The name means "Hulder Valley" in North Sámi.
The peak guarding the pass over from the valley to the mountains above has a similar name, Ruollačohkka, meaning "Troll Mountain"—and the large mountain presiding over the valley on its northern side is called Háldi, which is a term similar to the above-mentioned Norwegian rå, that is a spirit or local deity which rules a specific area.

==
Parallels ==
The hulder may be connected with the German holda.

== See also ==


==
References ==
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order is an action-adventure game developed by Respawn Entertainment and published by Electronic Arts.
It was released for Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One on November 15, 2019.
The story, set in the Star Wars universe five years after Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, follows Jedi Padawan Cal Kestis, who becomes a target of the Galactic Empire and is hunted throughout the galaxy by two Inquisitors while attempting to complete his training, escape his troubled past, and rebuild the fallen Jedi Order.

The game was announced during E3 2018, with a more detailed reveal during the Star Wars Celebration in April 2019.
The game received generally favorable reviews from critics and sold more than ten million copies by the end of March 2020.

==
Gameplay ==
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order is an action-adventure video game played from a third-person perspective.
It also adopted the "Metroidvania" style of exploration and progression.
Players control Cal Kestis and have access to a lightsaber and the Force, which are used in both combat and puzzle scenarios.
Enemy types range from Imperial stormtroopers, droids, and Purge Troopers, who have been trained specifically to battle Jedi, to wild beasts and skilled Zabrak warriors that are native to each planet
Cal explores.
The game's bosses include Inquisitors, who also wield lightsabers and the Force, bounty hunters hired to hunt down Cal, large vehicles such as AT-STs, and wild beasts like the Oggdo Bogdo and the Gorgara.

The options menu documents the story as well as characters the player meets, along with a guide of how to defeat enemies.

The player acquires abilities at certain points in the story, and each ability allows access to previously inaccessible areas.
Once these abilities are unlocked, the player can upgrade them through a skill tree.
The game can only be saved at checkpoints, which appear as "meditation circles".
At these meditation circles, the player can "rest", which replenishes his health, Force energy, and healing items, but causes all enemies to respawn.
The game's collectibles include different outfits for Cal to wear, lightsaber pieces that can be used to customize the player's lightsaber, and alternate color schemes for Cal's ship, the Stinger Mantis (which is used to travel between planets), and droid companion BD-1 (who is used to access these collectibles, as well as complete certain puzzles), with all of these items being cosmetic and not affecting gameplay.

With the addition of a Star Wars Day 2020 update, players can access the Meditation Arena through the meditation circles.
Here, they can complete combat challenges, where they fight multiple waves of enemies, set in arenas based on certain locations from the story mode; completing these challenges awards the player with one to three stars, depending on whether the player abided by restrictions on the character's health (i.e. never recovered health or took any damage), which can be used to unlock additional skins for BD-1.
The Meditation Arena also includes a battle grid, where the player can face off against their own custom enemy wave, while being able to grant themselves invincibility, unlimited Force, and other cheats.

==
Synopsis ==


===
Setting and characters ===
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order takes place five years after the events of Revenge of the Sith.
The game follows Jedi Padawan Cal Kestis (Cameron Monaghan) as he is being hunted by the Second Sister (Elizabeth Grullón) and her partner, the Ninth Sister (Misty Lee), both trained by the Sith Lord Darth Vader (Scott Lawrence) as part of the Imperial Inquisitors program.
Supporting characters include: Cal's friend and scrapping partner Prauf (JB Blanc); former Jedi Knight-turned-mercenary Cere Junda (Debra Wilson); Greez Dritus (Daniel Roebuck), owner and pilot of the Stinger Mantis and Cere's friend; BD-1 (Ben Burtt), a small droid which befriends and accompanies Cal; Jedi Master Eno Cordova (Tony Amendola), who appears in hologram messages; Partisan leader Saw Gerrera (Forest Whitaker); Merrin (Tina Ivlev), one of the last surviving members of the Nightsister clan of Dathomir; and Dark Jedi Taron Malicos
(Liam McIntyre).
Cal's former Jedi Master, Jaro Tapal (Travis Willingham), and numerous clone troopers (Dee Bradley Baker) appear in flashbacks.

===
Plot ===
Five years after the Great Jedi Purge and the Galactic Republic's conversion into the Galactic Empire, former Jedi Padawan Cal Kestis is hiding on the planet Bracca, where he works as a scrapper salvaging ships from the Clone Wars, and is hiding his Force abilities.
After Cal is recorded by an Imperial Probe droid while using the Force to save his friend Prauf, two Inquisitors known as the Second Sister and the Ninth Sister are sent to investigate.
After the Second Sister kills Prauf for speaking up against the Empire, Cal makes his escape, briefly engaging in a duel with the Second Sister before he is rescued by former Jedi Knight Cere Junda and her partner pilot Greez Dritus in their ship, the Stinger Mantis.

Cere takes Cal to the planet Bogano in the hopes he can access an ancient vault.
En route to the vault, Cal befriends a small droid named BD-1, who shows him a message from former Jedi Master Eno Cordova, revealing that the vault was built by an ancient civilization called the Zeffo and that a Jedi Holocron containing a list of Force-sensitive children has been hidden inside by Cordova.
Cere believes the list could help rebuild the Jedi Order, but the only way to access the vault is by following Cordova's path.
Cal heads to the Zeffo homeworld and explores an ancient temple, finding a clue pointing to Cordova's friend, the Wookiee chieftain Tarfful.
On the Wookiee homeworld of Kashyyyk, Cal encounters notorious insurgent Saw Gerrera, whom he helps free several Wookiees enslaved by the Empire.

Unable to find Tarfful
, Cal returns to Zeffo to find more clues regarding the vault but is ambushed by the Second Sister, who reveals herself as Trilla Suduri, Cere's former Padawan.
She explains that she was captured by the Empire after Cere betrayed her hidden location under torture, and warns Cal that Cere will inevitably betray him once they find the Holocron.
Eventually, Cal learns he requires a Zeffo artifact called Astrium to unlock the vault, before being captured by a Haxion Brood bounty hunter and forced to fight in a gladiatorial arena owned by Haxion boss Sorc Tormo.
After Cere and Greez rescue him, Cal returns to Kashyyyk to meet with Tarfful, who instructs him to investigate the top of the Origin Tree.
At the top of the tree, he finds another recording of Cordova saying that an Astrium can be found in a Zeffo tomb on Dathomir before being attacked by the Ninth Sister, whom he defeats.

On Dathomir, Cal's progress is impeded by Nightsister Merrin, who blames the Jedi for the massacre of her people during the Clone Wars, and attempts to keep him away using an army of revenants.
After experiencing a flashback of his former master, Jaro Tapal, sacrificing himself to protect him during Order 66, the kyber crystal of Cal's lightsaber is destroyed.
He meets former Jedi Taron Malicos, who crash-landed on Dathomir during the Purge and has been seeking to learn the magic of the Nightsisters, over time growing insane and succumbing to the dark side of the Force.
Cal refuses Malicos's offer to teach him this dark power and flees after Merrin attacks them both.
Aboard the Stinger Mantis, Cere admits she cut her connection to the Force after briefly falling to the dark side upon learning Trilla became an Inquisitor.
After traveling to Ilum to rebuild his lightsaber, Cal returns to Dathomir, where he retrieves the Astrium and overcomes his guilt for his part in Jaro's death.
He defeats Malicos with the unexpected aid of Merrin, who agrees to join the Stinger Mantis crew.

Back on Bogano, Cal unlocks the vault, but Trilla attacks him and steals the Holocron.
After Cere reassumes her status as a Jedi and grants Cal the rank of Jedi Knight, the pair infiltrate the Fortress Inquisitorius on Mustafar's oceanic moon Nur.
After battling his way through the fortress, Cal defeats Trilla and retrieves the Holocron.
Cere then attempts to reconcile with her former student, but Darth Vader appears and kills Trilla for her failure, nearly killing Cere and BD-1.
Unable to defeat Vader, the three barely escape from his grasp with help from Merrin.
Back on the Stinger Mantis, Cal, having realized that gathering the children would make it easier for the Empire to target them, destroys the Holocron, believing it to be better for those children to discover their own destinies.
Their mission complete, Cal asks his crew where they should head next.

==
Development ==
Following his exit from Santa Monica Studio, Stig Asmussen joined Respawn Entertainment in 2014 as the studio's game director, leading the studio's second development team.
The project was later revealed to be a third-person action-adventure game set in the Star Wars universe in May 2016.
Aaron Contreras, a narrative designer on Mafia III, led the game's narrative team, which included Chris Avellone and four other writers.
The studio collaborated with Lucasfilm to create new characters and locations.
The game was created with Unreal Engine 4.
Drawing inspiration from The Legend of Zelda:
The Wind Waker and the Dark Souls series, Asmussen has said the team's goals for the game design include creating a deep combat system and incorporating aspects of Metroidvania map design.
Lightsaber combat does not feature dismemberment of human enemies; this was attributed to guidelines imposed by Disney/Lucasfilm.
On June 8, 2019, it was announced that Gordy Haab and Stephen Barton would be composing the score for the game.
The former had previously composed the scores to Star Wars: The Old Republic and Star Wars:
Battlefront while the latter had collaborated with the studio on the Titanfall series and Apex Legends.
The score was recorded at Abbey Road Studios with the London Symphony Orchestra and the Bach Choir of London.
Mongolian folk metal band
The Hu wrote and recorded a song, "Sugaan Essena", which featured prominently in the game.
The song lyrics were written in Mongolian, then translated into a fictional Star Wars language.

==
Release ==
Publisher Electronic Arts announced the game at E3 2018.
At E3 2019, Electronic Arts showcased a 15-minute demo of the game.
Around two weeks after this on June 25, 2019, the studio showed an extended 25-minute version of the original demo.
It was released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One on November 15, 2019, a month before the theatrical release of Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.
A Stadia version was released November 24, 2020 to positive reception in regards to performance over cloud gaming.
The game was released in two editions; a Standard Edition, and a Deluxe Edition.
The latter of which featured exclusive skins for BD-1 and the Mantis, a Digital Artbook and a "Director's Cut" behind the scenes videos.
Exclusive cosmetics were also available by pre-ordering the game, and by having an active EA Access membership.
One of these cosmetics that were available through pre-ordering the game, the orange lightsaber crystal, was later made available through an update to all players.
A free update was released on May 4, 2020, to coincide with Star Wars Day.
It introduces combat challenges named "meditation training", New Game Plus, and new cosmetics for BD-1
and Cal.
On January 12, 2021, a free update was released that improved performance when running the game with backwards compatibility on PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S.


===
Tie-in media and merchandise ===
A tie-in comic series published by Marvel Comics,
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order – Dark Temple, was announced on June 11, 2019 for release in September 2019.
Dark Horse Comics also published a reference book, The Art of Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order on November 20, 2019.Hasbro also produced three figures in the Star Wars:
The Black Series range for Cal Kestis (and BD-1), the Second Sister and the Purge Stormtrooper, with this selection of designs also being adapted by Funko into Funko Pop!
figures.

== Reception ==


===
Critical ===
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order received "generally favorable reviews", according to review aggregator Metacritic.
IGN's Dan Stapleton gave the game 9/10, saying "Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order makes up for a lot of lost time with a fantastic single-player action-adventure that marks the return of the playable Jedi."
And "It’s a genre remix that samples the combat and exploration of a lightened-up Dark Souls and the action and energy of Uncharted..."
===
Sales ===
The PlayStation 4 version of Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order sold 26,761 copies within its first week on sale in Japan, which made it the fifth bestselling retail game of the week.
In the UK, it was the second bestselling retail game during its first week on sale, with 66% of sales being for the PlayStation 4 version and the remaining 34% for the Xbox One version.
It was also the fourth biggest physical release of 2019.Publisher Electronic Arts confirmed that Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order had the fastest-selling digital launch for any Star Wars game within its first two weeks on sale.
The game sold more than 8 million copies by the end of January 2020, exceeding EA's expectations.
More than 10 million units were sold by March 31, 2020.
===
Awards ===


==
See also ==
List of Star Wars video games


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official site
The Star Wars prequel trilogy, colloquially referred to as the prequels, is a series of epic space-opera films written and directed by George Lucas.
It was produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and distributed by 20th Century Fox.
The trilogy was released from 1999 to 2005 and is set before the original Star Wars trilogy (1977–83), making it the first act of the Skywalker saga, despite being the second released.
Lucas had planned a prequel trilogy (as well as a sequel trilogy) before the release of the original film, but halted major Star Wars films beyond the original trilogy by 1981.
With the subsequent advances of computer-generated imagery, Lucas revived plans for the prequels by the early 1990s.
The trilogy marked Lucas's return to directing after a 22-year hiatus following the original Star Wars in 1977.

The trilogy consists of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
The films follow the training of the powerful youth Anakin Skywalker (the father of the original trilogy protagonists Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa) as a Jedi under the tutelage of Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, his fall to the dark side of the Force and birth as Darth Vader.
The trilogy also depicts the corruption of the Galactic Republic, the annihilation of the Jedi Order, and the rise of the Empire under the secret Sith Lord and future Galactic Emperor Palpatine.
The first two films received mixed reviews, while the third's reception was more positive.

==
Background ==
According to original trilogy producer Gary Kurtz, loose plans for a prequel trilogy were developed during the outlining of the original two films.
In 1980, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine-film series plotted, but due to the stress of producing the original trilogy and pressure from his wife to settle down, he had decided to cancel further sequels by 1981.

However, technical advances in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the ability to create computer-generated imagery (CGI), inspired Lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit his saga.
In 1989, Lucas stated that the prequel trilogy would be "unbelievably expensive."
After viewing an early CGI test created by Industrial Light & Magic for Jurassic Park, Lucas said:

We did a test for Steven Spielberg; and when we put them up on the screen I had tears in my eyes.
It was like one of those moments in history, like the invention of the lightbulb or the first telephone call.
A major gap had been crossed and things were never going to be the same.

In 1992, Lucas acknowledged that he had plans to create the prequel trilogy in the Lucasfilm Fan Club magazine, and announced this to Variety in late 1993.
Producer Rick McCallum reached out to Frank Darabont, who had previously written The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles and The Shawshank Redemption, for possible future writing duties.
He was considered until at least 1995, but as time went on, Lucas continued writing the screenplays himself.
Before Lucas chose to direct the prequels, Return of the Jedi director Richard Marquand expressed interest on directing one of the prequel films, up until his death in 1987.
The popularity of the franchise had been prolonged by the Star Wars Expanded Universe, so that it still had a large audience.
A theatrical rerelease of the original trilogy in 1997 'updated' the 20-year-old films with the style of CGI envisioned for the new episodes.

== Films ==
Having been significantly anticipated by fans, Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace was released on May 19, 1999.
It sees the Jedi coming into contact with the young Anakin Skywalker and the corruption of the Galactic Senate by Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
Episode II –
Attack of the Clones was released on May 16, 2002.
The story jumps ahead 10 years and finds Anakin—now a Jedi apprentice of Obi-Wan Kenobi—pursuing a forbidden romance, as well as the outbreak of the Clone Wars.
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, the first PG-13 film in the franchise, was released on May 19, 2005.
It depicts Anakin's fall to the dark side of the Force and his rebirth as Darth Vader.

===
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace ===
32 years before the events of the original film, two Jedi Knights—Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi—discover that the corrupt Trade Federation has formed a blockade around the planet Naboo.
Naboo's senator Palpatine—who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious—has covertly engineered the blockade as a pretext to become Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic.
With the help of Naboo's queen, Padmé Amidala, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escape the blockade.
They land on Tatooine to repair their starship, and meet a nine-year-old slave named Anakin Skywalker.
Believing him to be the prophesied "Chosen One", Qui-Gon takes Anakin to be trained as a Jedi.
The prequels were originally planned to fill in history tangential to the original trilogy, but Lucas realized that they could form the first half of one long story focusing on Anakin.
This would shape the film series into a self-contained saga.
In 1994, Lucas began writing the screenplay for the first prequel, initially titled Episode I: The Beginning.
Following the film's release, Lucas announced that he would be directing the next two.
===
Episode II –
Attack of the Clones ===
10 years later, an assassination attempt is made on Padmé Amidala, who is now serving as Naboo's senator.
Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi and his apprentice, Anakin, are assigned to protect her; Obi-Wan tracks the assassin, while Anakin and Padmé secretly fall in love.
Meanwhile, Chancellor Palpatine schemes to draw the galaxy into the Clone Wars between the Republic army of clone troopers led by the Jedi, and the Confederacy of Independent Systems led by Palpatine's Sith apprentice, Count Dooku.
The first draft of Episode II was completed just weeks before principal photography, and Lucas hired Jonathan Hales, a writer from The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, to polish it.
Unsure of a title, Lucas had jokingly called the film "Jar Jar's Great Adventure".
In writing The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas initially considered that Lando Calrissian was a clone from a planet of clones which caused the Clone Wars mentioned in A New Hope.
He later came up with the concept of an army of clone shock troopers from a remote planet which attacked the Republic and were resisted by the Jedi.

===
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith ===
Three years into the Clone Wars, Anakin becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Council and begins to have visions of Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine convinces Anakin that the dark side of the Force holds the power to save Padmé's life.
Desperate, Anakin submits to Palpatine and assumes the Sith moniker Darth Vader.
Palpatine reveals himself as Darth Sidious to the Jedi and orders their extermination while declaring the former Republic an Empire.
Vader engages in a lightsaber duel with Obi-Wan on the volcanic planet Mustafar, while Padmé dies after giving birth to twins.
Work on Episode III began before Episode II was released, with one scene shot during the earlier film's production.
Lucas originally told concept artists that the film would open with a montage of the Clone Wars, and included a scene of Palpatine revealing to Anakin that he had willed his conception through the Force.
Lucas reviewed and radically reorganized the plot, having Anakin execute Dooku in the first act to foreshadow his fall to the dark side.
After principal photography was completed in 2003, Lucas made more changes, rewriting Anakin's arc.
He would now primarily turn to the dark side in a quest to save Padmé, rather than just believing that the Jedi are plotting to take over the Republic.
The rewrite was accomplished both through editing principal footage, and filming new and revised scenes during pick-ups in 2004.

==
Themes ==
Lucas made a conscious effort to parallel scenes and dialogue between the prequel and original trilogy, especially concerning the journey of Anakin Skywalker in the prequels and that of his son Luke in the older films.
Together with the original trilogy, Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
According to Lucas, the correct order to watch the films is by episode order.
There are many references to Christianity in the prequel trilogy, such as the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil, complete with red skin and horns.
The Star Wars film cycle features a similar Christian narrative involving Anakin Skywalker; he is the "Chosen One"—the individual prophesied to bring balance to the Force—who was conceived of a virgin birth.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin falls from grace and seemingly fails to fulfill his destiny (until the prophecy comes true in Return of the Jedi).
The saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.

Palpatine being a chancellor before becoming the Emperor in the prequel
trilogy alludes to Adolf Hitler's role as chancellor before appointing himself Führer.
Lucas has also drawn parallels between Palpatine and historical dictators such as Julius Caesar and Napoleon Bonaparte, as well as former president of the United States Richard Nixon.
The Great Jedi Purge depicted in Revenge of the Sith mirrors the events of the Night of the Long Knives.
The corruption of the Galactic Republic is modeled after the fall of the Roman Republic and the formation of an empire.

==
Re-releases ==
In 2011, box sets of the original and prequel trilogy were released on Blu-ray, all including alterations.

3D releases were planned for the then-six-film franchise, but after the financially unsuccessful 2012 3D release of The Phantom Menace, the rest were cancelled to focus on the sequels.

The trilogy was made available for streaming on Disney+
upon the service's launch in late 2019.

== Reception ==
The prequel trilogy received mixed reviews, generally transitioning from negative to positive with each installment.
Common criticisms surrounded the over-reliance on  computer-generated imagery and green screens, melodramatic and wooden dialogue including scenes of romance between Anakin and Padmé, slow-paced political scenes, and the comic relief character of Jar Jar Binks.
Director of the first and third film of the Star Wars sequel
trilogy J. J. Abrams criticized Darth Maul's quick death.
Many expressed their disappointment with the trilogy's portrayal of Anakin Skywalker, particularly calling the writing weak and the dialogue wooden, although Hayden Christensen's performance in the third film was more well-received.
Contrarily, Ewan McGregor's portrayal of Obi-Wan Kenobi, following in the footsteps of Sir Alec Guinness, has been generally praised.
Natalie Portman has expressed her disappointment with the trilogy's negative reception, saying that "When something has that much anticipation it can almost only disappoint."
She also acknowledged that "With the perspective of time, it's been re-evaluated by a lot of people who actually really love them now.
"The
trilogy has also received some criticism for clashing aesthetically with the original trilogy.
While the older films feature rough and aged technology, the prequels depict relatively sleek and new industrial designs.
Some have criticized this design choice by saying that it makes the earlier time period appear to depict a more advanced civilization, although Revenge of the Sith brings the design closer to that of the original trilogy.
Lucas has called the choice clever, as it illustrates the halt of technological innovation in a time period of civil war.
Conversely, some argue for the prequel trilogy's positive elements, including its handling of political issues, especially involving the rise of fascism.
This includes Star Wars: The Last Jedi director and writer Rian Johnson, who also praised its visual effects innovations.
Jar Jar Binks has been regarded as the first fully CGI character in a live-action film, and perceived as paving the way for Gollum in The Lord of the Rings.
J. J. Abrams praised the acting of Ian McDiarmid as Darth Sidious, saying the scene where he tells the tragedy of Darth Plagueis is the best scene of the trilogy.
In 2020, Screen Rant compared the way the prequel trilogy ended the saga compared to Disney's sequel trilogy, writing, "Amidst the bad execution of the story, the fact of the matter is, the prequel movies tell one coherent narrative, with a clear through-line between movies – this is something sorely lacking in the sequel trilogy.
"George
Lucas has responded to the negative criticism by saying that, like the original films, they were intended "for 12-year-olds"—while acknowledging that fans who saw the originals when they were young had different expectations as adults.
The prequels have been noted as retaining a dedicated fanbase, primarily composed of millennials who were children at the time of their release.
Additionally, the animated The Clone Wars series, which Lucas made with animation artist Dave Filoni, has been noted to have retroactively improved the perception of the prequel trilogy among fans.

===
Critical response ===


===
Academy Awards ===


===
Box office performance ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Star Wars:
Republic Commando is a tactical first-person shooter video game, set in the Star Wars universe.
It was developed by LucasArts using the Unreal Engine, and published for the Xbox and Microsoft Windows in 2005.
The game features both single-player and multiplayer game modes.
In the story, set in the Star Wars Legends expanded universe, players assume the role of RC-1138 ("Boss"), an elite clone trooper, known as "clone commando", and the leader of the special ops unit Delta Squad, consisting of three fellow clone commandos with distinctive personalities and character traits: RC-1262 ("Scorch"), RC-1140
("Fixer"), and RC-1207 ("Sev").
The story follows Delta Squad as they complete increasingly difficult missions throughout the Clone Wars and learn to bond as a team.

Republic Commando received generally favorable reviews at release.
Many critics praised the story and combat, but criticized the short length and average multiplayer.
In the years since its release, it has come to be considered one of the best Star Wars games ever made, and has gained a cult following.
The game was made available on Xbox One via backward compatibility on April 16, 2018.
An enhanced port of the game by Aspyr is set to release for the Nintendo Switch and PlayStation 4 on April 6, 2021.

==
Gameplay ==
The game features some gameplay elements that resemble features in other first-person shooters.
The heads-up display (HUD) shows the player character's helmet, with a tactical visor.
The player acts as squad leader of a squad of four elite troops.
The squadmate order system allows the player general tactical control over the three non-player characters (NPCs) squadmates that round out the four-man commando team.
Many objects in the game environment will highlight when the crosshair is placed over them.
The player can then press the "use" key to issue an order automatically associated with the object; for example, a sealed door may highlight with a synchronized team breach-and-clear command, or a computer console might have a "slice" (computer hacking) command, while a pile of cargo boxes suitable for a cover position with good vantage may provide a "take up Sniper/Anti-Armor position" command.
Where possible, the squadmates will usually take their preferred roles (sniper, demolitions and technical).
The player can order the squad to move to secure any position (wherever the crosshair is pointed), or perform search-and-destroy.
There are orders to command the squadmates to group up or spread out according to the player's discretion for the situation.

In single-player mode, the player and squadmates do not die when they run out of health, but rather are incapacitated.
If the player character is downed, the player can order the squad members to attempt to revive the player or to continue with their current orders.
Therefore, the game is only truly over when the player and all members of the squad are incapacitated at once or if the player is downed in a position their squadmates cannot reach (such as chasms).
Certain missions may require squad members to split up to accomplish various isolated objectives, and in such scenarios, where the player is operating alone, losing all the player's health also results in a game over.
While reviving a downed commando restores a small amount of health, bacta charging stations are necessary to fully regain it.

Weapons can be acquired in both single player and multiplayer.
Throughout the campaign, the player always carrys the compact DC-17 and a blaster pistol with unlimited ammo.
The DC-17 can be configured into an assault rifle, sniper rifle, and grenade launcher.
The player may also use weapons dropped by enemies.

Republic Commando maintains a first-person perspective throughout the game, presenting the story from the eyes of Delta Squad's squad leader, RC-1138 ("Boss").
His squadmates include RC-1262 ("Scorch"), a talkative explosives expert; RC-1140 ("Fixer"), a skilled hacker and a dedicated soldier; and RC-1207 ("Sev"), the squad's sniper who enjoys racking up kills.
Information is received via radio commands from a clone officer (referred to as "Advisor"), and a text-based objective list with a pop-up objective tracker arrow that points the player to the next objective.

==
Synopsis ==


===
Setting ===
The game is set during the events of the Clone Wars that started at the climax of the movie Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones.
The player takes command of a squad of four elite clone troopers, known as "clone commandos", who were genetically modified to surpass regular troopers in every aspect.
The team travels to various locations in the Star Wars universe, including Geonosis, Kashyyyk, and the derelict spacecraft Prosecutor.
Missions span most of the three year-long Clone Wars, taking place several years apart from each other.

===
Plot ===
Following a montage that briefly details Delta Squad's creation, early life, and training at the cloning facilities on Kamino, the game begins with the team being deployed into the front lines of the Battle of Geonosis at the onset of the Clone Wars.
There, team leader Delta-38 ("Boss", the player character) meets up with squad mates 62, 40, and 07 ("Scorch", "Fixer" and "Sev" respectively) as they are given their first assignment: to assassinate Sun Fac, chief lieutenant of Geonosian Archduke Poggle the Lesser, one of the members of the Separatist Council.
Upon successful completion of their objective, Delta Squad sabotage the droid factory underneath Sun Fac's headquarters, disable an anti-aircraft bunker that is wreaking havoc on the Republic Army's air forces, and sneak onto a disabled Separatist Trade Federation Lucrehulk-class Core Ship to steal important launch codes to prevent the Separatist fleet from retreating; escaping moments before the ship is destroyed.

A year into the war, the now-veteran Delta Squad is sent to investigate the derelict Acclamator-class Republic Assault Ship (RAS) Prosecutor, their former home before being deployed to active duty.
Delta Squad splits up to investigate, quickly losing contact with command as they board the ship.
Making their way inside, the squad find the Prosecutor seemingly abandoned and in disrepair.
The squad lose contact with Scorch after he reports electrical interference with his visor and Boss is soon ambushed by scavenger droids.
Boss makes his way to one of the ship's data cores to reunite with Sev, but he is suddenly attacked and captured by a Trandoshan who is part of a large crew of slavers and mercenaries who’ve taken over the ship.
Having evaded capture, Boss and Fixer meet up but are soon attacked by battle droids deployed by the Trandoshans.
After rescuing their captive squad members, Delta Squad takes back the ship’s bridge and destroy a jamming device which reestablishes communication with command.
It becomes clear that the Trandoshans intend to sell the vessel to the Separatists in exchange for battle droid dispensers.
Making their way down to the hangars, Delta Squad then destroys the Trandoshan dropship  during their retreat.
Immediately afterwards, a Lucrehulk-class Trade Federation Battleship drops out of hyperspace.
As Republic reinforcements are en route, Delta Squad defends the vessel against hordes of battle droids.
After successfully repelling the incoming droid forces, the enemy Battleship begins opening fire on the Prosecutor.
Delta Squad fight their way to the gunnery deck to activate the ship's turbo lasers in order to defend themselves.
The timely arrival of a second Republic ship, the RAS Arrestor, buys the squad enough time to activate the turbo lasers, ultimately destroying the Separatist Battleship and shutting down all remaining battle droids on board.

As the war drags on, Delta Squad continues to undertake dangerous missions.
Three years into the Clone Wars, the Wookiee Chieftan Tarfful is captured by Trandoshan slavers, and Delta Squad is sent to Kashyyyk to find and rescue him.
While making their way through the Trandoshan slave camp, they witness General Grievous arriving in his personal ship, the Soulless One, and are ordered to capture him if possible.
The squad manage to rescue Tarfful but are too late to capture Grievous, who escapes and leaves behind his MagnaGuards, which they destroy.
Delta Squad then sabotages a Trandoshan supply depot, deducing it to be a staging area for the Separatists’ invasion of Kashyyyk and confirming the allliance between the Separatis and Trandoshans.
After destroying the depot, the squad is deployed to the city of Kachirho, setting in motion the Battle of Kashyyyk.
There, they move through the Wookiee tree city, securing important objectives and battling against hordes of advanced battle droids.
Soldiering through Separatists forces, Delta Squad once again splits up to man four heavy anti-aircraft turrets in order to assist in the destruction of a Separatist destroyer hovering over Kachirho.
Once the ship is destroyed, Clone Advisor CC-01/425 orders
Delta Squad to regroup at Boss' position.
However, Sev reports that he is under heavy attack before all communication with him is lost.
Boss, Scorch, and Fixer prepare to rescue Sev, but are forced to abandon him when the Advisor orders them to evacuate immediately.
As they head out on the gunship, they are debriefed by Jedi Master Yoda.
A huge Republic fleet is seen deploying outside the gunship, as the now three-man Delta Squad prepares for another assignment in the battle.

==
Soundtrack ==
Republic Commando is notable for being the first entry in the official Star Wars game series to feature licensed music.
The song "Clones", performed by the band Ash, is played when the credits roll.
Ash are known for their Star Wars fandom; their debut album was entitled 1977, and contained numerous Star Wars references.

The main bulk of the soundtrack is a break from convention of previous Star Wars games that use abridged versions of John Williams' original score, instead using a combination of Williams' music and new music composed by Jesse Harlin.
This new music takes on a high-paced, gritty and vocal theme to the traditional Star Wars score.
"
The entire goal was to present a very dark and military take on the Star Wars universe from the point of view of disposable grunts – something no one had seen before," said Harlin.
"
Most of John Williams' material is very romantic and thematically relates to characters we weren't focusing on."
Of note is the "Vode An" theme, which plays in the main menu and several key points throughout the game (such as when the player's clone commandos defeats a large group of enemies).
The "Vode An" theme, as well as several other key music pieces, have additional choral lyrics in the Mandalorian language.
It was these lyrics that further inspired author Karen Traviss to develop the Mandalorian language into a "fully working language".

== Reception ==
Star Wars:
Republic Commando received "generally favorable" reviews, according to review aggregator Metacritic.
In the United Kingdom, sales of Republic Commando's Xbox version surpassed 60,000 copies by the end of 2005.
In France, 85,000 units were shipped for the game's launch.

== Cancelled sequel ==
A sequel to the game was already planned well ahead of production of Republic Commando.
The game was titled Star Wars: Imperial Commando and was based on the betrayal of Republic soldiers, however the project only went as far as concept art and was cancelled.

Nevertheless, Karen Traviss wrote a fifth and final novel of the Republic Commando novel series, titling it Star Wars Imperial Commando: 501st, after the cancelled sequel.

==
Legacy ==
Despite the game's storyline no longer being part of the Star Wars canon as of 2014, Delta Squad and other elements remained canon.
Delta Squad made a brief appearance in "Witches of the Mist," a season three episode of the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars; the series' supervising director Dave Filoni stated that he took inspiration from the game when creating the world of the show.

The concept of Republic Commandos (also known as Clone Commandos) first seen in the game has been featured in several Star Wars works since Republic Commando's release.
The episode "Missing in Action" of the fifth season of The Clone Wars introduces the character of Captain Gregor, a former clone commando suffering from amnesia.
The season seven episode "The Bad Batch" introduces Clone Force 99 (informally known as "The Bad Batch"), a clone commando squad consisting of four clone troopers with personality quirks that only slightly resemble normal clones—the result of specially designed genetic experimentation.
Clone Force 99's storyline will continue in the upcoming series Star Wars: The Bad Batch.
Clone commandos are also playable in the video game Star Wars Battlefront II.

== See also ==
Delta Squad


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
Republic Commando on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: Republic Commando at MobyGames
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker –
Original Motion Picture Soundtrack is the film score to the 2019 film of the same name composed and conducted by John Williams.
The soundtrack album was released in both digital formats and digipak CD by Walt Disney Records on December 18 and 20, 2019 respectively.
It is his final soundtrack for the franchise; shortly before the sessions began, Williams announced that he would be retiring from Star Wars after over 40 years as its musical heart.

==
Overview ==
On January 10, 2018, it was confirmed that John Williams would return to compose and conduct The Rise of Skywalker.
The next month, Williams announced that it would be the last Star Wars film for which he would compose the score.
In August 2019, at Tanglewood's Film Night, Williams revealed that scoring sessions were underway and that 80% of the music for Episode IX had been recorded and that an additional 40 minutes would be recorded at the request of director J.J Abrams.
Recording of the score had begun in mid-July at Sony Pictures Studios' Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage in Culver City, but ended up requiring as many as 11 sessions scattered over a five-month period.
Williams conducted the sessions himself, recording over three hours of music which consisted of new material and revisions of previous themes.
Speaking about the recording process, he said that "It was a wonderful way to spend six or eight months...and for being grateful for having the energy and interest to work with the orchestra, which was very lovely."
William Ross assisted with orchestrations, while mixing was handled by sound engineer Shawn Murphy.
Like the previous sequel trilogy films, it was recorded with a 102-piece freelance orchestra together with a 100-voice Los Angeles Master Chorale.
The final day of recording occurred on November 18, 2019 with many of the cast and executives present, such as Star Wars actors Mark Hamill, Daisy Ridley, Kelly Marie Tran and frequent collaborator Steven Spielberg.

In a lead up to the release of the soundtrack, a For
Your Consideration soundtrack album was released on the Disney awards website on December 10, 2019, which consisted of 50 minutes of the music for the film.
However, due to reasons unknown, it was taken down shortly after.
==
Track listing ==
All music is composed by John Williams.

==
Additional music ==


==
Charts ==


==
Awards ==
On February 20th, 2020, John Williams won 3 IFMCA Awards for the score, including Score of the Year, Best Original Score for a Fantasy/Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film, and Film Score Composition of the Year for the film's main theme, The Rise of Skywalker.
Williams was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score, his final nomination for a Star Wars film.

==
References ==
The cat-sìth (Scottish Gaelic:
[kʰaʰt̪ ˈʃiː], plural cait-shìth), in Irish cat
sí (Irish:
[kat̪ˠ ˈʃiː]) is a fairy creature from Celtic mythology, said to resemble a large black cat with a white spot on its chest.
Legend has it that the spectral cat haunts the Scottish Highlands.
The legends surrounding this creature are more common in Scottish folklore, but a few occur in Irish.
Some common folklore suggested that the cat-sìth was not a fairy, but a witch that could transform into a cat nine times.
The cat-sìth may have been inspired by the Scottish wildcat itself.
It is possible that the legends of the cat-sìth were inspired by Kellas cats, which are a distinctive hybrid between Scottish wildcats and domestic cats found only in Scotland (the Scottish wildcat is a population of the European wildcat, which is absent from elsewhere in the British Isles).

==
Appearance ==
The cat-sìth is all black with the exception of a white spot on its chest.
It is described as being as large as a dog and chooses to display itself with its back arched and bristles erect.

==
The King of the Cats ==
In the British folk tale "The King of the Cats", a man comes home to tell his wife and cat, Old Tom, that he saw nine black cats with white spots on their chests carrying a coffin with a crown on it and one of the cats tells the man to "Tell Tom Tildrum that Tim Toldrum is dead.
"
The cat then exclaims, "What?!
Old Tim dead!
Then I'm the King
o' the Cats!"
Old Tom then climbs up the chimney and is never seen again.

==
Soul-stealing ==
The people of the Scottish Highlands did not trust the cat-sìth.
They believed that it could steal a person's soul, before it was claimed by the gods, by passing over a corpse before burial; therefore, watches called the Fèill Fhadalach (Late Wake)
were performed night and day to keep the cat-sìth away from a corpse before burial.
Methods of "distraction" such as games of leaping and wrestling, catnip, riddles and music would be employed to keep the cat-sìth away from the room in which the corpse lay.
In addition, there were no fires where the body lay, as it was said that the cat-sìth was attracted to the warmth.

==
Samhain ==
On Samhain, it was believed that a cat-sìth would bless any house that left a saucer of milk out for it to drink and those houses that did not put out a saucer of milk would be cursed into having all of their cows' udders go dry.

==
Summoning ==
The demonic cat-sith called Big Ears could be summoned (Gaelic taghairm Scottish Gaelic pronunciation: [tɤrʲɤm]) to appear and grant any wish to those who took part in the ceremony.
The ceremony required practitioners to burn the bodies of cats over the course of four days and nights.

==
Transformation ==
Some people believed that the cat-sìth was a witch that could transform voluntarily into its cat form and back nine times.
If one of these witches chose to go back into their cat form for the ninth time, they would remain a cat for the rest of their lives.
It is believed by some that this is how the idea of a cat having nine lives originated.

== See also ==
Aos Sí
Beast of Bodmin
Cù-sìth
Cath Palug
Kellas cat
List of fictional cats
Phantom cat
"The Black Cat" (short story)


==
References ==
Created by Gene Roddenberry, the science fiction television series Star Trek (which eventually acquired the retronym Star Trek: The Original Series) starred William Shatner as Captain James T. Kirk, Leonard Nimoy as Mr. Spock, and DeForest Kelley as Dr. Leonard "Bones"
McCoy aboard the fictional Federation starship USS Enterprise.
The series originally aired from September 1966 through June 1969 on NBC.This is the first television series in the Star Trek franchise, and comprises 79 regular episodes over the series' three seasons, along with the series' original pilot episode, "The Cage".
The episodes are listed in order by original air date, which match the episode order in each season's original, remastered, and Blu-ray DVD box sets.
The original, single-disc DVD releases placed the episodes by production order, with "The Cage" on the final disc.
After the series' cancellation, Paramount Television released Star Trek to television stations as a syndication package, where the series' popularity grew to become a "major phenomenon within popular culture".
This popularity would eventually lead to the expansion of the Star Trek catalog, which as of 2020 includes nine more television series and thirteen Trek motion pictures.

In 2006, CBS Paramount Domestic Television (now CBS Television Distribution) announced that each Original Series episode would be re-syndicated in high definition after undergoing digital remastering, including both new and enhanced visual effects.
(
To date, the remastered episodes have only been broadcast in standard definition, though all three seasons are now available on the high-definition Blu-ray Disc format.)
The remastered episodes began with "Balance of Terror" (along with, in some markets, "Miri") during the weekend of September 16, 2006, and ended with "The Cage", which aired during the weekend of May 2, 2009.

The remastered air dates listed below are based on the weekend each episode aired in syndication.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Pilots (1964–1965) ===
Star Trek's pilot episode, "The Cage", was completed between November 1964 and January 1965, and starred Jeffrey Hunter as Captain Christopher Pike, Majel Barrett  as Number One, and Leonard Nimoy as Spock.
The pilot was rejected by NBC as being "too cerebral" among other complaints.
Jeffrey Hunter chose to withdraw from the role of Pike when creator Gene Roddenberry was asked to produce a second pilot episode ("Where No Man Has Gone Before") of which a slightly (but not significantly) edited version of the same name aired in 1966 as the third episode of the new series.
"The
Cage" never aired during Star Trek's original run on NBC.
It was presented by Roddenberry as a black-and-white workprint at various science fiction conventions over the years after Star Trek's cancellation but was not released on home video until 1986 when Paramount Home Video produced a "restored" release of "The Cage" (a combination of the original black-and-white footage and color portions of the Season 1 episode "The Menagerie") along with an introduction by Gene Roddenberry.
On October 15, 1988, Paramount Pictures aired a two-hour television special, hosted by Patrick Stewart, called The Star Trek Saga:
From One Generation to the Next, which featured, for the first time, a full-color television presentation of "The Cage".
In the United States, "The Cage" was first released to DVD in December 2001.
It was later included on the final disc in both the original and "remastered" season 3 DVD box sets (listed with the original air date of October 15,
1988)."Where
No Man Has Gone Before" in its original form (production number 02a)
had been forwarded to NBC, but only a re-edited version was aired, not as a pilot but as the third episode of the series (production number 02b).
The original version was thought to be lost, but later appeared on bootleg VHS tapes at conventions, until a print of it was discovered in 2009 and subsequently released on home video under the title "Where No Fan Has Gone Before" - The Restored, Unaired Alternate Pilot Episode as part of the TOS season 3 box set on Blu-ray; it has not been released on DVD.
This version remains unaired.

===
Season 1 (1966–1967) ===
After Roddenberry's second pilot episode, "Where No Man Has Gone Before", received a more favorable response from NBC, Star Trek finally aired its first episode—"The Man Trap"—at 8:30PM on September 8, 1966.
"
Where No Man...", which eventually aired in a re-edited format as the series' third episode, retained only Spock as a character from "The Cage" but introduced William Shatner as Captain James T. Kirk, James Doohan as chief engineer Scotty, and George Takei as physicist (later helmsman) Sulu.
Also joining the cast were DeForest Kelley as ship's surgeon Dr. Leonard "Bones" McCoy and Nichelle Nichols as the communications officer Uhura in "The Man Trap"; the first aired episode of the series.

Although her character of Number One was not retained from "The Cage", Majel Barrett returned to the series as a new character, nurse Christine Chapel, and made her first of many recurring appearances in "The Naked Time".
Grace Lee Whitney appeared in eight episodes as yeoman Janice Rand, beginning with "The Man Trap".
Whitney left the series after "The Conscience of the King", but would later make minor appearances in the first, third, fourth, and sixth Star Trek films as well as one episode of the companion series Star Trek: Voyager.

Star Trek's first season comprised 29 episodes, including the two-part episode "The Menagerie", which includes almost all of the footage from the original pilot, "The Cage".
Other notable episodes include "Balance of Terror", which introduces the Romulans; "Space Seed", which introduces Khan Noonien Singh and serves as the basis for Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan; "Errand of Mercy", in which the Klingons make their first appearance; and the critically acclaimed, Hugo-Award-winning episode "The City on the Edge of Forever", which features Kirk, Spock, and McCoy traveling into the past through the Guardian of Forever.
===
Season 2 (1967–1968) ===
The show's 26-episode second season began in September 1967 with "Amok Time", which introduced actor Walter Koenig as Russian navigator Pavel Chekov, and granted viewers the first glimpse of Spock's homeworld, Vulcan.
The season also includes such notable episodes as "Mirror, Mirror", which introduces the evil "mirror universe"; "Journey to Babel", featuring the introduction of Spock's parents Sarek and Amanda; and the light-hearted "The Trouble with Tribbles", which would later be revisited in a 1973 episode of Star Trek: The Animated Series and a 1996 episode of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine.
The season ended with "Assignment: Earth", an attempt to launch a spin-off television series set in the 1960s.

===
Season 3 (1968–1969) ===
After Star Trek's second season, NBC was prepared to cancel the show due to low ratings.
Led by fans Bjo and John Trimble, Trek viewers inundated NBC with letters protesting the show's demise and pleading with the network to renew the series for another year.
After NBC agreed to produce a third season, the network promised Gene Roddenberry that the show would air in a favorable timeslot (Mondays at 7:30 p.m.), but later changed the schedule so that Trek would air in the so-called "death slot"—Friday nights at 10:00 p.m.
In addition to the "mismanaged" schedule, the show's budget was "seriously slashed" and Nichelle Nichols described the series' eventual cancellation as "a self-fulfilling
prophecy".
Star Trek's final, 24-episode season began in September 1968 with "Spock's Brain".
The third season also includes "The Tholian Web", where Kirk becomes trapped between universes; this episode would later be revisited by two 2005 episodes of the prequel series Star Trek: Enterprise.
The last episode of the series, "Turnabout Intruder", aired on June 3, 1969, but Star Trek would eventually return to television in animated form when the animated Star Trek debuted in September 1973.

==
Production order ==
The list below details the series' episodes in production order, including the original series pilot, "The Cage".
While the "complete season" DVD releases (listed above) follow the original broadcast order, the original episodic DVD releases are numbered by production order.

==
British transmission ==
Star Trek was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One starting on July 12, 1969, with the episode "Where No Man Has Gone Before".

The first episode broadcast in color was "Arena" on November 15, 1969.

The episodes were broadcast in a different order than in the United States and were originally aired in four seasons between 1969 and 1971.

The BBC edited the episodes for broadcast by showing the title sequence first, then the teaser segment that aired before the titles in the United States, then the rest of the episode.

These edited episodes aired until the 1990s, after which the BBC was supplied with NTSC videotape transfers of the first season instead of new film prints, resulting in a substandard picture, and with edits originally made for syndication in the United States.

Viewer complaints led to the BBC obtaining film prints for the subsequent two seasons.

"The Cage" was first broadcast on Sky One in July 1990.

Three episodes, "Plato's Stepchildren", "The Empath", and "Whom Gods Destroy", were not broadcast on the BBC until 1994, although "The Empath" was listed in the Radio Times as scheduled to broadcast on December 16, 1970, at 7:20 pm.

Sky One was the first network to air these three episodes in the UK in 1990, although with the title sequence and teaser shown in the order as they were aired in the United States, whereas the rest of the episodes were broadcast as edited by the BBC.

==
See also ==
Lists of Star Trek episodes


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Trek:
The Original Series at IMDb
The Original Series at Memory Alpha (a Star Trek wiki)
Star Wars is an American epic space-opera media franchise, centered on a film series created by George Lucas that includes Star Wars (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980), and Return of the Jedi (1983).
The series depicts the adventures of various characters "a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away".
Many derivative Star Wars works have been produced in conjunction with, between, and after the original trilogy of films, and later installments.
This body of work was collectively known as the Star Wars Expanded Universe for decades.

In October 2012, The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm for $4.06 billion.
In April 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded the Expanded Universe material as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canon to the franchise.
The company's focus would be shifted towards a restructured Star Wars canon based on new material.
The first new canon adult novel was Star Wars:
A New Dawn by John Jackson Miller, published in September 2014.This is a list of original novels, novel adaptations, original junior novels, junior novel adaptations, young readers, and short stories in the Star Wars franchise.
This list does not include journals, graphic novels or comic books, which can be found in the list of Star Wars comic books.
Reference books and roleplaying gamebooks can be found at the list of Star Wars reference books.

==
Film and television adaptations ==
The novelizations offer an alternate take on the events of the movies.
Many include discarded or slightly altered plot-lines.
It should be remembered that those published before 25 April 2014 are considered Legends like all other media.

Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999), by Terry Brooks (32 BBY) (A)
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (junior novel) (1999), by Patricia Wrede (32 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), by R.A. Salvatore (22 BBY) (A)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (junior novelization) (2002), by Patricia Wrede (22 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008), by Karen Traviss (21.5 BBY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), by Matthew Stover (19 BBY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (junior novel) (2005), by Patricia Wrede (19 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker/Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1976), by Alan Dean Foster as George Lucas (0 BBY-0 ABY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980), by Donald F. Glut (3 ABY) (A)
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983), by James Kahn (4 ABY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi –
The Illustrated Edition (1983), by James Kahn (4 ABY)


===
William Shakespeare's Star Wars ===
William Shakespeare's The Phantom of Menace:
Star Wars Part the First (2015), by Ian Doescher (32 BBY)
William Shakespeare's The Clone Army Attacketh:
Star Wars Part the Second (2015), by Ian Doescher (22 BBY)
William Shakespeare's Tragedy of the Sith's Revenge:
Star Wars Part the Third (2015), by Ian Doescher (19 BBY)
William Shakespeare's Star Wars (Verily, A New Hope) (2013), by Ian Doescher (0 BBY–0 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Empire Striketh Back (2014), by Ian Doescher (3 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Jedi Doth Return (2014), by Ian Doescher (4 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Force Doth Awaken (2017), by Ian Doescher (34 ABY)
William Shakespeare's Jedi the Last (2018), by Ian Doescher (34 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Merry Rise of Skywalker (2020) by Ian Doescher (35 ABY)


==
Original canon stories (2014–present) ==
Since 2014, the official Star Wars canon includes all of the movie episodes, The Clone Wars film and the television shows Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars Rebels, and Star Wars Resistance, as well as any books, comics, and video games published after April 2014.
===
Short stories ===


====
Star Wars Insider (2014–present) ====
Since 2014, various short stories have been published in Star Wars Insider.

====
The Rise of the Empire (October 2015) ====
"Mercy Mission" by Melissa Scott (14 BBY)
"Bottleneck" by John Jackson Miller (12 BBY)
"
The Levers of Power" by Jason Fry (4 ABY)


====
"The Perfect Weapon" ====
"The Perfect Weapon" (November 2015) by Delilah S. Dawson (34 ABY).
This story is part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens promotional campaign.
Printed in the paperback edition of the Star Wars: The Force Awakens novelization.

====
Tales from a Galaxy
Far, Far Away: Aliens ====
The collection Tales from a Galaxy
Far, Far Away: Aliens is part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens promotional campaign.
Some stories were originally published as individual e-books, and later collected with other new stories.
However, they were all published together as a book called Star Wars: Tales From a Galaxy
Far, Far Away
"All Creatures Great and Small" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
High Noon on Jakku" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Count Dooku" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (31 ABY;
flashbacks to 19 BBY)
"
The Face of Evil" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
A Recipe for Death" (April 2016) by Landry Q. Walker
(Pre–32 BBY)
"True Love" (April 2016) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)


====
From a Certain Point of View (October 2017) ====


====
Canto Bight (December 2017) ====
"Rules of the Game", by Saladin Ahmed (34 ABY)
"Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing", by Rae Carson (34 ABY)
"
The Wine in Dreams", by Mira Grant (34 ABY)
"The Ride", by John Jackson Miller (34 ABY)


===
Children's books ===
Canon storybooks for younger readers that are shorter than a standard novel or young adult novel.

==
Original Star Wars Legends stories ==
This body of work represents the original Star Wars expanded universe, which was rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Beginning with the 1999 release of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, Lucasfilm has divided its titles by fictional "era" with symbols designating such.
===
Before the Republic era ===
This era contains stories taking place more than 25,000 years before Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
===
Old Galactic Republic era ===
This era contains stories taking place 25,000 to 1,000 years before Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
===
Rise of the Empire era ===
This era contains stories taking place within 100 years before Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

====
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones ====


====
The Clone Wars ====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008), by Karen Traviss (21.5 BBY) (Y)
The Clone Wars: Wild Space (2008), by Karen Miller (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Clone Wars: No Prisoners (2009), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
(A)


====
Clone Wars: Gambit by Karen Miller (21 BBY) ====
Stealth (2010)
(A)
Siege (2010)
(A)


====
Clone Wars:
Secret Missions by Ryder Windham (21 BBY) ====
Breakout Squad (2009)
(Y)
Curse of the Black Hole Pirates (2010)
(Y)
Duel at Shattered Rock (2011)
(Y)
Guardians of the Chiss Key (2012)
(Y)


====
Republic Commando ====
Republic Commando:
Hard Contact (2004), by Karen Traviss (22 BBY)
"Omega Squad: Targets" (2005), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #81 and Republic Commando:
Triple Zero
Republic Commando:
Triple Zero (2006), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
"Republic Commando: Odds" (2006), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #87 and Republic Commando: True Colors
Republic Commando:
True Colors (2007), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2008), by Karen Traviss (19 BBY)


=====
Imperial Commando =====
Imperial Commando: 501st (2009), by Karen Traviss (19 BBY)


====
Clone Wars ====
Shatterpoint (2003), by Matthew Stover (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Cestus Deception (2004), by Steven Barnes (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Hive (2004), by Steven Barnes (21.5 BBY) (E)
(A)
Jedi Trial (2004), by David Sherman & Dan Cragg (21.5 BBY)
(A)
Yoda: Dark Rendezvous (2004), by Sean Stewart (20 BBY)
MedStar
I:
Battle Surgeons (2004), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (20 BBY)
(A)
MedStar II:
Jedi Healer (2004), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (20 BBY)
(A)
Labyrinth of Evil (2005), by James Luceno (19 BBY)
(A)


====
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ====
Dark Lord:
The Rise of Darth Vader (2005), by James Luceno (19 BBY)
(A)
Kenobi (2013), by John Jackson Miller (19 BBY)
(A)
"Incognito" (2013), by John Jackson Miller (19 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #143 and Kenobi (A)


====
Coruscant Nights (18.8 – 17 BBY) ====
Jedi Twilight (2008), by Michael Reaves (18.8 BBY)
Street of Shadows (2008), by Michael Reaves (19 BBY–18.46 BBY)
Patterns of Force (2009), by Michael Reaves with Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (uncredited) (18.3 BBY)
The Last Jedi (2013), by Michael Reaves & Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (18–17 BBY)


====
The Last of the Jedi by Jude Watson (18 BBY) ====
The Desperate Mission (2005)
(Y)
Dark Warning (2005)
(Y)
Underworld (2005)
(Y)
Death on Naboo (2006)
(Y)
A Tangled Web (2006)
(Y)
Return of the Dark Side (2006)
(Y)
Secret Weapon (2007)
(Y)
Against The Empire (2007)
(Y)
Master of Deception (2008)
(Y)
Reckoning (2008)
(Y)


====
A New Hope:
The Life of Luke Skywalker (15 BBY – 4 ABY) ====
A New Hope:
The Life of Luke Skywalker (2009), by Ryder Windham (Y)


====
The Han Solo Trilogy ====
The Paradise Snare (1997), by A.C. Crispin (10 BBY)
(A)
The Hutt Gambit (1997), by A.C. Crispin (5-4 BBY)
(A)
Rebel Dawn (1998), by A.C. Crispin (3-0 BBY)
(A)


====
The Adventures of Lando Calrissian ====
Lando Calrissian and the Mindharp of Sharu (1983), by L. Neil Smith (4 BBY)
Lando Calrissian and the Flamewind of Oseon (1983), by L. Neil Smith (4 BBY)
Lando Calrissian and the Starcave of ThonBoka (1983), by L. Neil Smith (3 BBY)


====
The Force Unleashed (3 – 1 BBY) ====
The Force Unleashed (2008), by Sean Williams (3-2 BBY)
(A)
The Force Unleashed II
(2010), by Sean Williams (1 BBY)
(A)


====
The Han Solo Adventures (2 BBY) ====
Han Solo at Stars' End (1979), by Brian Daley
Han Solo's Revenge (1979), by Brian Daley
Han Solo and the Lost Legacy (1980), by Brian Daley


====
Death Troopers ====
Death Troopers (2009), by Joe Schreiber (1 BBY)
(A)


===
Rebellion era ==
=
This era contains stories taking place within five years after the events of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

====
Death Star ====
Death Star (2007), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (1 BBY – 0 BBY)


====
Shadow Games ====
Shadow Games (2011), by Michael Reaves and Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (1 BBY – 0 BBY)


====
Episode IV:
A New Hope ====
====
Rebel Force by Alex Wheeler (0 – 1 ABY) ====
0
ABY
Target (2008)
(Y)
Hostage (2008)
(Y)
Renegade (2009)
(Y)
0.5 ABY
Firefight (2009)
(Y)
Trapped (2010)
(Y)
Uprising (2010) (1 ABY) (Y)


====
Scoundrels
====
Winner Lose All
—A Lando Calrissian Tale (2012), by Timothy Zahn (1-0 BBY) (E)
Scoundrels (2013), by Timothy Zahn (0 ABY)
(A)


====
Galaxy of Fear by John Whitman (0.5 ABY) (Y) ===
=
Eaten
Alive (1997)
City of the Dead (1997)
Planet Plague (1997)
The Nightmare Machine (1997)
Ghost of the Jedi (1997)
Army of Terror (1997)
The Brain Spiders (1997)
The Swarm (1998)
Spore (1998)
The Doomsday Ship (1998)
Clones (1998)
The Hunger (1998)


====
Hand of Judgment (0.5 – 0.8 ABY) ====
Allegiance (2007), by Timothy Zahn (0.5 ABY) (A)
Choices of One (2011), by Timothy Zahn (0.8 ABY)


====
Smuggler's Gambit (0 – 3 ABY) ====
Smuggler's Gambit (2012), by Kyle Newman, F.J. DeSanto (A)


====
Star Wars Galaxies ====
Star Wars Galaxies:
The Ruins of Dantooine (2003), by Voronica Whitney-Robinson & Haden Blackman (1 ABY) (Y)


====
Splinter of the Mind's Eye ====
Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978), by Alan Dean Foster (2 ABY)
(A)


====
Empire and Rebellion (2 – 3 ABY)
(A) ====
Razor's Edge (2013), by Martha Wells (2 ABY)
Honor Among Thieves (2014), by James S. A. Corey (2–3 ABY)


====
The Further Adventures ====
24-page read-along book with color illustrations accompanied by a 7-inch 33 1/3 record or cassette.

Droid World (1983), by Archie Goodwin (adapter) and Dick Foes (illustrator) (3 ABY) (Y)
Planet of the Hoojibs (1983), by David Michelinie (adapter) and Greg Winters (illustrator) (3 ABY) (Y)


====
Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell ====
Vinyl record only, no book.

Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell (1983), by Brian Daley (3 ABY) (Y)


====
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back ====


====
Shadows of the Empire ====
Shadows of the Empire (1996), by Steve Perry (3.5 ABY)
(A)


====
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ====
24-page read-along book with color illustrations accompanied by a 7-inch 33 1/3 record or cassette.

The Ewoks Join the Fight (1983), by Bonnie Bogart (adapter) & Diane de Groat (illustrator) (4 ABY) (Y)


====
Golden Books ====
24-page illustrated children's books by Golden Books

Journey to Mos Eisley (1998), by Jay Rudko (0 BBY) (Y)
The Hoth Adventure (1998), by Jay Rudko (3 ABY)
(Y)
Escape from Jabba's Palace (1998), by Jay Rudko (4 ABY)
(Y)In 2015, the original six Star Wars films were adapted as Little Golden Books.
In 2017, A New Hope was also released as a Big Golden Book.
Additionally, Solo:
A Star Wars Story and the sequel trilogy were adapted.
Many other original titles featuring scenes from throughout the saga have been released, including I Am a Padawan by Ashley Eckstein.
An upcoming release will adapt The Mandalorian.

====
The Bounty Hunter Wars ====
The Mandalorian Armor (1998), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)
Slave Ship (1998), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)
Hard Merchandise (1999), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)


====
The Truce at Bakura ====
The Truce at Bakura (1993), by Kathy Tyers (4 ABY) (A)


===
New Republic era ===
This era takes place from five to 25 years after Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
====
Dark Forces by William C. Dietz (0 – 5 ABY) ====
Soldier for the Empire (1997) (0 ABY) (Y)
(A)
5 ABY
Rebel Agent (1998)
(Y)
(A)
Jedi Knight (1998)
(Y)
(A)


====
Jedi Prince by Paul & Hollace Davids (5 ABY) ====
The Glove of Darth Vader (1992) (Y)
The Lost City of the Jedi (1992)
(Y)
Zorba the Hutt's Revenge (1992)
(Y)
Mission from Mount Yoda (1993) (Y)
Queen of the Empire (1993) (Y)
Prophets of the Dark Side (1993) (Y)


====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor ====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor (2008), by Matthew Stover (5.5 ABY)
(A)


====
X-wing ====
Rogue Squadron (1996), by Michael Stackpole (6.5 ABY)
(A)
Wedge's Gamble (1996), by Michael Stackpole (6.5 ABY) (A)
The Krytos Trap (1996), by Michael Stackpole (7 ABY)
(A)
The Bacta War (1997), by Michael Stackpole (7 ABY)
(A)
Wraith Squadron (1998), by Aaron Allston (7 ABY) (A)
Iron Fist (1998), by Aaron Allston (7.5 ABY) (A)
Solo Command (1999), by Aaron Allston (7.5 ABY) (A)
Isard's Revenge (1999), by Michael Stackpole (9 ABY)
(A)
Starfighters of Adumar (1999), by Aaron Allston (12–13 ABY)
(A)


====
The Courtship of Princess Leia ====
The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994), by Dave Wolverton (8 ABY) (A)


====
A Forest Apart ====
A Forest
Apart (2003), by Troy Denning (8 ABY) (E)


====
Tatooine Ghost ====
Tatooine Ghost (2003), by Troy Denning (8 ABY)
(A)


==== Mixed up Droid ====
Mixed up Droid (1995), by Ryder Windham (8 ABY)
(A)


====
The Thrawn Trilogy ====
Heir to the Empire (1991), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)
Dark Force Rising (1992), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)
The Last Command (1993), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)


====
The Dark Empire Trilogy ====
Dark Empire (1991–1992), by Tom Veitch (10 ABY) (A)
Dark Empire II (1994–1995), by Tom Veitch (10 ABY)
(A)
Empire's End (1995), by Tom Veitch (11 ABY) (A)


====
Crimson Empire ====
Crimson Empire (1997), by Mike Richardson, Randy Stradley (11 ABY)
(A)


====
The Jedi Academy Trilogy ====
Jedi Search (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)
Dark Apprentice (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)
Champions of the Force (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)


====
I, Jedi ====
I, Jedi (1998), by Michael Stackpole (11 ABY) (A)


====
The Callista Trilogy ====
Children of the Jedi (1995), by Barbara Hambly (12–13 ABY)
(A)
Darksaber (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson (12–13 ABY)
(A)
Planet of Twilight (1997), by Barbara Hambly (12–13 ABY)
(A)


====
The Crystal Star ====
The Crystal Star (1994), by Vonda McIntyre (14 ABY) (A)


====
The Black Fleet Crisis Trilogy ====
Before the Storm (1996), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)
Shield of Lies (1997), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)
Tyrant's Test (1998), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)


====
The New Rebellion ====
The New Rebellion (1996), by Kristine Kathryn Rusch (17 ABY)
(A)


====
The Corellian Trilogy ====
Star Wars Legends:
Ambush at Corellia (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)
Assault at Selonia (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)
Showdown at Centerpoint (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)


====
The Hand of Thrawn ====
Specter of the Past (1997), by Timothy Zahn (19 ABY)
(A)
Vision of the Future (1998), by Timothy Zahn (19 ABY)
(A)


====
Scourge ====
Scourge (2012), by Jeff Grubb (19 ABY) (A)


====
Survivor's Quest ====
Fool's Bargain (2004), by Timothy Zahn (22 ABY) (E)
Survivor's Quest (2004), by Timothy Zahn (22 ABY)
(A)


====
Junior Jedi Knights ====
The Golden Globe (1995), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Lyric's World (1996), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Promises (1996), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Anakin's Quest (1996), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)
Vader's Fortress (1997), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)
Kenobi's Blade (1997), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)


====
Young Jedi Knights ====
Heirs of the Force (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Shadow Academy (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
The Lost Ones (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Lightsabers (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Darkest Knight (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Under Siege (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Shards of Alderaan (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Diversity Alliance (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Delusions of Grandeur (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Bounty (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
The Emperor's Plague (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Return to Ord Mantell (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Trouble on Cloud City (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Crisis at Crystal Reef (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Shadow (Omnibus – Heirs of the Force, Shadow Academy & The Lost Ones) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Sunrise (Omnibus – Lightsabers, Darkest Knight, & Jedi Under Siege) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Under the Black Sun (Omnibus – Return to Ord Mantell, Trouble on Cloud City, & Crisis at Crystal Reef) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)


===
New Jedi Order era ===
This era takes place within 25 to 39 years after Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
====
A Practical Man ====
Boba Fett:
A Practical Man (2006), by Karen Traviss (25 ABY) (E)


====
The New Jedi Order ====
Vector Prime (1999), by R.A. Salvatore (25 ABY) (A)
Dark Tide
I: Onslaught (2000), by Michael Stackpole (25 ABY)
(A)
Dark Tide II:
Ruin (2000), by Michael Stackpole (25 ABY)
(A)
Agents of Chaos
I: Hero's Trial (2000), by James Luceno (25 ABY) (A)
Agents of Chaos II:
Jedi Eclipse (2000), by James Luceno (25 ABY)
(A)
Balance Point (2000), by Kathy Tyers (26 ABY)
(A)
Recovery (2001), by Troy Denning (26 ABY) (E)
Edge of Victory I: Conquest (2001), by Greg Keyes (26 ABY) (A)
Edge of Victory II: Rebirth (2001), by Greg Keyes (27 ABY)
(A)
"Emissary of the Void" (2002), by Greg Keyes (26–27 ABY), serialized epic published in Star Wars Gamer, issues 8–10, and Star Wars Insider, issues
62–64
(A)
Star by Star (2001), by Troy Denning (27 ABY)
(A)
Dark Journey (2002), by Elaine Cunningham (27 ABY)
(A)
Enemy Lines
I: Rebel Dream (2002), by Aaron Allston (27 ABY) (A)
Enemy Lines II: Rebel Stand (2002), by Aaron Allston (27 ABY)(A)
Traitor (2002), by Matthew Stover (27 ABY)
(A)
Destiny's Way (2002), by Walter Jon Williams (28 ABY)
(A)
Ylesia (2002), by Walter Jon Williams (28 ABY) (E)
Force Heretic
I: Remnant (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28 ABY)
(A)
Force Heretic II:
Refugee (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28 ABY)
(A)
Force Heretic III: Reunion (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28–29 ABY)
(A)
The Final Prophecy (2003), by Greg Keyes (29 ABY) (A)
The Unifying Force (2003), by James Luceno (29 ABY)
(A)


====
The Dark Nest trilogy ====
The Joiner King (2005), by Troy Denning (35 ABY) (A)
The Unseen Queen (2005), by Troy Denning (36 ABY) (A)
The Swarm War (2005), by Troy Denning (36 ABY) (A)


===
Legacy era ===
This era takes place
40+ years after Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.
====
Legacy of the Force ====
Betrayal (2006), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY) (A)
Bloodlines (2006), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY)
(A)
Tempest (2006), by Troy Denning (40 ABY) (A)
Exile (2007), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY) (A)
Sacrifice (2007), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY) (A)
Inferno (2007), by Troy Denning (40 ABY)
(A)
Fury (2007), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY)
(A)
Revelation (2008), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY) (A)
Invincible (2008), by Troy Denning (41 ABY)
(A)


====
Crosscurrent ====
Crosscurrent (2010), by Paul S. Kemp (41 ABY)
(A)
Riptide (2011), by Paul S. Kemp (41 ABY)
(A)


====
Millennium Falcon ====
Millennium Falcon (2008), by James Luceno (60 BBY, 19 BBY, 10 BBY, 5 BBY, 43 ABY) (A)


====
Fate of the Jedi ====
Outcast (2009), by Aaron Allston (43.5 ABY)
(A)
Omen (2009), by Christie Golden (43.5 ABY) (A)
Abyss (2009), by Troy Denning (43.5 ABY)
(A)
Backlash (2010), by Aaron Allston (44 ABY) (A)
Allies (2010), by Christie Golden (44 ABY)
(A)
Vortex (2010), by Troy Denning (44 ABY) (A)
Conviction (2011), by Aaron Allston (44.5 ABY) (A)
Ascension (2011), by Christie Golden (44.5 ABY)
(A)
Apocalypse (2012), by Troy Denning (44.5 ABY) (A)


====
Crucible ====
Crucible (2013) by Troy Denning (45 ABY)
(A)


===
Short story anthologies ===
These books contain short Star Wars stories from several notable science-fiction authors with stories that span different timelines.

Tales from the Mos Eisley Cantina (1995), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (0–3 ABY) (E)
Tales from Jabba's Palace (1995), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (4 ABY)
Tales of the Bounty Hunters (1996), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (3 ABY)
Tales from the Empire (1997), edited by Peter Schweighofer (Various) (4 ABY)
Tales from the New Republic (1999), edited by Peter Schweighofer and Craig Carey (Various) (4 ABY)
Star Wars:
Science Adventures (1999) were authored by Jude Watson and K.D. Burkett.

== Notes ==


==
References ==
This is a list of Star Wars video games.
Though there have been many hobbyist-made and freeware games based on the Star Wars movie series and brand, this page lists only the games that have been developed or published by LucasArts, or officially licensed by Lucasfilm.

Platforms: Arcade, Apple II, Atari 2600, Famicom, Nintendo Entertainment System, Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Nintendo 64, Sega Master System, Sega Dreamcast, Game Gear, GameCube, DOS, Microsoft Windows, Macintosh, Classic Mac OS, macOS, PlayStation, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Xbox, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii, Wii U, Game Boy, Game Boy Color, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, iOS, Android, Linux, Stadia.

==
Episode-related titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars games that are based on the feature films.
They are listed in order of release by film.

===
Episode IV:
A New Hope ===
Star Wars (1983–88) –
Arcade
Re-released for: Atari 2600, Atari 5200, Commodore 64, Atari 8-bit family, ColecoVision, BBC Micro, ZX Spectrum, Acorn Electron, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Apple II, DOS, Macintosh, Amiga.

Star Wars (1987) – Famicom
Star Wars:
Attack on the Death Star (1991) – PC-9801, X68000
Star Wars (1991–93) – NES, Game Boy, Master System, Game Gear
Super Star Wars (1992) – SNES
Re-released for: Wii Virtual Console, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita
Star Wars Arcade (1993) –
Arcade
Re-released for: 32X


===
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
===
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1982) –
Atari 2600, Intellivision
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1985/88) –
Arcade
Re-released for: BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST.

Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992)
– NES, Game Boy
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1993) –
SNES
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


===
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ===
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Death Star Battle (1983/84) –
Atari 2600, Atari 8-bit family, Atari 5200, ZX Spectrum
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984/88) –
Arcade, BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST,
GameCube
Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1994) – SNES, Game Boy, Game Gear
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


==
=
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace ===
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999) – Microsoft Windows, PlayStation
Star Wars
Episode I (1999) –
Pinball
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020), Xbox One (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Episode
I: Jedi Power Battles (2000) – PlayStation, Dreamcast, Game Boy Advance
Star Wars
Episode
I: Battle for Naboo (2000) – Nintendo 64, Microsoft Windows
Star Wars
Episode
I:
Obi-Wan's Adventures (2000) –
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox,
Arcade
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Obi-Wan (2001) –
Xbox


===
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2002) – GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: The New Droid Army (2002) –
Game Boy Advance


===
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ===
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005) – PlayStation 2, Xbox, Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance
, Mobile Phone


== Series titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars games that are not based on a particular feature film, and form part of a series.
The list is ordered from the oldest series to the latest.

=== X-Wing ===
Star Wars: X-Wing (1993) – DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s):
Imperial Pursuit (1993) and B-Wing (1993)
Compilation: X-Wing (Collector's CD-ROM) (1994)
Star Wars: TIE Fighter (1994) – DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s): Defender of the Empire (1994)
Compilation:
TIE Fighter (Collector's CD-ROM) (1995)
Star Wars: X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter (1997) –
Windows
Expansions:
Balance of Power Campaigns (1997), and Flight School (1998)
Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance (1999) –
Windows


===
Rebel Assault ===
Star Wars: Rebel Assault (1993) DOS, Mac, Sega CD, 3DO
Star Wars: Rebel Assault II:
The Hidden Empire (1995) DOS, PlayStation,
Microsoft Windows


===
Jedi Knight ===
Star Wars:
Dark Forces (1995) DOS, Mac, PlayStation
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II
(1997)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Mysteries of the Sith (1998)
Windows
Star Wars Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast (2002)
Windows, Mac, Xbox, GameCube
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2019), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy (2003)
Windows, Mac, Xbox
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)


===
Rogue Squadron ===
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron (1998)
Windows, Nintendo 64
Star Wars Rogue Squadron II:
Rogue Leader (2001)
GameCube
Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike (2003)
GameCube


===
Star Wars Racer ===
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars Racer Revenge (2002) – PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation Store (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)


===
Galactic Battlegrounds ===
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds (2001)
Windows, Mac
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns (2002)
Windows, Mac


===
Starfighter ===
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) Windows, PlayStation 2
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter (2002)
Xbox, PlayStation 2


===
Knights of the Old Republic ===
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (2003) Windows, Xbox, Mac, iOS, Android
Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords (2005)
Windows, Linux (SteamOS), Xbox, Mac , Android
Star Wars:
The Old Republic (2011) (MMORPG)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Rise of the Hutt Cartel (2013), Galactic Starfighter (2014), Galactic Strongholds (2014), Shadow of Revan (2014), Knights of the Fallen Empire (2015), Knights of the Eternal Throne (2016), and Onslaught (2019)


===
Star Wars: Galaxies ===
Star Wars Galaxies:
An Empire Divided (2003)
Windows (Shutdown)
Expansion(s):
Star Wars Galaxies:
Jump to Lightspeed (2004)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Episode III Rage of the Wookiees (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Trials of Obi-Wan (2005),Compilation(s):
Star Wars Galaxies: Starter Kit (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
The Total Experience (2005), and Star Wars Galaxies:
The Complete Online Adventures (2006)


===
Battlefront ===
The Battlefront series has been handled by two different developers.

Pandemic Studios

Star Wars: Battlefront (2004) – PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, Mac, Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005) – PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007) –
PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron (2009) – PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons (2009) –
Mobile PhoneEA DICE

Star Wars Battlefront (2015) – PlayStation 4, Windows, Xbox One
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) – PlayStation 4, Windows,
Xbox One
===
Empire at War ===
Star Wars: Empire at War (2006
) Windows, Mac OS X
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Empire at War: Forces of Corruption  (2006
) WindowsCompilation:
Star Wars: Empire at War:
Gold Pack (game and expansion package) (2007)
Windows


===
The Force Unleashed ===
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed
(2008) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Wii, Nintendo DS, iOS
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed – Ultimate Sith Edition (
2009) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II
(2010)
Windows, Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, iOS


===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series ===
Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels (2008) –
Wii
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance (2008) – Nintendo DS
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes (2009) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii
Clone Wars Adventures (2010) – Windows, Mac (Shutdown)


==
Stand-alone titles ==
The following is a list of stand-alone Star Wars games that do not form part of a series, released primarily for consoles, personal computers, handhelds and arcade.
The titles are grouped together depending on the decade in which they were released.

=== 1980s ===
Star Wars: Jedi Arena (1983) – Atari 2600
Star Wars: Droids (1988) – Amstrad CPC,
ZX Spectrum


=== 1990s ===
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire (1996) – Nintendo 64, Windows
Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi (1997) – PlayStation
Star Wars: Yoda Stories (1997) –
Windows
Re-released for: Game Boy Color (1999)
Star Wars: Rebellion (Star Wars: Supremacy – UK) (1998) –
Windows
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade (1998) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Millennium Falcon CD-Rom Playset (1998) –
Windows


=== 2000s ===
Star Wars: Force Commander (2000) –
Windows
Star Wars: Demolition (2000) – PlayStation, Dreamcast
Star Wars: Super Bombad Racing (2001) – PlayStation 2
Star Wars: Bounty Hunter (2002) – GameCube, PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation 3 (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Star Wars: Flight of the Falcon (2003) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars Trilogy:
Apprentice of the Force (2004) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: Republic Commando (2005) – Xbox, Windows
Star Wars: Lethal Alliance (2006) – PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Star Wars: The Best of PC (2006) –
Windows


=== 2010s
===
Star Wars Battle Pod (2014) –
Arcade
Star Wars: Card Trader (2015) –  Card trading
Vader Immortal (2019) –
Oculus Rift, Oculus Quest, PlayStation VR
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order (2019) –
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Stadia


=== 2020s ===
Star Wars: Squadrons (2020) – Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One
Star Wars:
Tales from the Galaxy's Edge (2020) – Oculus Quest
== Games by genre ==
The following games are grouped together because they share the same genre, rather than because they are officially part of the same series.
Excluded are the games listed above.
===
Table games ===
Star Wars Chess (1993) – DOS, Sega CD, Windows
Monopoly Star Wars (1997) –
Windows


===
Pinball ===


====
Physical pinball ====
The Empire Strikes Back by Hankin
(1980)Star Wars by Data East (1992)
Star Wars
Original Trilogy by Sega Pinball (1997)
Star Wars
Episode
I by Williams (1999)
Star Wars by Stern Pinball
(2017)
Star Wars
The Pin by Stern Pinball (2019)


====
Virtual pinball ====
Star Wars Pinball (2013
) Windows, Mac, Wii U, Xbox 360, 3DS, PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Kindle Fire, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (2013)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Boba FettStar Wars Pinball:
Balance of the Force (2013)
Xbox 360,
PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Darth Vader
Star Wars Pinball:
Starfighter AssaultStar Wars Pinball:
Heroes Within (2014)
Xbox 360, PSVita, PS3, PS4, Android, iOS

Star Wars Pinball: Masters of the Force
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Droids
Star Wars Pinball:
Han SoloStar Wars Pinball:
Star Wars Rebels (2015)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Force Awakens (2016)
Star Wars Pinball:
Star Wars: Resistance
Star Wars Pinball:
Might of the First OrderStar Wars Pinball: Rogue One (2017)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi (2018)

Star Wars Pinball:
Ahch-To Island
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi - SurviveStar Wars Pinball:
Solo Pack (2018)
Star Wars Pinball:
Solo
Star Wars Pinball:
Calrissian Chronicles
Star Wars Pinball:
Battle of MimbanA twentieth pinball table, based on the first season of The Mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late October of 2020 and due for a spring 2021 release.

===
Kinect Motion Sensor ===
Kinect Star Wars (2012)
(Kinect) Xbox
360


===
Educational ===
Developed by Lucas Learning:
Star Wars: Yoda's Challenge
Star Wars: The Gungan Frontier
Star Wars: Droid Works (1999)
Windows, Mac
Star Wars:
Pit Droids Windows, iOS
Star Wars Math:
Jabba's Game Galaxy (Developed by Argonaut Games)
Star Wars: JarJar's Journey Adventure Book
Star Wars:
Anakin's Speedway
Star Wars:
Early Learning Activity CenterOther educational:
Star Wars: Jedi Math (2008)
(Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars: Jedi Reading (2008) (Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008)
(Platform/Educational)
Didj
Star Wars: Jedi Trials (2009)
Didj


===
Jakks Pacific-
Plug It
In & Play TV Games ===
Star Wars: Lightsaber Battle Game (2005)
Handheld TV game
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005) – Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars GameKey (expansion)
(2006)
Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (2007)
Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars: Republic Squadron (2009)
Jakks Pacific TV Game


===
Non-video game PC software ===
Star Wars Screen Entertainment (1994) (Screensaver) –
Windows
Star Wars:
Behind the Magic (1998) (CD-ROM encyclopedia) – Windows, Macintosh


==
Mobile titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars titles that are only for mobile operating systems.

Star Wars: Battle For The Republic (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Grievous Getaway (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Battle Above Coruscant (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Lightsaber Combat (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Trivia (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Ask Yoda (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Puzzle Blaster (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Jedi Assassin (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Imperial Ace 3D (2006) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Cantina (2010) –
iOS
Star Wars:
Trench Run (2009) –
iOS
Star Wars Battle of Hoth (2010) –
iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars Arcade: Falcon Gunner (2010) –
iOS
Star Wars: Imperial Academy (2011) –
iOS
Star Wars:
Force Collection (2013) –
Android, iOS
Star Wars:
Tiny Death Star (2013) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Assault Team (2014) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Commander (2014) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Galactic Defense (2014) – Android, iOS
Star Wars Journeys: The Phantom Menace (2014) –
iOS
Star Wars Journeys:
Beginnings (2014) –
iOS
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes (2015) –
Android, iOS
Star Wars: Uprising (2015) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Heroes Path (2015) – iOS
Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions (2015) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Card Trader (2015) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Force Arena (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Puzzle Droids (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Jedi Challenges (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars:
Rise to Power (TBA) –
Android


==
Browser games ==
StarWars.com
Carbon Connection
Force Flight
Garbage Masher
Sharpshooter Clone Training (2008)
Live Fire (2008)
Clones vs. Droids
Ewok VillageDisney.com

Star Wars Rebels:
Ghost Raid – StarWars.com, Disney.com
(2014)
Star Wars Rebels: Rebel Strike – Disney.com (2014)
==
Crossovers ==
In some cases, Lucasfilm has allowed other video game franchises to do their own Star Wars games, resulting in crossover hybrid franchises.

===
Lego Star Wars ===
Lego made video games based on their Lego Star Wars toys, as part of their Lego video games franchise.

Lego main series
Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005):
Windows, Mac, PlayStation 2, Xbox, GameCube, Nintendo DS,
Game Boy
Advance
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006):
Windows, Mac, PlayStation 2,  Xbox, Xbox 360, GameCube, Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011): PlayStation 3, Xbox 360,  3DS, Wii,  Windows, Mac, Nintendo DS, Nintendo, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3,  Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U,  Mac, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita, iOS
Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga (2021):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, Nintendo Switch
Compilation(s): Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007) includes Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, and Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Mac, Nintendo DS, iOS, AndroidMobile game and web browser

Lego Star Wars: The Quest for R2-D2 (2009):
Unity
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault (2011) –
Windows
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault 2 (2012) –
Windows
Lego Star Wars:
Battle Orders (2012) –
Unity
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles (2013) –
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars:
The New Yoda Chronicles (2014) –
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Microfighters (2014) – Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Battles (2020) – Android, iOSLego
Indiana Jones
Lego Indiana Jones:
The Original Adventures (2008), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo and cameos from other Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Windows
Lego Indiana Jones 2:
The Adventure Continues (2009), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring cameos from Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable,
Windows


===
Angry Birds Star Wars ===
Angry Birds Star Wars (2012)
Angry Birds Star Wars II
(2013)


===
Roblox ===
Star Wars (2014-2019):
Windows, Xbox One, Xbox One S, IOS, Android, Oculus Rift (VR) - Sponsors and events for Star Wars Rebels, Rogue One, The Last Jedi, Solo, and The Rise of Skywalker, which contained objectives with in-game virtual prizes (accessories and gears) attached to the events’ respective games, as well as free items in the Catalog (currently known as the Avatar Shop) for 1 ticket or for free.
List of sponsors:
Star Wars Rebels:
Season One (2014)
Star Wars Rebels:
Season Two (2015)List of events:

Universe (2016) - Sponsored by Rogue One: A Star Wars Story
Space Battle (2017) - Sponsored by Star Wars:
The Last Jedi
Battle Arena (2018) - Sponsored by Solo: A Star Wars Story
Galactic Speedway Creator Challenge (2019) - Sponsored by Star Wars:
The Rise of SkywalkerAdditional notes:
Besides the main events, a Disney XD crossover event known as Summer Camp (2015) included a virtual prize of the Star Wars: Rebels character, Chopper, in the form of a tiny shoulder pal.

The event also included promotional billboards of the Star Wars: Rebels TV series in the maps of the events’ respective games.

Similarly to Summer Camp (2015), Disney Infinity 3.0 was also featured as a sponsored event in 2015, and had the maps decorated in the games that were part of the event that included promotional billboards that featured the characters Princess Leia, Darth Vader, Yoda, Anakin Skywalker and Sabine Wren.

While the characters were advertised in billboards in the events’ respective games, none of the actual virtual prizes or free items tied directly into any Star Wars media.

As part of the sponsor, Star Wars Rebels:
Season Two not only included free items, but was also featured on the promotional material of the billboards in the maps of two pre-existing games on the platform, and also included the limited-time branding on the games’ respective thumbnails.

===
Disney Infinity ===
The Disney Infinity series allowed the use of Star Wars characters alongside characters from other franchises owned by Disney, including characters from the Marvel and Pixar films.

Disney Infinity 3.0 (2015):
Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii U, iOS, Android


===
The Sims ===
The Sims 4: Journey to Batuu (2020): Microsoft Windows, Mac, PlayStation 4, Xbox One - Ninth game pack for The Sims 4.
Adds a new destination world called Batuu with a Star Wars-style storyline.
Adds new types of aliens and other Star Wars-inspired outfits, objects and characters.

===
Minecraft ===
Star Wars (2020):
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, Amazon Kindle Fire, Amazon Fire TV, IOS, Android, Oculus Rift, Gear VR - DLC for Minecraft: Bedrock Edition purchasable through the Minecraft Market place.
Adds Star Wars maps, quests, mobs, skins, items and vehicles from the Original Trilogy and The Mandalorian into the game.

==
Cultural impact ==
This category refers to video games from other franchises where the inclusion of Star Wars characters is very minor and restricted only to small easter eggs or unlockable character cameos.

Night Shift (1990) – Platform game featuring action figures of various Star Wars characters.
Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, Mac, PC, Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater series:
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 (2001) – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Darth Maul.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 (2002) – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Jango Fett.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Secret Weapons Over Normandy (2003) – Flight simulation game featuring unlockable X-wing and TIE Fighter.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
, PC
Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction (2005) – Features unlockable character Han Solo.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
Soulcalibur IV (2008) –
Fighting game.
At release featuring Darth Vader exclusively in the PlayStation 3 version, with Yoda exclusively in the Xbox 360 version, and Darth Vader's apprentice Galen Starkiller Marek in both versions.
Months after the release, Darth Vader and Yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable content, each at the version they were absent at release.
Each of the Star Wars characters had his own ending on the "Story Mode".
However, in late 2016, all dlc in SoulCalibur IV was removed from the PlayStation and Microsoft stores due to licensing from the purchase of Star Wars by Disney.

Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings (2009) – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo.
Wii, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS,
PlayStation Portable


== Canceled games ==
Games that were never finished, nor released.

Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Ewok Adventure – Atari
2600 (unreleased)
Star Wars: Battlefront III (2008) PlayStation 3, Windows, Xbox 360
Star Wars: First Assault (2012) (First-person shooter)
Star Wars 1313 (2013)
(Action-adventure)
Star Wars Outpost (2013)
Star Wars: Attack Squadrons (2014)
Star Wars: Battle of the Sith Lords (2015) (Action-adventure)
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic III (Windows, Xbox)
Star Wars: The Force Unleashed III (Windows, Wii U, Xbox One, PlayStation 4)
Project Ragtag (Windows, Xbox One, PlayStation 4)


==
References ==
Daisy Jazz Isobel Ridley (born 10 April 1992) is an English actress who rose to international prominence through playing the role of Rey in the Star Wars
sequel trilogy
: The Force Awakens (2015),
The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

She has also featured as the title character of the romantic drama Ophelia (2018), appeared in the mystery film Murder on the Orient Express (2017), and lent her voice to the animated Peter Rabbit (2018).

==
Early life ==
Daisy Jazz Isobel Ridley was born on 10 April 1992 in the London borough of Westminster, and grew up in Maida Vale.
She is the youngest of three daughters born to Louise Fawkner-Corbett, a banker, and Christopher Ridley, a photographer.
She has two older sisters, Kika Rose and Poppy Sophia, as well as two older half-sisters.
Her mother's family, the Fawkner-Corbetts, were landed gentry with a military and medical background.
Her paternal great-uncle, Arnold Ridley, also served in the military, and separately forged a career as a playwright and actor (notably playing Private Godfrey in the sitcom Dad's Army); his brother, Daisy's grandfather, John Harry Dunn Ridley, OBE, was head of the Engineering Secretariat at the BBC from 1950 to 1965.Ridley has stated that while growing up, her favourite film was Matilda (1996), an adaptation of Roald Dahl's children's story, naming the title character (played by Mara Wilson in the film) as a role model.
While not a particularly strong Star Wars fan as a youth, she dedicatedly followed the Harry Potter series.
Ridley won a scholarship to Tring Park School for the Performing Arts in Hertfordshire, which she attended from ages nine to 18.
She then began reading classical civilisation at Birkbeck, University of London, before dropping out to focus on her acting career.
Prior to being cast in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, Ridley worked as a barmaid in two different pubs in London for nearly two years.
In 2016, she began studying for a Bachelor of Arts in social science through online courses with the Open University.

==
Career ==


=== 2013–2015: Early roles and Star Wars breakthrough
===
Ridley began her career with minor roles in the television programmes Youngers, Toast of London, Silent Witness, Mr Selfridge, and Casualty.
She appeared in the short film Blue Season, which was entered into the Sci-Fi-London 48-Hour Film Challenge.
Ridley played the lead in film three of Lifesaver, an interactive film which was nominated for a BAFTA Award.
She also appeared in the music video for Wiley's song "Lights On", playing the character of Kim.
Ridley made her film debut in the 2015 British independent horror film Scrawl, after her scenes from the British comedy film The Inbetweeners 2 were removed in the final cut.

In April 2014, the casting of Ridley as Rey, one of the lead characters in The Force Awakens, was announced.
She was cast for the film in February 2014.
At the time of her casting she was, according to Rolling Stone, a "total unknown."
Her choice by director J. J. Abrams was seen as a repeat of George Lucas' move of casting relatively unknown actors for the lead roles in the first Star Wars film in 1977.Ridley began filming her scenes in May 2014 at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, and prior to the film's release in December 2015, she appeared at the launch of a set of Star Wars postage stamps issued by the UK postal service Royal Mail, with her character Rey featuring on a stamp along with the droid BB-8.
With international revenues of over $2 billion, The Force Awakens was a major box-office hit and the highest-grossing film of 2015.
Her performance received critical acclaim, with Richard Roeper describing her portrayal as "a breakout performance" and adding "Ford has a terrific father figure chemistry [shared] with Ridley and [John] Boyega".
=== 2016–present:
Star Wars sequel trilogy and other projects ===
Ridley became executive producer of the documentary The Eagle Huntress in January 2016, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on 24 January 2016; she also recorded narration for the film's wide release.
Ridley was one of several actors featured on Barbra Streisand's 2016 album Encore:
Movie Partners Sing Broadway.
Along with Anne Hathaway, Ridley and Streisand perform the song "At the Ballet" from A Chorus Line, with Ridley performing the role of Bebe, one of a trio of dancers hoping to be cast in a forthcoming show.

In 2017, Ridley portrayed Mary Debenham in Murder on the Orient Express, an adaptation of Agatha Christie's detective novel of the same name.
Directed by and starring Kenneth Branagh, production began in London in November 2016.
She also reprised her role as Rey, opposite Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi, which was released in December 2017.In January 2018, Ridley starred in the titular role in Ophelia, a reimagining of the Hamlet tale, alongside Naomi Watts and Clive Owen.
The project was filmed from April to July 2017 and debuted at the 2018 Sundance Film Festival.
In February 2018, Ridley voiced the role of Cottontail in Peter Rabbit, an adaptation of the children's stories of the same name by Beatrix Potter.
In December 2019, Ridley appeared as Rey in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker, the last film in the sequel trilogy.
She is not expected to reprise her role again after this film, and is quoted as saying, "I don't think anything could top [The Rise of Skywalker] for this character."
However, she does show interest in returning as the character if needed, saying "[...] never say never.
I’m always open to a revisit.
But also the beautiful thing is it’s this wonderful, huge universe with all of these stories that have yet to be told.
I think there’s a lot of cool things to be made before any potential revisit."
She also reflected on her co-star Boyega's opinion that if more films were made without her involvement, she would feel left out.
In 2021, Ridley co-starred in the film Chaos Walking, an adaption of the young-adult novel by Patrick Ness.
She played Viola Eade, opposite Tom Holland who played Todd Hewitt.
The film was released on March 5, 2021.
The film had been delayed occasionally due to poor test screenings that followed the film's reshoots, and later due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

====
Upcoming projects ====
Ridley's upcoming films in pre-production are The Marsh King's Daughter, Women In The Castle, Young Woman and the Sea, and The Inventor.
In addition to acting, she will lend her voice for the upcoming indie game 12 Minutes, alongside James McAvoy and Willem Dafoe for Annapurna Interactive.
Her additional films in development include Daddio, Kolma, A Woman of No Importance, Piece of Mind, Super-Normal, The Lost Wife, and The Ice Beneath Her.

==
Personal life ==
Ridley resides in Primrose Hill, London.
Since 2017, she has been in a relationship with actor Tom Bateman, whom she met on the set of Murder on the Orient Express.
In 2016, Ridley revealed she had been diagnosed with endometriosis and polycystic ovary syndrome at age 15, requiring her to undergo multiple laparoscopic surgery procedures.
She states that her endometriosis left her feeling low in self-confidence due to acne that followed.
Following the 2016 Teen Choice Awards, which paid tribute to victims of gun violence, Ridley posted on both Instagram and Facebook an anti-gun violence message.
Her post prompted backlash from the public, with critics accusing the actress of hypocrisy in reference to the violence depicted in Star Wars.
Ridley has since quit social media in response to the harassment, though she briefly returned to Instagram, claiming the reason behind the deletion was because she had "a busy few months ahead [and] so wanted less distractions".
She reiterated this statement in 2017, saying that social media is "highly unhealthy for people's mental health," including hers.
Ridley further commented on the topic in a 2019 interview, vowing never to return to social media.
She stated:

"I honestly think now with social media and stuff...
it's great to have freedom of expression, but I do feel like people think opinions have so much weight...
I don't really think bad vibes should have the sun shone on them.
[...]
It's dangerous.
[...]
It's great in that respect for people who are in serious and dire situations to be able to be communicating, but for the most part I think — no, no, no.
"Ridley is a vegan.

==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


===
Theatre ===


===
Music videos ===


===
Video games ===


===
Theme park attractions ===


==
Awards and nominations ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==

Daisy Ridley at IMDb
Star Wars:
Clone Wars is an American animated television micro-series set in the Star Wars universe and developed and drawn by Genndy Tartakovsky.
Produced and released between the films
Episode II: Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, it is amongst the first of many works to explore the conflict known as the Clone Wars, and directly leads to the events of Revenge of the Sith.
The show follows the actions of various characters from the Star Wars prequel trilogy, notably Jedi and clone troopers, in their war against the battle droid armies of the Confederacy of Independent Systems and the Sith.

The series aired on Cartoon Network for three seasons consisting of 25 episodes altogether from 2003 to 2005, and was the first Star Wars television series since Ewoks (1985–1986).
The first two seasons of Clone Wars, released on DVD as "Volume One", were produced in episodes ranging from two to three minutes, while the third season consisted of five 12-minute episodes comprising "Volume Two".
Since its release, the series has received critical acclaim and won multiple awards, including the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program for both volumes.
Its success led to it being spun off as the half-hour CGI series The Clone Wars.

==
Plot ==
Clone Wars is part of the Star Wars prequel storyline, surrounding the fall of esteemed Jedi Anakin Skywalker and his subsequent transformation into the Sith lord Darth Vader.
The series begins shortly after Attack of the Clones, as the failing Galactic Republic and the Jedi Order are under siege from the Separatist Confederacy of Independent Systems and the Sith.
As the war rages, more and more planets slip from Republic control.

===
Synopsis ===
The main storyline of Volume One features the Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi leading an assault on the planet Muunilinst, home of the Intergalactic Banking Clan, benefactors of the Separatists wishing to break away from the Republic.
His apprentice, Anakin, is personally appointed to lead the space forces by Supreme Chancellor Palpatine.
Meanwhile, Separatist leader Count Dooku takes in the Force-sensitive Asajj Ventress as his Sith apprentice and sends her to eliminate Anakin.
Anakin diverts his attention in the middle of the space battle to pursue Ventress to Yavin 4, where he manages to defeat her in a lightsaber duel by drawing on his anger.
Surrounding this storyline are various battles focusing on other Jedi and their wartime exploits: Master Mace Windu faces a droid army unarmed on Dantooine, Master Yoda travels to the ice world Ilum to save two imperiled Jedi, the amphibious Kit Fisto leads an aquatic regiment of clone troopers on the waterworld Mon Calamari, and a team of Jedi encounter the dreaded General Grievous on Hypori.

Volume Two picks up at the conclusion to the Hypori battle: Obi-Wan sends his team of ARC troopers to Hypori to rescue the Jedi from Grievous.
The Republic is desperate, and after much consideration, the Jedi Council decides to promote Anakin to the rank of Jedi Knight.
The series then jumps ahead to nearly the end of the war, when Anakin has become a more powerful Jedi.
He aids Obi-Wan in capturing a fortress, saves Saesee Tiin in space battle, and rescues Jedi from crab droids.
Anakin and Obi-Wan are assigned to search for Grievous on the planet Nelvaan, but instead end up liberating a group of Nelvaanians who had been enslaved and mutated by the Separatist Techno Union.
While rescuing the Nelvaan warriors, Anakin sees a cryptic vision of his eventual transformation into Darth Vader.
Meanwhile, Grievous leads an assault on Coruscant and, despite the best efforts of Yoda, Windu, Shaak Ti, and others, kidnaps Palpatine for his master, Dooku.
Anakin and Obi-Wan then set out to rescue the Chancellor over Coruscant, leading directly into the beginning of Revenge of the Sith.
===
Continuity ===
Several attempts were made to maintain continuity with the overall saga, most notably bridging Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
Anakin appears with his new lightsaber (as it appears in Episode III) after his first was destroyed in the previous film.
In "Chapter 21", C-3PO makes his first appearance in gold plating and Anakin is knighted; he sends his Padawan braid to Padmé, who stores it with the necklace he gave her in The Phantom Menace.
It is implied that Anakin and Padmé may conceive the Skywalker twins on Naboo in "Chapter 22".
The series is notable for introducing Revenge of the Sith villain General Grievous (in "Chapter 20"), although some of his personality traits had yet to be finalized.
According to Tartakovsky, George Lucas initially pitched Grievous to him and his crew as "this ruthless, totally capable Jedi killer," but later developed him into "one of those old B-serial villains who does something bad ... twirls his mustache
and then he runs off.
"
The character was given a cough in Revenge of the Sith, intended to emphasize his organic nature as well as the flaws of having cyborg prosthetics.
His depiction in Clone Wars lacked a cough until the concluding episode, in which Mace Windu Force-crushes the chestplate housing Grievous's internal organs; this was intended to create continuity with the film and was mentioned in its novelization.
However, in the CGI The Clone Wars series (2008–2014, 2020), Grievous is depicted as having this cough all along.

Volume Two shares aspects of its storyline with the novel Labyrinth of Evil, which was created at the same time.
In the series, Anakin and Obi-Wan investigate a possible base for Grievous on Nelvaan prior to returning to Coruscant, but in the novel, they pursue Count Dooku on Tythe; Dooku briefly pauses at Nelvaan when escaping to Coruscant.
According to The New Essential Chronology, the events on Nelvaan occurred before those on Tythe, with the final scene of Obi-Wan and Anakin getting the message from Mace on the cruiser taking place afterwards.

Clone Wars served as a pilot for the half-hour CGI The Clone Wars.
The character designer for the latter series attempted to translate aspects of the character designs from the 2D series to 3D. Clone trooper Alpha from the older series was considered for the newer series, but Lucas thought too many characters had names beginning with the letter A, leading to the creation of Captain Rex.
It was originally reported that the 2008 series would not supersede the continuity of the 2003 series, but
following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, in 2014, it was announced that the CGI The Clone Wars would officially be considered canon, while most other spin-off works would not.
Den of Geek's Ryan Britt notes that the final arc of The Clone Wars does not entirely negate the final arc of the earlier series.

==
Production ==
The series was produced and directed by Genndy Tartakovsky, the creator of Dexter's Laboratory and Samurai Jack, and employs a similar animation style to the latter.
According to Tartakovsky, the series was developed in two weeks and created by a small crew.
Tartakovsky stated that he purposely animated C-3PO with moveable expressive eyes to pay homage to his animated appearances in The Star Wars Holiday Special and Droids.
Additionally, the planet Nelvaan's name was a nod to Nelvana, the production company that produced all previous Star Wars animated series.
In "Chapter 21", a Dulok appears, a species introduced in Ewoks.
According to art director Paul Rudish, the Banking Clan planet of Muunilinst was designed to look like a U.S. dollar bill.

==
Voice cast ==
Mat Lucas as Anakin Skywalker
Frankie Ryan Mariquez as young Anakin Skywalker
James Arnold Taylor as Obi-Wan Kenobi and Agen Kolar
Tom Kane as
Yoda
Terrence "T.C." Carson as Mace Windu and Saesee Tiin
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
Corey Burton as San Hill and Count Dooku
Grey DeLisle as Asajj Ventress, Padmé Amidala, Shaak Ti, and Stass Allie
Nick Jameson as Palpatine / Darth Sidious
André Sogliuzzo as Commander Cody, Captain Typho, Captain Fordo, and all clone troopers
Richard McGonagle as General Grievous and Kit Fisto
Fred Tatasciore
as Qui-Gon Jinn and Oppo Rancisis
Daran Norris as Ki-Adi-Mundi, Durge, Master Barrek, and Even Piell
Cree Summer as Luminara Unduli
Tatyana Yassukovich as Barriss Offee
Kevin Michael Richardson as K'Kruhk


== Broadcast
==
The series originally ran on Cartoon Network.
In addition to being shown on television, the episodes were released online simultaneously on the Star Wars and Cartoon Network websites.
It was heavily advertised by the channel, and was originally shown immediately before their popular Friday-night programming block, 'Fridays'.

==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2003) ===
The first season consisted of 10 episodes, lasting three minutes each.
Along with the second season, it was released on DVD as Volume One.
===
Season 2 (2004) ===
The second season consisted of 10 episodes, lasting three minutes each.
Along with the first season, it was released on DVD as Volume One.
===
Season 3 (2005) ===
The third and final season consisted of five episodes, lasting 12 minutes each.
These episodes were released on DVD as Volume Two.
==
Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
According to the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 80% of critics have given season 1 a positive review based on 5 reviews.
In 2009, Clone Wars was ranked 21 on IGN's Top 100 Animated Series list.
ComicBook.com writes that the series "is worth a watch for any fan of magnificent animation".

===
Awards and nominations ===


==
Home media ==
Both volumes were distributed by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment, making it one of the few Cartoon Network original shows not to have their Home Media releases released through Warner Home Video.
Both volumes were released on Disney+
on April 2, 2021.

==
Merchandising ==
A series of Hasbro action figures was released in the years of the series' run, including four Walmart-exclusive "Commemorative DVD Collection" 3-packs (which did not include a DVD).
Dark Horse Comics also published a ten-volume comic series titled Clone Wars – Adventures, which utilized the style of the 2D animated series and depicts original stories set during the era; the last issue was published in 2007.

==
Legacy ==
Elements of the series, including the regenerative villain Durge, are mentioned in the 2005 novelization of Revenge of the Sith.
Durge will appear in an upcoming issue of the canon Marvel comic book series Doctor Aphra, as part of the Boba Fett-centric "War of the Bounty Hunters" crossover event.
According to the (now-defunct) Star Wars Databank, Durge has a vendetta against Mandalorians, and extends this to the clones of Jango Fett.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
Clone Wars at IMDb
Star Wars:
Clone Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Clone Wars at TV.com
Star Wars:
Clone Wars (2003 TV series) at the Big Cartoon DataBase
The Rebel Alliance (also formerly known as the Alliance to Restore the Republic or known as the Rebellion) is a fictional stateless interstellar coalition of republican dissidents, revolutionary factions and anti-imperialist clandestine cell systems in a resistance movement against the imperialist Galactic Empire.
The Alliance's goal is to restore the Galactic Republic.
It is the main protagonist faction of the original Star Wars trilogy, parallel to the mostly fallen Jedi Order survived by Obi-Wan Kenobi, Yoda, and later Luke Skywalker.

As a direct reactionary movement to the formation of the Empire, the Rebel insurgency conducted covert operations on Imperial garrison-worlds and utilized a stateless strategy in conjunction with  wolfpack-guerrilla warfare against the Imperial Fleet throughout the galaxy.
Capital ships had no place in the Rebellion; they are expensive to build, maintain, and to keep fully crewed.
The Rebellion was far too limited in both manpower and resources to justify putting so much of both into a giant target.
When the Galactic Empire is capable of always fielding greater numbers and greater firepower, being able to hit high-valued targets and get out is much more important.
While the Empire considers all dissent and rebellion as acts of extremism and terrorism in Imperial propaganda, the Alliance is described and portrayed in various Star Wars media as a group of resilient freedom fighters, based on tolerance, self-empowerment, and hope for a better future using insurgency weapons and tactics.

The Rebel Alliance was first featured as the main protagonist-faction in the films Star Wars (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
The faction's origins were alluded to in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005), and their early activities are featured in the Disney XD television series Rebels and the anthology film Rogue One (2016).

== Depiction ==


===
Origins ===


====
Founding members ====
Senator Mon Mothma – Co-founder; current commander-in-chief
Senator Bail Organa – Co-founder; early constituting member and head of the Alliance Council
Died during Episode IV:
A New Hope, when the Death Star destroys Alderaan
Senator Padmé Amidala – Co-founder; early constituting member.
She died a few days after founding the Alliance.
(
While the scene from Revenge of the Sith was deleted from the film, the information was affirmed by other official sources.)Died during Episode III: Revenge of the Sith while giving birth to twins Luke and Leia; the latter was adopted by Organa.

====
Early insurgency ====
There is no consensus on when the Rebel Alliance was formed, be it de jure or de facto.
The three most commonly mentioned dates are:

19 BBY with the Delegation of 2000 Senators which demanded Chancellor Palpatine to lay down his emergency powers;
5 BBY with the formation of the rebel fleet and the start of major combat operations (beginning of the Age of Rebellion, ending in 4 ABY);
2 BBY with Mon Mothma's formal Declaration of Rebellionn after the Ghorman Massacre.

=====
Delegation of 2000 (19 BBY) =====
The earliest possible origins of the Alliance to Restore the Republic are told during the events of Revenge of the Sith (set in 19 BBY, 19 years before the Battle of Yavin IV portrayed in the first film A New Hope).
In deleted scene 2 called "A Stirring in the Senate", a group of six Senators including Padmé Amidala, Mon Mothma and Bail Organa meet in the latter's office to discuss ways to counter the already unjustified extraordinary powers of Supreme Chancellor Palpatine "subverting the Constitution" as the Clone Wars were waning, with Mothma stating their goal was "preserving democracy within the Republic".
Amidala was initially skeptical of Palpatine's evil intentions because he had supported her during the Trade Federation's occupation of Naboo (The Phantom Menace, 32 BBY), but Organa and Mothma announced the formation of an anti-Palpatine 'organisation'; the six Senators agreed to a pact of silence.
In deleted scene 3 called "Seeds of Rebellion" (in Amidala's apartment with two new Senators joining the group), it is explained that the Delegation of 2000 disgruntled Senators will present a petition to the Chancellor.
Amidala was more willing to oppose Palpatine now, but wanted to involve the Jedi, at least Anakin Skywalker.
However, aside from one Senator agreeing, the others doubted whether the Jedi Council would be loyal to the Republic or the Chancellor, and opted to wait.
Amidala died in premature childbirth not long after her last-ditch attempt to prevent Anakin's fall.
In The Imperial Handbook, Grand Moff Tarkin related that most members of the Delegation of 2000 were arrested; Mothma and Organa retained their Senatorship by remaining outwardly obedient to Palpatine, while secretly 'mastermind[ing]
the unification of disparate bands of insurgents into what they termed the Rebel Alliance'.
=====
First major battles, rebel fleet (5 BBY) =====
The Disney series Rebels depicts the development of the rebellion against the Galactic Empire beginning five years before A New Hope (5 BBY) and fourteen years after the fall of the Galactic Republic and the Jedi Order in Revenge of the Sith (19 BBY).
The show focuses on a motley group of rebels (all of whom have been affected by the Empire in one form or another) that banded together aboard a freighter starship called Ghost.
They called themselves the Spectres and were led by Hera Syndulla.
By the end of the first season, it is revealed that there were various clandestine cell systems that were resisting the Empire, such as Jun Sato's Phoenix Squadron.
Senator Bail Organa (along with his wife, queen Breha Organa) of Alderaan and former Jedi Ahsoka Tano
both play a pivotal role in coordinating these splinter cells into a legitimate threat capable of challenging Imperial rule.
Funded primarily by the Royal House of Alderaan, the alliance began to allocate resources towards a united front against Imperial rule.
The Spectres and Phoenix Squadron were later integrated into the Massassi Group based on Yavin IV, which by Rogue One (1 BBY)
and A New Hope (0 BBY) was commanded by General Jan Dodonna.
One last important rebel cell that later became part of the Rebel Alliance was the Mon Calamari Exodus Fleet, commanded by Admiral Raddus and Admiral Ackbar, formed out of civilian spacecraft during the Imperial Occupation of Mon Cala in 18 BBY (1 year into the Empire, 18 years prior to the Battle of Yavin).
=====
Declaration of Rebellion (2 BBY) =====
Near the end of the third season of Rebels, in "Secret Cargo", Alliance co-founder Senator Mon Mothma, escaped assassination for condemning the Ghorman Massacre and speaking out against the Emperor (2 BBY).
She called out to the various rebel cells and insurgency factions to unite into a unified coalition:
We, the beings of the Rebel Alliance, do this day send forth this Declaration to His Majesty, the Emperor, and to all sentient beings in the Galaxy, to make clear to all the Purposes and Goals of this Rebellion.

We believe that the Galactic Empire has willfully and malignantly usurped the rights of the free beings of the Galaxy and therefore, it is our unalienable right to abolish it from the Galaxy.

We, the Rebel Alliance, do therefore in the name—and by the authority—of the free beings of the Galaxy
, solemnly publish and declare our intentions:

To fight and oppose you and your forces, by any and all means at our disposal;
To refuse any Imperial law contrary to the rights of free beings;
To bring about your destruction and the destruction of the Galactic Empire;
To make forever free all beings in the galaxy.

To these ends, we pledge our property, our honor, and our lives.

Many Rebel ships arrive at a rendezvous point above Dantooine to unite and form the "Alliance to Restore the Republic".
===
Government ===


====
Senior civil government and military high command ====
Gial Ackbar – Supreme Commander of the Alliance Fleet.

Died during Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi, when a squadron of TIE fighters destroys the bridge of a Resistance ship.

Cassian Andor – Pilot and Intelligence Officer.

Died during Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, in the Battle of Scarif.

Crix Madine – General of the Alliance Special Forces.

Ahsoka Tano – Former Jedi Padawan; covert operations spymaster and first 'Fulcrum' agent.

Breha Organa – Adoptive mother of Leia Organa; ruling monarch of Alderaan; manager of the Rebel Alliance's funds, as revealed in the 2017 novel, Leia: Princess of Alderaan.
Played a pivotal role in securing Alderaan's support for the Rebel Alliance as its primary galactic advocate.

Died during Episode IV:
A New Hope, when the Death Star destroys Alderaan.

Wedge Antilles – Imperial defector and Commander of Rogue Squadron; Marshal of the Alliance Starfighter Corps.

Raymus Antilles – Captain of the famous Alderaanian cruiser Tantive IV.
Escort to members of the Royal House of Alderaan.

Died during Episode IV: A New Hope, killed by Darth Vader.

Lando Calrissian – General and former Cloud City administrator.

Carlist Rieekan – General and Commander of the Alliance's Echo Base on Hoth.

Jan Dodonna – General and Commander of the Alliance's Base One on Yavin 4.

Hera Syndulla – General and pilot of the Ghost.

Luke Skywalker – Commander and Jedi Knight; former Commander of Rogue Squadron and former Grand Master of the New Jedi Order.

Died during Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi, of exhaustion.

Leia Organa – Representative of the planet Alderaan in the Imperial Senate and Senior diplomat of the Alliance; General of the Resistance.

Died during Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker, of exhaustion.

Han Solo – General and former smuggler pilot of the Millennium Falcon.

Died in Episode VII:
The Force Awakens, killed by his own son Kylo Ren (Ben Solo).
===
Military ===
The Alliance Military and its activities were overseen by Alliance High Command, who managed the logistical and strategic matters of the Rebellion's efforts against the dominant Galactic Empire.
Alliance Intelligence was headed by Spymaster Bail Organa and Spymaster Ahsoka Tano, which proved essential for maintaining communications, finding missions for the various Alliance Cells, and coordinating the Alliance's highly decentralized structure.
At the time of the Battle of Endor, its chief commanders were:
Gial Ackbar serving as Admiral of the Alliance Starfleet; Jan Dodonna serving as General of the Alliance Grand Army; Crix Madine serving as General of Alliance Pathfinders; and Wedge Antilles serving as Marshal of the Alliance Starfighter Corps.

====
Alliance Grand Army ====
The Alliance military could never decisively win a "land war" with the Empire.
Generally speaking, the quality of Alliance infantry varied greatly by unit.
Due to the highly decentralized structure of the Alliance, these units often operated independently with little oversight, and were frequently lacking in discipline, equipment, intelligence and combat skills.
They often consisted of convicts, street thugs, pirates, outlaws, and anyone whose profession placed them at odds with the Empire.
These infantry were tolerated by Alliance Command, both for their willingness to mount an insurgency against the Empire, and for their expendability.

====
Alliance Pathfinders ====
Mission critical operations were carried out by few standardized special forces units, dubbed "pathfinders", who had previous military training for infiltration, asymmetrical warfare, and were capable of operating without resupply.
Pathfinders volunteered in the Battle of Scarif under Cassian Andor, and spearheaded the ground assault during the Battle of Endor.

====
Alliance Starfleet ====
The Alliance military largely consisted of mothballed, improvised, repurposed, or stolen civilian ships from dozens of manufacturers; they lacked the means, resources or shipyards to build, maintain and crew thousands of military-grade capital ships.
The Alliance, constantly had to change bases and their carrier ships routinely had to escape into hyperspace before recovering their fighter complement.
The biggest and most powerful warship they had available were several MC80 star cruisers supplied to the Alliance by Mon Calamari, but the Alliance Fleet kept these in reserve and never risked deploying them, even when strategically-critical bases in Atollon, Yavin, and Hoth came under siege.
The Alliance fleet is geared towards fabian strategy, space superiority, wolfpack operations, hit-and-run tactics, secret missions, subterfuge, and general elements of a stateless military grand strategy.
They used gunships and corvettes to screen Imperial starfighters.
Their warships carried a complement of expensive endurance-capable starfighters that traveled alongside the fleet.
These were equipped with life support systems, deflector shields, and FTL-drives.
The Alliance's focus on small light combat ships and on starfighters allowed them to effectively fight the Galactic Empire's well-funded and well-armed military.

The Alliance Starfleet almost never placed their ships at risk; they avoided  pitched battles, frontal assaults, war of attrition and conventional engagements with the Imperials at all costs'.
Instead of engaging the Imperials in open firefights, the Rebel Alliance largely embraced flexible non-committal attack tactics utilizing mainly fast attack
CR90 corvettes supplied to the Alliance by Alderaan.
The Imperial leadership considered collateral damage as "acceptable margins" in rooting out insurgents; this contrasted against the Alliance's surgical precision to avoid civilian casualties.
To minimize losses, the Alliance military leadership heavily favored carrier battle groups supporting starfighter strike crafts for fast-attack style of warfare, thereby leveraging a decisive advantage over the Galactic Empire's "big powerful ships" doctrine.
Anti-Imperial operations emphasized depredation and delayed actions, covertly relocating compromised bases to another secured system, interdiction in slowing down the Imperials' momentum, and inflicting maximum damage on the enemy without, in principle, becoming decisively engaged.

====
Alliance Starfighter Corps ====
The Alliance finds its strength almost entirely in the starfighter arena, offering some of the most effective and versatile small strike craft within Star Wars canon.
The Alliance was plagued by lack of resources: it was low on fighters, manpower, real estate.
Jan Dodonna believed unsupported hyperspace-capable starfighters could undermine the Empire's control of space and demonstrated this to the galaxy by winning high-profile victories:
Star Destroyers, shipyards, local fleets and the Death Star.
Despite the Corps' high-maintenance costs and being chronically understaffed, with starfighter logistics, aerospace engineers and veteran pilots being limited in numbers, the Alliance doctrine—raiding targets before they could mount a defense, then leaving—proved flawless in singling out vulnerable targets and attacking only when they had strength, and only when the results were spectacular.
Seventy percent of sorties were reconnaissance missions: finding targets for starfighter raids became the top priority of Alliance intelligence.
The introduction of the A-wing, B-wing and X-wing, along with the former Imperial officers who piloted them, only improved upon that advantage.

Gold Squadron, commanded by Jon Vander, was an BTL-A4 Y-wing light bomber squadron that served as part of the Rebel Alliance's elite starfighter corps during the Galactic Civil War.
This unit was instrumental in escorting Senator Mon Mothma safely to Dantooine, participated in the Battle of Scarif, and was nearly wiped out by Darth Vader in the Battle of Yavin.
Under the command of Lando Calrissian, it succeeded in destroying the second Death Star's reactor during the Battle of Endor.

Green Squadron, commanded by Arvel Crynyd, was a RZ-1 A-wing Interceptor squadron that served as part of the Rebel Alliance's starfighter corps during the Galactic Civil War.
The squadron most notably participated in the Alliance's most decisive campaigns, including: the Battle of Atollon; the Battle of Scarif; and the Battle of Endor.
It was Arvel Cyrnyd who crashed his A-wing into the bridge of the Executor, thereby disabling the ship.

Red Squadron, commanded by Garven Dreis, was a T-65B X-wing starfighter squadron that served as part of the Rebel Alliance's starfighter corps during the Galactic Civil War.
The squadron most notably participated in the Alliance's most decisive campaigns, including: the Battle of Scarif; the Battle of Vrogas Vas; the Battle of Hoth; and the Battle of Endor.

Blue Squadron, commanded by Antoc Merrick, was an airspeeder and starfighter squadron that served as part of the Rebel Alliance's elite starfighter corps during the Galactic Civil War.
The squadron most notably participated in the Alliance's most decisive campaigns, including: the Battle of Scarif; the Siege on Tureen VII; the Battle of Hoth; and the Battle of Endor.

Rogue Squadron, commanded by Wedge Antilles, was a  starfighter squadron in the Star Wars franchise.
The squadron appears in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) as "Rogue Group".
In the 2016 film Rogue One, Rebel fighters on a suicide mission to steal the plans for the Death Star (which causes the Battle of Scarif) self-identify as "Rogue One", a possible precursor to Rogue Squadron.
===
Galactic Civil War ===
The fall of the Old Republic and the birth of the Empire, as depicted in Revenge of the Sith, signaled the beginning of the bloody Galactic Civil War.

====
Decisive losses and victories ====
The Rebels episode, "Zero Hour", demonstrates the Imperials' absolute naval supremacy when they successfully entrapped the "Phoenix Fleet" during the Battle of Atollon, and forced them in engaging on equal footing; resulting a decisive victory for the Imperials and the total decimation of the Rebel fleet.

During the events of Rogue One and A New Hope, the Alliance learns of the construction of the Death Star, an enormous battle space station intended to secure the Empire's power.
With the help of the Rogue One squad led by Jyn Erso and Cassian Andor, the Rebels successfully steal and transmit the schematics of the station from the Imperial Citadel on planet Scarif.
This win was the Alliance's first major battle against the Empire; but at a 75% starfleet casualty rate and with all remaining Imperial and Rebel forces planetside decimated either by the battle or by Grand Moff
Wilhuff Tarkin's order to fire the space station's superlaser on the Citadel
, it was ultimately a pyrrhic victory and none of the squad survived.
After successfully downloading the Death Star plans, Alderaanian soldiers aboard a Mon Calamari flagship barely manage to escape the 501st Legion and Death Squadron with the stolen data plans.
Right after the battle, the Tantive IV, an Alderaanian corvette carrying Princess Leia Organa is captured by Vader's flagship, Imperial I-class Star Destroyer Devastator, while attempting to deliver the plans to Bail Organa on Alderaan.
All members of the Alderaanian Consular Security onboard are either killed or taken prisoner and
Princess Leia Organa is held hostage for a time by Darth Vader.
In order to punish both her and her home planet government's central involvement in the Rebel Alliance, Leia is forced to witness Alderaan's destruction by the Death Star.
The Princess is subsequently rescued by Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Chewbacca, and Obi-Wan Kenobi, who then deliver the station schematics to the Alliance.
This leads directly to the Alliance's victory in the Battle of Yavin and the loyalty of Luke Skywalker; the Rebellion's only remaining member with training in the Force.

In the Star Wars comics, the Rebellion wins numerous victories against the Empire after the destruction of the Death Star, destroying its major weapons factory on Cymoon 1, breaking an Imperial blockade around the Rebel world of Tureen VII by stealing the Imperial I-class Star Destroyer Harbinger and recruiting the Mon Calamari trading fleet to be refitted as an assault fleet.
Such firepower would finally allow the Alliance to attack the Empire on a larger scale.
However, one of the Rebellion's allies, Queen Trios of Shu-Torun (whose world's technology had been fitted into the ships of the new Rebel fleet), revealed herself as an undercover Imperial agent sent by Darth Vader to sabotage their efforts.
With their ships unexpectedly paralyzed by the Shu-Torun technology, the gathered Rebel fleet could do little as they were targeted for destruction by Vader's Imperial fleet.
Half the Rebel ships were destroyed in the battle before Leia found a way around the sabotage and allowed the remaining ships to escape.
However, Generals Jan Dodonna and Davits Draven, as well as several other high-ranking Rebel officers, were killed during the battle and the remaining Rebel ships were separated in their flight.
Mon Mothma instructed all Rebel cells to regroup in time while striking out at the Empire when and how they could.
Not until the Battle of Endor would the whole force of the Rebellion be once again united in a single place.

In The Empire Strikes Back, the Alliance suffers a crushing defeat on Hoth when one of their main command centers, Echo Base, is overrun by the Darth Vader's elite personal Imperial armed forces, the Death Squadron and the 501st Legion.
The remaining forces of the Rebellion are forced to stay mobile, using Admiral Ackbar's flagship, Home One, as their headquarters.

By Return of the Jedi, the Alliance has regrouped and learned that a new Death Star is being constructed, and will be completed under Emperor Palpatine's personal supervision.
Mon Mothma has Admiral Ackbar and Lando Calrissian command the Alliance fleet and dispatches Han Solo and Princess Leia in leading Alliance's elite special forces to disable the station's defenses while Luke distracts Darth Vader.
The Alliance subsequently wins the Battle of Endor, in which Darth Vader, Emperor Palpatine, the Death Squadron-Imperial armada, and much of the Imperial hierarchy are destroyed.
===
Successor ===
Following their victory at the Battle of Endor, a provisional New Republic was officially formed by the Alliance.
This, combined with the Imperial power vacuum, political infighting, and Operation: Cinder—Palpatine's scorched earth contingency plan—encouraged thousands of inhabited planets to either declare independence from the Empire, or defect to the Alliance.

The New Republic found itself with no shortage of recruits and resources: the declining popularity of the Empire pushed many long time
Imperial loyalists to the Rebel cause, including those of Inferno Squadron, who after Operation Cinder, which saw the destruction of countless Imperial worlds, opened the eyes of many to the atrocities of the Empire.
Even the most dedicated Imperials such as Inferno Squadron commander Iden Versio were moved to defect after the witnessing the destruction of her homeworld Vardos.
Finally realizing the Empire's propaganda had deceived them, many Imperials began to feel shame over their actions, in particular over the destruction of Alderaan.

Despite fact that the New Republic was now winning the war, had a lot more resources than before—and a lot more recruits—the New Republic was suffering from logistic nightmare.
The decentralized structure that served them well became a liability; described as "a ragtag force strategically ill-fed and cobbled together of incompatible ships and squadrons".
The Alliance Fleet shifted military doctrine; the guerrilla warfare aspect of the grand strategy was de-emphasized, and conventional forces took over the primary prosecution of the war.

Once the New Republic became powerful enough, the Alliance Fleet was reorganized into the New Republic Military, charged with the defense of the New Republic.

About a year after the Battle of Endor, the Rebellion defeated the Empire during the Battle of Jakku and formally established the New Republic.
Thus, the Galactic Civil War officially ended.
Three decades later, by the time of The Force Awakens, the New Republic backed the Resistance army, a successor of the Alliance, to stand against the First Order, a new military power formed by hardline remnants from the Empire.

===
Legends ===
After Disney's acquisition of the franchise, Lucasfilm announced in 2014 that previous works outside the theatrical films and The Clone Wars would no longer be considered canon, but began to be republished under the Legends banner.

According to Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, the Cantham House Meetings of Coruscant, including the participation of Senators Mon Mothma and Bail Organa, take place with the purpose of discussing the formation of a Galactic Alliance in opposition to Palpatine's Galactic Empire.
In addition, the RPG tells that although throughout the galaxy many sectors are already fighting against Imperial interests, resistance is relatively quiet until the incident on the planet Ghorman, which takes place 18 years before the Battle of Yavin.
The incident begins when an Imperial military cruiser commanded by Captain Wilhuff Tarkin is blocked by peaceful anti-Empire protesters who refuse to move off the ship's landing pad.
With implied permission from the Emperor, Tarkin lands the ship anyway, injuring and killing many, an incident that history would record as the Ghorman Massacre.
The myriad of civilizations which are fighting the Empire continue to grow in number and progressively coalesce into a ragtag organization known as the Resistance.
They intend upon removing the evil Emperor, but the growing ruthlessness of the Imperial state forces them into secrecy, as they are initially unable to undermine the Empire's regime.
The RPG tells that part of the strategy of the Rebel Alliance is the Doctrine of Space Denial, wherein the Rebellion would attack Imperial shipping frigates in hit and run raids, both to disrupt Imperial supplies and operations, and also to loot desperately needed materials.
These Rebel starfighters were equipped with hyperdrive capability along prearranged routes which would allow this kind of harassment and escape before the Empire may react.

The video game
The Force Unleashed presents a differing view of the Alliance's beginnings, hinting that the Emperor actually secretly pushed for its formation.
Palpatine clandestinely bids for the creation of another opposing force, intent on starting yet another war in order to consolidate his power with the fledgling Empire, just as he had done earlier with the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
The Emperor orders his apprentice Darth Vader to use his own secret apprentice, Galen Marek (called "Starkiller"), as a pawn to gather together the Empire's enemies, manipulating him into believing that the intention is to start a rebellion.
Vader quickly realizes that this is obviously a ploy by Palpatine in order to lure any significant rebels into a trap; however, it is unclear whether Vader (or the Emperor) had intended for the Rebellion to survive.
At the supposedly secret meeting known as the Corellian Treaty, Mon Mothma, Bail Organa, Garm Bel Iblis, Jedi-General Rahm Kota, and others meet to formally create the Rebellion against the Empire.
However, the proceedings are ambushed by Vader under orders from the Emperor, whom had actually secretly orchestrated the Treaty himself in order to gather all the Rebel leaders together and eliminate them.
Starkiller, now aligned with the Rebellion after two betrayals by his former master, manages to save the principal founders from the Empire, though at the cost of his own life.
Regrouping on Kashyyyk, the Senators formally proclaim an open Declaration of Rebellion, which states the grievances of the Empire against the Alliance to Restore the Republic and concludes with an open threat to depose the Emperor.
This marks the formal "founding" of the Rebel Alliance, and Galen Marek's family crest is chosen by Leia as its official symbol.
Thus, the Rebel Alliance is effectively founded by Darth Vader himself, and, by extension, Emperor Palpatine, though it is clear neither had imagined that the Alliance would actually ever become a serious threat.
The Galactic Civil War consequently ensues, during which the Rebellion confronts the Empire many times throughout the galaxy.

Empire at War depicts various allies contributing secretly to the Alliance, slowly making the united Rebel Force more powerful.
The most notable equipment contributions include the defection of the Incom Corporation staff and all relevant material involved in the development of an advanced spacefighter, the X-wing.

A "Declaration of Rebellion" was depicted in the 1990 book The Star Wars Rebel Alliance Sourcebook.

After its victory on Endor, the Rebellion was temporarily stationed there and renamed the "Alliance of Free Planets".
====
Members ====
Canon members:
General Leia Organa
Senator Bail Organa
Admiral Raddus- Captain of the Profundity
Nien Nunb- Rebel Engineer and pilot
Han Solo-Captain of the Millennium Falcon
Hera Syndulla-Pilot, leader of the Phoenix Squadron
Commander Sato
Jyn Erso- Member of the Rogue One group


=====
Founders =====
Senator Bana Breemu – Co-founder; early constituting member (deceased)
Senator Garm Bel Iblis – Co-founder; financed private army to fight against the Empire; rejoined Alliance during the Thrawn campaign.

Senator Bail Organa of the Imperial Senate (deceased)
Senator Mon Mothma of the Imperial Senate


=====
Senior civil government and military high command =====
Col Serra – Commander of Renegade Squadron
Ylenic It'kla – Commander and Jedi Knight who escaped Order 66, serving as a personal aide to Bail Organa on Alderaan.
Works with Alderaanian authorities to coordinate rebel activity.

Qu Rahn – General and Jedi Master who survived Order 66, mostly due to his connection and training with Yoda.

Rahm Kota – General and former Jedi Master who survived Order 66,
thanks to the aid of his own private militia.

Echuu Shen-Jon – General and Jedi Master who survived Order 66, thanks to his exile on Krant.

Talon Karrde – General and former smuggler who aided the New Republic during the Thrawn campaign.

== See also ==
Galactic Republic
Galactic Empire
New Republic


==
Brief list of appearances ==
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005; founded in a deleted scene)
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018)
Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018)
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016)
Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977)
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983)
Star Wars Battlefront (2015)
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017)


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Rebel Alliance in the StarWars.com Databank
Rebel Alliance on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Darth Vader is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
The character is the primary antagonist in the original trilogy and, as Anakin Skywalker, is a primary protagonist in the prequel trilogy.
Star Wars creator George Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
Originally a slave on Tatooine, Anakin is a Jedi prophesied to bring balance to the Force.
He is lured to the dark side of the Force by Palpatine and becomes a Sith lord, assuming the title Darth Vader.
After a lightsaber battle with his former mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi, in which he is severely injured, Vader is transformed into a cyborg.
He then serves the Galactic Empire as its chief enforcer until he ultimately redeems himself by saving his son, Luke Skywalker, and killing Palpatine, sacrificing his own life in the process.
He is also the secret husband of Padmé Amidala, father of Princess Leia, and maternal grandfather of Kylo Ren.

The character has been portrayed by numerous actors: David Prowse physically portrayed Vader while James Earl Jones voiced him in the original trilogy, and Sebastian Shaw portrayed the unmasked Anakin in Return of the Jedi, as well as the character's spirit in the original release of that film.
Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen played the character in the prequel trilogy in the first and next two films, respectively, and the latter also replaced Shaw as Anakin's spirit with the 2004 re-release of Return of the Jedi.
His cinematic appearances span the first six Star Wars films, as well as Rogue One.
He is referenced in both The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, and makes vocal cameos as both Vader and Anakin in The Rise of Skywalker.
He also appears in television series (most substantially The Clone Wars) and numerous iterations of the Star Wars Expanded Universe, including video games, novels, and comic books.

Darth Vader has become one of the most iconic villains in popular culture, and has been listed among the greatest villains and fictional characters ever.
The American Film Institute listed him as the third greatest movie villain in cinema history on 100 Years...
100 Heroes and Villains, behind Hannibal Lecter and Norman Bates.
His role as a tragic hero in the saga was also met with positive reviews.

== Creation and development ==


===
Name ===
Various combinations of names for the character were built upon the phrase "Dark Water".
Then Lucas "added lots of last names, Vaders and Wilsons and Smiths, and [he] just came up with the combination of Darth and Vader.
"
After the release of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Lucas said the name Vader was based upon the German/Dutch-language homophone vater or vader, meaning 'father', making the name representative of a "Dark Father".
Other words which may have inspired the name are "death" and "invader", as well as the name of a high school upperclassman of Lucas's, Gary Vader.
As no other character with the title "Darth" was introduced until the release of The Phantom Menace (1999), some viewers interpreted it as the character's first name, in part because Obi-Wan Kenobi addresses him as "Darth" in the original film.
The moniker is bestowed upon Anakin in Revenge of the Sith (2005) upon his turn to the dark side of the Force.

Director Ken Annakin's films Swiss Family Robinson and Battle of the Bulge influenced the original trilogy, leading some to believe that Anakin was named after him.
Lucas's publicist denied this following Annakin's death in 2009.
Anakin and Luke's original surname "Starkiller" remained in the script until a few months into filming Star Wars, when it was dropped due to what Lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with Charles Manson and replaced with "Skywalker".

====
In other countries ====
In France his name was changed to "Dark Vador" since the first film.
The names of other characters were changed too, but his is the only name that has been maintained even in the most recent films.
Also, the title "Dark" was used in place of "Darth" for the other Sith lords too.
In the Italian-language editions, Darth Vader is named "Dart Fener".
In 2005, before the release of Episode III, an on-line survey asked Italian fans whether they would rather maintaining the Italian name or switching it to the original: the first option won; however in 2015, when Epidode VII had to be released, the Italian localisation decided to change the historical name to the English "Darth Vader".
In Iceland his name is "Svarthöfði" (which means "blackhead").

===
Concept and writing ===
In the first draft of The Star Wars, tall, grim general "Darth Vader" was already close in line with his final depiction, and the protagonist Annikin Starkiller had a role similar to that of his son Luke's as the 16-year-old son of a respected warrior.
Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler.
In developing the backstory for The Empire Strikes
Back, Lucas condensed this into one character in the form of Darth Vader.
After the success of the original Star Wars (1977), Lucas hired science-fiction author Leigh Brackett to write the sequel with him.
They held story conferences and, by late November 1977, Lucas had produced a handwritten treatment.
In the first draft that Brackett would write from this, Luke's father appears as a ghost to instruct Luke.
Lucas was disappointed with the script, but Brackett died of cancer before he could discuss it with her.
With no writer available, Lucas wrote the next draft himself.
In this draft, dated April 1, 1978, he made use of a new plot twist: Vader claiming to be Luke's father.
According to Lucas, he found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the year-long struggles writing the first film.
Lucas has said that he knew Vader was Luke's father while writing the first film, though the relationship is not evidenced before said draft of The Empire Strikes Back.
The new plot element of Luke's parentage had drastic effects on the series.
Author Michael Kaminski argues in The Secret History of Star Wars that it is unlikely that the plot point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the first film was clearly operating under a storyline where Vader was a separate character from Luke's father.
After writing the second and third drafts in which the plot point was introduced, Lucas reviewed the new backstory he had created: Anakin had been Obi-Wan Kenobi's brilliant student and had a child named Luke, but was swayed to the dark side by Palpatine.
Anakin battled Obi-Wan on the site of a volcano and was badly wounded, but was then reborn as Vader.
Meanwhile, Obi-Wan hid Luke on Tatooine while the Galactic Republic became the tyrannical Galactic Empire and Vader systematically hunted down and killed the Jedi.
This change in character would provide a springboard to the "tragedy of Darth Vader" storyline that underlies the prequel trilogy.

After deciding to create the prequel trilogy, Lucas indicated that the story arc would be a tragic one depicting Anakin's fall to the dark side.
He also saw that the prequels could form the beginning of one long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death.
This was the final step towards turning the film series into a "saga".
For the first prequel, Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Lucas made Anakin nine years old to make the character's separation from his mother more poignant.
Movie trailers focused on Anakin and a one-sheet poster showing him casting Vader's shadow informed otherwise unknowing audiences of the character's eventual fate.
The movie ultimately achieved a primary goal of introducing audiences to Anakin, as well as introducing the concept that he is the Chosen One of an ancient Jedi prophecy, destined to bring balance to the Force.
Lucas states in an interview recorded around the time of the third prequel, Revenge of the Sith (2005), that "Anakin is the Chosen One.
Even when Anakin turns into Darth Vader, he is still the Chosen One.
"Michael
Kaminski offers evidence that issues in Anakin's fall to the dark side prompted Lucas to make fundamental story changes, first revising the opening sequence of Revenge of the Sith to have Palpatine kidnapped and his apprentice, Count Dooku, killed by Anakin in cold blood as the first act in the latter's turn towards the dark side.
After principal photography was complete in 2003, Lucas re-wrote Anakin's turn to the dark side; Anakin's fall from grace would now be motivated by a desire to save his wife, Padmé Amidala, rather than the previous version in which that reason was one of several, including that he genuinely believed that the Jedi were plotting to take over the Republic.
This fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the principal footage, and new and revised scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.During production of the animated The Clone Wars television series, Ahsoka Tano was developed to illustrate how Anakin develops from the brash, undisciplined Padawan apprentice in Attack of the Clones (2002) to the more reserved Jedi Knight in Revenge of the Sith.
Clone Wars supervising director and Rebels co-creator
Dave Filoni said that giving Anakin responsibility for a Padawan was meant to place the character in a role that forced him to become more cautious and responsible.
It would also give him insight into his relationship with Obi-Wan and depict how their relationship matured.
Ahsoka and Anakin's relationship was seen as an essential story arc spanning both the animated film and Clone Wars television series.
Filoni began thinking about the final confrontation between Ahsoka and Vader ever since he created the former; different iterations had different endings, including one in which Vader kills Ahsoka just as she slashes open his helmet to reveal his scarred face.
A similar scene is included in an episode of Rebels, in which Ahsoka slashes Vader's helmet open, and the Sith lord recognizes her.
According to Filoni, Ahsoka's presence in the series allows Vader to encounter the show's lead characters without the latter being "destroyed", as Ahsoka can "stand toe-to-toe" with her former master.

===
Design ===
The original design of Darth Vader's costume did not originally include a helmet.
The idea that Vader should wear a breathing apparatus was first proposed by concept artist Ralph McQuarrie during preproduction discussions for Star Wars with George Lucas in 1975.
McQuarrie stated that Lucas's artistic direction was to portray a malevolent figure in a cape with samurai armor. "
For Darth Vader, George just said he would like to have a very tall, dark fluttering figure that had a spooky feeling like it came in on the wind."
McQuarrie noted that the script indicated that Vader would travel between spaceships and needed to survive in the vacuum of space, and he proposed that Vader should wear some sort of space suit.
Lucas agreed, and McQuarrie combined a full-face breathing mask with a samurai helmet, thus creating one of the most iconic designs of space fantasy cinema.
McQuarrie's 1975 production painting of Darth Vader engaged in a lightsaber duel with Deak Starkiller (a character prototype for Luke Skywalker) depicts Vader wearing black armor, a flowing cape and an elongated, skull-like mask and helmet.
Its similarity to the final design of Vader's costume demonstrates that McQuarrie's earliest conception of Vader was so successful that very little needed to be changed for production.

Working from McQuarrie's designs, the costume designer John Mollo devised a costume that could be worn by an actor on-screen using a combination of clerical robes, a motorcycle suit, a German military helmet and a military gas mask.
The prop sculptor Brian Muir created the helmet and armour used in the film.
The sound of the respirator function of Vader's mask was created by Ben Burtt using modified recordings of scuba breathing apparatus used by divers.
The sound effect is trademarked in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office under Trademark #77419252 and is officially described in the documentation as "The sound of rhythmic mechanical human breathing created by breathing through a scuba tank regulator.
"Commentators have often pointed to the influence of Akira Kurosawa's films such as The Hidden Fortress (1958) on George Lucas, and Vader's samurai-inspired costume design is held up as a significant example of the Japanese influences on Star Wars.

===
Portrayals ===
Darth Vader was portrayed by bodybuilder David Prowse in the original film trilogy, with fencer Bob Anderson performing the character's lightsaber fight scenes.
At 6 ft 6 in (1.98 m) tall, George Lucas thought Prowse "brought a physicality to Darth Vader that was essential for the character ... with an imposing stature and movement performance to match the intensity and undercurrent of Vader’s presence.
"Lucas chose to have a different actor be the voice of Vader, since Prowse had a strong West Country English accent that led the rest of the cast to nickname him "Darth Farmer".
Lucas originally intended for Orson Welles to voice Vader, but after deciding that Welles's voice would be too recognizable, he cast the lesser-known James Earl Jones instead.
Jones initially felt his contributions to the films were too small to warrant recognition and his role was uncredited at his request until the release of Return of the Jedi (1983).
When Jones was specifically asked if he had supplied Vader's voice for Revenge of the Sith—either newly or from a previous recording—Jones answered, "You'd have to ask Lucas about that.
I don't know."
Hayden Christensen and Gene Bryant alternately portray Vader in Revenge of the Sith.
During the production of Revenge of the Sith, Christensen asked Lucas if a special Vader suit could be constructed to fit his own body, rather than have a different actor don one of the original sets of Vader armor worn by Prowse.
Brock Peters provided the voice of Darth Vader in the NPR/USC radio series.
Both Spencer Wilding and Daniel Naprous portrayed Vader in Rogue One (2016), with Jones reprising his role as the character's voice.
Vader's character has also been portrayed in several video games; in games such as Rebel Assault II: The Hidden Empire and Dark Forces, visual effects artist C. Andrew Nelson appears in short sequences in the Vader costume, voiced by Scott Lawrence.
Matt Sloan, who appeared in the YouTube parody Chad Vader, provided the voice of Darth Vader in The Force Unleashed.
As a result of his video game appearances, Nelson was cast to appear as Vader in brief sequences inserted into the Special Edition of The Empire Strikes Back, in which Vader is seen boarding his shuttle.
During production of Return of the Jedi, the casting crew sought an experienced actor for the role of Anakin Skywalker since his death was unquestionably the emotional climax of the film, and Sebastian Shaw was selected for the role.
When Shaw arrived at the set for filming, he ran into his friend Ian McDiarmid, the actor playing the Emperor.
When McDiarmid asked him what he was doing there, Shaw responded, "I don't know,
dear boy, I think it's something to do with science-fiction.
"
His presence during the filming was kept secret from all but the minimum cast and crew, and Shaw was contractually obliged not to discuss any film secrets with anyone, even his family.
The unmasking scene, directed by Richard Marquand, was filmed in one day and required only a few takes, with no alteration from the original dialogue.
Lucas personally directed Shaw for his appearance in the final scene of the film, in which he is a Force Ghost of Anakin.
Shaw's image in this scene was replaced with that of Christensen in the 2004 DVD release.
This last attempt to tie the prequel and original trilogies together proved to be possibly the most controversial change in the Star Wars re-releases.
Shaw received more fan mail and autograph requests from Return of the Jedi than he had for any role in the rest of his career.
He later reflected that he enjoyed his experience filming Return of the Jedi and expressed particular surprise that an action figure was made of him from the film.

When The Phantom Menace was being produced, hundreds of actors were tested for the role of young Anakin before the producers settled on Jake Lloyd, who Lucas considered met his requirements of "a good actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
Producer Rick McCallum said that Lloyd was "smart, mischievous and loves anything mechanical—just like Anakin."
During production of Attack of the Clones, casting director Robin Gurland reviewed about 1,500 other candidates for the role of the young Anakin before Lucas eventually selected Hayden Christensen for the role.
When Revenge of the Sith was being produced, Christensen and Ewan McGregor began rehearsing their climactic lightsaber duel long before Lucas would shoot it.
They trained extensively with stunt coordinator Nick Gillard to memorize and perform their duel together.
As in the previous prequel film, McGregor and Christensen performed their own lightsaber fighting scenes without the use of stunt doubles.
Anakin has also been voiced by Mat Lucas for the 2003 micro-series Clone Wars, and by Matt Lanter in the CGI animated film The Clone Wars, the television series of the same name and for Anakin's small roles in the animated series Rebels and Forces of Destiny.
James Earl Jones reprised the voice role for Vader's appearances in Rebels.
Both Lanter and Jones contributed their voices for the second-season finale of Rebels, at times with identical dialogue spoken by both actors blended together in different ways.

===
Characteristics ===
In Attack of the Clones, Anakin Skywalker feels "smothered" by Obi-Wan Kenobi and is incapable of controlling his own life.
By Revenge of the Sith, however, his "father-son" friction with his master has matured into a more equal, brotherly relationship.
Once he becomes Darth Vader, each evil act he commits shatters any hope or connection towards his previous life, which makes it harder for him to return to the light, but he ultimately escapes the dark side and redeems himself by sacrificing his life to save his son, Luke Skywalker, and kill the Emperor in Return of the Jedi.
Eric Bui, a psychiatrist at University of Toulouse Hospital, argued at the 2007 American Psychiatric Association convention that Anakin Skywalker meets six of the nine diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder (BPD), one more than necessary for a diagnosis.
He and a colleague, Rachel Rodgers, published their findings in a 2010 letter to the editor of the journal Psychiatry Research.
Bui says he found Anakin Skywalker a useful example to explain BPD to medical students.
In particular, Bui points to Anakin's abandonment issues and uncertainty over his identity.
Anakin's mass murders of the Tusken Raiders in Attack of the Clones and the young Jedi in Revenge of the Sith count as two dissociative episodes, fulfilling another criterion.
Bui hoped his paper would help raise awareness of the disorder, especially among teens.

==
Appearances ==
Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker appears in seven of the live-action Star Wars films, the animated series The Clone Wars (including the film), Rebels, and the micro-series Clone Wars and Forces of Destiny.
He also has a main and recurring role in games, comics, books and the non-canon Star Wars Legends material.

===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
Darth Vader first appears in Star Wars as a ruthless cyborg Sith Lord serving the Galactic Empire.
He is tasked, along with Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing), with recovering the secret plans for the Death Star superweapon, which were stolen by the Rebel Alliance.
Vader captures and tortures Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), who has hidden the plans inside the droid R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and sent it to find Vader's former Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) on the planet Tatooine.
During Leia's rescue by Obi-Wan's allies Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and Han Solo
(Harrison Ford), Vader strikes down Obi-Wan in a lightsaber duel.
Having placed a tracking device aboard their ship, the Millennium Falcon, Vader is able to track down the Rebel base on the planet Yavin 4.
During the Rebel attack on the Death Star, Vader boards his TIE fighter and attempts to shoot down Rebel X-wing fighters, but Solo intervenes and sends Vader's ship spiraling off course, allowing Luke to destroy the Death Star.

In The Empire Strikes Back, Vader becomes obsessed with finding the Force-sensitive Luke and leads his stormtroopers to attack on the Rebel base on Hoth, which the Rebels escape.
While conversing with the Emperor (Ian McDiarmid) via hologram, Vader convinces him that Luke would be a valuable ally if he could be turned to the dark side.
Vader hires a group of bounty hunters to follow Luke's friends, and negotiates with Bespin administrator Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams) to set a trap for them to bait Luke.
After Han, Leia, Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) arrive, Vader tortures and freezes Han in carbonite and gives him to the bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch).
When Luke arrives, Vader overpowers him in a lightsaber duel, severing his hand.
Vader tells Luke that he is his father, and tries to persuade him to join the dark side and help him overthrow the Emperor.
Horrified, Luke escapes through an air shaft.
Vader telepathically tells Luke that it is his destiny to join the dark side.

In Return of the Jedi, Vader and the Emperor supervise the final stages of the second Death Star's construction.
Thinking that there is still good in his father, Luke surrenders to Vader and tries to convince him to turn from the dark side.
Vader takes Luke to the second Death Star to meet the Emperor.
While there, the Emperor tempts Luke to give in to his anger, which leads to Vader dueling with Luke once again.
Realizing that Leia is Luke's twin sister, Vader threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit.
Furious, Luke overpowers Vader and severs his father's cybernetic hand.
The Emperor entreats Luke to kill Vader and take his place.
Luke refuses and the Emperor tortures him with Force lightning.
Unwilling to let his son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor chute to his death, but is mortally wounded by his former master's lightning in the process.
The redeemed Anakin Skywalker asks Luke to remove his mask, and admits that there was still good in him after all as he dies peacefully in his son's arms.
Luke escapes the second Death Star with his father's body and cremates it in a pyre on Endor.
As the Rebels celebrate the Death Star's destruction and the Empire's defeat, Luke sees the spirits of Anakin, Yoda (Frank Oz), and Obi-Wan watching over him.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
In Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, which takes place 32 years before A New Hope
, Anakin appears as a nine-year-old slave living on Tatooine with his mother Shmi (Pernilla August).
In addition to being a gifted pilot and mechanic, Anakin has built his own protocol droid, C-3PO.
Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) meets Anakin after making an emergency landing on Tatooine with Queen of Naboo Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman).
Qui-Gon learns from Shmi that Anakin was conceived without a father and can foresee the future.
Qui-Gon senses Anakin's strong connection to the Force and becomes convinced that he is the "Chosen One" of Jedi prophecy who will bring balance to the Force.
After winning his freedom in a podrace wager, Anakin leaves with Qui-Gon to be trained as a Jedi on Coruscant, but is forced to leave his mother behind.
During the journey, Anakin forms a bond with Padmé.
Qui-Gon asks the Jedi Council for permission to train Anakin, but they sense fear in the boy and refuse.
Eventually, Anakin helps end the corrupt Trade Federation's invasion of Naboo by destroying their control ship.
After Qui-Gon is killed in a lightsaber duel with Sith Lord Darth Maul (portrayed by Ray Park, voiced by Peter Serafinowicz), Qui-Gon's apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) promises to train Anakin, with the council's reluctant approval.
Palpatine, newly elected as the Galactic Republic's Chancellor, befriends Anakin and tells him, "We will watch your career with great interest".

In Episode II: Attack of the Clones, which takes place 10 years after The Phantom Menace, 19-year-old Anakin is still Obi-Wan's Padawan apprentice.
Over the years, he has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is holding him back.
After rescuing Padmé from an assassination attempt, Anakin travels with her to Naboo as her bodyguard, and they fall in love, which is against the Jedi Code.
Sensing that Shmi is in pain, Anakin travels with Padmé to Tatooine to rescue his mother.
While there, Anakin learns that Shmi had been freed by and
married farmer Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson)
a few years after he left.
He then visits Cliegg and learns from him that she was kidnapped by Tusken Raiders.
Anakin locates Shmi at a Tusken campsite, where she dies in his arms.
Anakin, enraged, massacres the Tusken tribe and returns to the Lars homestead to bury Shmi.
Anakin then travels with Padmé to Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan from Sith Lord Count Dooku (Christopher Lee).
Dooku captures the trio and sentences them to death.
However, a battalion of Jedi arrives with an army of clone troopers to halt the executions.
Obi-Wan and Anakin confront Dooku, but the Sith Lord beats them both in a lightsaber duel and severs Anakin's arm.
After being rescued by Yoda, Anakin is fitted with a robotic arm and marries Padmé in a secret ceremony.

In Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, set three years after Attack of the Clones, Anakin is now a Jedi Knight and a hero of the Clone Wars.
He and Obi-Wan lead a mission to rescue Palpatine from Separatist commander General Grievous (voiced by Matthew Wood).
The two Jedi battle Count Dooku, whom Anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold blood at Palpatine's urging.
They rescue Palpatine and return to Coruscant.
Anakin reunites with Padmé, who tells him that she is pregnant.
Although initially excited, Anakin soon begins to have nightmares about Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine also appoints Anakin to the Jedi Council as his personal representative.
Suspicious of Palpatine, the Council allows Anakin as a member, but declines to grant him the rank of Jedi Master and instead instructs him to spy on Palpatine, diminishing Anakin's trust in the Jedi.
Later, Palpatine reveals to Anakin that he is the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, and says that only he has the power to save Padmé from dying.
Anakin reports Sidious' treachery to Jedi Master Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson), who confronts and subdues Sidious.
Desperate to save Padmé, Anakin intervenes on Sidious' behalf and disarms Windu, allowing Sidious to kill him.

Anakin then pledges himself to the Sith, and Sidious dubs him Darth Vader.
On Sidious' orders, Vader leads the 501st Legion to kill everyone in the Jedi Temple, including the children, and then goes to the volcanic planet Mustafar to assassinate the Separatist Council.
A distraught Padmé goes to Mustafar and implores Vader to abandon the dark side, but he refuses.
Sensing Obi-Wan's presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill him, Vader angrily uses the Force to strangle Padmé to unconsciousness.
Obi-Wan engages Vader in a lightsaber duel that ends with Obi-Wan severing Vader's limbs and leaving him for dead on the banks of a lava flow, severely burned.
Sidious finds a barely alive Vader and takes him to Coruscant, where his mutilated body is treated and covered in the black suit first depicted in the original trilogy.
When Vader asks if Padmé is safe, Sidious says that he killed her out of anger, and Vader screams in agony.
At the end of the film, Vader supervises the construction of the first Death Star alongside Sidious and Tarkin (Wayne Pygram).

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Darth Vader's melted helmet appears in The Force Awakens (2015), in which Vader's grandson Kylo Ren (Adam Driver) is seen addressing him, though Vader does not appear in the film.
At one point, his helmet was considered as the film's MacGuffin.
The helmet appears again in The Rise of Skywalker (2019), when Kylo briefly meditates with it, and during the film's first duel between Kylo and Rey (Daisy Ridley), during which it is last seen on Kijimi, which is later destroyed by a Sith Star Destroyer.
The film also reveals that the voice which Ren perceived coming from Vader's helmet in The Force Awakens was generated by Emperor Palpatine.

In The Rise of Skywalker, Anakin makes a vocal cameo, along with other "voices of Jedi Past", where he encourages Rey to "bring back the balance... as [he] did" before she faces a resurrected Palpatine.

===
Other Star Wars films ===


====
The Clone Wars (film) ====
In the 2008 3D animated film The Clone Wars, Yoda (voiced by Tom Kane) assigns Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein) as Anakin's Padawan apprentice, a responsibility Anakin is at first reluctant to accept.
Anakin calls her "Snips" for her "snippy" attitude, while Ahsoka calls him "Skyguy" as a pun on his surname.
After earning Anakin's respect during a dangerous mission, Ahsoka joins him on a quest to rescue Jabba the Hutt's infant son, Rotta.
Her impetuousness both annoys and endears her to her master, and Anakin develops a friendly affection for his apprentice.

====
Rogue One ====
In the first anthology film Rogue One (2016), Darth Vader makes a cameo appearance in which he summons Orson Krennic (Ben Mendelsohn), the Imperial Director of Advanced Weapons Research, to his castle on Mustafar.
He confronts him about his handling of the Death Star project and the destruction of Jedha City, while Krennic asks Vader for an audience with the Emperor regarding the Death Star, which he lost command of to Tarkin.
Vader refuses, ordering him to ensure that the Death Star project has not been compromised.
When Krennic asks him if he would still regain command of the Death Star, Vader uses the Force to choke him, telling him, "Be careful not to choke on your aspirations, Director.
"
At the end of the film, Vader boards the disabled Rebel flagship, the MC75 Star Cruiser Profundity, with a cadre of 501st
Legion troopers and kills several Rebel soldiers as he attempts to recover the plans.
However, the docked blockade runner Tantive IV escapes with the plans, setting up the events of A New Hope.

Darth Vader had a much different role in early versions of the film's story.
Screenwriter Gary Whitta stated that in his initial pitch, Vader would appear on Scarif and slaughter the Rebel blockade there.
In an earlier storyline, Vader would also have killed Krennic for his failure to prevent the Rebels from stealing the Death Star plans.
An image of a deleted scene featuring Vader was revealed in February 2021 by Industrial Light & Magic visual effects animator Hal Hickel, who added that Vader was supposed to have a conversation with Tarkin in that scene.

===
Television series ===


====
Clone Wars (2003–2005) ====
Anakin is a lead character in all three seasons of the Clone Wars micro-series, which takes place shortly after the conclusion of Attack of the Clones.
Anakin becomes a Jedi Knight and is quickly promoted to a General of the Republic's Clone Army, due in part to Palpatine's (voiced by Nick Jameson) influence.
Among other missions, he fights a duel with Dooku's apprentice Asajj Ventress (voiced by Grey DeLisle), helps Obi-Wan (voiced by James Arnold Taylor) capture a Separatist-controlled fortress and rescues Jedi Master Saesee Tiin (voiced by Dee Bradley Baker) during a space battle.
During the third season, Anakin frees a planet's indigenous species from Separatist control and sees a cryptic vision of his future as Darth Vader.
In the series finale, Anakin and Obi-Wan go on a mission to rescue Palpatine from General Grievous, leading to the opening of Revenge of the Sith.

====
The Clone Wars (2008–2014, 2020) ====
Anakin is a lead character in all seasons of The Clone Wars.
As a Jedi Knight, he leads the 501st Legion on missions with both his master Obi-Wan and apprentice Ahsoka Tano throughout the war.
Some of Anakin's actions taken out of concern for Ahsoka violate the Jedi code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her location when she goes missing.
Throughout the series there are several references to Anakin's eventual fall to the dark side, including visions of his future as Darth Vader in the third season, and disillusion with the Jedi Council after they wrongly accuse Ahsoka of bombing the Jedi Temple in the fifth season.
While she is later forgiven after the true culprit is found, she nonetheless chooses to leave the Jedi Order.
Anakin appears as Vader in the final scene of the series finale, some time after Revenge of the Sith.
He investigates the crash site of Ahsoka's Star Destroyer, which collapsed during her battle with her clone troopers after Darth Sidious issued Order 66, turning the clones against the Jedi.
Finding her lightsaber among the wreckage, Vader assumes that his former Padawan has perished and leaves with the lightsaber.

====
Rebels (2014–2018) ====
Darth Vader appears in two episodes of the first season of Star Wars Rebels, which takes place 14 years after The Clone Wars concludes, and serves as the main antagonist of its second season.
Vader leads a squadron of Force-sensitive Imperial Inquisitors who actively search for and kill any remaining Jedi and Force-sensitive children.
In the second-season premiere, Vader orchestrates the murder of Minister Maketh Tua, an Imperial who tried to defect to the rebellion, and confronts the rebel crew of the Ghost.
When he later attacks the fleet of the Phoenix Squadron, Vader discovers that Ahsoka is still alive and has joined the Rebel Alliance, while Ahsoka is overwhelmed when she recognizes Anakin under "a layer of hate" in Darth Vader.
The Emperor orders Vader to dispatch an Inquisitor to capture her.
Later in the season, Ahsoka has a vision in which Anakin blames her for allowing him to fall to the dark side.
In the season finale, Ahsoka duels with her former master inside a Sith Temple, allowing her friends to escape Vader and the temple's destruction.
As the episode concludes, Vader escapes from the temple's ruins.
Vader makes a final voiceless cameo in the late fourth-season episode "A World Between Worlds", in which it is revealed that Ahsoka escaped from her previous duel with Vader by entering a Force-realm.
Shortly afterward, Vader's voice is heard echoing in the void.

====
Forces of Destiny (2017–2018) ====
Anakin Skywalker appears in multiple episodes of the 2D animated online micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny.

====
Obi-Wan Kenobi ====
On December 10, 2020, during a Disney Investor event, it was announced that Hayden Christensen would return as Vader in the upcoming Disney+
streaming series Obi-Wan Kenobi.

===
Canon literature ===
In the first chapter of the novelization of The Phantom Menace, Anakin participates in a podrace through Beggar's Canyon on Tatooine.
This parallels his future son Luke's flights through the same canyon as mentioned in A New Hope.
Star Wars:
Lords of the Sith was one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
In it, Vader and Palpatine find themselves hunted by revolutionaries on the Twi'lek planet Ryloth.

====
Comics ====
In 2015, Marvel released a 25-issue series called Darth Vader (2015–16), written by Kieron Gillen.
It focuses on the Sith lord in the aftermath of the Death Star's destruction, as well as his life after learning about his son's existence, and introduces franchise fan favorite character Doctor Aphra.
This series takes place parallel to the comic book series Star Wars, in which Vader and Luke meet; the two series have a crossover titled Vader Down.
A continuation set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi debuted in 2020, written by Greg Pak.
The first few issues deal with Vader carrying out his revenge on those who concealed Luke; he also visits Padmé's tomb on Naboo and encounters her handmaidens.
The five-issue limited series Obi-Wan & Anakin (2016), written by Charles Soule, depicts the lives of the titular Jedi between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones.
At New York Comic Con 2015, Soule described the story as "pretty unexplored territory".
Between 2017 and 2018, Soule wrote a prequel-era series, also called Darth Vader (sometimes subtitled Dark Lord of the Sith).
It begins immediately after Vader wakes up in his armor at the end of Revenge of the Sith and explores his emotional transformation upon learning of Padmé's death, his adjustment to his mechanical suit, how he creates his red-bladed lightsaber, and his hunting of Jedi in the Inquisitor program (introduced in Rebels).
Its final arc, which deals with the construction of Vader's fortress on Mustafar, implies that Palpatine used the Force to conceive Anakin in utero, as some had theorized that Revenge of the Sith indicates.
A Lucasfilm story group member later clarified that "This is all in Anakin's head".
A five-issue limited series written by Dennis Hopeless, Vader: Dark Visions, was released in 2019.
According to Marvel, the series "sheds new light on the many sides of the galaxy's greatest villain".
===
Virtual reality game ===
In the 2015 Star Wars Celebration, it was announced David S. Goyer was helping to develop a virtual reality game series based on Darth Vader.
As an observer with limited influence, the player is able to walk, pick up, push and open things, and possibly affect the story.
The game, titled Vader Immortal, had three episodes overall, set between Revenge of the Sith and Rogue One; the first became available with the launch of Oculus Quest, while the last episode was released on November 21, 2019.
The game was later ported to the Oculus Rift.
On August 25, 2020, all three episodes were also released on PlayStation VR.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.

====
Books ====
Vader is featured prominently in novels set in the Star Wars universe.
In the 1978 novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye by Alan Dean Foster, Vader meets Luke Skywalker for the first time and engages him in a lightsaber duel that ends with Luke cutting off Vader's arm and Vader falling into a deep pit.
Shadows of the Empire (1996) reveals that Vader is conflicted about trying to turn his son to the dark side of the Force, and knows deep down that there is still some good in himself.

Vader's supposedly indestructible glove is the MacGuffin of the young-reader's book The Glove of Darth Vader (1992).
Anakin Skywalker's redeemed spirit appears in The Truce at Bakura (1993), set a few days after the end of Return of the Jedi.
He appears to Leia, imploring her forgiveness.
Leia condemns Anakin for his crimes and exiles him from her life.
He promises that he will be there for her when she needs him, and disappears.
In Tatooine Ghost (2003), Leia learns to forgive her father after learning about his childhood as a slave and his mother's traumatic death.
In The Unifying Force (2003), Anakin tells his grandson Jacen Solo to "stand firm" in his battle with the Supreme Overlord of the Yuuzhan Vong.

Upon the release of the prequel films, the Expanded Universe grew to include novels about Vader's former life as Anakin Skywalker.
Greg Bear's 2000 novel Rogue Planet and Jude Watson's Jedi Quest series chronicle Anakin's early missions with Obi-Wan, while James Luceno's 2005 novel Labyrinth of Evil, set during the Clone Wars, depicts Anakin battling Separatist commander General Grievous.
In Luceno's Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader (2005), set a few months after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Vader disavows his identity as Skywalker as he systematically pursues and kills the surviving Jedi and cements his position in the Empire.
The novel reveals that Vader plans to eventually overthrow Palpatine and that he betrayed the Jedi because he resented their supposed failure to recognize his power.

In the Dark Nest trilogy (2005), Luke and Leia uncover old recordings of their parents in R2-D2's memory drive; for the first time, they see their own birth and their mother's death, as well as their father's corruption to the dark side.
In Bloodlines (2006), Han and Leia's son Jacen—who has turned to the dark side—uses the Force to envision Vader slaughtering the children at the Jedi Temple.

Vader also appears in a series of tongue-in-cheek children's books by Jeffrey Brown.
In Brown's series, a hapless Vader sets out to be a father to a young Luke and Leia, with some scenes portraying light-hearted versions of their darker film counterparts.
For example, one scene shows Vader, Luke and Leia at the carbonite freezing chamber on Bespin, with Vader pronouncing the freezer adequate for making ice cream.

====
Comics ====
Vader appears in several comic books such as Marvel Comics' Star Wars (1977–1986).
In Dark Empire II, he is revealed to have had a castle on the planet Vjun.
Anakin Skywalker is a major character in Dark Horse Comics' Star Wars: Republic series (1998–2006).
In Boba Fett: Enemy of the Empire (1999), Vader hires Fett a few years before the events of A New Hope.
In Vader's Quest (1999), set soon after A New Hope, the dark lord encounters Luke for the first time.
Star Wars: Empire (2002–2005) spans from about a year before A New Hope to several months afterwards.
Anakin and Vader appear in the non-canonical Star Wars Tales (1999–2005); in the story Resurrection, Darth Maul is resurrected and faces Vader in battle.
Vader-centric comics released and set just after Revenge of the Sith include Dark Times (2006–2013), Darth Vader and the Lost Command (2011), Darth Vader and the Ghost Prison (2012), and Darth Vader and the Cry of Shadows (2013–14).

===
Video games ===
Darth Vader and Anakin Skywalker have appeared in a number of Star Wars since the earliest days of the franchise, though rarely as a playable character.
Vader plays a central role in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed (2008), where he is the playable character for the first level of the game.
He also appears in the sequel Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II as the final boss.
Darth Vader has also appeared in non-Star Wars video games as a guest character, for example Soulcalibur IV (2008).

Most recently, Vader makes a cameo appearance in the final mission of Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, after the main antagonist, the Second Sister, is defeated.
After Vader kills her for her failure to retrieve a Jedi Holocron, the protagonist, Padawan Cal Kestis, must escape from Vader, who attempts to get the Holocron in his possession.
Cal is ultimately able to escape from Vader's grasp with the help of his allies.

===
Other ===
In the Star Wars Holiday Special, a television special broadcast by CBS in 1978, features a brief appearance by Darth Vader, who appears on-screen speaking with Imperial officer "Chief Bast" in footage cut from the original 1977 film.
The sequence is dubbed with new dialogue, performed by James Earl Jones.
In the story, Vader colludes with Boba Fett to entrap the Rebels.
Darth Vader features in the 1981 radio drama adaptation of Star Wars, voiced by the actor Brock Peters.
Vader makes his first appearance on the planet Ralltiir, where he treats Princess Leia with suspicion.
In later extended scenes, he is heard interrogating and torturing Leia on board his Star Destroyer and aboard the Death Star.
Vader appears in Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue, where he is once again voiced by Jones.
An action figure of Vader comes to life alongside RoboCop and Jurassic Park toys in The Indian in the Cupboard (1995).
Vader also had a brief cameo in Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009), in which he and Oscar the Grouch try unsuccessfully to join the army formed by Ivan the Terrible, Napoleon and Al Capone.

==
Cultural impact ==
In 1977, a writer for New Journal and Guide criticized the lack of racial diversity in the original Star Wars film, pointing out that "the force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the voice of a black man."
George Lucas felt hurt at such accusations.
Psychiatrists have considered Vader to be a useful example for explaining borderline personality disorder to medical students.
Anakin's origin story in The Phantom Menace has been compared to signifiers of African American racial identity, particularly his being a slave, and his dissatisfaction with his life has been compared to Siddartha's before he became Gautama Buddha.
A Mexican church advised Christians against seeing The Phantom Menace because it portrays Anakin as a Christ figure.

Many films and television series have paid homage to Darth Vader.
The 1982 movie Cosmic Princess, compiled from parts of Space: 1999 episodes, contains several Star Wars references including a character named "Vader".
Marty McFly in Back to the Future (1985), dressed in a radiation suit, calls himself "Darth Vader from the planet Vulcan" in one scene.
Vader is parodied as "Dark Helmet" (Rick Moranis) in the Star Wars parody Spaceballs (1987).
A primary antagonist in Final Fantasy IV (1991) was stated by game creator Takashi Tokita to be based on Vader.
In Chasing Amy (1997), Hooper X (Dwight Ewell) speaks at a comic book convention about Darth Vader being a metaphor for how poorly the science fiction genre treats Black people; he is especially offended that Vader, the "Blackest brother in the galaxy", reveals himself to be a "feeble, crusty old white man" at the end of Return of the Jedi.
Vader, especially his role as a father, is parodied as Emperor Zurg in Toy Story 2.
The character of Dark Mayhem in The Thundermans is also a parody of Vader, especially in his original depiction.
The Warner Bros. animated show
Loonatics Unleashed has a Sylvester the Cat-type character named Sylth Vester, a play on Vader and his name.

The slime-mold beetle Agathidium vaderi is named after Vader, as is the louse Ricinus vaderi.
Several buildings across the globe are regularly compared to him.
A grotesque of Darth Vader looms over the east face of the Washington National Cathedral's northwest tower.
During the 2007–08 NHL season, Ottawa Senators goaltender Martin Gerber performed so well in an all-black mask that fans endearingly termed him "Darth Gerber".
Many commentators and comedians have also evoked Vader's visage to satirize politicians and other public figures, and several American political figures have been unflatteringly compared to the character.
In response to Ronald Reagan's proposed Strategic Defense Initiative (dubbed "Star Wars" by his political opponents), German news magazine Der Spiegel portrayed the president wearing Vader's helmet on its cover in 1984.
In 2005, Al Gore referred to Tele-Communications Inc.'s John C. Malone as the "Darth Vader of cable", and political strategist Lee Atwater was known by his political enemies as "the Darth Vader of the Republican Party".
Native American artist Bunky Echohawk portrayed General George Armstrong Custer as Vader in his painting Darth Custer.
In 2015, a statue of Vladimir Lenin in Odessa, Ukraine, was converted into one of Vader due to a law on decommunization.
In 2006, while discussing the war on terror, US Vice President Dick Cheney stated, "I suppose, sometimes, people look at my demeanor and say, 'Well, he's the Darth Vader of the administration.'"

In January 2007, Jon Stewart put on a Vader helmet to address Cheney as a "kindred spirit" on The Daily Show.
Cheney's wife, Lynne, presented Stewart with a Darth Vader action figure on her October 2007 appearance on the show.
Both Stewart and Stephen Colbert have occasionally referred to Cheney as "Darth Cheney".
In the satirical cartoon show Lil' Bush, Cheney's father is portrayed as Vader.
At a presidential campaign event in September 2007, Hillary Clinton also referred to Cheney as Vader.
At the 2008 Washington Radio and Television Correspondents' Association Dinner, Cheney joked that his wife told him that the Vader comparison "humanizes" him.
In 2009, George Lucas stated that Cheney is more akin to Palpatine, and that a better stand-in for Vader would be George W. Bush.
An issue of Newsweek referenced this quote, and compared Bush and Cheney to Vader and Palpatine, respectively, in a satirical article comparing politicians to various Star Wars and Star Trek characters.
In 2010, IGN ranked Darth Vader 25th in the "Top 100 Videogame Villains".
In Ukraine, the Internet Party of Ukraine regularly lets people named Darth Vader take part in elections.
In 2019, an original Vader helmet from The Empire Strikes Back was sold for $900,000 in an online auction.
On December 2, 2020, a figurine of Darth Vader appeared on the plinth where the statue of Edward Colston once stood in Bristol, United Kingdom, in what was seen as a tribute to the actor David Prowse, who died on November 29, 2020.

==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Darth Vader in the StarWars.com Databank
Anakin Skywalker in the StarWars.com Databank
Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Darth Vader on IMDb
"Darth Vader".
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Star Wars is a media franchise and shared fictional universe that is the setting of science fiction films produced by Lucasfilm, based on characters created by George Lucas.
The Skywalker Saga of the franchise includes nine films, featuring three trilogies; the original trilogy, the prequel trilogy, and the sequel trilogy.
The original trilogy began with A New Hope in 1977, followed by The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983), while the prequel trilogy consists of The Phantom Menace (1999), Attack of the Clones (2002), and Revenge of the Sith (2005).
The sequel trilogy consists of The Force Awakens (2015),
The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), and chronologically follows Return of the Jedi in the saga.
Additionally, an animated film was released in 2008, and two standalone anthology films were released in 2016 and 2018.The films feature large, sometimes ensemble, casts of actors and actresses, with multiple lead actors.
Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, and Carrie Fisher star as Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, and Leia Organa, respectively, in the original trilogy films.
Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, Jake Lloyd and Natalie Portman respectively star as Qui-Gon Jinn, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala in The Phantom Menace, with McGregor and Portman returning for its two sequels and Hayden Christensen playing the older Anakin in them.
Matt Lanter portrays Anakin in the animated film The Clone Wars (2008).
Ford, Hamill, Fisher, and other cast members from the original trilogy returned to reprise their roles and co-star alongside Adam Driver as Kylo Ren, Daisy Ridley as Rey, John Boyega as Finn and Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron in the sequel trilogy films.
Felicity Jones portrays Jyn Erso in Rogue One (2016) and Alden Ehrenreich portrays a young Han Solo in Solo (2018).

Anthony Daniels is the actor to have appeared in the most films in the franchise, appearing as C-3PO in all except Solo.
Other cast members who recur across multiple films and series within the franchise include Kenny Baker, Ahmed Best, Silas Carson, Oliver Ford Davies, Warwick Davis, Alec Guinness, Oscar Isaac, Samuel L. Jackson, James Earl Jones, Denis Lawson, Christopher Lee, Peter Mayhew, Ian McDiarmid, Frank Oz, David Prowse, Tim Rose, Jimmy Smits, Joonas Suotamo, Jimmy Vee, and Matthew Wood.
The list below is sorted by film and the character's surname, as some characters have been portrayed by multiple actors.
All characters that have made appearances in other Star Wars media, such as the television series, or television films, are noted.

==
Skywalker Saga ==
List indicator(s)
This section shows characters who have appeared in the Skywalker Saga.

An empty, dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film, or that the character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.

A indicates an appearance through archival footage.

C indicates a cameo role.

V indicates a voice-only role.

Y indicates a younger version of the character.

O indicates the character appears in other films outside the Skywalker Saga.

TS indicates the character appears in a television series.

TF indicates the character appears in a television film.

==
Other films ==
List indicator(s)
This section shows characters who have appeared in films outside the Skywalker Saga.

An empty, dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film, or that the character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.

A indicates an appearance through archival footage.

C indicates a cameo role.

V indicates a voice-only role.

Y indicates a younger version of the character.

TS indicates the character appears in a television series.

TF indicates the character appears in a television film.

== See also ==
Star Wars television series actors
Star Wars
Holiday Special actors
Caravan of Courage
: An Ewok Adventure actors
Ewoks: The Battle for Endor actors


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars comics have been produced by various comic book publishers since the debut of the 1977 film Star Wars.
Marvel Comics launched an eponymous series in 1977 which began with a six-issue comic adaptation of the film and ran for 107 issues, included an adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back.
Marvel also released an adaptation of Return of the Jedi and spin-offs based on Droids and Ewoks.
A self-titled comic strip ran in American newspapers between 1979 and 1984.
Blackthorne Publishing released a three-issue run of 3-D comics from 1987 to 1988.

Dark Horse Comics published the limited series Dark Empire in 1991, and ultimately produced over 100 Star Wars titles, including Tales of the Jedi (1993–1998), X-wing: Rogue Squadron (1995–1998), Republic (1998–2006), Tales (1999–2005), Empire (2002–2006), Knights of the Old Republic (2006–2010), and Legacy (2006–2010), as well as manga adaptations of the original film trilogy and the 1999 prequel The Phantom Menace.

The Walt Disney Company acquired Marvel in 2009 and Lucasfilm in 2012, and the Star Wars comics license returned to Marvel in 2015.
Several new series were launched, including Star Wars, Star Wars: Darth Vader, and Doctor Aphra.
In 2017, IDW Publishing launched the anthology series Star Wars Adventures.

==
Overview ==
An eponymous series by Marvel Comics began in 1977 with a six-issue comic adaptation of the original film and ran for 107 issues and three Annuals until 1986, featuring stories set between the original trilogy films, as well as adaptations of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
From 1985 to 1987, Marvel published two short-lived series based on the Star Wars animated series Droids and Ewoks.
Briefly, the publishing rights went to Blackthorne Publishing, which released a three-issue run of 3-D comics from 1987 to 1988.
Then, three years later, the rights to publish Star Wars comics were acquired by Dark Horse Comics, who published the limited series Dark Empire in 1991 and ultimately produced over 100 Star Wars titles until 2014.

Following the October 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, in January 2014, it was announced that the Star Wars comics license would return to Marvel Comics in 2015 (Disney having previously purchased Marvel Entertainment and the Marvel Comics brand and publishing in 2009).

In April 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded the majority of the Star Wars Expanded Universe as Legends, only keeping the theatrical Skywalker saga and the 2008 Clone Wars theatrical film and television series as canon.
Most media released since then is considered part of the same canon, including comics.

===
Marvel (1977–1987) ===
Lucasfilm publicity supervisor Charles Lippincott approached publisher Stan Lee at Marvel Comics in 1975 about publishing a Star Wars comic book prior to the film's release.
Lee initially declined to consider such a proposal until the film was completed, and was only persuaded otherwise in a second meeting arranged by Roy Thomas, who wanted to edit the series.
Since movie tie-in comics rarely sold well at that time, Lee negotiated a publishing arrangement which gave no royalties to Lucasfilm until sales exceeded 100,000.
Thomas and artist Howard Chaykin adapted the events of the original film in issues #1–6 of Star Wars, with the first issue released for sale on April 12, 1977.
According to former Marvel editor-in-chief Jim Shooter, the strong sales of Star Wars comics saved Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
The series began featuring original stories with issue #7 (January 1978).
Writer Archie Goodwin and artist Carmine Infantino took over the series as of #11 (May 1978).
The series was one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.
The 100,000 copy sales quota was surpassed quickly, allowing Lippincott to renegotiate the royalty arrangements.
A six-issue adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back by Goodwin and artists Al Williamson and Carlos Garzon appeared in issues
#39–44 (September 1980 – February 1981).
Writer David Michelinie and artist Walt Simonson became the new creative team with issue #51 (September 1981).
Ron Frenz became the regular artist of the title starting with #71 (May 1983).
As of 1984, the Star Wars series was primarily written by Jo Duffy, and art for the final year and a half of the series was by Cynthia Martin.
Marvel published the series until 1986, lasting 107 issues and three annuals.
The first original Star Wars stories not directly adapted from the films to appear in print form were Star Wars comics serialized in the Marvel magazine Pizzazz (1977–1979).
The first story arc, titled "The Keeper's World", was by Thomas, Chaykin, and Tony DeZuniga.
The second story arc, entitled "The Kingdom of Ice", was by Goodwin, Simonson, Klaus Janson, Dave Cockrum, and John Tartaglione.
The final two chapters were scheduled to be printed in issues 17 and 18, but the magazine was cancelled after the 16th issue.
Marvel UK reprinted "The Keeper's World" in its Star Wars Weekly #47–50, and "The Kingdom of Ice" (including the previously unreleased chapters) in its Star Wars Weekly #57–60 between 1978 and 1979.Marvel's Star Wars comics were reprinted in the UK as a weekly black-and-white comics anthology.
The weekly UK issues split the stories from the US monthly issues into smaller installments, and it usually took around three weekly issues to complete a US monthly issue.
The UK comic also published original Star Wars stories by British creators, including Alan Moore.
Star Wars Weekly #1 was published with a free cut-out X-wing fighter on February 8, 1978.
It became The Empire Strikes
Back Weekly from issue #118 in May 1980, and then became a monthly title from issue #140 in November 1980, reverting to the title Star Wars with issue #159 in July 1982.
The monthly comic ran until issue #171 in July 1983, when the numbering was reset at #1 for Return of the Jedi Weekly, which was the first time the UK comic had been printed in color.
This is the title and format that remained until the last issue (#155) was published in June 1986.
Further original content was published in issues #94–99, #104–115, #149, #153–157.
Throughout this eight-year period, Marvel UK also published several Star Wars annuals and specials.

Marvel's adaptation of Return of the Jedi (October 1983 – January 1984) appeared in a separate, eponymous four-issue limited series as well as in Marvel Super Special #27 and in a mass market paperback.
From 1985 to 1987, the animated children's series Ewoks and Droids inspired comic series from Marvel's Star Comics line.

===
Pendulum Press (1978) ===
In 1978, Pendulum Press, under their educational series Contemporary Motivators, also published a 31-page loose adaptation of Star Wars by Linda A. Cadrain and Charles Nicholas.
Produced as part of a package which included an audio tape and a film strip, the comic was specifically designed for classroom use, with typeset instead of hand lettering, and vocabulary appropriate for children.

===
Newspaper strip (1979–1984) ===
A newspaper strip was published between 1979 and 1984, distributed by Los Angeles Times Syndicate and the Watertown Daily Times.
The creative teams were revolving, but included Archie Goodwin, Williamson, Russ Manning, Steve Gerber, Alfredo Alcala, Carlos Garzon and letterer Ed King.
Goodwin switched from writing Marvel's Star Wars series to the weekly newspaper comic strip after the release of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), becoming the first writer to draw from more than just the original film in establishing the era set between the two films.
The strip was based on the storyline and characters established in the original trilogy, but never adapted any of the films, instead fleshing out the history between them.
From October 1980 to February 1981, Goodwin and Alcala adapted Brian Daley's Han Solo at Stars' End (1979).In 1991, Russ Cochran published a 2500-copy limited run of a three-volume hardcover boxset of all of Goodwin and Williamson's Star Wars comic strips from 1981 to 1984, signed by both creators, and featuring new cover illustrations by the latter.
Dark Horse Comics collected colorized compilations of the newspaper strip in its Classic Star Wars series from 1992 to 1994.
Between 2017 and 2018, The Library of American Comics published a three-volume reprint series of the complete comic strip.

===
Blackthorne (1987–1988) ===
Blackthorne Publishing released a three-issue series called Star Wars 3D from December 1987 to February 1988.
The comics were later reprinted in a black-and-white, non-3-D format by Dark Horse in their 2013 Star Wars Omnibus: Wild Space, Volume 1.
===
Dark Horse (1991–2014) ===


====
Adaptations ====


=====
Film and television adaptations =====
Dark Horse also published miniseries adapting Episode I: The Phantom Menace, Episode II: Attack of the Clones, Episode III: Revenge of the Sith .
From 1998 to 1999, Dark Horse produced Star Wars manga, adapting the original trilogy and The Phantom Menace as manga with all the typical narrative and stylistic characteristics of the form.

=====
Legends
novel adaptations =====
Between 1995 and 1998, Dark Horse published adaptations of the Thrawn trilogy of novels by Timothy Zahn.
====
Original series (Dark Horse comics) ====
Dark Horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after, in between, and before the original film trilogy, including Tales of the Jedi (1993–1998), X-wing: Rogue Squadron (1995–1998), Republic (1998–2006), the mostly non-canonical Tales (1999–2005), Empire (2002–2006), Knights of the Old Republic (2006–2010), and Legacy (2006–2010)
=====
Dark Empire =====
In the late 1980s, writer Tom Veitch and artist Cam Kennedy secured a deal to produce a Star Wars comic for Archie Goodwin at Epic Comics, a Marvel imprint.
After the project was announced, Goodwin left Marvel, which dropped the comic.
Dark Horse Comics subsequently published it as the Dark Empire sequence (1991–1995).

=====
Classic Star Wars =====
Classic Star Wars is a series of comics which included compilations of weekly installments of the newspaper comics written by Archie Goodwin with art by Al Williamson.

===== X-wing
=====
Star Wars:
X-wing – Rogue Squadron is a comic book series of 35 issues released between 1995 and 1998.
It follows the titular squadron beginning about one year after the events of Return of the Jedi.

X-wing – Rogue Leader is a three-part comic book series set approximately one week after the end of Return of the Jedi.
Several participants in the destruction of the second Death Star are sent, a little while after the events of Bakura, to scout out Imperial activity in Corellian space.
=====
Shadows of the Empire =====


=====
Crimson Empire =====
The Crimson Empire trilogy follows Kir Kanos, one of Palpatine's Imperial guards, beginning about seven years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
Set shortly after Dark Empire, it relates that Imperial Guard Carnor Jax betrayed the cloned Palpatine and his guards in an attempt to consolidate his own power.
Kanos swears to stop him, coming close to New Republic Intelligence agent Mirith Sinn in the process.

===== Qui-Gon & Obi-Wan =====

Qui-Gon & Obi-Wan: Last Stand on Ord Mantell is a three-part comics series written by Ryder Windham, published by Dark Horse Comics between December 2000 and March 2001.
The story features Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi five years before Episode I – The Phantom Menace.

Qui-Gon & Obi-Wan:
The Aurorient Express is a two-part comics series written by Mike Kennedy, and published by Dark Horse Comics between February 2002 and June 2002.
The series is set in the Star Wars galaxy six years before The Phantom Menace.
A luxury cloud cruiser has slipped out of control and is going to crash over Yorn Skot.
The two Jedi must board the runaway ship and regain control.

=====
Knights of The Old Republic and The Old Republic =====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and Star Wars:
The Old Republic are series set around the events of the game series of the same name, exploring its backstory.

=====
Legacy =====


=====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars =====
=====
Other original series (Dark Horse comics) =====
Star Wars: Agent of the Empire is a series set a few years before Episode IV – A New Hope, and focusing on an Imperial Intelligence agent named Jahan Cross.
Trade paperbacks:
Volume 1: Iron Eclipse (collects Star Wars: Agent of the Empire –
Iron Eclipse #
1–5, 128 pages, October 2012
, ISBN 1-59582-950-4)Star Wars:
Invasion is a series set during the early days of the Yuuzhan Vong War, and dealing with how the New Republic is faring.
The series, published by Dark Horse Comics, was written by Tom Taylor, and illustrated by Colin Wilson with color by Wes Dzioba.
The first printed issue was published on July 1, 2009.
Published by Dark Horse Comics, the series was set in the New Jedi Order era and depict the events of the Yuuzhan Vong War over 16 issues, plus a prologue issue.
In January 2010, Star Wars: Invasion #0 was nominated for a 'Diamond Gem Award' in the '2009 Comic Book of the Year Over $3.00' category.
Star Wars:
Dark Times, is a series set in the years after Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, and showing former characters from Star Wars: Republic after Order 66.Star Wars: Knight Errant, a series set 1,000 years before The Phantom Menace, and dealing with a lone Jedi's war against the Sith.

Star Wars:
Blood Ties, a series set in varying time periods that shows the bonds between certain characters in the saga, such as Jango Fett and Boba Fett.

Star Wars:
Darth Vader, a series set almost immediately after Revenge of the Sith, and showing how Darth Vader is dealing with his past as Anakin Skywalker.

Star Wars: Dawn of the Jedi, a series set thousands of years before Episode I – The Phantom Menace, and showing the origins of the Jedi and the Sith.
====
Limited series (Dark Horse comics) ====
After Knights of the Old Republic and Legacy ended in 2010, instead of publishing ongoing series, Dark Horse began publishing a "series of miniseries", including:

Star Wars: Jedi, a series set a few decades before The Phantom Menace, and dealing with Qui-Gon Jinn in an undocumented area of his life.

====
One-shots (Dark Horse comics) ====
Routine Valor is a comic book one-shot released on May 6, 2006 by Dark Horse Comics for Free Comic Book Day 2006 as part of a Star Wars-Conan flipbook.
The story is set during the end of the Clone Wars, approximately one year before the events of Revenge of the Sith (and 20 years before the events of A New Hope).
Characters include Obi-Wan Kenobi, along Clone troopers Commander Cody, CT-8867, CT-8868, and CT-8869
External links:
Routine Valor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Dark Horse Listing


====
Alternate storylines ====
While non-canonical to the Expanded Universe, Star Wars Infinities shows alternate storylines for the original trilogy films, and Visionaries featured stories by artists who worked on Revenge of the Sith.

The Star Wars is a non-canonical series based on George Lucas's discarded 1974 draft for the original film.
Adapted by J. W. Rinzler, Dark Horse released it as an eight-part comic book series beginning in September 2013.
In this version, Luke Skywalker is more mature and a Jedi, and the main protagonist is named Annikin Starkiller.
The series received mostly positive reviews.

===
Return to Marvel (2015–present) ===
Following the acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, it was announced in January 2014 that the Star Wars comics license would return to Marvel Comics in 2015.
Disney had purchased Marvel's parent company, Marvel Entertainment, in 2009.
Meanwhile, with the sequel film The Force Awakens in production, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.Early reports in May 2014 suggested that Marvel would announce two new ongoing Star Wars comic series at the San Diego Comic-Con.
In July 2014, Marvel announced three new series at SDCC:
Star Wars, Star Wars: Darth Vader, and the limited series
Star Wars: Princess Leia.
====
Ongoing series ====
The initial series, Star Wars, was released in January 2015, with Darth Vader debuting in February.
The ongoing series Star Wars: Poe Dameron was announced in January 2016.
Featuring X-wing fighter pilot Poe Dameron introduced in The Force Awakens, the series debuted on April 6, 2016.
A six-issue comic adaptation of The Force Awakens by Chuck Wendig began publication in June 2016.
In 2017.
A second volume of the Marvel Darth Vader comic, subtitled Dark Lord of the Sith, began in June 2017 from writer Charles Soule and artist Giuseppe Camuncoli.
In August 2019, Marvel announced that the main Star Wars series that started in 2015, which has narratively caught up to the timeframe of the events of The Empire Strikes Back, would end in November 2019 with issue #75.
A 56-page one-shot called Star Wars: Empire Ascendant, written by Soule, Greg Pak, Simon Spurrier, and Ethan Sacks, was released in December 2019 to wrap up the series.
At New York Comic Con in October 2019, Lucasfilm and Marvel announced the main Star Wars title would relaunch with a new ongoing series beginning in January 2020.
Written by Soule, the flagship series will explore the time between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
It will expand on stories like how the demoralized ragtag band of rebels grows into the massive fleet that attacks the second Death Star
, how the plan to rescue Han Solo from Jabba the Hutt is formed, how Leia balances her personal desires to save Han with her responsibilities to the Rebellion, Luke's growth as a Jedi while coming to an understanding of Darth Vader's reveal of his heritage, and the evolution of Lando Calrissian from selfish betrayer to trusted general.
First announced as Project Luminous at Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, full details of a publishing initiative called Star Wars: The High Republic were revealed in a press conference in February 2020.
Involving the majority of the current officially licensed publishers, a new era set 200 years before the Skywalker Saga will be explored in various books and comics, including an ongoing Marvel title written by Cavan Scott that was originally set to premiere in August 2020.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the launch of The High Republic was pushed to January 2021 with the release date of the ongoing comic title yet to be revealed.

=====
Trade paperback collections =====


======
Star Wars (2015) ======


======
Star Wars (2020) ======


======
Darth Vader (2015) ======


======
Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith ======
======
Darth Vader (2020) ======


======
Doctor Aphra ======


======
Kanan ======


======
Poe Dameron ======


======
Star Wars: Bounty Hunters ======


======
Crossovers ======


====
Limited series and one-shots ====
Princess Leia released in March 2015.
Chewbacca (October–December 2015), Obi-Wan & Anakin (January–May 2016), and Han Solo (June–November 2016), as well as the one-shots Vader Down (November 2015) and C-3PO (April 2016).
Several other limited series followed, including Kanan (April 2015 – March 2016), Lando (July–October 2015), Shattered Empire (September–October 2015),In 2017, limited series Darth Maul, Mace Windu, and Captain Phasma, as well as further one-shots, continued to expand the Star Wars universe.
The comic adaptation of Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story was also released.
Both the Poe Dameron and the second Darth Vader comics ended their runs in 2018, in September and December respectively.
In 2018, Marvel adapted the events of author Timothy Zahn's Star Wars:
Thrawn novel in a limited series.
The character had been introduced by Zahn's Heir to the Empire trilogy in the early 1990s, now part of the Legends line, and was re-introduced in the new canon in Star Wars Rebels.
Adaptations of both The Last Jedi and Solo: A Star Wars Story were released, and the timeframe of Solo was explored further in the Beckett one-shot and in limited series featuring young Lando (Double or Nothing) and Han's time in the Empire (Imperial Cadet).
Marvel announced in October 2018 that a five-issue, Wendig penned miniseries, Star Wars: Shadow of Vader, would be released starting in January 2019.
The series would be an anthology told from the perspectives of those who had encountered Darth Vader.
After three issues had been written, Wendig was removed from the miniseries (and future projects) by Marvel over concerns of his use of social media, and ultimately the miniseries was cancelled.
In December 2018, a new miniseries with a similar premise, Star Wars: Vader – Dark Visions, was announced to be written by Dennis Hopeless with art from Paolo Villanelli and Brian Level and was launched in March 2019.For 2019, Marvel announced a number of new limited series.
As a companion to Star Wars: Alphabet Squadron, a novel by author Alexander Freed centered on a New Republic squadron of various Rebel ships (an A-wing interceptor, B-wing heavy assault fighter, U-wing transport, X-wing starfghter, and Y-wing bomber) in the wake of the Battle of Endor, a five-issue series called Star Wars: TIE Fighter will explore the fallout of the battle from both the New Republic and Imperial Remnant sides.
A five-issue miniseries titled Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge will feature stories of the Black Spire Outpost on the Outer Rim planet Batuu and tie into the theme park experiences set to open at Disneyland and Walt Disney World in 2019.
In May 2019, a one-shot by writer Matthew Rosenberg and various artists called Star Wars #108 will pick up the story of the original Marvel Star Wars comic run that ended in 1986.In connection with the forthcoming video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order by Electronic Arts and Respawn Entertainment, a five-issue miniseries called Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order –
Dark Temple was announced in June 2019 to start publishing in September.
At a panel discussing the Journey to The Rise of Skywalker publishing program at San Diego Comic-Con 2019, the four-issue Star Wars: Journey to The Rise of Skywalker – Allegiance miniseries was announced.
It will help cover a one-year period during the time between The Last Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker.
Charles Soule was announced to be writing a four-issue miniseries exploring the backstory of Ben Solo's transition into Kylo Ren.
Star Wars:
The Rise of Kylo Ren premiered on December 16, 2019.
====
Age of Star Wars Maxiseries ====
At San Diego Comic-Con 2018, Marvel announced Age of Star Wars, a 27-issue maxiseries starting in December 2018 that would span all three eras of the Star Wars saga.
Star Wars:
Age of Republic by writer Jody Houser will focus on the time of the Galactic Republic and the Clone Wars during the prequel trilogy era; Star Wars: Age of Rebellion by writer Greg Pak will focus on the Galactic Civil War between the Empire and the Rebel Alliance during the original trilogy era; and Star Wars:
Age of Resistance by writer Tom Taylor will focus on the fall of the New Republic and the struggle between the Resistance and the First Order during the sequel trilogy era.
At the time of release, Age of Republic was revealed to have eight one-shots spotlighting individual characters and a special anthology issue with up to four stories by different creative teams.

Age of Star Wars tradepaperbacks:


====
Reprints ====
In mid-2014, Marvel stated that it would publish collected volumes of past Star Wars comics, beginning with Volume 1 of Star Wars: The Original Marvel Years in January 2015, and Volume 1 of Star Wars Legends Epic Collection: The Empire in April 2015, which reprinted Dark Horse's Star Wars comics.
In December 2019, Marvel reprinted the first issue of the 1977 series as Star Wars #1 – Facsimile Edition.
A series of reprints under the title
True Believers:
Star Wars was released in April and May 2019, celebrating Marvel's 80th anniversary.
A second collection of True Believers: Star Wars titles was released in December 2019.

===
IDW Publishing (2017–present) ===
In September 2017, IDW Publishing debuted Star Wars Adventures, an anthology series published as part of the "Journey to Star Wars: The Last Jedi" publishing program.
In January 2018, IDW released a five-issue comic tie-in to Star Wars: Forces of Destiny.
In November 2018, IDW released Star Wars Adventures: Destroyer Down.
This three-issue miniseries reprinted the previously released Loot Crate special from December 2017.

IDW has also published graphic novel adaptations of each Star Wars film since The Force Awakens.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars comic books, an in-universe "chronological" list of comics
Star Wars (UK comics), a British publication which reprints some of the Dark Horse comics
Star Wars (manga)


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars (Marvel) at the Grand Comics Database
 Star Wars (Dark Horse) at the Grand Comics Database
Star Wars (1977–1986 Marvel Comics) at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original)
Star Wars (2015–present Marvel Comics) at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original)
Van As, Trevor (October 9, 2017). "
Your Ultimate Guide To Marvel's Star Wars Comics [2015–present]".
How to Love Comics.
Archived from the original on October 30, 2017.
Media related to Star Wars comics at Wikimedia Commons
The following are lists of Star Trek episodes:

List of Star Trek:
The Original Series episodes
List of Star Trek:
The Animated Series episodes
List of Star Trek:
The Next Generation episodes
List of Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine episodes
List of Star Trek: Voyager episodes
List of Star Trek:
Enterprise episodes
List of Star Trek:
Discovery episodes
List of Star Trek:
Short Treks episodes
List of Star Trek:
Picard episodes
List of Star Trek:
Lower Decks episodes


==
Episode length ==
Star Trek episodes are usually from 40–50 minutes, designed for a 1-hour television slot but with breaks for ads.
However, as mentioned there is a number feature-length episodes up to an hour and half (90 minutes), but they are also split into two parts format, each with its own introduction.

"The Cage" — 63 minutes
The Measure of a Man: Extended Cut — 57 minutes
(Star Trek:
The Next Generation)
"
Beyond the Farthest Star" —  25 minutes (Star Trek:
The Animated Series)
"Calypso" — 17 minutes
(Star Trek:
Short Treks (Star Trek:Discovery))
"Encounter at Farpoint" (unified version) — 1 hour 31 minutes / 90 minutes
(Star Trek:
The Next Generation)
"The Best of Both Worlds, Part I" — 45 minutes
(Star Trek:
The Next Generation)


==
References ==


==
See also ==
List of Star Trek films and television series
List of Star Trek games
Ahsoka Tano is a character in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced as the Jedi Padawan of Anakin Skywalker, she is a protagonist of the 2008 animated film Star Wars: The Clone Wars and the subsequent television series.
Ahsoka reappears in Star Wars Rebels, where she uses the codename Fulcrum, and as a voiceover cameo in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.
Ashley Eckstein voices Ahsoka in these appearances.
Ahsoka is also the main character of the eponymous novel Star Wars: Ahsoka, which has Eckstein narrating the audiobook version.
Ahsoka's live-action debut was in the second season of The Mandalorian, portrayed by Rosario Dawson.
Dawson will return to play Ahsoka in her own series Ahsoka on Disney+, releasing in 2022.

Although initially disliked by both fans and critics at first, Ahsoka eventually developed into a more complex, well-rounded character, and ultimately became a fan favorite.
Serving as a foil for Anakin Skywalker, she has been highlighted as a strong female character of the franchise.

== Creation and development ==


===
Concept ===
Ahsoka was developed to illustrate how Anakin Skywalker develops from the brash, undisciplined Padawan apprentice in Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) to the more reserved Jedi Knight in Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Star Wars creator George Lucas, who had two daughters, also wanted the character to appeal to girls.
Early in development, Ahsoka's name was "Ashla".
Lucas renamed her after the ancient Indian emperor Ashoka; the spelling was then altered by screenwriter Henry Gilroy.
The Clone Wars supervising director and writer Dave Filoni wrote a fable about Ahsoka's early childhood to help develop the character.
He imagined the discovery that she has "the right stuff" to become a Jedi would be a cause for celebration in her hometown.
Filoni said he is protective of the Ahsoka character.
Giving Anakin responsibility for a Padawan was meant to place the character in a role that forced him to become more cautious and responsible.
It would also provide him with insight into his relationship with his own master, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and depict how their relationship matured.
Ahsoka and Anakin's relationship was seen as an essential story arc spanning both the animated film and the Clone Wars television series.

===
Writing ===
Filoni initially struggled with writing Ahsoka because he had "zero perspective" on what it was like to be a 14-year-old girl.
He, therefore, shifted his focus and instead wrote Ahsoka primarily as a Jedi who just happens to be an adolescent female.
Filoni said he "has always had a story in mind" for Ahsoka's overall development.
He began thinking about the final confrontation between Ahsoka and Vader ever since he created Ahsoka; different iterations had different endings, including one in which Vader kills Ahsoka just as she slashes open his helmet to reveal Anakin's scarred face.
Ashley Eckstein, who primarily voiced Ahsoka, said she and the writers were aware that audiences initially found the character annoying, and that there was a "fine line" between Ahsoka being bratty and becoming endearing.
Because production was a year ahead of what was broadcast, with Ahsoka developing over that time, Eckstein implored fans to be patient with the character's growth.
Although Ahsoka leaves the Jedi Order at the end of The Clone Wars' fifth season, the storyline initially had her return to the Order.
Filoni said this would be the "normal" arc and suggested to Lucas that she instead remain expelled; Lucas agreed.
Lucas believed Ahsoka survived Order 66,
the command that led the Republic's clone army to murder the Jedi.
The Fulcrum character introduced early in Star Wars Rebels was always understood to be Ahsoka.
Filoni, who served as executive producer and co-creator of Rebels, worked with Lucas on identifying what Ahsoka would know about Anakin's fate.
Filoni also collaborated with executive producer Simon Kinberg and season one executive producer Greg Weisman on developing Ahsoka's role as a Rebel agent.
The show's writers were excited for Ahsoka's return in the second season, and Filoni was anxious about Rebels instead becoming "The Ahsoka Tano Show".
Consequently, Filoni required that Ahsoka play a role in service of Rebels' main characters, Ezra Bridger and Kanan Jarrus; he saw Ahsoka's new role as similar to the one played by Obi-Wan Kenobi in Star Wars.
Although Ahsoka is more mature in Rebels, Filoni wanted "aspects of that kid who was there to shine through".
He initially envisioned Ahsoka as a more "passive player" not engaged in combat, but later decided it was more appropriate to see Ahsoka as a warrior during a turbulent time.
Ahsoka's presence was necessary to allow Darth Vader to encounter the show's lead characters without the latter being destroyed; Ahsoka can stand toe-to-toe with Vader.
Filoni cites fans' passion for the character as one reason for Ahsoka's prominence in Clone Wars and Rebels.

===
Voice acting ===
Eckstein said Filoni wanted her to bring some of her own personality into the Ahsoka character; he told her that her actions and speech between audition takes had a bigger impact on her getting the role than the actual audition.
Once production on The Clone Wars began, it took about six months for Eckstein and the writers to understand Ahsoka; consequently, much of the dialogue for the first half of season one was re-recorded to depict the character better.
Eckstein also credits the casting of Matt Lanter as Anakin, which occurred halfway through the first season, with helping solidify the Ahsoka character.
Eckstein reprised the role of Ahsoka for Rebels, although she did not do all of Fulcrum's voice work.
She learned about Ahsoka's return about a year before the first season's finale aired and said it was hard to keep it a secret.
Eckstein said Ahsoka developed a quiet confidence and quiet strength
the younger character doesn't possess, but sometimes she played Ahsoka too seriously; she pointed out that "snippiness" and determination are still part of Ahsoka's personality.
Eckstein pitched her voice down a bit but, because she and Ahsoka were now much closer in age, generally spoke like herself.
Not knowing Ahsoka's experiences between The Clone Wars and Rebels at times presented challenges for Eckstein's performance.
Filoni avoids giving the actors plot details that might inappropriately affect their performance; for example, he did not tell Eckstein whether Ahsoka survives her duel with Darth Vader lest Eckstein telegraph something in her performance that the character would not know.

===
Appearance ===
Ahsoka's design evolved over three years before her introduction in the Clone Wars film.
Her appearance was inspired by San in Princess Mononoke.
Ahsoka initially appears in what Wired called a "tube-top-and-miniskirt costume.
"
In the third season, Ahsoka and other characters received new costumes.
Filoni said the changes were meant to bring the show's aesthetic closer to that of Revenge of the Sith and were made possible by improved animation techniques.
For the seventh and final season of Clone Wars, Ahsoka's design was once again tweaked due to improvements in animation technology.
Her costume was also changed to a more grayish-blue color, similar to her appearance Star Wars Rebels, which aired prior to the season.
Ahsoka often uses a reverse lightsaber grip, similar to that of the Japanese film character Zatoichi.
Along with the costume change in the third season of Clone Wars, Ahsoka also received a second lightsaber.
In the seventh and final season, she received new blue lightsabers.
Ahsoka's armor in Rebels is based on a "pseudo-samurai look" influenced by photographs of samurai women.
The armor is meant to appear as if she found it in an ancient Jedi temple, and her lightsabers' colorless blades indicate she is neither a Jedi nor a Sith.
Filoni said the white lightsabers appear much better than he anticipated.
Her facial markings were changed to show that she has aged.
It was "new ground" for the production team to shift Ahsoka's animation style to reflect her older age.

== Depiction ==


===
Film ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Ahsoka Tano was introduced the 2008 Clone Wars animated film (serving as a pilot for the television series of the same name) as a 14-year-old Padawan apprentice assigned to Anakin Skywalker.
Yoda assigns her to Anakin to teach him a greater sense of responsibility, and Anakin is initially frustrated by this decision.
Their early interactions are "playfully contentious", with Anakin calling her "Snips" for her "snippy" attitude and Ahsoka calling him "Skyguy" as a pun on his surname.
After earning Anakin's respect on a dangerous mission, Ahsoka joins him on a quest to rescue Jabba the Hutt's infant son.
Her impetuous nature both annoys and endears her to her master, and, by the end of the film, Anakin reveals a newfound affection for his padawan.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Ahsoka Tano makes a vocal cameo in The Rise of Skywalker as one of the past Jedi who help Rey in her battle against the resurrected Darth Sidious.
Ashley Eckstein returned to voice the character.

===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) ====
Ahsoka is a lead character in six of the seven seasons of The Clone Wars.
She is a padawan-commander of the 501st Legion in the Grand Army of the Republic and continues to learn the ways of the Jedi as Anakin's apprentice.
The two develop a mutual fondness, at times taking great risks to protect or save one another.
Some of Anakin's actions taken out of concern for Ahsoka expose his darker tendencies, such as his torture of prisoners who may know her location when she goes missing.
Ahsoka also finds mentorship from Captain Rex, a clone trooper with whom she and Anakin serve throughout the war.
During the final arc of season five, Ahsoka is framed and imprisoned for a deadly explosion and a subsequent murder, both of which were committed by her friend Barriss Offee.
Although eventually exonerated, she becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Council and leaves the Jedi Order in the season finale.
Anakin is greatly affected by this ordeal and this begins to shake his trust in the Jedi Council.

Filoni said an initial finale concept for The Clone Wars would have had Rex escape Order 66, and his and Ahsoka's presence elsewhere would have explained both characters' absence from Revenge of the Sith.
Ahsoka returns in the seventh and final season of The Clone Wars, which aired in 2020 on Disney+.
She is the focus of two of the three story arcs featured in the season.
The second one, set during the events of Revenge of the Sith, sees her briefly reuniting with Anakin and acting as an advisor to Rex (promoted to Commander) in the 332nd Company (split from the 501st Legion) during the Siege of Mandalore to capture the former Sith Lord Maul.
When she confronts Maul, he reveals that Darth Sidious intends to make Anakin his new apprentice and offers to join forces to prevent this, but she does not believe him and fights him.
Ahsoka defeats and captures Maul, but as she is preparing to take him to Coruscant, she senses her former master in trouble, though not actually aware that he has fallen to the dark side and helped kill Mace Windu.
Order 66 is issued, causing Ahsoka's clone troopers, including Rex, to turn on her.
She escapes and manages to remove Rex's chip controlling his brain, while also freeing Maul to create a distraction.
When the Venator-class Star Destroyer Tribunal they are on crashes on a small moon, Ahsoka and Rex survive and bury all the deceased clone troopers, along with the former's lightsaber, before parting ways.
The final scene of the series depicts Darth Vader leading a search party on the moon and walking up to the remains of the ship.
He notices Ahsoka's blade on the ground, picks it up, and ignites it, before leaving with the saber in silence.

====
Rebels (2014–2018) ====
Ahsoka is a secretive rebel agent in the first season of Star Wars Rebels, which takes place 14 years after The Clone Wars concludes.
Operating under the codename "Fulcrum", she provides the rebel crew of the Ghost with intelligence and supplies.
Until her identity is revealed in the season finale, she disguises her appearance by using an altered voice and appearing as a hooded hologram.

She becomes a recurring character in the second season, continuing to help lead a group of rebel forces and working with the Ghost's crew.
Having assumed that Anakin died like most other Jedi at the end of the Clone Wars, she is overwhelmed to recognize her mentor under "a layer of hate" in Darth Vader.
Later in the season, a vision of Anakin blames her for leaving him and allowing him to fall to the dark side.
In the season finale, Ahsoka duels with Darth Vader inside a Sith temple on Malachor-V allowing her friends from the Ghost to escape Vader and the temple's destruction.
As the episode concludes, Darth Vader is shown injured and leaving the temple, watched by a green and white owl.
The owl, previously a companion to Ahsoka in the show and an avatar of the Daughter of Mortis, then flies back into the temple to witness
Ahsoka seemingly walking deeper inside its walls.
Filoni said Ahsoka's fate is ambiguous and "a bit open-ended" though Eckstein believed the character to still be alive.
In the fourth-season episode, "A World Between Worlds", Ahsoka's fate is finally revealed.
Ezra Bridger, having ended up in the realm "between worlds and time" within the Jedi temple on Lothal and guided by Ahsoka's convoy Morai, pulls her out of the moment before Vader could deliver the deathblow and thus altered her fate.
Ahsoka is updated on what occurred to the Ghost crew while convincing Ezra to not prevent Kanan's fate as he would risk losing his own life.
Palpatine then makes his presence known as he attempts to force Ezra into bringing him into the realm with Sith sorcery.
Ahsoka helps Ezra escape while returning (with Morai) to her timeline moments after the Sith temple collapsed, vowing to find Ezra and the crew again.
Ahsoka makes a return appearance in the epilogue of the series finale "Family Reunion – and Farewell", returning to Lothal following the events of the Battle of Endor to join Sabine Wren in her quest to find Ezra, who disappeared during Lothal's liberation.

====
The Mandalorian (2020) ====
Rosario Dawson expressed interest in playing Ahsoka Tano in early 2017, with some fan support.
In March 2020, Dawson was reported to be appearing as the character in the second season of The Mandalorian.
The next month, Dawson said the casting was yet to be confirmed.
In October, the German Disney+ Instagram account published a story naming Dawson as part of the then-upcoming season's cast.
Ahsoka made an appearance in "Chapter 13:
The Jedi", the fifth of the season, released on
Disney+
on November 27, 2020.
During her search for Grand Admiral Thrawn, she attempts to liberate the city of Calidan on Corvus from Imperial occupation, and encounters the titular character, who was told to seek her out by Bo-Katan Kryze so that she could train "The Child".
Communing with him through the Force, she learns that the child's name is Grogu and that he was raised at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, before being rescued during the Great Jedi Purge and hidden for his own safety, which is why he suppresses his Force powers.
Sensing great fear in Grogu, and a deep connection with the Mandalorian, Ahsoka refuses to take him as an apprentice, fearing that he could follow the same dark path as her former master.
After the Mandalorian helps her liberate Calidan, Ahsoka tells him to take Grogu to the Jedi Temple on Tython, where he might be able to reach out to another Jedi through the Force.

====
Ahsoka ====
In December 2020, Lucasfilm announced Ahsoka would be getting her own limited series on Disney+, titled Ahsoka.
Developed by Jon Favreau and Dave Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian and Rangers of the New Republic through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".
Dawson reprises her role as Ahsoka Tano.
===
Other media ===
Filoni said he does not want Ahsoka thought of as an animated character, but rather as a Star Wars character who can exist "in all forms of media".
Ahsoka appears in the Star Wars Forces of Destiny series, in the comic Touching Darkness, and as a collectable, playable character in the video game Disney Infinity 3.0.
At Star Wars Celebration Europe 2016, Filoni, Eckstein, and Lucasfilm Story Group member Pablo Hidalgo held a panel about Ahsoka's "Untold Tales" that occur between The Clone Wars and Rebels.

====
Ahsoka (2016) ====
Star Wars:
Ahsoka is a young-adult novel by E. K. Johnston published in October 2016.
It is set between the events of The Clone Wars and Rebels, and makes several references to Ahsoka's "Untold Tales".
Filoni was heavily involved in developing the novel, and the cover art by Jason P. Wojtowicz is based on a sketch Filoni created several years prior.
Eckstein narrates the audiobook version.
The novel was on the New York Times best sellers list and in the category of young adult hardcovers it reached number one shortly after release.
A year after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Ahsoka gains work as a mechanic and freighter pilot with the powerful Fardi clan on the planet Thabeska.
She is forced to go into hiding after exposing her Force powers while trying to save the life of four-year old Hedala Fardi, the youngest Fardi daughter.
Ahsoka settles down on the agrarian moon of Raada, where she finds work as a mechanic and befriends several local farmers, including the teenage sisters Kaeden and Miara Larte, and their guardian Vartan.
The Galactic Empire subsequently establishes a presence on Raada and forces the farmers to plant new crops, which leach the moon's soils.
Ahsoka becomes the leader of a resistance movement.
However, the planned uprising goes awry and Ahsoka exposes her Force powers during a skirmish with Imperial forces.
In response, the Empire dispatches a Jedi-hunting Inquisitor known as the Sixth Brother to hunt Ahsoka.

Having attracted the attention of the Empire, Ahsoka is forced to leave Raada.
Alderaanian Senator Bail Organa takes an interest in Imperial reports about Ahsoka and decides to find her.
Returning to the Fardis, Ahsoka resumes work as a pilot and mechanic.
She learns that a "shadow" (who turns out to be the Sixth Brother) has been stalking the Force-sensitive Hedala.
With the Empire tightening its grip on Thabeska, the Fardi patriarch advises Ahsoka to leave.
Ahsoka's ship is captured by two pilots in the service of Organa.
Mistaking the pilots for threats, Ahsoka knocks them unconscious.
She encounters R2-D2 and convinces him to smuggle her aboard Organa's corvette.
Ahsoka forges an alliance with Organa in return for his help in protecting Force-sensitive children from the Empire.
Returning to Raada, she finds Miara and learns that the Sixth Brother captured her older sister Kaeden.
Following a lightsaber duel, Ahsoka defeats and kills the Sixth Brother, and takes his Kyber crystals to forge her new twin lightsabers.
After freeing Kaeden, Ahsoka organizes an evacuation of Raada's population with Organa's help.
Ahsoka then decides to join Organa's rebellion while the Larte sisters and the other refugees settle down on Alderaan.
Meanwhile, the Empire dispatches the Grand Inquisitor, a perennial antagonist from Star Wars Rebels, to hunt down Ahsoka.

==
Critical response ==
After her introduction, some critics called Ahsoka annoying and predicted the character would die before The Clone Wars series ended because she does not appear in Revenge of the Sith.
The Los Angeles Times called Ahsoka a "carefully calculated-to-be-cute" character in The Clone Wars film.
Wired criticized Ahsoka's "half-naked" appearance in The Clone Wars' first two seasons, calling her third-season costume change "more appropriate".
Blastr said Ahsoka's initial immaturity gives the character room to grow, saying she becomes "a well-rounded and complex character in every sense".
Ahsoka's youth aided her in being a point-of-view character for younger viewers.
io9 called Ahsoka's development arc one of the best aspects of The Clone Wars, highlighting the character's role in exploring the nuances of war and the flaws of the Jedi Order.
According to Tech Times, Ahsoka's maturation and development mirror the show's, and the producers chose wisely in making Ahsoka the audience's "entry point" to The Clone Wars.
Chris Taylor called Ahsoka's decision to leave the Jedi Order "the show's most shocking cliffhanger".
Ashley Eckstein was nominated for the 2012 and 2013
"Best Female Lead Vocal Performance in a Television Series - Action/Drama" awards from Behind the Voice Actors.
The Mary Sue said Ahsoka's relationship with Anakin is critical in understanding his development between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, and the publication called Ahsoka a foil for Anakin's growth.
Blastr commented that Anakin's interactions with Ahsoka help show that he is a powerful Jedi and war hero.
Blastr also hypothesized that Anakin's sense of failure when Ahsoka leaves the Jedi contributes to his fall to the dark side; io9 posited that Anakin might have succeeded in reforming the Jedi if Ahsoka had stayed with him.
io9 said Ahsoka, more than Anakin, articulates moral guidance in The Clone Wars.
Blastr identified Ahsoka as one of the most important characters in Star Wars, especially for young girls who, until that point, had not seen a potent female Jedi depicted on screen.
Erika Travis of California Baptist University said Ahsoka is "compassionate and feminine, without being overtly sexualized".
Mara Wood called Ahsoka a feminist icon, adding that Ahsoka is one of several characters that make The Clone Wars superior to the original and prequel trilogies in depicting strong women.
Wood added that Ahsoka probably shows the most growth of any woman in the Star Wars canon.

==
Relationships ==


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Ahsoka Tano in the StarWars.com Databank
Ahsoka Tano on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The fictional universe of the Star Wars franchise features multiple planets and moons.
While only the feature films and selected other works are considered canon to the franchise since the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, some canon planets were first named or explored in works from the non-canon Star Wars
expanded universe, now rebranded Star Wars Legends.

In the theatrical Star Wars films, many settings for scenes set on these planets and moons were filmed at real-world locations on Earth.
For example, the resort city of Canto Bight located on the planet Cantonica, seen in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), was filmed in Dubrovnik, Croatia.

==
Star Wars canon astrography ==
The Star Wars galaxy contains several broad sub-regions.
Their exact definitions fluctuated somewhat during the Legends continuity, but were later formally updated by the new canon continuity when Disney purchased Lucasfilm.
The new canon map is broadly similar to the later versions of the Legends galactic map.

As a general rule, most of the galaxy's wealth, power, and population are concentrated near the middle of the galactic circle – the "Core Worlds".
The first major interstellar powers in the core are stated to have risen many millennia ago, gradually coalescing into the early Galactic Republic, with its capital at Coruscant.
Waves of colonization (and conquest) by the Republic gradually spread outward from the Core, into the sparser systems at the galaxy's edge, such as Tatooine.
Worlds of the Outer Rim are rich in raw resources but lack the population, infrastructure, or political power of the Core.
Major galactic sub-regions are further divided into quadrants, sectors, etc.,
down to individual star systems and planets.

The galaxy has at least two companion-satellite dwarf galaxies, one of which is known as the Rishi Maze, but they are very lightly settled or explored.

The canon map depicts a top-down view of the galactic disk, with "north" as the side of the galactic center that Coruscant is located on.
As the capital planet of the Republic and later the Empire, Coruscant is used as the reference point for galactic astronomy, set at XYZ coordinates 0-0-0.
Standardized galactic time measurements are also based on Coruscant's local solar day and year.

According to the updated Visual Dictionary series made by Pablo Hidalgo for the Sequel Trilogy, these are the general regions of the galaxy spreading outward from the Core:
Deep Core – the innermost brightly lit region of space, with a supermassive black hole at the center which binds the galaxy together.
Densely-packed with stars, nebulae, and other anomalies, it is therefore thinly settled due to the resulting high radiation levels and lack of stable hyperspace routes.

Core Worlds – powerful and wealthy planets with millennia-long histories, many of them founding members of the Galactic Republic.
On-screen examples include Coruscant, Corellia, Alderaan, and Hosnian Prime.

The Colonies – the first colonies founded by the nascent Galactic Republic in ancient times.
The name is somewhat of a misnomer, as they have grown nearly as powerful as the "Core Worlds" themselves, though their histories aren't quite as long or prestigious (i.e. comparable to how the United States or Canada could be called "the colonies" of Great Britain).
Mentioned by name in The Rise of Skywalker.

Inner Rim – the original edge of the Galactic Republic, where expansion waves stopped for many generations.

Expansion Region – nestled between the "Inner Rim" and the "Mid Rim", anachronistically named due to a new colonization wave starting again.

Mid-Rim
– Generally industrialized though not very important planets, but more developed than the true "frontier" in the Outer Rim.
On-screen examples include Naboo and Kashyyyk.

Outer Rim – a vast region including all of the last major star systems up to the galaxy's edge.
As the last region that the Republic expanded into, it is relatively the least developed, a frontier more often than not exploited by the central galactic government for its resources.
On-screen examples include Tatooine, Yavin, Hoth, Bespin, Endor, Geonosis, Utapau, Mustafar, and Kessel.

Wild Space – star systems located beyond the Outer Rim – because a galaxy's "edge" is not a fixed border line, but a concentration of stars tapering off in frequency.
Unlike the Outer Rim, these sparse few systems around the galaxy's circumference were never formally charted.
More broadly, Attack of the Clones established that the Star Wars galaxy actually possesses at least three small satellite galaxies, never colonized and considered largely inhospitable.
The secret cloner-world Kamino, however, is located in one of these minor galactic clusters beyond the Outer Rim.

Unknown Regions – the new Canon map establishes that, due to the stability of hyperspace lanes, inhabited planets are weighted toward the "eastern" quadrant of the galactic plane with the "western" one being mostly unexplored.
These Unknown Regions are home to the first Jedi temple on Ahch-To and the Chiss Ascendancy, into which Grand Admiral Thrawn was born.
The remnants of the Empire retreated here after their defeat at Endor, reforming into the First Order – as well as, secret even to the First Order, Palpatine's Sith forces reconstituting on Exegol.

Western Reaches – the sectors once controlled by the Republic that border the Unknown Regions of the galactic "west".
Essentially similar to the Outer Rim in terms of their history and economic development, the only difference being that instead of being located at the galaxy's physical edge, they are located at the edge of galactic exploration in the "western" side of the Republic.
In The Force Awakens, it is stated in dialogue that Jakku is in the Western Reaches.
Apart from these broad regions radiating out from the galactic core, there are also several major galactic sub-regions of note:

Mandalorian space – technically located in the Outer Rim, but relatively close to the border with the Mid-Rim, near Kashyyyk, in the galactic "northeast".
The planet Mandalore had its own regional space empire in ancient times, led by their formidable warrior culture.
The Mandalorians were the most difficult enemies the Jedi ever faced short of the Sith: they were not Force-wielders, but were a culture of regular humans who had honed themselves to possess the pinnacle of combat training, equipment, and battle tactics.
During a series of long wars with the Republic, however, many centuries before the Clone Wars, the Jedi were eventually able to fight them into submission - though with heavy losses.
In the Star Wars: Clone Wars animated series, both the Republic and the Separatists compete for support from rival Mandalorian factions, and in the later Star Wars: Rebels animated series, Mandalorians again divide into a proxy war between pro-Imperial and pro-Rebel forces.
According to The Mandalorian TV series, this eventually resulted in the devastation of Mandalorian space by the Empire, with surviving enclaves scattering across the Outer Rim.
Hutt Space – a fairly large swath of space along the "eastern" quadrant of the galactic plane, loosely straddling the border between the Mid-Rim and Outer-Rim.
The Hutts are a kleptocratic Mafia state, derided as "gangsters" composed of several rival clans.
The Hutts' resources and power are formidable enough that both the Republic and the Empire never bothered to conquer them, while the Hutts were too divided by their own internal politics to seriously challenge the Republic (unlike the Mandalorians).This official galactic astrography was later re-confirmed for the first time in on-screen, live-action dialogue in The Mandalorian.
In the second season's fourth episode, "The Siege", a classroom is briefly shown on a planet in the Outer Rim, in which a lesson on galactic astrography is being taught by a protocol droid.
The teacher not only lists off each of these major regions from the Visual Dictionary, but lists them in the exact same order, from the Outer Rim to the Core:
"Who can name one of the five major trade routes in the galaxy?
The Hydian Way [runs] from the Outer Rim to as far away as the Core Worlds.
However, there are several other regions within our galaxy.
They are the Mid Rim, the Expansion Region, the Inner Rim, the Colonies, the Core, and the Deep Core."
==
Star Wars canon planets and moons ==
The following list names prominent planets and moons from the Star Wars films or other canon media.

==
Star Wars Legends planets and moons =
=
These are planets with multiple appearances in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, now rebranded as Star Wars Legends.
The accompanying works were declared non-canon by Lucasfilm in April 2014, following its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company in October 2012.

==
Similarities to real-world planets ==
The discovery of exoplanets in the real-world universe gained pace in the early 21st century.
In 2015, the US space agency NASA published an article which stated that many of the newly discovered astronomical bodies possessed scientifically confirmed properties that are similar to planets in the fictional Star Wars universe.

Kepler-452b, a rocky super-Earth-type planet
, is said to be similar to the Star Wars planet Coruscant.
Likewise, the planets Kepler-16b and Kepler-453b, planets discovered orbitting binary stars probably resemble the desert world Tatooine.
The hot, molten worlds of Kepler-10b and Kepler-78b are comparable to the volcanic planet Mustafar.
OGLE-2005-BLG-390Lb, a cold, remote exoplanet, is like the ice planet Hoth.
Kepler-22b, thought by scientists to be an ocean planet, is compared to the planet Kamino.
According to NASA, there are also similarities to Alderaan and Endor in the real-world universe.

===
Solar System ===
Two non-canonical works also feature the real-life Solar System's planets.
Monsters and Aliens from George Lucas (1993) contains a feature, presented as a clip from a gossip column, in which a pair of Duros are abducted by humans and taken to "Urthha" (Earth), where they create havoc by misunderstanding terrestrial objects and food.
In issue #19 of the comic series Star Wars Tales (2004), the story "Into the Great Unknown" finds Han Solo and Chewbacca in the Millennium Falcon, fleeing the Imperial Navy.
They jump to hyperspace without doing calculations and find themselves in the middle of our Solar System, overpassing Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars while decelerating and landing in Northern America.
Han is killed by Native Americans, and a mourning Chewbacca leaves the Falcon to live in the trees, where the natives believe him to be a sasquatch.
In an epilogue set 126 years later, archaeologist Dr. Jones and his sidekick Short Round, searching for the sasquatch, find the Falcon and Han's remains.

==
See also ==
List of Star Wars filming locations
Planets in science
fiction


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
Content in this article was copied from The galaxy at the Wookieepedia, the Star Wars Wiki, which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share
Alike 3.0 (Unported)
(CC-BY-SA 3.0) license.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2015).
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-3816-4.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2017).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-5551-2.

Luceno, James (2005).
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 0-7566-1128-8.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2019).
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-7903-7.

Wallace, Daniel (1998).
Star Wars: The Essential Guide to Planets and Moons.
Del Rey.
ISBN 0345420683.

==
External links ==
Galaxy Building, from Alderaan to Utapau at StarWars.com (official)
Star Wars Canon:
Just How Realistic Are the Single-Biome Planets?
at The Escapist
List of planets on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Interactive map of Star Wars galaxy
The Dullahan, Durahan or Dullaghan (Irish: dúlachán, ), also called Gan Ceann (meaning "without a head" in Irish), is a type of mythological creature in Irish folklore.

==
Mythology ==
The Dullahan is depicted as a headless rider, usually on a black horse, who carries his own head on his arm.
Usually, the Dullahan is male, but there are some female versions.
It is said to be the embodiment of the Celtic God Crom Dubh.
The myth of the Dullahan comes from Ireland.

The mouth is usually in a hideous grin that touches both sides of the head.
Its eyes are constantly moving about and can see across the countryside even during the darkest nights.
The flesh of the head is said to have the colour and consistency of mouldy cheese.
The Dullahan is believed to use the spine of a human corpse for a whip, and its wagon is adorned with funeral objects: it has candles in skulls to light the way, the spokes of the wheels are made from thigh bones, and the wagon's covering is made from a worm-chewed pall or dried human skin.
The ancient Irish believed that where the Dullahan stops riding, a person is due to die.
The Dullahan calls out the person's name, drawing away the soul of his victim, at which point the person immediately drops dead.
There are rumours that golden objects can force the Dullahan to disappear.

==
In popular culture ==
The Death Coach is driven by a Dullahan in Darby O’Gill and the Little People.
When it arrives, it calls out Darby’s name in place of his daughter and he enters the coach, and is only saved by the trickery of the king of the leprechauns.

Dullahan is a common name for headless warriors - predominantly knights - in Japanese video games.
The influence from this has resulted in Japanese young adult media commonly portraying 'Dullahans' with traits not associated with the original Irish folklore, such as wearing plate armour.

In the Durarara!!
light novel and anime series, it features a Dullahan named Celty Sturluson as a main character.

The Monster Musume anime and manga series features a Dullahan named Lala who is one of the main characters in Kimihito Kurusu's harem.

Interviews with Monster Girls also features a Dullahan main character who is named Kyoko Machi.

Lost Girl one of the lesser antagonists
The Overlord Light Novel and Anime have a Dullahan as a member of the Pleiades.
Her name is Yuri Alpha.

In the light novel Konosuba', one of the Demon King's Generals is a Dullahan named Verdia.

In the game Touhou Kishinjō ~  Double Dealing Character, Sekibanki,
the stage 2 boss's theme's name is "Dullahan Under the Willows", despite her actually being a nukekubi.

Maou Sadao, the demon overlord from Hataraku Maou-sama!
calls his bicycle 'Dullahan'.

Irish author Derek Landy's work draws from Irish folklore.
Skulduggery Pleasant:
Mortal Coil features a Dullahan who drives the Coach-a-Bowers, which is pulled by four headless horses.
He is summoned to collect any human who has heard the call of a banshee.

== See also ==
Headless Horseman
Headless Horseman (Legend of Sleepy Hollow)
Crom Dubh


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The Dullahan of Celtic Mythology, via The Irish Place
The Dullahan Legend at Scary For Kids.

Dullahan Website
How tales of the headless horseman came from Celtic mythology, via the Irish Times, Wed, Oct 23, 2019.
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is a 2008 computer-animated epic space-opera film directed by Dave Filoni (in his feature directorial debut), produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and Lucasfilm Animation, and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures.
The film is set in the Star Wars universe during the Clone Wars, a three-year conflict between the Galactic Republic and the Confederacy of Independent Systems, established at the end of Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002).
In Star Wars: The Clone Wars, Count Dooku and Jabba the Hutt's uncle Ziro orchestrate a plot to turn Jabba against the Republic by framing the Jedi for the kidnapping of his son, which would in turn allow Ziro to take over Jabba's criminal empire after Jabba is arrested.
While Anakin Skywalker and his newly-assigned apprentice, Ahsoka Tano, attempt to deliver Jabba's son back to his father, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Padmé Amidala lead separate investigations of Dooku and Ziro's plot.
The film introduces the fan-favorite characters of Tano and Captain Rex to the franchise.

The film premiered on August 10, 2008, at Grauman's Egyptian Theatre, followed by a wide release in Australia on August 14 and in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom the next day.
The Clone Wars was the first Star Wars film to not be distributed by 20th Century Fox, and the first to be completely animated.
The film received largely negative reviews, becoming the worst-reviewed theatrically-released Star Wars film with critics panning the writing, animation, tone, dialogue and the decision to release the pilot episodes as a feature-length film, while praising the action scenes, visual aspects, and voice acting.
While the film was a commercial success, grossing $68.3 million worldwide against an $8.5 million budget, it is also the lowest grossing Star Wars film.
The Clone Wars served as the backdoor pilot to the Cartoon Network television series of the same name, which had a far more favorable reception than the film.

==
Plot ==
The events of the film chronologically take place between the Clone Wars season 1 episode "The Hidden Enemy" and the season 3 episode "Clone Cadets".
During the first year of the Clone Wars, Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker and his former master, Obi-Wan Kenobi lead a small battalion of Republic Clone troopers against the Separatist droid army on the planet Christophsis.
Awaiting reinforcements, the two Jedi greet a shuttle carrying a young Jedi named Ahsoka Tano, who insists that she has been assigned by Jedi Grandmaster Yoda to serve as Anakin's apprentice.
Anakin reluctantly accepts Ahsoka as his apprentice and the two succeed in deactivating the Separatists' energy field while Obi-Wan stalls the droid army commander, allowing a Republic victory.
Ahsoka earns Anakin's respect.

Following the battle, Yoda arrives and informs the Jedi that crime lord Jabba the Hutt's son Rotta has been kidnapped.
Anakin and Ahsoka are tasked with retrieving the Huttlet, while Obi-Wan is sent to Tatooine to negotiate with Jabba over a potential treaty between the Hutts and the Republic.
Anakin and Ahsoka track the kidnapper and Rotta to the planet Teth, where they are ambushed by Separatist forces led by Count Dooku's apprentice Asajj Ventress.
Unknown to the Jedi, the plot has been engineered by Dooku's Sith master Darth Sidious, who hopes to frame the Jedi for Rotta's kidnapping in order to get Jabba to ally with the Separatists and fuel anti-Jedi sentiment from the Hutts.
The Jedi manage to escape the trap along with R2-D2 and hijack a derelict transport with which they travel to Tatooine.
Obi-Wan, alerted by Anakin, arrives on Teth and defeats Ventress in a lightsaber duel, though she manages to escape.

Meanwhile, Anakin's secret wife Senator Padmé Amidala learns of her husband's mission and fears for his safety.
She decides to contact Jabba's uncle Ziro on Coruscant.
The Hutt refuses to cooperate, apparently believing that it is the Jedi who are responsible for the situation.
However, Padmé soon discovers that Ziro has actually conspired with Dooku to have Rotta killed, so that Jabba would execute Anakin and Ahsoka in return and be taken into custody by the Jedi Council, which will allow Ziro to seize power over the Hutt Clan.
Against Chancellor Palpatine's wishes, Padmé travels to Tatooine but is discovered and detained.
However, a chance call by C-3PO enables her to summon a squadron of clone troopers, and Ziro is arrested.

Upon their arrival on Tatooine, Anakin and Ahsoka are shot down by MagnaGuards.
Anakin devises a ruse to confront Dooku while carrying a decoy Rotta, leaving Ahsoka to take the real Rotta to Jabba's palace.
While Anakin fights off Dooku, Ahsoka is ambushed by the MagnaGuards, whom she defeats.
The two deliver Rotta safely to Jabba, who nonetheless orders the Jedi to be executed for their supposed kidnapping attempt.
However, Padmé contacts Jabba in time and reveals Ziro and the Separatists' responsibility for the kidnapping.
Acknowledging the Jedi's heroism and allowing the Republic to have Ziro punished for his betrayal, Jabba agrees to the treaty while Anakin and Ahsoka are picked up by Obi-Wan and Yoda.
Meanwhile, Dooku reports the plot's failure to Sidious, who assures him that the tide of the war is still in their favor.

== Cast ==
Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, a former Jedi Padawan who has recently been promoted to the rank of Jedi Knight, and a general in the Republic' army, leading the 501st Legion
Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, Anakin's new Padawan apprentice and commander of the 501st Legion
James Arnold Taylor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Master, Anakin's mentor, and general of the Republic,
leading the 212th Attack Battalion
Taylor also voices 4A-7, a droid spy
Tom Kane as Yoda, the Jedi Grandmaster and leader of the Jedi Council
Kane also voices the film's Narrator, who explains the events driving the film's plot, and Admiral Yularen, an admiral of the Republic Navy assigned to Anakin
Dee Bradley Baker as Captain Rex, a Clone Captain of the 501st Legion and Anakin's
second-in-command
Baker also voices Commander Cody, a Clone Commander of the 212th Attack Battalion and Obi-Wan's second-in-command, as well as the other clone troopers
Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, a Sith Lord and the puppet leader of the Separatist Alliance
Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, a Jedi Master, senior member of the Jedi Council, and general of the Republic
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, Anakin and Padme's protocol droid
Nika Futterman as Asajj Ventress, Count Dooku's disciple, and as TC-70, Jabba the Hutt's protocol droid
Ian Abercrombie as Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic who is secretly a Sith Lord, Count Dooku's master, and the mastermind behind the Clone Wars
Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala, the Senator of Naboo and Anakin's secret wife
Corey Burton as Ziro the Hutt, a member of the Hutt Clan and
Jabba's uncle
Burton also voices Whorm Loathsom, commander of the Separatist Droid Army occupying Christophsis, and KRONOS-327, an assassin droid working for Ziro
David Acord as Rotta the Huttlet, Jabba's kidnapped son
Kevin Michael Richardson as Jabba the Hutt, a notorious crime lord, leader of the Hutt Clan, and Rotta's father
Matthew Wood as battle droids
==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars was made to serve as both a stand-alone story and a lead-in to the weekly animated TV series of the same name.
George Lucas had the idea for a film after viewing some of the completed footage of the early episodes on the big screen.
Those first few episodes, originally planned for release on television, were then woven together to form the theatrical release.
Warner Bros. had tracked the series' development from the beginning, and Lucas decided on a theatrical launch after viewing early footage declaring "This is so beautiful, why don't we just go and use the crew and make a feature?"
This decision helped convince WB parent company Time Warner to distribute the movie, and to encourage its subsidiary Cartoon Network to air the series.
Lucas described the film as "almost an afterthought."
Howard Roffman, president of Lucas Licensing, said of the decision, "Sometimes George works in strange ways."
Producer Catherine Winder said the sudden decision added to an already large challenge of establishing a show "of this sophistication and complexity," but she felt it was a good way to start the series, and thought budgetary constraints forced the production team to think outside the box in a positive way.
The story of the kidnapped Hutt was inspired by the Sonny Chiba samurai film titled Shogun's Shadow.
===
Animation ===
Lucasfilm and Lucasfilm Animation used Autodesk software to animate both the film and the series using the Maya 3D modeling program to create highly detailed worlds, characters and creatures.
The film's animation style was designed to pay homage to the stylized looks of both Japanese anime and manga, and the supermarionation of the British 1960s series Thunderbirds.
At a Cartoon Network-hosted discussion, Lucas said he did not want the Clone Wars film or television series to look like such movies as Beowulf, because he wanted a stylized look rather than a realistic one.
He also felt it should not look like the popular Pixar movies such as The Incredibles, because he wanted the film and characters to have its own unique style.
Lucas also decided to create the animated film and series from a live-action perspective, which Winder said set it apart from other CGI films.
Essentially, it "meant using long camera shots, aggressive lighting techniques, and relying on editing instead of storyboards.
"
Animators also reviewed designs from the original 2003 Clone Wars series when creating the animation style for the film and the new series.
In charge was Steward Lee, working as the storyboard artist during filming.
Some actors from the live-action films returned to vocally reprise their roles of their respective characters: Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, Matthew Wood as B1 Battle Droids, Christopher Lee as Count Dooku, and Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu.
However, Lee and Jackson did not reprise their roles in the subsequent television series.

===
Music ===
The musical score for Star Wars:
The Clone Wars was composed by Kevin Kiner.
The original motion picture soundtrack was released by Sony Classical on August 12, 2008.
The disc begins with the main theme by John Williams, followed by more than 30 separate music cues composed by Kiner.
Kiner is known for his work on such television series as Stargate SG-1, Star Trek: Enterprise, Superboy and CSI: Miami.
The soundtrack uses some instruments never heard before in a Star Wars score, including erhus, duduks and ouds.

==
Marketing ==


===
Toys ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars merchandise was first released on July 26, 2008.
Hasbro released several 3​3⁄4-inch Clone Wars action figures, an electronic clone trooper helmet, a customizable lightsaber, and an electronic All Terrain Tactical Enforcer (AT-TE).
Target and KB Toys also devoted shelf space for Clone Wars toys, but did not hold midnight releases or pursue the branding opportunities Toys "R"
Us did.
Toys "R"
Us mounted digital clocks in all 585 of its stores that counted down to the release of the Clone Wars toys, and
more than 225 of the stores opened at midnight for the debut of the Star Wars products.
Two of the Toys "R" Us flagship outlets in Mission Bay, San Diego and Times Square in Manhattan, New York City held costume and trivia contests on July 26, and gave away limited-edition Star Wars toys with every purchase.
A section of the Toys "R" Us website was also dedicated to The Clone Wars.
The toy line continues with The Clone Wars figures being well received by collectors for their detail to the characters and vehicles.

===
Food ===
Due to Lucas' sudden decision to produce the film, Lucas Licensing did not have time to enter into agreements with previous Star Wars marketing partners like Pepsi, Burger King and Kellogg's, with which the Lucasfilm licensing company had a ten-year marketing plan for the other films.
When questioned by The New York Times about Star Wars merchandising in July 2008, a Pepsi spokesperson was unaware a new Star Wars film was being released.
On August 15, McDonald's held its first ever Happy Meal promotion for a Star Wars film and for four weeks, 18 exclusive toys came in specially designed Happy Meal boxes.

===
Comics and books ===
Dark Horse Comics published a six-issue digest-sized comic book miniseries.
Randy Stradley, vice president of publishing for Dark Horse, said the sudden decision to release the Clone Wars film required the company to temporarily delay plans for two other Star Wars comic book series, Dark Times and Rebellion.
The Clone Wars comics did not receive the promotional campaign it otherwise would have due to the abruptness of the theatrical and comic book releases.
Topps, the trading cards company, released a series of 90 Clone Wars cards on July 26, which also included foil cards, motion cards, animation cel cards and rare sketch cards by top Star Wars artists and Lucasfilm animators.
DK Publishing and the Penguin Group released books, activities and other merchandise that tied in with the film.
Also released was the Clone Wars: The Visual Guide, published by DK, and Star Wars: The Clone Wars in the UK, published by Puffin and in the U.S. by Grosset & Dunlap.
The publishers also released a storybook, picture books and an activity book.
At the American International Toy Fair, Lego announced a product line for the film and the TV series, to be released in July 2008 in the United States and on August 2008 in the United Kingdom.

===
Video games ===
The LucasArts video game developer adapted the film into Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance for the Nintendo DS and Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels for Wii.
A reviewer from PocketGamer.co.uk said his expectations for Jedi Alliance were low due to poor Clone Wars movie reviews, but he found the game "a varied and well-paced experience."

===
Portable media players ===
A Star Wars:
The Clone Wars MP3 player was released in August 2008.
The player includes one gigabyte of memory, which holds 200 songs or 20 hours of music and comes with three interchangeable faceplates: a green one with Yoda and a lightsaber on it, a silver one with Captain Rex and a Galactic Empire logo on it, and one with two clone troopers on Coruscant.
One review claimed it improved upon a Darth Vader MP3 player released in July 2008, which featured only 512 megabytes of memory and a dated visual display.
A Star Wars iPod iSpeaker (a speaker/dock for iPods, iPhones and MP3 players) was also released.
The speaker includes an image of Captain Rex and three other Clone Troopers.

===
Racing sponsorship ===
A Star Wars:
The Clone Wars open wheel car for the IndyCar Series was unveiled at the 2008 San Diego Comic-Con International.
The No.
26 car, which also included Blockbuster Inc. decals and was driven by Andretti Green Racing driver Marco Andretti, ran August 24 on the Infineon Raceway in the Sonoma Mountains in California.
Andretti said, "I'm hoping that my upcoming battle at Infineon will be as exciting as anything in a Star Wars movie
so I can win it for both Blockbuster and Lucasfilm.
"
The car finished 14th at Infineon, which Andretti attributed to a slow pit stop early in the race; he added, "I just don't think it was a very good performance for us today."
The Clone Wars car was the second collaboration between Lucasfilm, Blockbuster and Andretti Green Racing.
It premiered as an Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull car at the Indianapolis 500 in May 2008.

===
Novelization ===
A novelization of the film by Karen Traviss was released by Del Rey Books on July 26, 2008.
In addition to narrating the film's plot from various points of view, it includes some of Anakin's memories of his early childhood as a Hutt slave, as well as some of Dooku's recollections of battling the Mandalorians (previously explored in the 2002 comic book Jango Fett: Open Seasons).

===
Home media ===
The film's two-disc DVD and Blu-ray Disc was released on November 11, 2008 in the United States and on December 8, 2008 in the United Kingdom.
The film was released as a single-disc DVD, two-disc Special Edition DVD, and Blu-ray Disc.
The standard-definition versions include the film in widescreen format with Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround EX sound, and with feature-length audio commentary.
The film is also available on the Disney+ streaming service, which launched on November 12, 2019.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
The film was panned by critics.
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 18% based on 170 reviews, with an average rating of 4.2/10.
The site's critical consensus reads: "Mechanical animation and a less-than stellar script make The Clone Wars a pale shadow of George Lucas' once great franchise.
"
This constituted the lowest Rotten Tomatoes rating of any Star Wars film; the previous six theatrical films ranged from 52% to 95% and the made-for-television Ewok films and the Star Wars Holiday Special garnered higher ratings, although their averages encompassed far fewer reviews.
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 35 out of 100 based on 30 critic reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B-" on an A+ to F scale.

Entertainment Weekly listed Star Wars: The Clone Wars as one of the five worst films of 2008 with critic Owen Gleiberman saying, It's hard to tell the droids from the Jedi drones in this robotic animated dud, in which the George Lucas Empire Strikes Back—at the audience.
What wears you out is Lucas' immersion in a Star Wars cosmology that has grown so obsessive-compulsively cluttered yet trivial
that it's no longer escapism; Because this movie has bad lightsaber duels and the lack of the original cast, it's something you want to escape from.

Ain't
It
Cool News posted two reviews of the film during the week before its release, but pulled them down due to an embargo placed on those attending the screening its writers attended.
The same reviews were re-posted on the site, on the day of the film's release.
The retraction prompted some readers to allege a conspiracy by Lucasfilm to keep negative press out of circulation until the release of the film, but although the review by site creator Harry Knowles was negative, Drew McWeeny said that his review was positive and that no such conspiracy existed.
Several critics compared The Clone Wars to a Saturday morning cartoon and described it as little more than a plug for the upcoming animated series.
Linda Barnard, of the Toronto Star, said the movie "pretty much drives a stake into the heart of every loyal fan of the movies.
And now [George Lucas is] out to stick it to those too young to know about Jar Jar Binks."
Variety magazine reviewer Todd McCarthy said, "This isn't the Star Wars we've always known and at least sometimes loved."
Joe Neumiar, of the New York Daily News, wrote, "If this were a true Star Wars film, right about now somebody would say, '...
I've got a bad feeling about this.'
"
In his review for Entertainment Weekly, critic Owen Gleiberman gave the film an F grade and wrote, "George Lucas is turning into the enemy of fun."
Carrie Rickey, of The Philadelphia Inquirer, said, "The best that can be said about the movie is that it's harmless and mostly charmless.
The Clone Wars is to Star Wars what karaoke is to pop music."

The main criticism toward the film was the animation.
Many criticized it as cheap, wooden, non-engaging and out-of-date; some reviewers drew negative comparisons to 1960s
marionette-based shows Thunderbirds and Fireball XL5, although George Lucas previously said the animation style was a deliberate homage to such shows.
Tom Long of The Detroit News said the animation "is downright weak compared to what's generally seen on screens these days" and said the characters are so stiff they look like they were "carved by Pinocchio's father."
Roger Ebert gave the film 1.5 stars out of 4 and said "the characters have hair that looks molded from Play-Doh, bodies that seem arthritic, and moving lips on half-frozen faces—all signs that shortcuts were taken in the animation work."
McCarthy said "the movements, both of the characters and the compositions, look mechanical, and the mostly familiar characters have all the facial expressiveness of Easter Island statues."
But some of the same reviewers who criticized the animation acknowledged some positive elements about it; McCarthy said it allowed for "somewhat more dramatic compositions and color schemes," and Carrie Rickey, of The Philadelphia Inquirer, said the scenery and backgrounds were "vivid and alive", although she said the characters "move as you would imagine the statues at a waxworks might.
"Reviewers also criticized the dialogue, which Ebert said was limited to "simplistic declamations" and Claudia Puig of USA
Today described as "stilted and overblown, a problem also in some of the live-action incarnations.
"
Many critics also said that the battle scenes were repetitive and lacked tension; McCarthy described the action sequences as "a little exposition, an invasion; some more exposition, a lightsaber fight; a bit more blah-blah, a spaceship dogfight, and on and on."
Linda Stasi, of the New York Post, also described the lack of character development in the film, writing that whereas the original Star Wars films dedicated time to allowing viewers to get to know the characters, "Director Dave Filoni is so concentrated on the action that we're never given the chance to care who lives and who is blown into spare parts."
Jason Anderson, of the Globe and Mail, wrote that although The Clone Wars is intended for younger audiences, "parents may be perturbed by the film's relentless violence."
Ebert also found protagonist Ahsoka Tano "annoying," and Michael Rechtshaffen, of The Hollywood Reporter, said the attempts of humor amid the bickering between Ahsoka Tano and Anakin Skywalker are "strained".
Puig said she enjoyed the character, and that "her repartee with Anakin enlivens things."

===
Box office ===
The Clone Wars earned $68,282,845 worldwide, including $35,161,554 in North American domestic box office grosses and $33,121,290 in international grosses.
The film earned $14,611,273 on 3,452 screens in its opening weekend, including $6,228,973 on its opening day, August 15.
It was the third-highest earning film of the weekend in spite of negative critical reception, behind Tropic Thunder and The Dark Knight, which earned $25.8 million and $16.3 million, respectively.
Dan Fellman, head of distribution for Warner Bros., said that the box office performance met expectations because two-thirds of the audience were families and the budget for the film was $8.5 million, frugal considering it was a CGI film and because the film was meant to introduce the animated series.
Fellman said, "It was targeted to a specific audience for specific reasons.
We accomplished that mission, and it will continue in another medium.
"
When The Clone Wars dropped to $5.6 million in its second week of release, ContactMusic.com described it as "the first bona fide Star Wars flop.
"
The film also earned $23,428,376 from DVD sales in the US.

===
Accolades ===
The film was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award in the category "Worst Prequel, Remake, Rip-Off or Sequel", but lost to Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at LucasFilm.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at Box Office Mojo
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (or simply Rogue One) is a 2016 American epic space opera film directed by Gareth Edwards.
The screenplay by Chris Weitz and Tony Gilroy is from a story by John Knoll and Gary Whitta.
It was produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures.
It is the first installment of the Star Wars anthology series and an immediate prequel to Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977).
The main cast consists of Felicity Jones, Diego Luna, Ben Mendelsohn, Donnie Yen, Mads Mikkelsen, Alan Tudyk, Riz Ahmed, Jiang Wen, and Forest Whitaker.
Set a week before A New Hope, the plot follows a group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the Death Star, the ultimate weapon of the Galactic Empire.
The film also details the Rebel Alliance's first effective victory against the Empire, first referenced in A New Hope's opening crawl.
Based on an idea first pitched by Knoll ten years before it entered development, the film was made to be different in tone and style from the traditional Star Wars films, omitting the customary opening crawl and transitional screen wipes.
Principal photography on the film began at Pinewood Studios, Buckinghamshire, in early August 2015 and wrapped in February 2016.
The film then went through extensive reshoots directed by Gilroy in mid-2016.
With an estimated production budget of at least $200 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on December 10, 2016, and was released in the United States on December 16.
It received positive reviews from critics, with praise for its acting, story, visuals, musical score, and dark tone, but criticism for its pacing, characters, and digital recreations of Peter Cushing and Carrie Fisher.
It grossed over $1 billion worldwide, making it the 20th-highest-grossing film of all time and the second-highest-grossing film of 2016 during its theatrical run.
It received two Oscar nominations for Best Sound Mixing and Best Visual Effects.

==
Plot ==
Research scientist Galen Erso and his family are in hiding on the planet Lah'mu when Imperial weapons developer Orson Krennic arrives to press him into completing the Death Star, a space station-based superweapon capable of destroying entire planets.
Galen's wife, Lyra, is killed in the confrontation while their daughter, Jyn, escapes and is rescued by rebel extremist Saw Gerrera.

Fifteen years later, cargo pilot Bodhi Rook defects from the Empire, taking a holographic message recorded by Galen to Gerrera on the desert moon Jedha.
Rebel Alliance intelligence officer Cassian Andor learns of Rook's defection and the Death Star from an informant.
Jyn is freed from an Imperial labor camp at Wobani and is brought to the Rebel leader Mon Mothma, who convinces her to find and rescue Galen so the Alliance can learn more about the Death Star.
Cassian is covertly ordered to kill Galen rather than extract him.

Jyn, Cassian, and reprogrammed Imperial droid K-2SO travel to Jedha, where the Empire is removing kyber crystals from the holy city to power the Death Star; Gerrera and his partisans are engaged in an armed insurgency against them.
With the aid of blind spiritual warrior Chirrut Îmwe and his mercenary friend Baze Malbus, Jyn makes contact with Gerrera, who has been holding Rook captive.
Gerrera shows her the message, in which Galen reveals he has secretly built a vulnerability into the Death Star and directs them to retrieve the schematics from an Imperial data bank on the planet
Scarif.

On the Death Star, Krennic orders a low-powered test shot which destroys Jedha's capital.
Jyn and her group take Rook and flee the moon, but Gerrera remains to die with the city.
Grand Moff Tarkin congratulates Krennic before using Rook's defection and security leak as a pretext to take control of the project.
Rook leads the group to Galen's Imperial research facility on the planet Eadu, where Cassian chooses not to kill Galen.
Jyn makes her presence known moments before Rebel bombers attack the facility.
Galen is mortally wounded by the bombers and dies in his daughter's arms, before she escapes with her group on board a stolen Imperial cargo shuttle.
Krennic is summoned by Darth Vader to answer for the Death Star's attack on Jedha City.
Krennic seeks his support for an audience with the Emperor, but Vader instead Force-chokes him and orders him to ensure no further breaches occur.

Jyn proposes a plan to steal the Death Star schematics using the Rebel fleet but fails to gain approval from the Alliance Council, who feel victory against the Empire is now impossible.
Frustrated at their inaction, Jyn's group lead a small squad of Rebel volunteers to raid the databank themselves.
Arriving at Scarif on the stolen Imperial ship, which Rook dubs "Rogue One", a disguised Jyn and Cassian enter the base with K-2SO while the other Rebels attack the Imperial garrison as a diversion.
The Alliance learns of the raid from intercepted Imperial communications and deploys their fleet in support, revealing their full might to the Empire.
K-2SO
sacrifices himself so Jyn and Cassian can retrieve the data.
Îmwe is killed after activating the master switch to allow communication with the Rebel fleet, and Malbus is killed in action shortly afterward.
Rook is killed by a grenade after informing the Rebel fleet that it must deactivate the planetary shield to allow the transmission of the schematics.
The Rebel commander, Admiral Raddus, uses a Hammerhead corvette to destroy two Star Destroyers, and the wreckage crashes atop the shield generator, punching a hole in the shield.
Jyn and Cassian obtain the schematics, but they are ambushed by Krennic, who is eventually shot and wounded by Cassian.
Jyn transmits the schematics to the Rebel command ship.
The Death Star enters orbit above Scarif, where Tarkin uses another low-power shot to destroy the compromised base, killing Krennic, Cassian, and Jyn, along with all remaining ground Imperial and Rebel forces.

The Rebel fleet prepares to jump to hyperspace, but many of the fleet's ships are intercepted by Vader's arriving Star Destroyer.
Vader boards the Rebel command ship and kills many of the rebel troops in an attempt to regain the schematics, but a small starship escapes with the plans on board.
Aboard the fleeing ship, Princess Leia declares that the schematics will provide hope for the Rebellion.

== Cast ==
Felicity Jones as Jyn Erso, a young renegade woman who is detained for her crimes against the Empire until she is freed by the Rebel Alliance.
Beau Gadsdon as 8-year-old Jyn
Dolly Gadsdon as 4-year-old Jyn
Diego Luna as Cassian Andor, a Rebel captain and intelligence officer.

Ben Mendelsohn as Orson Krennic, the director of advanced weapons research for the Imperial military.

Donnie Yen as Chirrut Îmwe, a blind warrior who believes in the Force.
He is said to be one of the Guardians of the Whills.

Mads Mikkelsen as Galen Erso, Jyn's father and a research scientist.

Alan Tudyk as K-2SO, a former Imperial enforcer droid who was reprogrammed by Cassian Andor to serve the Rebellion.

Riz Ahmed as Bodhi Rook, a former Imperial cargo pilot who defects to the rebels under the influence of Galen Erso.

Jiang Wen as Baze Malbus, a longtime companion of Chirrut Îmwe and one-time devoted Guardian of the Whills, now a Rebel warrior and mercenary.

Forest Whitaker as Saw Gerrera, a veteran of the Clone Wars and a friend of the Erso family who had mentored Jyn in her later childhood years.
Jimmy Smits, Genevieve O'Reilly, Anthony Daniels, and Jimmy Vee reprise their roles from previous films as Bail Organa, Mon Mothma, C-3PO, and R2-D2, respectively; Vee is uncredited for his role.
James Earl Jones also reprises his role from previous films as the voice of Darth Vader, who is physically portrayed by Spencer Wilding during the meeting with Krennic and aboard the Star Destroyer, and by Daniel Naprous for the end scene.
Grand Moff Tarkin and Princess Leia Organa are played by Guy Henry and Ingvild Deila, respectively, with the digital likenesses of Peter Cushing and Carrie Fisher superimposed.
Henry also provides the voice for Tarkin, while archival audio of Fisher is used for Leia.
Angus MacInnes and Drewe Henley are featured as Gold Leader Dutch Vander and Red Leader Garven Dreis, respectively, via unused footage from A New Hope; MacInnes returned to record new dialogue for Vander, while new dialogue for the deceased Henley was assembled from archival material.
David Ankrum, who voiced Wedge Antilles in A New Hope, reprises his role in a vocal cameo.
Ian McElhinney, Michael Smiley, Andy de la Tour, and Tim Beckmann play General Jan Dodonna, Dr. Evazan, General Hurst Romodi, and Captain Raymus Antilles, respectively.
Warwick Davis plays Weeteef Cyubee, a member of Saw Gerrera's Partisans.
Dave Filoni reprises his role as C1-10P from Star Wars Rebels.
Stephen Stanton voices
Admiral Raddus, while Paul Kasey appears in costume as the alien character on-screen.

Additionally, Alistair Petrie plays General Davits Draven, Ben Daniels plays General Antoc Merrick, and Valene Kane plays Lyra Erso, Jyn's mother.
Jonathan Aris, Fares Fares, and
Sharon Duncan-Brewster appear as Senators Nower Jebel, Vasp Vaspar, and Tynnra Pamlo, respectively.
Simon Farnaby plays a member of Blue Squadron.
Jordan Stephens appears as Rebel Alliance member Corporal Tonc.
Nick Kellington plays Bistan, the door gunner on a U-wing during the battle on Scarif.
Ian Whyte plays Moroff, a member of Saw Gerrera's Partisans.
Daniel Mays appears as Tivik.
Rian Johnson and Ram Bergman, director and producer of Star Wars: The Last Jedi, respectively, cameo as two Death Star technicians.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Rogue One is the first film in the Star Wars anthology series, a series of standalone spin-off films in the Star Wars franchise.
John Knoll, visual effects supervisor for the Star Wars prequel trilogy, pitched the idea as an episode of the unproduced series Star Wars: Underworld 10 years before the film's development; after the Disney acquisition he felt as if he had to pitch it again or forever wonder "what might've happened if I had".
In May 2014, Disney announced Gareth Edwards would direct the film and Gary Whitta would write the script.
That October, cinematographer Greig Fraser revealed that he would work on the film.
In January 2015, it was revealed Whitta had completed his work on the script, and would no longer be with the project.
Simon Kinberg was considered as a replacement.
Later that month, it was announced Chris Weitz had signed to write the script for the film.
In March 2015, the title was announced.
Edwards stated the style of the film would be similar to that of a war film, stating, "It's the reality of war.
Good guys are bad.
Bad guys are good.
It's complicated, layered; a very rich scenario in which to set a movie."
Assuming Disney would not allow a dark ending, Edwards had the main characters surviving in the original version of the script, but the producers opted for a more tragic ending and never filmed the original version.
In May 2016, reports emerged the film would undergo five weeks of reshoots with Tony Gilroy writing additional scenes, as well as acting as a second-unit director under Edwards.
With input from Edwards, Gilroy oversaw the edit and additional photography of the film which tackled several issues, including the ending.
In August, Gilroy was given screenplay credit alongside Weitz and was paid $5 million for his work on the film.
Additionally, Christopher McQuarrie, Scott Z. Burns, and Michael Arndt all contributed to the script at various stages in development.
In July 2016, discussing whether the film would feature an opening crawl, Kathleen Kennedy said, "we're in the midst of talking about it, but I don't think these [anthology] films will have an opening crawl."
Edwards explained "The idea is this film is supposed to be different than the saga films," and that "This film is born out of a crawl. ...
There's this feeling that if we did a crawl, then it'll create another movie."
In November 2016, Kennedy confirmed the film would not feature an opening crawl, instead beginning in "a way that is traditional, with just the title.
"At
the 2016 Star Wars Celebration, Edwards said the title had three meanings: "a military sign", referring to the Red Squadron from A New Hope; "the 'rogue' one" of the franchise, given it
is the first film to not be part of the main saga; and a description of Jyn Erso's personality.

===
Casting ===
In January 2015, The Hollywood Reporter stated numerous actresses, including Tatiana Maslany, Rooney Mara, and Felicity Jones were being tested for the film's lead.
In February 2015, it was announced Jones was in final talks to star in the film, while Aaron Paul and Édgar Ramírez were being eyed for the male lead role.
In March 2015, Jones was officially cast.
In March 2015, Deadline Hollywood reported a rumor that Ben Mendelsohn was being considered for a lead role.
The next month, TheWrap reported that Sam Claflin was being eyed for a role, while Riz Ahmed was in negotiations to join the film.
In May, Mendelsohn, Ahmed, and Diego Luna were added to the cast of the film, in the lead roles.
Forest Whitaker was added to the cast in June 2015.
In July 2015, Jonathan Aris was cast to play Senator Jebel.
Genevieve O'Reilly was cast as Mon Mothma, reprising her role from Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
James Earl Jones was confirmed to return as the voice of Darth Vader in June 2016.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography on the film began at Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire on August 8, 2015.
Much of the other photography was completed at or near Pinewood Studios at Buckinghamshire, UK where huge sets were built to complement scenes filmed elsewhere in the world.
The film was shot using Ultra Panavision 70 lenses with Arri Alexa 65 large format digital 6K cameras.

Filming locations were used around the world.
In Iceland, the crew shot in Reynisfjara, and around the mountains of Hjörleifshöfði and Hafursey at Mýrdalssandur, which were used to represent Lah'mu and Eadu.
Also used were the Krafla area with its volcanic crater and around Lake Mývatn's rock formations.
The islands of Gan and Baresdhoo of the Laamu Atoll in the Maldives, as well as the former RAF Bovingdon airfield, were used to represent Scarif.
Wadi Rum in Jordan was used to represent Jedha.
Pymmes Park in Edmonton
, London was also used for location filming, and scenes set on Yavin 4 were filmed at Cardington Airfield.
Gareth Edwards selected the London Underground's Canary Wharf station as a location for a chase scene in an Imperial base; the location shoot took place between midnight and 4 am, when the station was closed to the public.
The film spent an estimated total of $265 million and received a $45.5 million subsidy from the United Kingdom's film incentive program.
===
Post-production ===
On February 11, 2016, Disney executives stated the film was "virtually completed".
Several weeks of pre-scheduled reshoots began in June 2016.
Tony Gilroy, who was an uncredited writer on the film at the time, was hired to direct the reshoots and rework aspects of the film, earning him a screenwriting credit.
It was created solely using digital tools.
Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) produced the film's visual effects.
ILM used CGI and digitally altered archive footage to insert Peter Cushing's likeness over the body of actor Guy Henry.
Lucasfilm secured permission from the late actor's estate to include him in the film.
The team reportedly searched through countless hours of Cushing footage in order to find suitable reference material, and Henry provided the motion capture and voice work.
A digital model of Cushing was mapped over Henry's performance like a digital body mask.
Cushing's mannerisms, including his manner of speaking, were studied by the creative team and applied to the digital Tarkin model.
Cushing's estate was heavily involved with the creation and had input right down to "small, subtle adjustments".
A similar process was used in the portrayal of Princess Leia; Carrie Fisher's appearance as Leia in the first film was superimposed over Norwegian actress Ingvild Deila's face and archival audio of Fisher saying "Hope" was used to voice the character.
Post-production wrapped on November 28, 2016.
== Music ==
In March 2015, it was reported that Alexandre Desplat, who had worked with Edwards on Godzilla, would compose the score for Rogue One.
Despite rumors that a contract had not been initially set in place by Lucasfilm, Desplat confirmed in an April 2016 interview that he would serve as composer for the film.
Concerning the film, Desplat commented that "[Edwards and I] had a great partnership on Godzilla, and I can't wait to be starting with him.
It will be in a few weeks from now, and it is very exciting and frightening at the same time because it's such a legendary project.
To be called to come after John Williams ...
it's a great challenge for me."
But then, in September 2016, it was announced that Michael Giacchino would be replacing Desplat as composer, after the film's reshoots altered the post-production schedule, and reportedly left Desplat no longer available.
Giacchino only had four and a half weeks to compose the music for the film, beginning almost immediately after finishing production on Doctor Strange.
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly in November 2016, Giacchino stated: "It is a film that is in many ways a really great World War II movie, and I loved that about it.
But it also has this huge, huge heart at the center of it, and that was the one thing I just didn't want to discount.
Yes, it's an action movie, and it's a Star Wars film, and it has all the things that you would come to expect and love about that,
but I didn't want to forget that it was also an incredibly emotional movie as well.
That was what really pulled me in.
"Giacchino
incorporated John Williams' themes from previous films into the score.
The official soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on December 16, 2016.All music was composed by Giacchino except where noted.
Giacchino, who has a history of using track titles that contain wordplay, shared his alternate list in the liner notes of the soundtrack release.
These names are listed in the notes.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Rogue One premiered at the Pantages Theatre in Los Angeles on December 10, 2016.
The film was released in certain European countries on December 14, 2016, and was released in North America on December 16, with China getting the film on January 6, 2017.
===
Marketing ===
Promotion of Rogue One was initially delayed by the release of the film Mission:
Impossible – Rogue Nation in July 2015, because the titles are similar.
Paramount Pictures registered and cleared the title with the Motion Picture Association of America in January 2015, well before Disney announced the title of its forthcoming Star Wars spinoff.
Disney and Lucasfilm had to reach an agreement with Paramount over promotion in order to avoid any confusion in the public mind.
Disney agreed to embargo promotion on Rogue One until after mid-2015, with the exception of a very short teaser which was screened at Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim that year.
A teaser trailer for Rogue One, released by Lucasfilm on April 7, 2016, was praised by reviewers for its portrayal of strong female characters.
The Daily Telegraph described Jyn Erso's character as "a roguish, Han Solo-style heroine", calling the film "progressive", while noting its painstaking faithfulness to the production design style of the original Star Wars trilogy.
The Hollywood Reporter also noted the visual nods to the original trilogy, and examined the film's possible narrative direction, considering that the outcome is to some extent already revealed in the opening crawl of A New Hope.
The Atlantic writer David Sims stated that the trailer brought "back some memorable pieces of architecture, from the lumbering AT-AT walkers to the Death Star itself, not to mention the glorious 70s costuming of Star Wars."
He added that the trailer has "the look", blending the old with the new.
The trailer was viewed close to 30 million times in its first 29 hours, at a rate of 800,000 views per hour, from Facebook and YouTube, which is 200,000 views shy of what the first teaser trailer for Star Wars: The Force Awakens was receiving in November 2014.In June 2016, Rogue One was promoted at the Star Wars Celebration Europe III event in London.
During the event, a new official poster was unveiled, which depicts a battle taking place on the tropical planet Scarif, with the Death Star looming large in a blue sky, above which is printed the tagline "A Rebellion Built on Hope".
A second teaser trailer was also unveiled, screened exclusively for the Celebration audience, and not streamed online.
This new trailer was reviewed favorably by critics; The Daily Telegraph noted that the trailer revealed new locations such as the planets Jedha and Scarif, and that its most significant revelation came in the final seconds of the teaser, with the appearance of Darth Vader, reflected in a computer screen and accompanied by his classic breathing sound effect.
Variety also hailed the Vader reveal, and noted that the emphasis of the production was much more on the kinetic depiction of large battle sequences and full-on warfare, comparing it to Francis Ford Coppola's 1979 Vietnam War epic Apocalypse Now.
A showreel was also shown during the event, which featured footage from the film, cut with behind-the-scenes shots and interviews with the director and cast members.
The second trailer was shown publicly during a broadcast of the 2016 Summer Olympics and received positive responses; Wired stated that the trailer was "littered with nostalgic throwbacks to the original trilogy", while Rolling Stone described the CGI landscape shots seen in the footage as "eye-poppingly gorgeous".
A further trailer released in October 2016 prompted The Hollywood Reporter to comment that the newly revealed footage looked like "a trailer to a different movie than the one advertised earlier", remarking that Jyn Erso appeared to be portrayed as a more vulnerable character, and highlighting the appearance of Galen Erso as a protective father figure.
Vanity Fair also commented on the emphasis given to Jyn's relationship with her father, suggesting that Rogue One was drawing on "the Star Wars franchise's greatest natural resource: daddy issues".
The film's publicity tour began in Mexico on November 23, 2016.In Asia, Disney focused marketing efforts on Donnie Yen, where his individual poster is used for marketing in territories including Japan, Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, Hong Kong, China, Vietnam, and Malaysia.
The official Star Wars Facebook page of the respective Asian countries also featured clips and videos of Donnie Yen speaking various languages, greeting fans and telling them to support the film.
In addition, Disney also released various versions of international trailers with more footage of Yen.

===
Home media ===
Rogue One was released on Digital HD on March 24, 2017, and by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu-ray, Blu-ray 3D, and DVD on April 4, 2017.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Rogue One grossed $532.2 million in the United States and Canada and $523.8 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $1.056 billion.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $319.6 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film, making it the third-most profitable release of 2016.In late November 2016, box office projections for the United States and Canada had the film grossing $100–150 million during its opening weekend.
Disney chairman Bob Iger noted that Disney and Lucasfilm did not expect Rogue One to match The Force Awakens' total gross of $2.1 billion, nor its $248 million opening.
Pre-sale tickets for the film went on sale at 12:01 AM EST on November 28, 2016.
Within 10 minutes, ticket sale sites such as Fandango crashed, much like they had in advance of The Force Awakens the year prior.
In its first 24 hours, the film had the second-highest number of pre-sale tickets ever sold, behind only The Force Awakens.
Worldwide, the film was expected to gross $280–350 million in its opening weekend.
In the United States, the film made $29 million from its Thursday night previews, making it the highest-grossing Thursday opening of 2016.
On Friday, the film grossed $71.1 million, and $46.3 million the next day, securing a total of $155.1 million in its opening weekend, the third-biggest debut of 2016.
It topped the box office once again in its second weekend, grossing $64 million (down 58.7%) over the three day weekend, and $96.1 million over the four day weekend.
On Christmas Day, it grossed $25.9 million.
It finished first at the box office again in its third weekend, grossing $49.6 million (-22.5%) over the three-day weekend and $65.5 million over the four-day weekend.
In its fourth weekend, Sunday projections had the film grossing $22 million, besting newcomer Hidden Figures' $21.8 million.
However, final figures the following day revealed the film tallied a weekend total of $21.9 million, falling to second place behind Hidden Figures' $22.8 million.
===
Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 84% based on 446 reviews, with an average rating of 7.48/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Rogue One draws deep on Star Wars mythology while breaking new narrative and aesthetic ground and suggesting a bright blockbuster future for the franchise.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score 65 out of 100, based on 51 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave the film a 91% overall positive score.
IGN reviewer Eric Goldman gave the film 9/10, saying, "Rogue One is a movie crammed with fan service, but when fan service is done this well, there's little to complain about and much to adore."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars, writing, "
this spin-off/prequel has the same primitive, lived-in, emotional, loopy, let's-put-on-a-show spirit that made us fall in love with the original trilogy."
/Film gave Rogue One 8/10, writing that the film is enjoyable but does not have the emotional weight of The Force Awakens, because "no character in Rogue One was strongly compelling".
PopMatters wrote, "Rogue One seems to enjoy spending time on a whole new batch of moons and planets we haven't seen before, reveling in the clutter and clamor of far-flung settlements where anti-Imperial sentiments fester.
But the film is bogged down in engineering the complex maneuverings of spy games, dogfights, and the most sprawling Rebel-versus-Empire land battle scene since the opening of The Empire Strikes Back."
Justin Chang, writing for the Los Angeles Times, called Rogue One "a swiftly paced, rough-and-ready entertainment".
The New York Times wrote, "All the pieces are there, in other words, like Lego figures in a box.
The problem is that the filmmakers haven't really bothered to think of anything very interesting to do with them.
A couple of 9-year-olds on a screen-free rainy afternoon would come up with better adventures, and probably also better dialogue."
Richard Brody of The New Yorker called the film "lobotomized and "depersonalized", and wrote it "isn't so much a movie as a feature-length promotional film for itself; it's a movie that is still waiting to be made."
The Washington Post wrote "Rogue One represents an unobjectionable exercise in franchise extension.
It's fine.
It'll do.
For now.
"IndieWire's David Ehrlich gave the film a C+ rating, calling it "a spirited but agonizingly safe attempt to expand cinema's most holy blockbuster franchise and keep the wheels greased between proper installments ... just a glorified excuse to retcon some sense into one of the silliest things about the original".
While he praised the set design and visuals, calling them "gorgeous", he criticized a lack of interesting character development and a script that felt "completely constricted by its purpose".
Peter Bradshaw, film critic of The Guardian says, "Rogue One doesn't really go rogue at any stage, and it isn't a pop culture event like The Force Awakens, in whose slipstream this appears; part of its charm resides in the eerie, almost dreamlike effect of continually producing familiar elements, reshuffled and reconfigured, a reaching back to the past and hinting at a preordained future.
There are some truly spectacular cameos from much-loved personae, involving next-level digital effects—almost creepily exact, so that watching feels at various stages like going into a time machine, back to the 80s and 70s".
Rogue One introduced many new characters into the Star Wars mythology, with Chirrut Îmwe, played by Donnie Yen, and K-2SO, played by Alan Tudyk, being the most popular.
In a poll on the official Star Wars website in May 2017, in which more than 30,000 people voted, Chirrut Îmwe was voted as the most popular Rogue One character.
George Lucas was reported to have enjoyed the film more than The Force Awakens; upon hearing this, Gareth Edwards said, "I can die happy now.
"The
film was praised for its exploration of ethics in engineering; in a reviewer's words, "the core ethical arc of the film is one man's decision to engineer the Death Star in such a way as to prevent its use for galactic domination.
One could fairly retitle the movie to 'Rogue One: an Engineering Ethics Story.'
"

====
Digital recreation ====
While much of the computer-generated imagery (CGI) received praise, some news organizations published criticism about certain aspects, including the visual effects (VFX) that were used to revive Peter Cushing, who had died in 1994, as Grand Moff Tarkin.
The Guardian's Catherine Shoard described the "resurrection" as a "digital indignity".
Joseph Walsh of The Guardian raised legal and ethical issues about bringing a long-dead actor to life.
However, Lucasfilm had obtained permission from Cushing's estate before deciding to use his likeness.
The Washington Times' Eric Althoff rejected the entire concept of using CGI to recreate a deceased actor: "Alas, what we get is, basically, not a simulation, but an approximation of a simulation—a dead character portrayed by a living actor inhabiting not the character, but imitating the dead actor.
"Some
journalists also criticized the quality of the CGI that was used to represent a younger Carrie Fisher in order to portray Princess Leia at an earlier time, as well as its suitability in movie-making.
Eliana Dockterman of Time wrote that "there was something particularly plastic about this version of the young Carrie Fisher—so smooth and so perfect it couldn't be real—that pulled me out of the moment."
Kelly Lawler of USA
Today said: "... while Tarkin is merely unnerving, the Leia cameo is so jarring as to take the audience completely out of the film at its most emotional moment.
Leia's appearance was meant to help the film end on a hopeful note (quite literally, as 'hope' is her line), but instead it ends on a weird and unsettling one."
Michael Cavna of The Washington Post described the facial effect as feeling "distractingly artificial and nearly alien, like a plastered death mask robbed of authentic actorly effect, well beyond the usual artifice of Botox."
Nonetheless, Fisher was shown the CGI rendition of her younger self for the film by Kathleen Kennedy and "loved it."
===
Accolades ===


==
In other media ==


===
Television ===
Rogue One
utilized Saw Gerrera, a character introduced in the animated television series The Clone Wars, as well as featuring cameo appearances of the Ghost and Chopper from the animated series Star Wars Rebels, and mentioning Hera Syndulla from that series.

Characters from the film also appeared in the second half of Rebels, starting with Saw in the hour-long Season 3 episode "Ghosts of Geonosis".
The Imperial Death Troopers appeared in the same season's hour-long finale, "Zero Hour".
More characters and vehicles that were first introduced in the film appear in the series' fourth and final season, while the film's main antagonist, Orson Krennic, is mentioned by name.

====
Andor ====
On November 8, 2018, it was announced that a live-action prequel series was officially in development and set to air on Disney's streaming service, Disney+.
The series will take place five years before the events in Rogue One and will focus on Cassian Andor with Diego Luna reprising the role.
Additionally, Alan Tudyk is also reprising his role as K-2SO.

===
Tie-in novels ===
A tie-in novel to the film, Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel, was released on November 15, 2016.
Written by veteran Star Wars novelist James Luceno, the story is set some years before the events of Rogue One, and provides a backstory to the 2016 film.
The novelization of the film was written by Alexander Freed, and released on December 16, 2016.Months after the film was released, Disney | Lucasfilm Press published another novel titled Star Wars: Rebel Rising on May 2, 2017.

Written by Beth Revis, the novel explains what happened to Jyn Erso between the time her mother died and the day when Rebel agents freed her from an Imperial labor camp, a time period that the film skips over in its opening minutes.

On the same day Rebel Rising was released, the novel Guardians of the Whills was released as well by Disney | Lucasfilm Press.
Written by novelist and comic writer Greg Rucka, it focused on the characters Chirrut and Baze, telling their backstories as well as giving more context to the events that happened on Jedha prior to the film and even the Imperial occupation.

===
Comics ===
Months after the film was released, Marvel Comics adapted the film into a six-part comic book miniseries, which adds extra content.

The miniseries' complete collection was released on December 12, 2017.

In August 2017, IDW Publishing announced that it would make a one-shot graphic novel adaptation of the film, which was released one day after the Marvel miniseries' collection was released.

Unlike the Marvel miniseries, this graphic novel will have slightly more cartoonish visuals.
In the same month, Marvel Comics released the Star Wars: Rogue One – Cassian & K-2SO Special, a 40-page one-shot comic focusing on the first meeting between Cassian Andor and K-2SO.
The comic was written by Duane Swierczynski and pencilled by Fernando Blanco.

===
Video games ===
A downloadable expansion pack was released for the Star Wars Battlefront reboot, titled Rogue One: Scarif, that allows players the ability to play through the various locations, characters and set pieces from the planet introduced in Rogue One.
A free virtual reality mission for PlayStation 4 was also released alongside the expansion.
The sequel to the Star Wars Battlefront reboot, Star Wars Battlefront 2 (2017), released an update including the planet Scarif as a location for several of its gamemodes.
Several characters and concepts from the film were also included in the mobile games Star Wars: Force Arena, Star Wars Commander, and Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, all available on iOS and Android.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Official website
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at Starwars.com
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at Lucasfilm.com
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at IMDb
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Nissan Rogue is a compact crossover SUV produced by the Japanese automobile manufacturer Nissan.
It made its debut in October 2007 for the 2008 model year.
Since 2013, the model has been paralleled with the X-Trail sold outside North America, making them essentially identical.
It is currently Nissan's best-selling vehicle in the United States.
The Rogue is manufactured at the Nissan Smyrna Assembly Plant in Tennessee, United States, although some variants have been built at Nissan Shatai's Kyushu Plant in Fukuoka, Japan and at the Renault Samsung Motors plant in Busan, South Korea.

==
First generation (S35; 2007) ==
The Nissan Rogue made its debut at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit on January 7, 2007.
It replaces the Nissan X-Trail in Canada as Nissan's entry-level SUV and the body-on-frame Nissan Xterra in Mexico due to the Smyrna plant freeing capacity for the 2009 Suzuki Equator, but the Xterra continued on sale in the United States and Canada through 2015 after being withdrawn from the Mexican market after the 2008 model year.
===
Initial release ===
The Rogue comes in three trim levels in the United States: S, SV and SL.
S is the base model, which comes factory equipped with anti-lock braking system; air conditioning; cruise control; power windows, locks and mirrors; remote keyless entry; and AM/FM/CD stereo with four speakers and auxiliary input jack.
An optional "360 Value" package on the S model adds 16-inch alloy wheels, auto-dimming rear-view mirror with rear-view monitor, body-color rear spoiler, chrome grille and rear privacy glass.
An S Krōm trim edition includes Krōm integrated body design, center-exit exhaust, body-color rear spoiler, 17-inch brilliant-finish aluminum-alloy wheels and rear privacy glass.
Both trims are available with front-wheel drive and all-wheel drive.

====
Safety ====
Safety features in the Rogue include front airbags, side-impact airbags, side-curtain airbags with rollover sensors, tire-pressure monitor, ABS with brake-assist and electronic brake-force distribution, traction control, and anti-skid control.
The following summarizes the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) Crash Test Ratings
In the IIHS evaluation of the 2013 model year, the Rogue achieved a "Good" crashworthiness rating for Head Restraints & Seats, Side, and Moderate Overlap Front, while achieving an “Acceptable” rating in Roof Strength, and a "Marginal" rating in Small Overlap Front.
Modifications were made starting in the 2014 model year which increased the Small Overlap Front and Roof Strength ratings to "Good".
====
Awards and recognition ====
2010
Rogue Awarded Consumers Digest's Automotive Best Buy Award.

2010
Rogue Received the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)'s Highest Side-Impact Safety Rating (five stars).
===
2011 model year update ===
Changes to the Rogue include redesigned gauges recolored from orange to black, redesigned center dash for addition of the navigation system, redesigned exterior featuring a new front fascia and grille, new front and rear spoilers, new chrome side door guard molding trim accents, new front and rear tire deflectors and a new chrome license plate finisher; new 18-inch aluminum-alloy wheels for the Rogue S Krōm Edition and Rogue SL Package, new low rolling resistance tires (available with the 17-inch aluminum-alloy wheels) and a new under-body cover.

The Rogue S Krōm Edition is a version of Rogue S with more aggressive styling, sport-tuned exhaust, 18-inch polished wheels and tires, a unique grille and bumper with fog lamps, and other styling tweaks.
The vehicle was unveiled at the 23rd Annual International Z Car Convention in Nashville.

US models went on sale at Nissan dealers nationwide beginning August 13, 2010.
Early models include S and SV.
====
Equipment ====
The SV is available with an optional SL package, adding leather seats, touch screen navigation system and 18" alloy wheels, along with other premium features.

====
Recalls ====
Nissan vehicles with Garmin Navi 750, 760 and 765 GPS devices, which included Rogue sold with the Garmin devices between 2008 and 2010, were recalled in 2010 due to overheating.
On November 23, 2011, Nissan announced a recall of 7,365 2011 Rogue vehicles for improperly manufactured electric power steering (EPS) assist units, which over time could cause the power assist feature to fail, causing a loss of power assist and an increased risk of an accident.

===
2012
model year update ===
Changes to 2012
Rogue includes new aluminum-alloy wheels design, sport mode to the CVT, one new exterior color (Graphite Blue), Around View Monitor for SL package, which creates a composite top-view of the vehicle's surrounding and displays it through a LCD monitor.
"Special
Edition" (replaced "Krom" edition) adds 16-inch alloy wheels, a premium audio system, satellite radio, privacy glass, rear view monitor and fog lamps to the S trim.
In Canada, the Rogue comes in S and SV trim in front- or all-wheel-drive, and in a top-line SL trim in all-wheel-drive.

====
Recalls ====
In February 2012, Nissan recalled 2,983 MY 2012 versions of the Murano and Rogue, because the tire pressure monitoring system was not activated when the cars were assembled.

===
Rogue Select ===
The Select was a continuation of the first generation Rogue sold alongside an all-new Rogue that went on sale in 2013 as a 2014 model.
Since the production capacity allowed for the first generation to be built in conjunction with the second generation, it allowed for a lower entry price to Rogue customers as well as fleet sales.
It went on sale in January 2014 as a 2014 model year vehicle and was continued through 2015.
Nissan then announced that 2015 would be the final year.
The Rogue Select was not offered in Canada.

The Rogue Select was built in Nissan's Kyushu, Japan plant.

==
Second generation (T32; 2013) ==
The second generation Rogue is a version of Nissan X-Trail and inspired by the Hi-Cross Concept to adapt to the US and Canada markets.
Changes include optional third row 7 passenger seating, standard four-wheel independent suspension, electric power-assisted steering and four-wheel disc brakes with an anti-lock braking system.
This generation has an interior size similar to Nissan's Murano, Altima and Maxima.
For the 2018 model year, Nissan decided to drop the third row option in favor of optimizing interior passenger room and cargo utility space.

The vehicle was unveiled at the 2013 Frankfurt Motor Show.
US models went on sale in November 2013 as a 2014 model year vehicle.
Early models included 2.5-liter 4-cylinder QR25DE engine rated 170 hp (127 kW) and 175 pound-feet (237 N⋅m), Xtronic CVT Jatco CVT8 with standard Sport Mode switch, 3 trims (S, SV and SL, each in a choice of front-wheel or all-wheel drive).Production of the 2014 Rogue began at Smyrna, Tennessee as the facility's 10 millionth vehicle.
Production of the Rogue crossover at South Korean manufacturer Renault Samsung Motors's Busan plant started in September 2014, with an annual capacity of about 80,000 units.
The 2014 Rogue received the distinction of being the first automobile to be manufactured in South Korea for a Japanese automaker and sold under a Japanese brand, thanks to the Renault–Nissan Alliance, in which the Rogue is built by Renault Samsung Motors in Busan.
In calendar year 2016, the Rogue became Nissan's top-selling model for the first time, a total of 329,904 sales reflecting a 14.9 percent increase.

===
Updates ===
====
2016 ====
The 2016 model comes with technology such as NissanConnect with Navigation, Siri Eyes Free and many other new features.
Eight exterior colors are offered.

==== 2017
====
The Rogue was facelifted for the 2017 model year, with restyled headlights and taillights, and LED daytime running lights standard on all trim levels.
The SL trim is also available with full LED headlamps with HID as part of the SL Premium Package.
The front grille plastics also changed, with the wider V-Motion grille, that Nissan has throughout its lineup.

==== 2018
====
Automatic Emergency Braking, Blind Spot Warning and Rear Cross Traffic Alert became standard safety features for MY 2018 both in US and Canadian markets.
The SV trim received the bigger touch screen radio as standard equipment.
ProPILOT Assist is an option on the SL trim.

===
Rogue Hybrid ===
A hybrid Rogue debuted January 2017, with limited availability for the 2017 model year.
The hybrid features regenerative braking, pure drive hybrid emblems, energy monitor, hybrid battery status, under-floor storage area replacing Divide-N-Hide Cargo System, a 2.0 Liter four-cylinder gasoline engine (power: 141 hp and torque: 141 lb-ft) and Xtronic CVT combined with an electric motor
(power: 40 hp) and Lithium-Ion battery, for a combined power of 176 hp.
The lithium-ion battery is located below the thick flooring of the under-floor cargo storage area.
The Rogue Hybrid is available in two trim levels, SV and SL, but does not offer third-row seating ("Family Package") and Divide-N-Hide Cargo System due to the bulk of the lithium-ion battery.

===
Marketing ===
In 2007, the Rogue was featured on the television series Heroes, and in 2014, Nissan became the exclusive automotive partner for the launch of Apple's iTunes Radio, with the campaign theme "Make the Ordinary Extraordinary."
====
Star Wars Edition ====
A special edition model known as the "2017 Nissan Rogue:
Rogue One Star Wars Limited Edition" inspired by the 2016 film
Rogue One was released for the 2017 model year.
Available with the glacier white or the magnetic black exterior color and charcoal interior, the Rogue One Edition is only available on the SV trim levels and features a panoramic moonroof, BOSE Audio System, black glossed front grille, black gloss accents on the front and rear bumper, black chrome door handles, black roof rails, black smoked twin LED projector headlights with HID, black wheels, death trooper helmet replica, and Rogue One Edition badging and emblems on the exterior and the interior door sill panels as additional standard features for the Rogue One model versus the regular Nissan Rogue.
Only 5,000 units of this limited edition were built.

=== Safety ===
The Rogue is currently holding the Top Safety Pick For IIHS Ratings.
With the safety features from the first generation, it also includes lane departure warning, frontal collision warning, object detection warning (SL trim only), and a 360 degree backup camera.

The Small Overlap Test, introduced in 2012 by the IIHS simulates a frontal collision on 25% of the driver's side.
Since its adoption, the IIHS has noticed several automakers making non-symmetrical modifications to their vehicles, the Rogue being one of them.
Another Small Overlap Test was conducted on a number of vehicles including a 2014 Rogue, but was conducted on the passenger side instead.
Based on this test, the Rogue would have received a "Marginal" rating if the IIHS were to provide ratings for passenger-side protection.
The crash test's intrusion was 10 inches further into the vehicle on the passenger's side than on the driver's side and completely tore off the structural door hinge pillar on the passenger side.
The Rogue was redesigned for the 2014 model year.
The redesigned Rogue shares no ratings with the previous design, built since the 2008 model year and given a new name for 2014-15, the Rogue Select.
Starting with the 2014 year, the Rogue was awarded Top Safety Pick+ by IIHS (Insurance Institute for Highway Safety).Nissan vehicles built 2014 to 2017 were put under a recall as the occupant classification sensor (OCS) would think that an adult in the passenger seat is a child.
They recalled over 6 million vehicles for either reprogramming or replacing.

==
Third generation (T33; 2020) ==
The third generation Rogue was unveiled in North America on June 15, 2020.
Production in the United States started on September 22, 2020 and the vehicle arrived at Nissan dealerships in the United States in late October.
It is claimed to be built on a new platform, although the dimensions are similar to its predecessor.
It has a more distinctive exterior design, punctuated by a boxier, more squared-off front end and recognizable LED lighting signatures along with two-tone exterior color combinations.
The QR25DE engine used in the previous two generations has been replaced with a new direct-injected PR25DD engine, once again paired with a CVT.
A flagship Platinum model featuring a 12.3-inch digital gauge cluster, quilted semi-aniline leather upholstery, heated rear seats and wireless Apple CarPlay and Android Auto (late availability) joins the pre-existing S, SV and SL trim levels.
The interior has also been revised with an electronic shifter setup and an 8- or 9-inch infotainment screen.

==
Sales ==
From 2016, the United States sales figures of the Rogue included the smaller Rogue Sport.

==
Rogue Sport ==
A version of the global Qashqai was released in the US market for the 2017 model year as the Rogue Sport.
Imported from Kyushu, Japan, the vehicle serves customers interest in a smaller, lower price-point Rogue after the discontinuation of previous-generation Rogue Select.
The Rogue Sport is slightly smaller than the regular Rogue and comes with a 2.0-liter direct-injected inline-four engine rated 141 hp (105 kW)
at 6000 rpm and 147 lb-ft of torque at 4400 rpm.
Compared with the Rogue, the Rogue Sport is 12 inches shorter overall, 0.4 inches lower and has a two-inch shorter wheelbase.
Trim levels include S, SV and SL with FWD or AWD.

For the 2020 model year, the Rogue Sport received a minor facelift.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website (Global)
Catalyst:
A Rogue One Novel is a science-fiction novel written by James Luceno that was published on November 15, 2016.
It is set in the Star Wars universe and takes place in the time period from the Clone Wars to a couple years after Revenge of the Sith, serving as a prelude to the 2016 Star Wars  anthology film Rogue One.
It relates the story of the Galactic Republic's and later the Galactic Empire's project to develop its superweapon, the Death Star.
The novel serves to create a backstory both to Rogue One and to A New Hope from 1977.Catalyst was announced in July 2016 at the Star Wars Celebration Europe event in London during a Star Wars Publishing panel session.

==
Plot ==
During the Clone Wars, the Galactic Republic begins working on a moon-sized battle station based on a Separatist design, hoping to complete its construction before the Separatists potentially finish their own station.
However, the Republic finds that building the primary weapon of the station will entail a breakthrough in energy enhancement.
Lieutenant Commander Orson Krennic offers to recruit one of the finest scientists in the galaxy, an energy scientist named Galen Erso, to provide the breakthrough.
Krennic has a personal connection with Erso, becoming friends while studying at the same university.

Meanwhile, Erso, a neutralist, is working on the planet Vallt doing energy research for Zerpen Industries, when the planetary government is overthrown in a coup sympathetic to the Separatists.
Erso is imprisoned in a bid to force his loyalty to the Separatists.
His pregnant wife Lyra is also imprisoned and gives birth to a daughter, Jyn.

Galen, Lyra and Jyn are rescued by Krennic, masquerading as a Zerpen representative, making an exchange for the Ersos.
Safely off-planet, Krennic reveals he is working for the Republic, and a Republic battleship destroys the government complex of Vallt while Krennic and the Ersos watch.
On Coruscant, Krennic and other members of the military work to subtly persuade Galen to join the battle station project under construction in orbit around the planet of Geonosis.

Krennic finds a non-research position for Galen at Helical HyperCom on the planet Lokori.
Galen and his family move to Lokori, which comes under regular Separatist attack.
At the end of a major offensive which has very nearly conquered Lokori, the attack is suspended.
It is learned that the Clone Wars are over, the Republic has become an Empire, the Separatist leadership was killed and the Jedi Order destroyed.
The Ersos move back to Coruscant, where Krennic has set up the Project Celestial Power project for Galen to continue his energy research with kyber crystals, ostensibly to provide power sources to Empire worlds, but secretly a cover project for the weapon construction of the battle station, which continues to be constructed, despite the war being over.

Krennic hires Obitt and his smugglers to drop decommissioned weapons to the planets Samovar and Wadi Raffa.
The weapon drops are a ruse for the Empire to enter on the pretext of suspected anarchist activity.
Once the weapons are found, the Empire uses the circumstances to set up occupying forces on the planets, taking over mining corporations on the worlds.
The pretext gives the Empire the chance to exploit the two worlds' resources, overriding the environmental protections in force on the two "Legacy" worlds.

Unknown to Galen, Krennic has set up a satellite facility on the planet Malpaz where Erso's former colleague Dagio Belcoze is attempting to test the energy output.
The experiments on Malpaz blow up and kill ten thousand on the planet.
The damage is attributed to anarchist elements opposing the Empire.
Krennic becomes suspicious of Lyra's intentions and influence over Galen and arranges for her to lead a survey team of the planet Alpinn looking for kyberite and the possibility of kyber crystals.
After the survey is over, Obitt shows Lyra and Nari the planets of Samovar and Wadi Raffa, protected planets mostly destroyed by Empire mining for the battle station project.

Lyra returns to Coruscant to find Galen absorbed in his research, and the Celestial project now under tight security.
Galen was developing serious suspicions about the use of his energy research, but chose not to discuss it with Lyra without stronger proof.
Galen continued to make breakthroughs with a boulder-size kyber, learning how to use its properties to amplify energy beams.
His work led to a breakthrough and Krennic arranged to have a Star Destroyer set up with a twin laser array, which was tested successfully in deep space.

Meanwhile, Krennic had set up another smuggling mission for Obitt to the Salient system.
In secret, Obitt has arranged with Saw Gerrera to warn the Salient system of the Empire's intentions, letting them prepare for an Empire invasion.
After the drop, Tarkin brings a Star Destroyer to demand access to Salient, as was done on Samovar and Wadi Raffa.
This time, the system starts fighting with the Empire, and destroying any facilities that the Empire can use.
Tarkin's forces are tied down in battle, and he suspects that Krennic has allowed Obitt to warn the Salient system, likely as an attempt to further his career over Tarkin's.

Krennic's research team, who are unaware of the true purpose of their energy research and questions Krennic, demands to be released from the program.
Krennic promises them full releases from their contracts, but instead kills them all, destroying their facility on Hypori with turbolaser blasts from his Star Destroyer.
He returns to Coruscant, where he finds more evidence of suspicious behaviour by Galen and Lyra.
He threatens Lyra with prosecution, which only leads to Lyra forcing a talk with Galen in secret, where they both reveal their suspicions about the project.

Tarkin is finally successful in subjugating the Salient system and captures Obitt.
Obitt was severely injured in the battle, but wakes up on Tarkin's Destroyer fully healed.
Under interrogation by Tarkin, Obitt reveals all of his recent activity with the Ersos and Krennic.
Tarkin decides to use Obitt to strike back at Krennic.

On Coruscant, Krennic is confronted by the Ersos.
Krennic leaves them, worried about their intentions when he learns that Obitt's ship has been tracked coming to Coruscant.
Krennic believes that Obitt may be helping the Ersos to escape and orders the project security to hold them, but it is too late.
Krennic arrives at the spaceport to confront Obitt and prevent the Ersos escape.
However, Obitt has arranged for Gerrera to arrive in another ship and the Ersos leave Coruscant.

Obitt continues to work for Tarkin, reporting on Krennic's activities, while also looking for the Ersos for Krennic.
Tarkin is assigned to the bases of the battle station construction to supervise security, plotting to take control of the battle station project, while Krennic is demoted for losing Galen Erso.
The Ersos, meanwhile have escaped with Gerrera to the planet
Lah'mu.

==
Characters ==
Galen Erso – A scientist involved in energy crystal and energy enrichment research, and an old friend of Lt.
Commander Krennic.

Lyra Erso –
The wife of Galen, and the mother of Jyn.

Lieutenant Commander Orson Krennic – Commander in the Republic Corps of Engineers, Special Weapons Group.

Commander Wilhuff Tarkin – Adjutant General for the Republic Navy.

Captain Has Obitt – Dressellian smuggler
Saw Gerrera – Smuggler and former soldier.

Archduke Poggle
the Lesser – Leader of the planet of Geonosis.

Jyn Erso – The daughter of Galen and Lyra.

Vice Chancellor Mas Amedda – Vizier to Emperor Palpatine and overseer of the battle station's construction


==
Reception ==
Den of Geek's Megan Crouse gave Catalyst a 3.5/5 rating.
Nerdist's Amy Ratcliff described Catalyst as an exciting read but not without its flaws.
Jim Lehane of the website Adventures
In Poor Taste stated Catalyst was insightful but only half the story.
Books-a-Million rated the novel 4.8/5.
==
Publication ==
Catalyst was released in hardback and electronic versions on November 15, 2016.
A mass market edition was released on May 2, 2017, the same day Disney Lucasfilm Press released Star Wars: Rebel Rising, which follows the events of Catalyst.

==
Sequels ==
The conclusion of Catalyst leads into the first events of the Rogue One: A Star Wars Story novel, released in December 2016.
Jyn Erso's story during the period from the prologue of Rogue One to later events in that film and novel are told in the novel Star Wars:
Rebel Rising, released in hardcover in 2017.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Catalyst on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Listing on Penguin Random House
Saw Gerrera is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He was originally introduced as a minor character in the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, where he was voiced by Andrew Kishino.
He was subsequently played by Forest Whitaker in the film Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story, who went on to voice the character in the animated series Star Wars Rebels and the video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order.
Saw is also set to appear in The Clone Wars spin-off Star Wars:
The Bad Batch, with Kishino reprising his role.

In The Clone Wars, he is the brother of the leader of the Onderon rebels, Steela Gerrera, with whom he helps free Onderon from the Confederacy of Independent Systems, and is mentored in military combat by the Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker (along with his Padawan Ahsoka Tano) and clone trooper Captain Rex.
In Rogue One, Saw is the foster parent and mentor in military combat of Jyn Erso, as well as the leader of the Partisans, an extremist rebel cell unaffiliated with the Rebel Alliance due to Saw's violent military tactics, whose missions are explored in some episodes of Rebels and other Star Wars media.

==
Concept and creation ==
Though Saw appeared in animated form in The Clone Wars, that was not the original plan for him.
Appearing on The Star Wars Show, Pablo Hidalgo of Lucasfilm’s Story Group revealed the character’s origin; "He started off before that.
George Lucas had him in mind for his live-action TV series that was in development, which ultimately never happened, but he found a place to put Saw into a story in Clone Wars.
"Supervising
director of The Clone Wars Dave Filoni stated: "We wanted a brother/sister duo on Onderon, and the character Saw was a character that George had already created, and he just wanted to involve and tell a little more about that character.
So in the course of that we created Steela [to be Saw's sister], who would act as a natural foil to Ahsoka.
"Andrew
Kishino, who voiced Saw in The Clone Wars, said that the character "[H]as even sort of, embodied in him, that feisty spirit of the Rebellion.
The take-no-garbage kind of individual.
He's stoic and strong and brash.
He's 'that' guy, and it's that kind of strength tempered with Steela's calm, level-headed thinking, that is, to stand up to something that will ultimately become the Empire, absolutely critical and necessary.
Saw Gerrera's name is a "mnemonic riff" on the Argentinian revolutionary Che Guevara.
Gerrera is also a heterograph of the Spanish word "guerrera", meaning "female warrior", describing Steela.

Entertainment Weekly revealed the character's appearance in Rogue One on June 22, 2016.
The film's director, Gareth Edwards, had wanted a character to showcase the more "militant" and "extreme" side of the rebellion.
Co-producer Kiri Hart suggested using Gerrera, a pre-established character, in this role.
Gerrera appears significantly older in Rogue One than he did in The Clone Wars, despite the two works taking place only roughly twenty years apart.

==
Appearances ==


===
Films and animated series ===


====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars ====
Saw Gerrera (voiced by Andrew Kishino) first appeared in the fifth season of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, in the "Onderon arc" consisting of the episodes "A War on Two Fronts", "Front Runners", "The Soft War", and "Tipping Point".
The character appears on all the episodes of the arc, along with his sister, Steela Gerrera, the leader of the Onderon rebels.
The Jedi Knights Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker (and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano), along with clone trooper Captain Rex, secretly train Saw and the other members of the resistance movement in military combat but refuse to get involved in the conflict, and leave Ahsoka to supervise the operation with instructions to not fight the battle for them.

Saw attempts to rescue the deposed King Ramsis Dendup from execution, only to be captured and tortured.
However, he plays a vital part in the Onderon rebellion by convincing Dendup and militia General Tandin that the rebels are fighting out of loyalty to their rightful sovereign.
Eventually, Saw and Steela lead the Onderon resistance to victory over the Confederacy of Independent Systems, though not without paying a heavy price for it when Steela dies saving the king.
Dave Filoni, along with the writers, decided for the arc to end with the death of Steela, because in his words, he wanted to depict that "there had to be a price paid for their freedom".

====
Star Wars Rebels ====
Saw is mentioned in the Star Wars Rebels second-season episode "The Honorable Ones", as being a factor in Agent Kallus's disdain for the rebellion's tactics against the Empire and part of the reason he participated in the genocide of the Lasat race of Ghost crew member Garazeb "Zeb" Orrelios.

Saw makes an appearance in the third season, two-part episode "Ghost of Geonosis", with Forest Whitaker reprising his role from Rogue One in vocal capacity.
In the episode, after the Rebellion loses contact with Saw and his squad investigating Geonosis, they decide to send the Ghost crew (including Jedi Knight Kanan Jarrus, his Padawan Ezra Bridger, and Captain Rex) to rescue him.
Given the continuity error of Saw having a different eye colour in Rogue One to his appearance in The Clone Wars, a mixture of the two was used to imply Gerrera's eye colour to be changing with age.
Saw later appears in the fourth season's two-part episode "In the Name of the Rebellion", which is set shortly before the events of Rogue One.
He rescues Ezra and Sabine Wren during their mission to assist him in learning about the Empire's super weapon, which he was investigating since Geonosis.
Though learning it is powered by Kyber Crystals, Saw reached a dead end.

====
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story ====
Saw reappears in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, portrayed by Forest Whitaker.
Within the film, Gerrera leads the Partisans, an extremist rebel faction unaffiliated with the Rebel Alliance, on the planet Jedha.
He plays on the frequent theme of duality between light and dark, a Rebel foil of Darth Vader whose body is mostly mechanized and who uses extreme methods in the pursuit of his goals.
He is Jyn Erso's mentor, having rescued her as a child when her father Galen was abducted by Orson Krennic, the Imperial military director of weapons research.
Gerrera has a reunion with Jyn on Jedha, where he passes along a message from Galen indicating a weakness in the Death Star.
Meanwhile, the Death Star fires on Jedha City; while Jyn and her rebel companions escape, Gerrera chooses to stay and is killed when his hideout is annihilated in the wake of the blast.
Krennic later boasts to Galen that Gerrera and his band of fanatics are dead.

====
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch ====
Saw will appear in The Clone Wars spin-off Star Wars:
The Bad Batch, with Andrew Kishino returning to voice the character.
===
Novels ===
Saw appears in the novelization adaptation of the film Rogue One by Alexander Freed.
Saw Gerrera appears along a seven-year-old Jyn Erso, in the novelization of the film Solo: A Star Wars Story, the short appearance reveals that Enfys Nest was working stealing the fuel for Saw.

====
Star Wars: Bloodline ====
The character is mentioned in the novel Star Wars:
Bloodline, set six years before the events of Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, where it is noted that his methods of combating the Empire are viewed as having been "extreme".
====
Catalyst:
A
Rogue One Novel ====
Gerrera appears in Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel, detailing how he came to meet Galen, Lyra and Jyn Erso.

====
Rebel Rising ====
Gerrera appears in the novel Rebel Rising by Beth Revis.
The novel's timeline takes place between Catalyst:
A Rogue One Novel and the beginning of Rogue One.
===
Video games ===


====
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order ====
Gerrera appears in Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, again voiced by Forest Whitaker.
Despite the game taking place only five years after The Clone Wars, Gerrera is significantly older, closely resembling his Star Wars Rebels self.
He is first seen on Kashyyyk alongside his Partisans attempting to liberate the Wookiees from Imperial occupation.
During his quest to find the Wookiee chieftain Tarfull, Cal Kestis encounters Gerrera and his men, who ask for his help in freeing the Wookiees in exchange for tracking down Tarfull.
Gerrera's men eventually find Tarfull, but are overwhelmed by Imperial forces and retreat.
By the time Cal returns to Kashyyyk to meet with Tarfull, Gerrera has left the planet, though some of his Partisans stayed behind to continue assisting the Wookiees.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Saw Gerrera in the StarWars.com Databank
Saw Gerrera on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Saw Gerrera on IMDb
Rogue Squadron is a starfighter squadron in the Star Wars franchise.
Many surviving members of Red Squadron, the Rebel X-wing attack force that Luke Skywalker joins during the Battle of Yavin in Star Wars (1977), later join Rogue Squadron.
The squadron appears in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) as Rogue Group.

Rogue Squadron is prominently featured in the comic book series Star Wars: X-wing Rogue Squadron, the ten-volume novel series Star Wars: X-wing, and the Rogue Squadron video game series.
The unit is depicted as consisting of "the best pilots and the best fighters".
Following the release of the Star Wars anthology series film, Rogue One, it was established in other works that the squadron was named in honor of the Rogue One squad who sacrificed themselves to obtain the vital plans to the Death Star.

An upcoming film titled Rogue Squadron is being directed by Patty Jenkins.

== Depiction in film ==
Red Squadron, the forerunner of Rogue Squadron, is first featured as a Rebel Alliance division in A New Hope (1977) during the attack on the first Death Star.
This appearance features many notable pilots, including Biggs Darklighter ("Red Three"), Jek Porkins ("Red Six"), Wedge Antilles ("Red Two"), and Luke Skywalker ("Red Five").
The squadron went on to appear in The Empire Strikes Back at the Battle of Hoth and in Return of the Jedi during the attack on the second Death Star.
The squadron was never a prominent feature of these films, and was rarely referred to as "Rogue Squadron" (rather, the "Red Squadron" designation is used).

In the films' plot, Red Squadron is essential to the destruction of the Death Star at the Battle of Yavin, where they engaged in a dogfight against Darth Vader.
They use X-wing starfighters for the assault.
Jek Porkins, Biggs Darklighter, and most of the Squadron dies.
Wedge leaves too damaged to continue.
Luke would have died, had not being saved by Han Solo and Chewbacca piloting the Millennium Falcon, and giving Luke time to deliver the shot that destroyed the Death Star.
Luke Skywalker and Wedge Antilles are the only members of Red Squadron to survive the assault.

The Rogue Squadron on the ice planet Hoth, during The Empire Strikes Back, has the burden of defending Echo Base with new pilots added to their roster, like Derek Klivian and Tycho Celchu.
During the Battle of Hoth.
The twelve snowspeeders of the Rogues gave the Rebels enough time to evacuate Echo Base and were destroyed later in the battle.
Luke and Wedge survive.

After the evacuation of Hoth, Antilles took command during the absence of Skywalker while he trained with Yoda at Dagobah.
After the events of The Empire Strikes Back, Skywalker and Antilles formed a squadron of twelve units around the core group and the Rogue Squadron
was formed.
Antilles often commanded the squadron when Luke had important off-flight missions.

During the Battle of Endor on Return of the Jedi, Rogue Squadron was dissolved and absorbed into the general fleet and Antilles
took the role of Red Leader, in memory of the Battle of Yavin.
Luke is busy helping on the ground as a Jedi, and Wedge destroys the second Death Star with the aid of Lando Calrissian and Nien Numb, who pilot the Millennium Falcon.

The anthology film Rogue One, set shortly before A New Hope, features many of the pilots who fought on the Death Star fighting on the battle of Scarif, where Jyn Erso leads a group of Rebels called Rogue One, in an on-foot mission to steal the plans of the original Death Star.
Unable to leave the planet, team Rogue One beams the plans to Leia's ship.
Minutes later, all Rogue One members are killed by the Death Star.
Since the release of the prequel, the Rogue Squadron has been hinted and later revealed to have named itself in the memory of the Rogue One team.

===
Rogue Squadron (2023) ===
During Disney Investor Day 2020, Lucasfilm revealed that Patty Jenkins would direct a film titled Rogue Squadron, which will be released on Christmas 2023.
According to StarWars.com, the film "will introduce a new generation of starfighter pilots as they earn their wings and risk their lives in a boundary-pushing, high-speed thrill-ride, and move the saga into the future era of the galaxy."
According to Jenkins, the film will be "something original with great influence from the games and the books.
There's a lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the greatness of all of those things, but yes, it's an original story
and I'm so psyched to do it."
==
Notable pilots ==
These are the pilots featured in the films and the canon of Star Wars.

===
Garven Dreis ===
He is the leader of Rogue Squadron during the battle of Yavin 4 in A New Hope (played by Drewe Henley).

He is killed by Vader.

===
Luke Skywalker ===
Luke Skywalker's debut with the Rebel Alliance came as Red Five at the Battle of Yavin, as portrayed in A New Hope.
After his destruction of the Death Star, he founded Rogue Squadron with Wedge's help using the Rebels' best X-wing pilots as shown in the video game Rogue Squadron and proceeded to have a long and distinguished flying career with the group.
By the time of Return of the Jedi, Luke was focusing on his training as a Jedi Knight and had thus handed command of Rogue Squadron to Wedge.

The last mission of Rogue Squadron takes place six years after the Battle of Endor, during Dark Empire.

===
Wedge Antilles ===
Although Luke Skywalker was the first commander of Rogue Squadron, Antilles is often considered the "face" of the squadron due to his tenure as its leader.
He appears in the films A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi, in which he commands the squadron.
When seeing the Death Star for the first time in A New Hope, Wedge utters the line "Look at the size of that thing!"

Wedge has a unique situation casting-wise.
Colin Higgins portrayed him during the Rebel briefing for the Battle of Yavin, where he expresses his doubt that even a computer could shoot a proton torpedo down the Death Star's thermal exhaust port.
In every other scene, Denis Lawson portrays Wedge.
Wedge appears in season 3 of Star Wars: Rebels, where he is voiced by Nathan Kress.

===
Biggs Darklighter ===
Biggs Darklighter briefly appeared in A New Hope played by Garrick Hagon.
Biggs was in the Battle of Yavin scene, where he joined his childhood friend Luke Skywalker and Luke's other wingman, Wedge, in their attack run on the first Death Star.

Biggs had a larger role in earlier drafts of the script for the movie and several of the additional scenes appeared in the novelization.
His additional scenes include a conversation with Luke on Tatooine where Biggs tells Luke of his secret desire to join the Rebel Alliance despite his training at the Imperial Academy.
This scene was deleted from A New Hope, but the book Inside the Worlds of the Star Wars Trilogy depicts the missing scene at Tosche Station, and it can be seen in its entirety on the encyclopedic Star Wars: Behind the Magic CD-ROM and on the Blu-ray release of A New Hope.
Biggs also shows up on Yavin 4 in the Rebel base hangar where he is reunited with his childhood best friend Luke and helped convince Red Squadron to allow Luke to join the squadron about to depart towards the Battle of Yavin.
Biggs assures Red Squadron leader Garvin Dreis that Luke can handle the X-wing, calling him the best bush pilot in the Outer Rim.
This scene was reintroduced in the 1997 re-release of the film.
However, a line in which Dreis referred to Luke's father Anakin and said that "if he had his skill he would do fine" remained on the cutting room floor.
While flanking Luke's X-wing on its decisive attack run, Biggs was shot down and killed by Darth Vader.

Biggs has a larger role in the Legends non-canonical storyline.
In the radio version, Kale Browne provided the voice of Biggs.
According to a Dark Horse four-issue comic series in Star Wars: Empire spotlighting Biggs entitled Darklighter, Biggs was a longtime friend of Luke's on Tatooine.
Biggs left Tatooine to be trained as an Imperial pilot, and during this training, he heard rumors of the Death Star from fellow trainees.
After several months training, he was assigned as first mate on the Imperial starship Rand Ecliptic, with an old enemy named Derek Klivian (nicknamed Hobbie) as second mate.
He came back to visit Tatooine to tell his friends and family of his new assignment but only tells Luke and his family of his hope to join the Rebel Alliance.
During the events of A New Hope, Biggs is planning a mutiny of the Rand Ecliptic, not realizing that several mutinies are being planned by several different groups.
He joins forces with Hobbie, one of the leaders, and the two go AWOL to Yavin 4.
Biggs becomes a part of the Alliance's missions to steal their first R2 units and X-wings, which they receive just days before the Battle of Yavin.
Before going to battle, Biggs saves Hobbie's life by finding medicine for a strange disease Hobbie caught on Yavin 4, which the Rebellion did not have a cure for.
The New Republic later named a military base on Coruscant in Biggs's honor.

=== Jek "Piggy" Porkins ===
Jek Tono Porkins is a famously overweight Red Squadron pilot whose death is depicted in A New Hope (played by William Hootkins) when his X-wing is destroyed after being hit by a piece of a broken laser battery crashing into the star fighter's frame.

Porkins gained prominence in the Legends non-canonical literature, most notably Stackpole's X-wing series.
He has also been occasionally parodied in popular media, most notably in the Family Guy Star Wars spoof Blue Harvest, in which he is depicted as being too fat to fit in his fighter and crashes.
===
Corran Horn ===
In the Star Wars Legends timeline, Corran Horn fought with Rogue Squadron.
Force-sensitive, Horn helped Rogue Squadron win the second Battle of Borelias, and was captured after helping capture Coruscant from the warlord Ysanne Isard.

===
Wes Janson ===
A minor character in the original films
, Janson only appears in The Empire Strikes Back in the role of Wedge Antilles' gunner at the Battle of Hoth.
He manages to take out the first AT-AT, emphasized by a terse "Cable detached!"
(
preceded by "Cable out, let her go!",
and Wedge's "Detach cable!"),
his only speaking role in the films.

In the Legends non-canonical literature, Janson was stranded with Wedge in the 1983 Marvel Star Wars comic "Hoth Stuff!
"
some time after the Battle of Hoth.
He was then killed by scavengers, and Wedge used one of their ships to escape the planet.

Janson is featured as a major character in Michael A. Stackpole's X-Wing comic book series as alternately Wedge and Hobbie's wingman and an integral member of the squadron.
Aaron Allston included the character in his installments in the X-wing novel series which followed from the comics, although Janson in those novels is prominent as a member of Wraith Squadron, not Rogue Squadron.
Janson also fought against the Yuuzhan Vong during the New Jedi Order series of novels, and kept an eye on Han Solo after the death of Chewbacca.
He was known as a skilled pilot and an expert shot, and personality-wise is known to be a joker.

In his early days as part of the Rebel Alliance was mainly a gunner in the two seated version of the Y-wing because of his shooting ability.
His first combat kill was New Republic pilot Kell Tainer's father during a botched mission where Doran was about to stray into an Imperial radar scan.
Despite repeated attempts to get him to change course, Janson was forced to shoot him down to save the rest of the squadron.
In the Wraith Squadron Series he was the first to implement the saying "Yub Yub Commander."
as a joke to Wedge after fooling him during the pilot interviews.
The rest of the squadron soon followed and Wedge was hounded by it for many years to come.
===
Tycho Celchu ===
Celchu never appears by name in the original film series, although he is attributed as the A-wing pilot that acts as a decoy for Lando Calrissian during the attack run on the second Death Star.

In the Legends non-canonical storyline Celchu, plays a major role in Stackpole's X-wing series, and also appears in numerous other novels, all of which give him a rich character background.
Celchu was an Imperial TIE fighter pilot that defected to the Rebel Alliance after his homeworld, Alderaan (also the homeworld of Princess Leia), was destroyed by the first Death Star, killing all of his immediate family and his fiancée.
Celchu's Imperial past drives much of the plot of Stackpole's X-wing novels, as he is continually suspected of being an undercover Imperial agent.
After the battle of Coruscant, Celchu was put on trial for treason and the murder of Corran Horn, but the prosecution dropped the case when Horn returned from the Lusankya.
Celchu also holds the noteworthy distinction of being one of very few Rebel pilots to have flown in the Hoth, Endor and Bakura campaigns.
This is a very rare accomplishment, and one that is matched by longtime wingman and friend Wedge Antillies.

=== Derek "Hobbie" Klivian ===
Klivian flies as Luke Skywalker's wingman during the Battle of Hoth.
Originally doomed to die when his snowspeeder crashes into General Veers' walker, his life was spared after that scene from the fourth draft was cut.

His first film appearance, was in Leia's briefing before the battle, when he questions the plan by rhetorically asking, "Two fighters against a Star Destroyer?".
Hobbie appears in season 3 of Rebels, where he is voiced by Trevor Devall.

In the non-canonical Legends literature and the Rogue Squadron video game series, it is said Hobbie is not only the most reckless pilot, he's also the luckiest, having crashed more fighters than all of Rogue Squadron and coming away from each of them unscathed.
He's generally the most dour of all the pilots, having a bleak outlook on life.
Despite this, Hobbie has a close camaraderie and friendship with Wes Janson, and often becomes involved in Janson's elaborate pranks and jokes at the expense of other pilots (especially Wedge).
Hobbie's sense of humor is extremely dry and sardonic, making for a good counterpoint to Janson's flamboyant and often silly wit.

=== Dak Ralter ===
Dak Ralter is depicted in The Empire Strikes Back as Luke Skywalker's gunner.
He was killed in battle by a flak explosion from an AT-AT's heavy guns during the Battle of Hoth.

In the Legends non-canonical storyline, he is featured on the video game
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron, with
Luke Skywalker saying that Dak "reminded him of a younger version of himself."
He was the son of political prisoners.

===
Zev Senesca ===
Zev Senesca, callsign Rogue Two, appears in The Empire Strikes Back, and is the pilot who locates Han Solo and Luke Skywalker after they get lost on Hoth at the beginning of the film.
In Rogue Squadron, he had been fighting longer than any other Rogues and had quite a few stories to tell.
Like Dak, he joined the rebellion for personal and political reasons.
He is killed when his speeder is shot down by Imperial walkers during the Battle of Hoth.

== Legends ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In the Legends non-canonical storyline, the X-wing comic series, written by Michael A. Stackpole and published by Dark Horse Comics, were the first works of Star Wars literature to focus on the adventures and exploits of the squadron.
The comic series picked up with the reformation of the squadron after the Battle of Endor.
Stackpole went on to novelize the squadron's tale in his X-wing book series, which initially spanned four volumes.
Stackpole is credited as the creator of the character Corran Horn, who later starred in his own first-person novel, I, Jedi, also written by Stackpole.
Horn later became a popular character in the Expanded Universe, playing a major part in several New Jedi Order novels.
By the time of the events of The New Jedi Order, Horn was a Jedi Knight and no longer a member of the squadron, but the Rogues are still a vital fighting force and command a presence in several of the New Jedi Order novels as well.
The squadron is also the focus of the Rogue Squadron video game series.

In Dark Horse's eponymous Star Wars series (2013–14), set in the months after A New Hope, Leia has begun calling the former Red Squadron "Stealth Squadron", but Wedge reveals to Luke that he prefers the name "Rogue Squadron".
After A New Hope, the squadron is operated as two groups.
The first was the Renegade Flight under Commander Narra, the squadron leader, and the second was the Rogue Flight under Luke Skywalker.
As the Rogues became more autonomous, they became a group with no standing orders, ready any time or place for urgent missions that would arise.
Their core was Luke Skywalker, Wedge Antilles, Zev Senesca, and Wes Janson.
The Renegade Flight is eventually destroyed before The Empire Strikes Back on an escort mission with a convoy carrying supplies for the Rebel Base.
The Rogues on Hoth had now the burden to defend Echo Base alone although new pilots were already added to their roster, like Derek Klivian and Tycho Celchu.
During the Battle of Hoth, the Rogues had to add many "guest" members into their squadron.

The twelve snowspeeders of the Rogues gave the Rebels enough time to evacuate Echo Base and were destroyed later in the battle.
Before Return of the Jedi, one of Luke's last missions was the Battle of Gall against the Empire, in an attempt to capture the bounty hunters who had abducted Han Solo.
After Return of the Jedi, the squadron was hastily and temporarily reformed by Antilles with the best rebel pilots in order to defend the planet Bakura.
Rogue Squadron was now a lean team of six units: Antilles, Janson, Klivian, Celchu, Plourr Ilo and Dllr Nep.

One of the important missions during the New Republic's creation was the failed rescue mission of Sate Pestage, which bolstered the fame of New Republic.

Since Janson and Klivian moved on to train new pilots and squadrons, Antilles had to reinvent Rogue Squadron, now with pilots from a wide variety of planets, clearly for political reasons.
This "new" Rogue Squadron destroyed some of the Imperial forces led by Ysanne Isard and contributed heavily to the retaking of Coruscant.

After resigning from the Alliance military, the squadron fought in the Bacta War to retake the world of Thyferra from Isard.
During that time, Klivian led a temporary Rogue Squadron in the absence of the "true" Rogue Squadron.

Upon their return from Thyferra, Antilles turned command over to Tycho Celchu and founded Wraith Squadron.

Antilles commanded both squadrons against Warlord Zsinj and after that he returned to his command as Rogue Leader to battle against Thrawn, Krennel, Palpatine's clones and lead the team to other battles.

The squadron played a role in the Battle for Mon Calamari during Admiral Daala's campaign against the New Republic.

Around this time, former squadron leader Luke Skywalker was teaching his first class of Jedi Knights, including Rogue Squadron member Corran Horn.
The squadron was led by Tycho Celchu after the campaign against Krennel, and was then led by Gavin Darklighter during the Yuuzhan Vong War.

Later on during a brewing civil war within the Republic, the squadron would temporarily be led by Jaina Solo.
===
Notable pilots ===
The following characters are featured within the Legends non-canonical storyline, but have not appeared on the canon.
They are featured along the pilots featured on the canon.

====
Gavin Darklighter ====
Gavin Darklighter, Biggs' cousin, joined Rogue Squadron at 16 years old and quickly proved to be a more than capable pilot.
He became fast friends with Corran Horn, who helped him out of a situation where he was the "worst" pilot in the squadron.
Darklighter was wounded during the Imperial invasion of Talasea in the Morobe system.

During the Battle of Coruscant, Gavin became emotionally involved with Asyr
Sei'Lar, a Bothan who would later join Rogue Squadron.

Gavin was promoted to the rank of captain after the death of Grand Admiral Thrawn, and was promoted to Colonel and given command of Rogue Squadron at an unspecified date before the Yuuzhan Vong invasion.
Gavin would continue to move up the ranks during the Second Galactic Civil War and beyond, at one point leading the Galactic Alliance Marines.

====
Corran Horn ====
Corran Horn was invented by writer Michael Stackpole for the X-wing series.
Horn eventually became a major character in the Expanded Universe, starring in the novel
I, Jedi, as well as several New Jedi Order novels (in which he is a Jedi Knight, not a Rogue Squadron pilot).
Horn hails from Corellia, and originally worked as a security officer for CorSec before fleeing from the pursuit of Kirtan Loor, an Imperial intelligence officer.
Horn became an accomplished pilot, and remained with the Rogues for some time after discovering his Force-sensitive heritage.

He later trained to become a Jedi Knight after his wife was kidnapped in I, Jedi.

During the events of the Yuuzhan Vong War, Horn was promoted to Jedi Master and eventually went on to serve on the Jedi Council as one of the most powerful and prominent Jedi of his time.

He is also notable for carrying one of only a few "dual-phase" lightsabers known to exist.
The weapon was crafted by Horn during the time line of the I, Jedi novel based on designs given to him by Rostek Horn.
These were possibly the same plans that his distant forefather, Keiran Halcyon, had created for his own dual-phase lightsaber.

====
Kasan Moor ====
Kasan Moor appears in Rogue Squadron, originally as a formidable opponent of the squadron.
She is a decorated Imperial TIE Interceptor pilot and leader of the famous 128th TIE Interceptor Squadron, but despite her record, like Tycho, her faith in the Imperial cause has been severely shaken after the Death Star's destruction of her homeworld of Alderaan.
She is recruited during the Liberation of Gerrard V, and when she joins, she becomes Rogue Squadron's lone female pilot during the game and a treasure trove of information on the Imperials.
Olivia Hussey provides her voice.

==
Cultural impact ==
Several games in the Final Fantasy series have a pair of minor characters named after Biggs and Wedge Antilles.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Rogue Squadron on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Captain Cassian Jeron Andor is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise portrayed by Mexican actor Diego Luna in the 2016 film Rogue One.
He is a pilot, intelligence officer for the Rebel Alliance, and leader of Rogue One, a rebel unit which attempts to steal the plans to the Death Star, a weapon powerful enough to destroy a planet.

==
Character ==


=== Creation and development ===
Though not initially named Cassian Andor, a "Cassian Andor-type character" appeared in the original treatment of Rogue One written by John Knoll, chief creative officer at Industrial Light & Magic and in the first draft of the script written by Gary Whitta.
The character was created as a member of Rogue One, then commanded by a Rebel Alliance sergeant version of Jyn Erso.
The original intention was to kill all members of the Rogue One team, including Cassian.
However, fearing that Disney would not allow the ending, Knoll and Whitta wrote that Cassian escapes Scarif with the Death Star plans alongside Jyn Erso and, though their ship is destroyed by Darth Vader after they transfer the plans to Princess Leia, they narrowly survive in an escape pod.
Whitta stated that having to "jump through so many hoops" to ensure survival indicated that Cassian and Jyn should die on Scarif.
Producer Kathleen Kennedy and Disney ultimately approved the ending in which the entire crew dies.
The main purpose of this action was believed to be for the characters to be ultimately replaced after the film by the crew of the original trilogy.

===
Casting and portrayal ===
In May 2015, it was announced that Diego Luna had been cast in a lead role in Rogue One.
Director Gareth Edwards wanted Cassian to be warm and likeable rather than the typical stoic, brooding action hero, leading to Edwards' decision to cast Luna early in the casting process.
Diego Luna felt that his casting, and the casting of other non-white men in the film's leading roles, reflected a "modern approach" and a world in which "racial and cultural diversity is in fact making us richer and more interesting.
"Luna spoke in the role with his native Mexican accent, an exception for the film franchise, which has mostly featured American and British accents.
Luna stated that his accent was not an issue with the film's producers, who were happy with it.

==
Appearances ==


===
Rogue One ===
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story was released in December 2016, featuring Luna in the role of Cassian Andor, a man who had been fighting in the Rebellion since he was six years old.
In the film, Cassian learns about the defection of Imperial pilot Bodhi Rook and the Death Star superweapon from rebel informant Tivik, whom he kills to avoid his capture since he is unable to escape due to an injured arm.
Cassian is later secretly ordered to find and assassinate scientist Galen Erso, who was captured by Director Orson Krennic and forced to help build the Death Star.

Andor and his co-pilot, reprogrammed Imperial security droid K-2SO, travel to Jedha with Galen's daughter Jyn Erso to obtain a message from Galen, carried by Rook.
Later, the rebels arrive on Eadu after learning that Galen is there; Cassian hesitantly chooses not to kill him.
He ultimately leads a team with Jyn to steal the plans for the Death Star on Scarif, where he infiltrates its Imperial data center with Jyn and K-2SO.
After K-2SO sacrifices himself, Jyn and Cassian obtain the schematics, but they are ambushed by Krennic, who shoots Cassian.
However, Andor recovers and shoots and wounds
Krennic before Jyn successfully transmits the plans to the Rebel forces in orbit.
The Death Star then fires upon the planet, killing Cassian and Jyn as they embrace.

====
Related works and merchandising ====
Cassian appears in the film novelization of Rogue One by Alexander Freed.

He also appears in Star Wars: Secrets of the Empire, a virtual reality experience produced by ILMxLAB and The VOID for the Disneyland Resort and Walt Disney World; Diego Luna reprises his role as Cassian to provide mission briefings and deliver orders throughout the experience.

===
Andor ===
Luna is set to reprise his role as Andor in a live-action "spy thriller" series for Disney+, which began production in November 2018 and was set to begin filming in June 2020, but the filming date was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On August 7, 2020, Luna disclosed, "slowly we're going back, but there's no rush."
According to Luna, his character will appear younger in the series, which is set five years before Rogue One.
Genevieve O'Reilly will reprise her role as Mon Mothma, and the series is also set to feature Stellan Skarsgård, Denise Gough, Kyle Soller, and Adria Arjona.
Filming ultimately began in December 2020 in London, United Kingdom.

== Reception ==
Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times praised Luna's "flinty charisma", but Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote that "the fey, soft-spoken Luna is particularly ill-suited to play a rakish man of adventure".
Praising Felicity Jones in the role of Jyn Erso, Chris Nashawaty wrote in Entertainment Weekly, "I wish Luna had a little more personality, a little more Han Solo swagger, to match her."
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Cassian Andor in the StarWars.com Databank
Cassian Andor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Cassian Andor on IMDb
Bodhi Rook is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who first appeared in 2016 in Rogue One, portrayed by British Pakistani actor Riz Ahmed.
Bodhi is a former Imperial cargo pilot who, under the influence of Galen Erso, defects to the Rebel Alliance in an attempt to steal the plans to the Death Star.

==
Character ==


===
Origins ===
Industrial Light & Magic chief creative officer John Knoll, credited for the story of Rogue One, told Vanity Fair in 2016 that he conceived the plot of the film while working as a visual effects supervisor on the 2005 film Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
Hearing about the development of a live-action Star Wars television series, he conceived a story, inspired by a plot point mentioned in the opening crawl of the original 1977 film Star Wars, which would eventually become Rogue One.
At the beginning of shooting, Bodhi did not have a big role in the film, with Ahmed noting "He had a different name and a different relationship to the rest of the team, and he really evolved once I signed on
and once I started shooting, even.
"
Once shooting had begun, Bodhi was brought into the story much earlier and was made a more integral member of the team.
His first name, "Bodhi", is Sanskrit and Pāli for "enlightment" or "awaking".
===
Casting ===
Ahmed was reported to be in talks in April 2015 by The Wrap, his casting was later confirmed by Variety in May 2015.
Ahmed has said that director Gareth Edwards reached out to him for the role although it had not been fully developed yet, and Ahmed sent over 10 audition tapes in the hopes that at least one would satisfy the director, recounting in an interview with TIME magazine; "He [Edwards] made the mistake of giving me his email address because I just spammed him about 10-15 different versions of this thing—doing this obsessive thing that I do.
And he emailed me back at one point like, "Hey Riz, you don't need to keep emailing me your audition.
You're good.
We'll get back to you."
In this interview, Ahmed also revealed that he took inspiration from Dennis Hopper's performance in Apocalypse Now.

===
Description ===
Bodhi Rook was an Imperial cargo pilot working on an Imperial research facility on the planet Eadu, and under the influence of Galen, whom he describes as a "great man", Rook defects from the Empire and joins the Rebel Alliance with news of a "planet destroyer".
Rook is consistently doubting his abilities and reveals the only reason he defected was because Galen convinced him he was strong enough and brave enough.
Director Gareth Edwards has said that out of all the Rogue One characters, he relates to Bodhi the most.
Rook has strong piloting and technical skills, which helps the Rebels immensely.

==
Appearances ==


===
Rogue One ===
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story was released in December 2016, featuring Riz Ahmed in the role of Bodhi.
In the film, he has just defected from the Empire after being given a holographic message of Galen Erso, father of lead character Jyn Erso.
Under Galen's orders, Rook travels to his home planet of Jedha to meet Saw Gerrera, leader of the Partisans, an extremist faction of the Rebel Alliance.
Rook smuggles the hologram of Galen to Gerrera, who tortures him to test his loyalty.
As Jedha City is destroyed by the superlaser from the Death Star, Bodhi is helped in his escape by Cassian Andor and the rest of the Rebels.
He leads them to Eadu, where they find Galen and steal the Imperial cargo shuttle SW-0608.
Eventually, Bodhi participates in the final battle on Scarif, as part of a mission to steal the Death Star plans.
Rook's role in the battle is to stay on the stolen ship, as he is the Rebels' only chance of escape, after being told by Cassian that he must make contact with the Rebels to get assistance and destroy the shield surrounding the planet.
Rook compromises his position to do so and is killed when a shoretrooper throws a grenade into the ship, destroying it.

===
In other media ===
Rook appears in the film novelization of Rogue One by Alexander Freed.

Rook also appeared as a playable character in the mobile turn-based role-playing game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, available on iOS and Android, where he is classified as a support who works well with fellow Rebels, while slowing down enemies and making them easier to hit.

Rook is a playable Light Side squad leader in the mobile MOBA Star Wars:
Force Arena, also released on the same platforms.

He can deploy supply drops to assist allies, and is paired with a U-Wing as his unique assistant, which can be summoned to bomb one particular area of the field.

== Reception ==
Sam Adams of BBC stated that Bodhi's storyline was not handled well, saying "this part of the movie's a mess".
Eric Goldman of IGN wrote "There are a couple of cases though where it feels like a bit more backstory would have helped provide motivation – most notable, perhaps, with Bodhi, whose huge decision to betray the Empire, prior to the start of the film, doesn't feel fully fleshed out."
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Bodhi Rook in the StarWars.com Databank
Bodhi Rook on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Bodhi Rook on IMDb
Darth Vader is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
The character is the primary antagonist in the original trilogy and, as Anakin Skywalker, is a primary protagonist in the prequel trilogy.
Star Wars creator George Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
Originally a slave on Tatooine, Anakin is a Jedi prophesied to bring balance to the Force.
He is lured to the dark side of the Force by Palpatine and becomes a Sith lord, assuming the title Darth Vader.
After a lightsaber battle with his former mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi, in which he is severely injured, Vader is transformed into a cyborg.
He then serves the Galactic Empire as its chief enforcer until he ultimately redeems himself by saving his son, Luke Skywalker, and killing Palpatine, sacrificing his own life in the process.
He is also the secret husband of Padmé Amidala, father of Princess Leia, and maternal grandfather of Kylo Ren.

The character has been portrayed by numerous actors: David Prowse physically portrayed Vader while James Earl Jones voiced him in the original trilogy, and Sebastian Shaw portrayed the unmasked Anakin in Return of the Jedi, as well as the character's spirit in the original release of that film.
Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen played the character in the prequel trilogy in the first and next two films, respectively, and the latter also replaced Shaw as Anakin's spirit with the 2004 re-release of Return of the Jedi.
His cinematic appearances span the first six Star Wars films, as well as Rogue One.
He is referenced in both The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, and makes vocal cameos as both Vader and Anakin in The Rise of Skywalker.
He also appears in television series (most substantially The Clone Wars) and numerous iterations of the Star Wars Expanded Universe, including video games, novels, and comic books.

Darth Vader has become one of the most iconic villains in popular culture, and has been listed among the greatest villains and fictional characters ever.
The American Film Institute listed him as the third greatest movie villain in cinema history on 100 Years...
100 Heroes and Villains, behind Hannibal Lecter and Norman Bates.
His role as a tragic hero in the saga was also met with positive reviews.

== Creation and development ==


===
Name ===
Various combinations of names for the character were built upon the phrase "Dark Water".
Then Lucas "added lots of last names, Vaders and Wilsons and Smiths, and [he] just came up with the combination of Darth and Vader.
"
After the release of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Lucas said the name Vader was based upon the German/Dutch-language homophone vater or vader, meaning 'father', making the name representative of a "Dark Father".
Other words which may have inspired the name are "death" and "invader", as well as the name of a high school upperclassman of Lucas's, Gary Vader.
As no other character with the title "Darth" was introduced until the release of The Phantom Menace (1999), some viewers interpreted it as the character's first name, in part because Obi-Wan Kenobi addresses him as "Darth" in the original film.
The moniker is bestowed upon Anakin in Revenge of the Sith (2005) upon his turn to the dark side of the Force.

Director Ken Annakin's films Swiss Family Robinson and Battle of the Bulge influenced the original trilogy, leading some to believe that Anakin was named after him.
Lucas's publicist denied this following Annakin's death in 2009.
Anakin and Luke's original surname "Starkiller" remained in the script until a few months into filming Star Wars, when it was dropped due to what Lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with Charles Manson and replaced with "Skywalker".

====
In other countries ====
In France his name was changed to "Dark Vador" since the first film.
The names of other characters were changed too, but his is the only name that has been maintained even in the most recent films.
Also, the title "Dark" was used in place of "Darth" for the other Sith lords too.
In the Italian-language editions, Darth Vader is named "Dart Fener".
In 2005, before the release of Episode III, an on-line survey asked Italian fans whether they would rather maintaining the Italian name or switching it to the original: the first option won; however in 2015, when Epidode VII had to be released, the Italian localisation decided to change the historical name to the English "Darth Vader".
In Iceland his name is "Svarthöfði" (which means "blackhead").

===
Concept and writing ===
In the first draft of The Star Wars, tall, grim general "Darth Vader" was already close in line with his final depiction, and the protagonist Annikin Starkiller had a role similar to that of his son Luke's as the 16-year-old son of a respected warrior.
Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler.
In developing the backstory for The Empire Strikes
Back, Lucas condensed this into one character in the form of Darth Vader.
After the success of the original Star Wars (1977), Lucas hired science-fiction author Leigh Brackett to write the sequel with him.
They held story conferences and, by late November 1977, Lucas had produced a handwritten treatment.
In the first draft that Brackett would write from this, Luke's father appears as a ghost to instruct Luke.
Lucas was disappointed with the script, but Brackett died of cancer before he could discuss it with her.
With no writer available, Lucas wrote the next draft himself.
In this draft, dated April 1, 1978, he made use of a new plot twist: Vader claiming to be Luke's father.
According to Lucas, he found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the year-long struggles writing the first film.
Lucas has said that he knew Vader was Luke's father while writing the first film, though the relationship is not evidenced before said draft of The Empire Strikes Back.
The new plot element of Luke's parentage had drastic effects on the series.
Author Michael Kaminski argues in The Secret History of Star Wars that it is unlikely that the plot point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the first film was clearly operating under a storyline where Vader was a separate character from Luke's father.
After writing the second and third drafts in which the plot point was introduced, Lucas reviewed the new backstory he had created: Anakin had been Obi-Wan Kenobi's brilliant student and had a child named Luke, but was swayed to the dark side by Palpatine.
Anakin battled Obi-Wan on the site of a volcano and was badly wounded, but was then reborn as Vader.
Meanwhile, Obi-Wan hid Luke on Tatooine while the Galactic Republic became the tyrannical Galactic Empire and Vader systematically hunted down and killed the Jedi.
This change in character would provide a springboard to the "tragedy of Darth Vader" storyline that underlies the prequel trilogy.

After deciding to create the prequel trilogy, Lucas indicated that the story arc would be a tragic one depicting Anakin's fall to the dark side.
He also saw that the prequels could form the beginning of one long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death.
This was the final step towards turning the film series into a "saga".
For the first prequel, Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Lucas made Anakin nine years old to make the character's separation from his mother more poignant.
Movie trailers focused on Anakin and a one-sheet poster showing him casting Vader's shadow informed otherwise unknowing audiences of the character's eventual fate.
The movie ultimately achieved a primary goal of introducing audiences to Anakin, as well as introducing the concept that he is the Chosen One of an ancient Jedi prophecy, destined to bring balance to the Force.
Lucas states in an interview recorded around the time of the third prequel, Revenge of the Sith (2005), that "Anakin is the Chosen One.
Even when Anakin turns into Darth Vader, he is still the Chosen One.
"Michael
Kaminski offers evidence that issues in Anakin's fall to the dark side prompted Lucas to make fundamental story changes, first revising the opening sequence of Revenge of the Sith to have Palpatine kidnapped and his apprentice, Count Dooku, killed by Anakin in cold blood as the first act in the latter's turn towards the dark side.
After principal photography was complete in 2003, Lucas re-wrote Anakin's turn to the dark side; Anakin's fall from grace would now be motivated by a desire to save his wife, Padmé Amidala, rather than the previous version in which that reason was one of several, including that he genuinely believed that the Jedi were plotting to take over the Republic.
This fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the principal footage, and new and revised scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.During production of the animated The Clone Wars television series, Ahsoka Tano was developed to illustrate how Anakin develops from the brash, undisciplined Padawan apprentice in Attack of the Clones (2002) to the more reserved Jedi Knight in Revenge of the Sith.
Clone Wars supervising director and Rebels co-creator
Dave Filoni said that giving Anakin responsibility for a Padawan was meant to place the character in a role that forced him to become more cautious and responsible.
It would also give him insight into his relationship with Obi-Wan and depict how their relationship matured.
Ahsoka and Anakin's relationship was seen as an essential story arc spanning both the animated film and Clone Wars television series.
Filoni began thinking about the final confrontation between Ahsoka and Vader ever since he created the former; different iterations had different endings, including one in which Vader kills Ahsoka just as she slashes open his helmet to reveal his scarred face.
A similar scene is included in an episode of Rebels, in which Ahsoka slashes Vader's helmet open, and the Sith lord recognizes her.
According to Filoni, Ahsoka's presence in the series allows Vader to encounter the show's lead characters without the latter being "destroyed", as Ahsoka can "stand toe-to-toe" with her former master.

===
Design ===
The original design of Darth Vader's costume did not originally include a helmet.
The idea that Vader should wear a breathing apparatus was first proposed by concept artist Ralph McQuarrie during preproduction discussions for Star Wars with George Lucas in 1975.
McQuarrie stated that Lucas's artistic direction was to portray a malevolent figure in a cape with samurai armor. "
For Darth Vader, George just said he would like to have a very tall, dark fluttering figure that had a spooky feeling like it came in on the wind."
McQuarrie noted that the script indicated that Vader would travel between spaceships and needed to survive in the vacuum of space, and he proposed that Vader should wear some sort of space suit.
Lucas agreed, and McQuarrie combined a full-face breathing mask with a samurai helmet, thus creating one of the most iconic designs of space fantasy cinema.
McQuarrie's 1975 production painting of Darth Vader engaged in a lightsaber duel with Deak Starkiller (a character prototype for Luke Skywalker) depicts Vader wearing black armor, a flowing cape and an elongated, skull-like mask and helmet.
Its similarity to the final design of Vader's costume demonstrates that McQuarrie's earliest conception of Vader was so successful that very little needed to be changed for production.

Working from McQuarrie's designs, the costume designer John Mollo devised a costume that could be worn by an actor on-screen using a combination of clerical robes, a motorcycle suit, a German military helmet and a military gas mask.
The prop sculptor Brian Muir created the helmet and armour used in the film.
The sound of the respirator function of Vader's mask was created by Ben Burtt using modified recordings of scuba breathing apparatus used by divers.
The sound effect is trademarked in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office under Trademark #77419252 and is officially described in the documentation as "The sound of rhythmic mechanical human breathing created by breathing through a scuba tank regulator.
"Commentators have often pointed to the influence of Akira Kurosawa's films such as The Hidden Fortress (1958) on George Lucas, and Vader's samurai-inspired costume design is held up as a significant example of the Japanese influences on Star Wars.

===
Portrayals ===
Darth Vader was portrayed by bodybuilder David Prowse in the original film trilogy, with fencer Bob Anderson performing the character's lightsaber fight scenes.
At 6 ft 6 in (1.98 m) tall, George Lucas thought Prowse "brought a physicality to Darth Vader that was essential for the character ... with an imposing stature and movement performance to match the intensity and undercurrent of Vader’s presence.
"Lucas chose to have a different actor be the voice of Vader, since Prowse had a strong West Country English accent that led the rest of the cast to nickname him "Darth Farmer".
Lucas originally intended for Orson Welles to voice Vader, but after deciding that Welles's voice would be too recognizable, he cast the lesser-known James Earl Jones instead.
Jones initially felt his contributions to the films were too small to warrant recognition and his role was uncredited at his request until the release of Return of the Jedi (1983).
When Jones was specifically asked if he had supplied Vader's voice for Revenge of the Sith—either newly or from a previous recording—Jones answered, "You'd have to ask Lucas about that.
I don't know."
Hayden Christensen and Gene Bryant alternately portray Vader in Revenge of the Sith.
During the production of Revenge of the Sith, Christensen asked Lucas if a special Vader suit could be constructed to fit his own body, rather than have a different actor don one of the original sets of Vader armor worn by Prowse.
Brock Peters provided the voice of Darth Vader in the NPR/USC radio series.
Both Spencer Wilding and Daniel Naprous portrayed Vader in Rogue One (2016), with Jones reprising his role as the character's voice.
Vader's character has also been portrayed in several video games; in games such as Rebel Assault II: The Hidden Empire and Dark Forces, visual effects artist C. Andrew Nelson appears in short sequences in the Vader costume, voiced by Scott Lawrence.
Matt Sloan, who appeared in the YouTube parody Chad Vader, provided the voice of Darth Vader in The Force Unleashed.
As a result of his video game appearances, Nelson was cast to appear as Vader in brief sequences inserted into the Special Edition of The Empire Strikes Back, in which Vader is seen boarding his shuttle.
During production of Return of the Jedi, the casting crew sought an experienced actor for the role of Anakin Skywalker since his death was unquestionably the emotional climax of the film, and Sebastian Shaw was selected for the role.
When Shaw arrived at the set for filming, he ran into his friend Ian McDiarmid, the actor playing the Emperor.
When McDiarmid asked him what he was doing there, Shaw responded, "I don't know,
dear boy, I think it's something to do with science-fiction.
"
His presence during the filming was kept secret from all but the minimum cast and crew, and Shaw was contractually obliged not to discuss any film secrets with anyone, even his family.
The unmasking scene, directed by Richard Marquand, was filmed in one day and required only a few takes, with no alteration from the original dialogue.
Lucas personally directed Shaw for his appearance in the final scene of the film, in which he is a Force Ghost of Anakin.
Shaw's image in this scene was replaced with that of Christensen in the 2004 DVD release.
This last attempt to tie the prequel and original trilogies together proved to be possibly the most controversial change in the Star Wars re-releases.
Shaw received more fan mail and autograph requests from Return of the Jedi than he had for any role in the rest of his career.
He later reflected that he enjoyed his experience filming Return of the Jedi and expressed particular surprise that an action figure was made of him from the film.

When The Phantom Menace was being produced, hundreds of actors were tested for the role of young Anakin before the producers settled on Jake Lloyd, who Lucas considered met his requirements of "a good actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
Producer Rick McCallum said that Lloyd was "smart, mischievous and loves anything mechanical—just like Anakin."
During production of Attack of the Clones, casting director Robin Gurland reviewed about 1,500 other candidates for the role of the young Anakin before Lucas eventually selected Hayden Christensen for the role.
When Revenge of the Sith was being produced, Christensen and Ewan McGregor began rehearsing their climactic lightsaber duel long before Lucas would shoot it.
They trained extensively with stunt coordinator Nick Gillard to memorize and perform their duel together.
As in the previous prequel film, McGregor and Christensen performed their own lightsaber fighting scenes without the use of stunt doubles.
Anakin has also been voiced by Mat Lucas for the 2003 micro-series Clone Wars, and by Matt Lanter in the CGI animated film The Clone Wars, the television series of the same name and for Anakin's small roles in the animated series Rebels and Forces of Destiny.
James Earl Jones reprised the voice role for Vader's appearances in Rebels.
Both Lanter and Jones contributed their voices for the second-season finale of Rebels, at times with identical dialogue spoken by both actors blended together in different ways.

===
Characteristics ===
In Attack of the Clones, Anakin Skywalker feels "smothered" by Obi-Wan Kenobi and is incapable of controlling his own life.
By Revenge of the Sith, however, his "father-son" friction with his master has matured into a more equal, brotherly relationship.
Once he becomes Darth Vader, each evil act he commits shatters any hope or connection towards his previous life, which makes it harder for him to return to the light, but he ultimately escapes the dark side and redeems himself by sacrificing his life to save his son, Luke Skywalker, and kill the Emperor in Return of the Jedi.
Eric Bui, a psychiatrist at University of Toulouse Hospital, argued at the 2007 American Psychiatric Association convention that Anakin Skywalker meets six of the nine diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder (BPD), one more than necessary for a diagnosis.
He and a colleague, Rachel Rodgers, published their findings in a 2010 letter to the editor of the journal Psychiatry Research.
Bui says he found Anakin Skywalker a useful example to explain BPD to medical students.
In particular, Bui points to Anakin's abandonment issues and uncertainty over his identity.
Anakin's mass murders of the Tusken Raiders in Attack of the Clones and the young Jedi in Revenge of the Sith count as two dissociative episodes, fulfilling another criterion.
Bui hoped his paper would help raise awareness of the disorder, especially among teens.

==
Appearances ==
Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker appears in seven of the live-action Star Wars films, the animated series The Clone Wars (including the film), Rebels, and the micro-series Clone Wars and Forces of Destiny.
He also has a main and recurring role in games, comics, books and the non-canon Star Wars Legends material.

===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
Darth Vader first appears in Star Wars as a ruthless cyborg Sith Lord serving the Galactic Empire.
He is tasked, along with Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing), with recovering the secret plans for the Death Star superweapon, which were stolen by the Rebel Alliance.
Vader captures and tortures Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), who has hidden the plans inside the droid R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and sent it to find Vader's former Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) on the planet Tatooine.
During Leia's rescue by Obi-Wan's allies Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and Han Solo
(Harrison Ford), Vader strikes down Obi-Wan in a lightsaber duel.
Having placed a tracking device aboard their ship, the Millennium Falcon, Vader is able to track down the Rebel base on the planet Yavin 4.
During the Rebel attack on the Death Star, Vader boards his TIE fighter and attempts to shoot down Rebel X-wing fighters, but Solo intervenes and sends Vader's ship spiraling off course, allowing Luke to destroy the Death Star.

In The Empire Strikes Back, Vader becomes obsessed with finding the Force-sensitive Luke and leads his stormtroopers to attack on the Rebel base on Hoth, which the Rebels escape.
While conversing with the Emperor (Ian McDiarmid) via hologram, Vader convinces him that Luke would be a valuable ally if he could be turned to the dark side.
Vader hires a group of bounty hunters to follow Luke's friends, and negotiates with Bespin administrator Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams) to set a trap for them to bait Luke.
After Han, Leia, Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) arrive, Vader tortures and freezes Han in carbonite and gives him to the bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch).
When Luke arrives, Vader overpowers him in a lightsaber duel, severing his hand.
Vader tells Luke that he is his father, and tries to persuade him to join the dark side and help him overthrow the Emperor.
Horrified, Luke escapes through an air shaft.
Vader telepathically tells Luke that it is his destiny to join the dark side.

In Return of the Jedi, Vader and the Emperor supervise the final stages of the second Death Star's construction.
Thinking that there is still good in his father, Luke surrenders to Vader and tries to convince him to turn from the dark side.
Vader takes Luke to the second Death Star to meet the Emperor.
While there, the Emperor tempts Luke to give in to his anger, which leads to Vader dueling with Luke once again.
Realizing that Leia is Luke's twin sister, Vader threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit.
Furious, Luke overpowers Vader and severs his father's cybernetic hand.
The Emperor entreats Luke to kill Vader and take his place.
Luke refuses and the Emperor tortures him with Force lightning.
Unwilling to let his son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor chute to his death, but is mortally wounded by his former master's lightning in the process.
The redeemed Anakin Skywalker asks Luke to remove his mask, and admits that there was still good in him after all as he dies peacefully in his son's arms.
Luke escapes the second Death Star with his father's body and cremates it in a pyre on Endor.
As the Rebels celebrate the Death Star's destruction and the Empire's defeat, Luke sees the spirits of Anakin, Yoda (Frank Oz), and Obi-Wan watching over him.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
In Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, which takes place 32 years before A New Hope
, Anakin appears as a nine-year-old slave living on Tatooine with his mother Shmi (Pernilla August).
In addition to being a gifted pilot and mechanic, Anakin has built his own protocol droid, C-3PO.
Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) meets Anakin after making an emergency landing on Tatooine with Queen of Naboo Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman).
Qui-Gon learns from Shmi that Anakin was conceived without a father and can foresee the future.
Qui-Gon senses Anakin's strong connection to the Force and becomes convinced that he is the "Chosen One" of Jedi prophecy who will bring balance to the Force.
After winning his freedom in a podrace wager, Anakin leaves with Qui-Gon to be trained as a Jedi on Coruscant, but is forced to leave his mother behind.
During the journey, Anakin forms a bond with Padmé.
Qui-Gon asks the Jedi Council for permission to train Anakin, but they sense fear in the boy and refuse.
Eventually, Anakin helps end the corrupt Trade Federation's invasion of Naboo by destroying their control ship.
After Qui-Gon is killed in a lightsaber duel with Sith Lord Darth Maul (portrayed by Ray Park, voiced by Peter Serafinowicz), Qui-Gon's apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) promises to train Anakin, with the council's reluctant approval.
Palpatine, newly elected as the Galactic Republic's Chancellor, befriends Anakin and tells him, "We will watch your career with great interest".

In Episode II: Attack of the Clones, which takes place 10 years after The Phantom Menace, 19-year-old Anakin is still Obi-Wan's Padawan apprentice.
Over the years, he has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is holding him back.
After rescuing Padmé from an assassination attempt, Anakin travels with her to Naboo as her bodyguard, and they fall in love, which is against the Jedi Code.
Sensing that Shmi is in pain, Anakin travels with Padmé to Tatooine to rescue his mother.
While there, Anakin learns that Shmi had been freed by and
married farmer Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson)
a few years after he left.
He then visits Cliegg and learns from him that she was kidnapped by Tusken Raiders.
Anakin locates Shmi at a Tusken campsite, where she dies in his arms.
Anakin, enraged, massacres the Tusken tribe and returns to the Lars homestead to bury Shmi.
Anakin then travels with Padmé to Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan from Sith Lord Count Dooku (Christopher Lee).
Dooku captures the trio and sentences them to death.
However, a battalion of Jedi arrives with an army of clone troopers to halt the executions.
Obi-Wan and Anakin confront Dooku, but the Sith Lord beats them both in a lightsaber duel and severs Anakin's arm.
After being rescued by Yoda, Anakin is fitted with a robotic arm and marries Padmé in a secret ceremony.

In Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, set three years after Attack of the Clones, Anakin is now a Jedi Knight and a hero of the Clone Wars.
He and Obi-Wan lead a mission to rescue Palpatine from Separatist commander General Grievous (voiced by Matthew Wood).
The two Jedi battle Count Dooku, whom Anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold blood at Palpatine's urging.
They rescue Palpatine and return to Coruscant.
Anakin reunites with Padmé, who tells him that she is pregnant.
Although initially excited, Anakin soon begins to have nightmares about Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine also appoints Anakin to the Jedi Council as his personal representative.
Suspicious of Palpatine, the Council allows Anakin as a member, but declines to grant him the rank of Jedi Master and instead instructs him to spy on Palpatine, diminishing Anakin's trust in the Jedi.
Later, Palpatine reveals to Anakin that he is the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, and says that only he has the power to save Padmé from dying.
Anakin reports Sidious' treachery to Jedi Master Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson), who confronts and subdues Sidious.
Desperate to save Padmé, Anakin intervenes on Sidious' behalf and disarms Windu, allowing Sidious to kill him.

Anakin then pledges himself to the Sith, and Sidious dubs him Darth Vader.
On Sidious' orders, Vader leads the 501st Legion to kill everyone in the Jedi Temple, including the children, and then goes to the volcanic planet Mustafar to assassinate the Separatist Council.
A distraught Padmé goes to Mustafar and implores Vader to abandon the dark side, but he refuses.
Sensing Obi-Wan's presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill him, Vader angrily uses the Force to strangle Padmé to unconsciousness.
Obi-Wan engages Vader in a lightsaber duel that ends with Obi-Wan severing Vader's limbs and leaving him for dead on the banks of a lava flow, severely burned.
Sidious finds a barely alive Vader and takes him to Coruscant, where his mutilated body is treated and covered in the black suit first depicted in the original trilogy.
When Vader asks if Padmé is safe, Sidious says that he killed her out of anger, and Vader screams in agony.
At the end of the film, Vader supervises the construction of the first Death Star alongside Sidious and Tarkin (Wayne Pygram).

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Darth Vader's melted helmet appears in The Force Awakens (2015), in which Vader's grandson Kylo Ren (Adam Driver) is seen addressing him, though Vader does not appear in the film.
At one point, his helmet was considered as the film's MacGuffin.
The helmet appears again in The Rise of Skywalker (2019), when Kylo briefly meditates with it, and during the film's first duel between Kylo and Rey (Daisy Ridley), during which it is last seen on Kijimi, which is later destroyed by a Sith Star Destroyer.
The film also reveals that the voice which Ren perceived coming from Vader's helmet in The Force Awakens was generated by Emperor Palpatine.

In The Rise of Skywalker, Anakin makes a vocal cameo, along with other "voices of Jedi Past", where he encourages Rey to "bring back the balance... as [he] did" before she faces a resurrected Palpatine.

===
Other Star Wars films ===


====
The Clone Wars (film) ====
In the 2008 3D animated film The Clone Wars, Yoda (voiced by Tom Kane) assigns Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein) as Anakin's Padawan apprentice, a responsibility Anakin is at first reluctant to accept.
Anakin calls her "Snips" for her "snippy" attitude, while Ahsoka calls him "Skyguy" as a pun on his surname.
After earning Anakin's respect during a dangerous mission, Ahsoka joins him on a quest to rescue Jabba the Hutt's infant son, Rotta.
Her impetuousness both annoys and endears her to her master, and Anakin develops a friendly affection for his apprentice.

====
Rogue One ====
In the first anthology film Rogue One (2016), Darth Vader makes a cameo appearance in which he summons Orson Krennic (Ben Mendelsohn), the Imperial Director of Advanced Weapons Research, to his castle on Mustafar.
He confronts him about his handling of the Death Star project and the destruction of Jedha City, while Krennic asks Vader for an audience with the Emperor regarding the Death Star, which he lost command of to Tarkin.
Vader refuses, ordering him to ensure that the Death Star project has not been compromised.
When Krennic asks him if he would still regain command of the Death Star, Vader uses the Force to choke him, telling him, "Be careful not to choke on your aspirations, Director.
"
At the end of the film, Vader boards the disabled Rebel flagship, the MC75 Star Cruiser Profundity, with a cadre of 501st
Legion troopers and kills several Rebel soldiers as he attempts to recover the plans.
However, the docked blockade runner Tantive IV escapes with the plans, setting up the events of A New Hope.

Darth Vader had a much different role in early versions of the film's story.
Screenwriter Gary Whitta stated that in his initial pitch, Vader would appear on Scarif and slaughter the Rebel blockade there.
In an earlier storyline, Vader would also have killed Krennic for his failure to prevent the Rebels from stealing the Death Star plans.
An image of a deleted scene featuring Vader was revealed in February 2021 by Industrial Light & Magic visual effects animator Hal Hickel, who added that Vader was supposed to have a conversation with Tarkin in that scene.

===
Television series ===


====
Clone Wars (2003–2005) ====
Anakin is a lead character in all three seasons of the Clone Wars micro-series, which takes place shortly after the conclusion of Attack of the Clones.
Anakin becomes a Jedi Knight and is quickly promoted to a General of the Republic's Clone Army, due in part to Palpatine's (voiced by Nick Jameson) influence.
Among other missions, he fights a duel with Dooku's apprentice Asajj Ventress (voiced by Grey DeLisle), helps Obi-Wan (voiced by James Arnold Taylor) capture a Separatist-controlled fortress and rescues Jedi Master Saesee Tiin (voiced by Dee Bradley Baker) during a space battle.
During the third season, Anakin frees a planet's indigenous species from Separatist control and sees a cryptic vision of his future as Darth Vader.
In the series finale, Anakin and Obi-Wan go on a mission to rescue Palpatine from General Grievous, leading to the opening of Revenge of the Sith.

====
The Clone Wars (2008–2014, 2020) ====
Anakin is a lead character in all seasons of The Clone Wars.
As a Jedi Knight, he leads the 501st Legion on missions with both his master Obi-Wan and apprentice Ahsoka Tano throughout the war.
Some of Anakin's actions taken out of concern for Ahsoka violate the Jedi code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her location when she goes missing.
Throughout the series there are several references to Anakin's eventual fall to the dark side, including visions of his future as Darth Vader in the third season, and disillusion with the Jedi Council after they wrongly accuse Ahsoka of bombing the Jedi Temple in the fifth season.
While she is later forgiven after the true culprit is found, she nonetheless chooses to leave the Jedi Order.
Anakin appears as Vader in the final scene of the series finale, some time after Revenge of the Sith.
He investigates the crash site of Ahsoka's Star Destroyer, which collapsed during her battle with her clone troopers after Darth Sidious issued Order 66, turning the clones against the Jedi.
Finding her lightsaber among the wreckage, Vader assumes that his former Padawan has perished and leaves with the lightsaber.

====
Rebels (2014–2018) ====
Darth Vader appears in two episodes of the first season of Star Wars Rebels, which takes place 14 years after The Clone Wars concludes, and serves as the main antagonist of its second season.
Vader leads a squadron of Force-sensitive Imperial Inquisitors who actively search for and kill any remaining Jedi and Force-sensitive children.
In the second-season premiere, Vader orchestrates the murder of Minister Maketh Tua, an Imperial who tried to defect to the rebellion, and confronts the rebel crew of the Ghost.
When he later attacks the fleet of the Phoenix Squadron, Vader discovers that Ahsoka is still alive and has joined the Rebel Alliance, while Ahsoka is overwhelmed when she recognizes Anakin under "a layer of hate" in Darth Vader.
The Emperor orders Vader to dispatch an Inquisitor to capture her.
Later in the season, Ahsoka has a vision in which Anakin blames her for allowing him to fall to the dark side.
In the season finale, Ahsoka duels with her former master inside a Sith Temple, allowing her friends to escape Vader and the temple's destruction.
As the episode concludes, Vader escapes from the temple's ruins.
Vader makes a final voiceless cameo in the late fourth-season episode "A World Between Worlds", in which it is revealed that Ahsoka escaped from her previous duel with Vader by entering a Force-realm.
Shortly afterward, Vader's voice is heard echoing in the void.

====
Forces of Destiny (2017–2018) ====
Anakin Skywalker appears in multiple episodes of the 2D animated online micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny.

====
Obi-Wan Kenobi ====
On December 10, 2020, during a Disney Investor event, it was announced that Hayden Christensen would return as Vader in the upcoming Disney+
streaming series Obi-Wan Kenobi.

===
Canon literature ===
In the first chapter of the novelization of The Phantom Menace, Anakin participates in a podrace through Beggar's Canyon on Tatooine.
This parallels his future son Luke's flights through the same canyon as mentioned in A New Hope.
Star Wars:
Lords of the Sith was one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
In it, Vader and Palpatine find themselves hunted by revolutionaries on the Twi'lek planet Ryloth.

====
Comics ====
In 2015, Marvel released a 25-issue series called Darth Vader (2015–16), written by Kieron Gillen.
It focuses on the Sith lord in the aftermath of the Death Star's destruction, as well as his life after learning about his son's existence, and introduces franchise fan favorite character Doctor Aphra.
This series takes place parallel to the comic book series Star Wars, in which Vader and Luke meet; the two series have a crossover titled Vader Down.
A continuation set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi debuted in 2020, written by Greg Pak.
The first few issues deal with Vader carrying out his revenge on those who concealed Luke; he also visits Padmé's tomb on Naboo and encounters her handmaidens.
The five-issue limited series Obi-Wan & Anakin (2016), written by Charles Soule, depicts the lives of the titular Jedi between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones.
At New York Comic Con 2015, Soule described the story as "pretty unexplored territory".
Between 2017 and 2018, Soule wrote a prequel-era series, also called Darth Vader (sometimes subtitled Dark Lord of the Sith).
It begins immediately after Vader wakes up in his armor at the end of Revenge of the Sith and explores his emotional transformation upon learning of Padmé's death, his adjustment to his mechanical suit, how he creates his red-bladed lightsaber, and his hunting of Jedi in the Inquisitor program (introduced in Rebels).
Its final arc, which deals with the construction of Vader's fortress on Mustafar, implies that Palpatine used the Force to conceive Anakin in utero, as some had theorized that Revenge of the Sith indicates.
A Lucasfilm story group member later clarified that "This is all in Anakin's head".
A five-issue limited series written by Dennis Hopeless, Vader: Dark Visions, was released in 2019.
According to Marvel, the series "sheds new light on the many sides of the galaxy's greatest villain".
===
Virtual reality game ===
In the 2015 Star Wars Celebration, it was announced David S. Goyer was helping to develop a virtual reality game series based on Darth Vader.
As an observer with limited influence, the player is able to walk, pick up, push and open things, and possibly affect the story.
The game, titled Vader Immortal, had three episodes overall, set between Revenge of the Sith and Rogue One; the first became available with the launch of Oculus Quest, while the last episode was released on November 21, 2019.
The game was later ported to the Oculus Rift.
On August 25, 2020, all three episodes were also released on PlayStation VR.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.

====
Books ====
Vader is featured prominently in novels set in the Star Wars universe.
In the 1978 novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye by Alan Dean Foster, Vader meets Luke Skywalker for the first time and engages him in a lightsaber duel that ends with Luke cutting off Vader's arm and Vader falling into a deep pit.
Shadows of the Empire (1996) reveals that Vader is conflicted about trying to turn his son to the dark side of the Force, and knows deep down that there is still some good in himself.

Vader's supposedly indestructible glove is the MacGuffin of the young-reader's book The Glove of Darth Vader (1992).
Anakin Skywalker's redeemed spirit appears in The Truce at Bakura (1993), set a few days after the end of Return of the Jedi.
He appears to Leia, imploring her forgiveness.
Leia condemns Anakin for his crimes and exiles him from her life.
He promises that he will be there for her when she needs him, and disappears.
In Tatooine Ghost (2003), Leia learns to forgive her father after learning about his childhood as a slave and his mother's traumatic death.
In The Unifying Force (2003), Anakin tells his grandson Jacen Solo to "stand firm" in his battle with the Supreme Overlord of the Yuuzhan Vong.

Upon the release of the prequel films, the Expanded Universe grew to include novels about Vader's former life as Anakin Skywalker.
Greg Bear's 2000 novel Rogue Planet and Jude Watson's Jedi Quest series chronicle Anakin's early missions with Obi-Wan, while James Luceno's 2005 novel Labyrinth of Evil, set during the Clone Wars, depicts Anakin battling Separatist commander General Grievous.
In Luceno's Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader (2005), set a few months after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Vader disavows his identity as Skywalker as he systematically pursues and kills the surviving Jedi and cements his position in the Empire.
The novel reveals that Vader plans to eventually overthrow Palpatine and that he betrayed the Jedi because he resented their supposed failure to recognize his power.

In the Dark Nest trilogy (2005), Luke and Leia uncover old recordings of their parents in R2-D2's memory drive; for the first time, they see their own birth and their mother's death, as well as their father's corruption to the dark side.
In Bloodlines (2006), Han and Leia's son Jacen—who has turned to the dark side—uses the Force to envision Vader slaughtering the children at the Jedi Temple.

Vader also appears in a series of tongue-in-cheek children's books by Jeffrey Brown.
In Brown's series, a hapless Vader sets out to be a father to a young Luke and Leia, with some scenes portraying light-hearted versions of their darker film counterparts.
For example, one scene shows Vader, Luke and Leia at the carbonite freezing chamber on Bespin, with Vader pronouncing the freezer adequate for making ice cream.

====
Comics ====
Vader appears in several comic books such as Marvel Comics' Star Wars (1977–1986).
In Dark Empire II, he is revealed to have had a castle on the planet Vjun.
Anakin Skywalker is a major character in Dark Horse Comics' Star Wars: Republic series (1998–2006).
In Boba Fett: Enemy of the Empire (1999), Vader hires Fett a few years before the events of A New Hope.
In Vader's Quest (1999), set soon after A New Hope, the dark lord encounters Luke for the first time.
Star Wars: Empire (2002–2005) spans from about a year before A New Hope to several months afterwards.
Anakin and Vader appear in the non-canonical Star Wars Tales (1999–2005); in the story Resurrection, Darth Maul is resurrected and faces Vader in battle.
Vader-centric comics released and set just after Revenge of the Sith include Dark Times (2006–2013), Darth Vader and the Lost Command (2011), Darth Vader and the Ghost Prison (2012), and Darth Vader and the Cry of Shadows (2013–14).

===
Video games ===
Darth Vader and Anakin Skywalker have appeared in a number of Star Wars since the earliest days of the franchise, though rarely as a playable character.
Vader plays a central role in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed (2008), where he is the playable character for the first level of the game.
He also appears in the sequel Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II as the final boss.
Darth Vader has also appeared in non-Star Wars video games as a guest character, for example Soulcalibur IV (2008).

Most recently, Vader makes a cameo appearance in the final mission of Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, after the main antagonist, the Second Sister, is defeated.
After Vader kills her for her failure to retrieve a Jedi Holocron, the protagonist, Padawan Cal Kestis, must escape from Vader, who attempts to get the Holocron in his possession.
Cal is ultimately able to escape from Vader's grasp with the help of his allies.

===
Other ===
In the Star Wars Holiday Special, a television special broadcast by CBS in 1978, features a brief appearance by Darth Vader, who appears on-screen speaking with Imperial officer "Chief Bast" in footage cut from the original 1977 film.
The sequence is dubbed with new dialogue, performed by James Earl Jones.
In the story, Vader colludes with Boba Fett to entrap the Rebels.
Darth Vader features in the 1981 radio drama adaptation of Star Wars, voiced by the actor Brock Peters.
Vader makes his first appearance on the planet Ralltiir, where he treats Princess Leia with suspicion.
In later extended scenes, he is heard interrogating and torturing Leia on board his Star Destroyer and aboard the Death Star.
Vader appears in Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue, where he is once again voiced by Jones.
An action figure of Vader comes to life alongside RoboCop and Jurassic Park toys in The Indian in the Cupboard (1995).
Vader also had a brief cameo in Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009), in which he and Oscar the Grouch try unsuccessfully to join the army formed by Ivan the Terrible, Napoleon and Al Capone.

==
Cultural impact ==
In 1977, a writer for New Journal and Guide criticized the lack of racial diversity in the original Star Wars film, pointing out that "the force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the voice of a black man."
George Lucas felt hurt at such accusations.
Psychiatrists have considered Vader to be a useful example for explaining borderline personality disorder to medical students.
Anakin's origin story in The Phantom Menace has been compared to signifiers of African American racial identity, particularly his being a slave, and his dissatisfaction with his life has been compared to Siddartha's before he became Gautama Buddha.
A Mexican church advised Christians against seeing The Phantom Menace because it portrays Anakin as a Christ figure.

Many films and television series have paid homage to Darth Vader.
The 1982 movie Cosmic Princess, compiled from parts of Space: 1999 episodes, contains several Star Wars references including a character named "Vader".
Marty McFly in Back to the Future (1985), dressed in a radiation suit, calls himself "Darth Vader from the planet Vulcan" in one scene.
Vader is parodied as "Dark Helmet" (Rick Moranis) in the Star Wars parody Spaceballs (1987).
A primary antagonist in Final Fantasy IV (1991) was stated by game creator Takashi Tokita to be based on Vader.
In Chasing Amy (1997), Hooper X (Dwight Ewell) speaks at a comic book convention about Darth Vader being a metaphor for how poorly the science fiction genre treats Black people; he is especially offended that Vader, the "Blackest brother in the galaxy", reveals himself to be a "feeble, crusty old white man" at the end of Return of the Jedi.
Vader, especially his role as a father, is parodied as Emperor Zurg in Toy Story 2.
The character of Dark Mayhem in The Thundermans is also a parody of Vader, especially in his original depiction.
The Warner Bros. animated show
Loonatics Unleashed has a Sylvester the Cat-type character named Sylth Vester, a play on Vader and his name.

The slime-mold beetle Agathidium vaderi is named after Vader, as is the louse Ricinus vaderi.
Several buildings across the globe are regularly compared to him.
A grotesque of Darth Vader looms over the east face of the Washington National Cathedral's northwest tower.
During the 2007–08 NHL season, Ottawa Senators goaltender Martin Gerber performed so well in an all-black mask that fans endearingly termed him "Darth Gerber".
Many commentators and comedians have also evoked Vader's visage to satirize politicians and other public figures, and several American political figures have been unflatteringly compared to the character.
In response to Ronald Reagan's proposed Strategic Defense Initiative (dubbed "Star Wars" by his political opponents), German news magazine Der Spiegel portrayed the president wearing Vader's helmet on its cover in 1984.
In 2005, Al Gore referred to Tele-Communications Inc.'s John C. Malone as the "Darth Vader of cable", and political strategist Lee Atwater was known by his political enemies as "the Darth Vader of the Republican Party".
Native American artist Bunky Echohawk portrayed General George Armstrong Custer as Vader in his painting Darth Custer.
In 2015, a statue of Vladimir Lenin in Odessa, Ukraine, was converted into one of Vader due to a law on decommunization.
In 2006, while discussing the war on terror, US Vice President Dick Cheney stated, "I suppose, sometimes, people look at my demeanor and say, 'Well, he's the Darth Vader of the administration.'"

In January 2007, Jon Stewart put on a Vader helmet to address Cheney as a "kindred spirit" on The Daily Show.
Cheney's wife, Lynne, presented Stewart with a Darth Vader action figure on her October 2007 appearance on the show.
Both Stewart and Stephen Colbert have occasionally referred to Cheney as "Darth Cheney".
In the satirical cartoon show Lil' Bush, Cheney's father is portrayed as Vader.
At a presidential campaign event in September 2007, Hillary Clinton also referred to Cheney as Vader.
At the 2008 Washington Radio and Television Correspondents' Association Dinner, Cheney joked that his wife told him that the Vader comparison "humanizes" him.
In 2009, George Lucas stated that Cheney is more akin to Palpatine, and that a better stand-in for Vader would be George W. Bush.
An issue of Newsweek referenced this quote, and compared Bush and Cheney to Vader and Palpatine, respectively, in a satirical article comparing politicians to various Star Wars and Star Trek characters.
In 2010, IGN ranked Darth Vader 25th in the "Top 100 Videogame Villains".
In Ukraine, the Internet Party of Ukraine regularly lets people named Darth Vader take part in elections.
In 2019, an original Vader helmet from The Empire Strikes Back was sold for $900,000 in an online auction.
On December 2, 2020, a figurine of Darth Vader appeared on the plinth where the statue of Edward Colston once stood in Bristol, United Kingdom, in what was seen as a tribute to the actor David Prowse, who died on November 29, 2020.

==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Darth Vader in the StarWars.com Databank
Anakin Skywalker in the StarWars.com Databank
Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Darth Vader on IMDb
"Darth Vader".
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Jyn Erso is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed by English actress Felicity Jones in the 2016 film Rogue One.
Jyn aids the Rebel Alliance in a desperate attempt to steal the plans to the Death Star, a powerful weapon possessed by the Empire with enough power to destroy an entire planet.
The character was introduced as a child in the 2016 prequel novel Catalyst by James Luceno.

==
Character ==


===
Origins ===
Industrial Light & Magic chief creative officer John Knoll, credited for the story of Rogue One, told Vanity Fair in 2016 that he conceived the plot of the film while working as a visual effects supervisor on the 2005 film Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
Hearing about the development of a live-action Star Wars television series, he conceived a story, inspired by a plot point mentioned in the opening crawl of the original 1977 film Star Wars, which would eventually become Rogue One.
Knoll envisioned Jyn as a female protagonist who could be an inspiration for his daughters.
The casting of Felicity Jones in the role of Jyn was announced on March 12, 2015.

===
Portrayal ===
In January 2015, The Hollywood Reporter stated that numerous actresses, including Tatiana Maslany, Rooney Mara, and Felicity Jones were being tested for the lead role in Rogue One, the first stand-alone Star Wars film.
In February 2015, it was reported that Jones was in final talks to star in the film, and her official casting was announced in March 2015.

=== Description ===
Jyn is the daughter of Galen Erso, a scientist forced by the Empire to develop their Death Star superweapon.
Young Jyn escapes when Galen is captured and his wife Lyra is killed by Imperial forces.
She grows up under the watch of "extremist militant" Saw Gerrera, who also mentors and trains her in military combat.
IGN's Eric Goldman wrote that she has "put up a brash, stern wall to protect herself, thanks to a traumatic childhood".
Chris Barsanti of PopMatters added that Jyn's childhood tragedy leaves her "just cynical and bereft enough to make her hold out a respectable length of time before agreeing to assist the Rebel Alliance".
Writing for Vanity Fair, Hilary Busis suggested that with Jyn's backstory, the film was drawing on "the Star Wars franchise's greatest natural resource: daddy issues".
The Daily Telegraph described Jyn as "a roguish, Han Solo-style heroine", and Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter called the character "a female warrior driven by destiny to take on the mightiest power in the galaxy".
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly described Jyn as a "fierce fighter" and "rallying leader".
A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times that in Rogue One, "Jyn's idealistic Jedi-ish tendencies are at first checked by a hint of Bogart-esque cynicism.
She's suspicious of the rebels and contemptuous of the Empire, and has complicated feelings about Saw Gerrera".
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called Jyn "a born rebel", and Richard Brody of The New Yorker noted that "though Jyn had never exhibited any spirit of revolt", coming together with Gerrera and the rebels results in "Jyn's transition from an apolitical survivor to an active rebel".

== Appearances ==


===
Novels ===
Jyn is introduced as a child in the prequel novel Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel by James Luceno, published in November 2016.
In the novel, Republic Lieutenant Commander Orson Krennic saves his old friend Galen Erso and his family from a coup, and enlists the scientist to develop energy technology using kyber crystals that would ostensibly be applied to altruistic purposes.
The research is actually necessary for the successful construction of Emperor Palpatine's secret superweapon, the Death Star.
Galen and his wife Lyra begin to suspect Krennic's ulterior motives, and plot to free themselves and their daughter Jyn from his grasp.
Jyn appears as the main character in the novel Rebel Rising by Beth Revis.
This novel takes place between the prologue and main narrative of Rogue One.

She also appears in the novelization of Rogue One by Alexander Freed.
Saw Gerrera appears with an eleven-year-old Jyn Erso in the novelization of the film Solo:
A Star Wars Story.

===
Film ===


====
Rogue One ====
Rogue One was released in December 2016, with Felicity Jones in the role of Jyn.
In the film, scientist Galen Erso (Mads Mikkelsen) is pressed into the service of the Empire against his will.
When he is captured and his wife Lyra (Valene Kane) is killed, their young daughter Jyn escapes and hides in the bunker.
She is later rescued by a Rebel extremist named Saw Gerrera (Forest Whitaker) who cared for her after Galen's capture.

Fifteen years later, Jyn is being held in Imperial custody on several criminal charges, but the Rebel Alliance frees her during a prisoner transport on the planet Wobani.
They seek her help in contacting Saw Gerrera and persuading him to turn over information he has received about a powerful new weapon being developed by the Empire.
Accompanied by Rebel intelligence operative Cassian Andor (Diego Luna) and the reprogrammed Imperial enforcer droid K-2SO (Alan Tudyk), Jyn travels to the desert moon Jedha and reconnects with Saw, who shows her a holographic message that Galen recorded for her.
Galen explains that he has secretly given the Imperial superweapon, called the Death Star, a fatal flaw that can be exploited to destroy it.
Jyn and her comrades, joined by the defecting Imperial pilot who brought the message, Bodhi Rook (Riz Ahmed), and a pair of local warriors, flee as the Empire's Death Star, an armored battle station the size of a small moon, destroys Jedha City.

They track Galen to his research facility on Eadu, where he and Jyn are briefly reunited just before he dies in a Rebel attack.
Galvanized
, Jyn proposes a mission to steal the schematics for the Death Star, stored on the planet Scarif, but the council of Rebel leaders does not support it.
Nevertheless, Jyn and a team of Rebel volunteers sneak away under the callsign "Rogue One" to infiltrate the Imperial facility on Scarif.
She and Andor succeed in stealing and transmitting the plans, but the Death Star fires on the planet near the base in a too-late effort to stop them.
Jyn and Cassian embrace each other as they are engulfed by a fireball and killed.

Chris Barsanti of PopMatters noted that "Jyn's backstory also helps answer a question that's plagued fans ever since 1977: why did the Empire spend all that time and all those resources building a moon-sized space station only to leave one rather glaring and easily exploited vulnerability?"
IndieWire's David Ehrlich suggested that the film "is ultimately just a glorified excuse to retcon some sense into one of the silliest things about the original."
===
Animated series ===


====
Forces of Destiny ====
Jyn is also featured in Star Wars Forces of Destiny, an animated web series focusing on female heroes including Princess Leia and Ahsoka Tano.
In the episode "The Stranger", Jyn witnesses a little girl's cat being confiscated by stormtroopers.
Jyn intervenes, snatching the pet and leading the pursuing stormtroopers to fall into drain, and then returns the cat to the girl.

Jyn reappears in the series in the episode, "Accidental Allies," where she encounters Sabine Wren from Star Wars Rebels.

During the episode, Jyn picks up a holo-map stolen by Sabine that contains crucial intelligence, but is forced to flee when stormtroopers mistake Jyn as the actual thief.

When Sabine realizes she has lost the map, she helps Jyn evade the stormtroopers and shares her own experience of working alone to persuade Jyn to give her the map.

After some reflection, Jyn agrees and the women part ways.
Jyn reappears once more in the episode "Jyn's Trade", where she helps a young thief learn a valuable life lesson.
She was voiced by Felicity Jones in the first season and Helen Sadler in the second season.

===
Related works and merchandising ===
Jyn is a playable character in the 2015 action shooter video game Star Wars Battlefront, as part of the 2016 downloadable content (DLC) Rogue One:
Scarif expansion pack.
She is voiced by Helen Sadler.
Jyn also appears as a character in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.

== Reception ==
A. O. Scott of The New York Times wrote, "Felicity Jones is a fine addition to the Star Wars tradition of tough-minded, quick-thinking heroines."
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian noted that "Jones is in the tousled-yet-game tradition of Star Wars female leads, like Carrie Fisher or Daisy Ridley: well-born but determined, with a sense of purpose befitting an heiress, if not a princess."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called Jones "smashing" and her Jyn "a female warrior to rank with the great ones", and Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times praised Jones for her "sympathetic ferocity" in the role.
IndieWire's David Ehrlich compared Jyn to Rey (Ridley) from The Force Awakens, and described her as "indistinguishable from the bland and plucky heroine of Episode VII save for her
privileged disillusionment".
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly called Jyn "the kind role model
any moviegoing parent would want to expose their daughters (and sons) to", adding that "Jones plays her with a fiery warmth that turns her into more than just a pawn piece going through the larger storytelling paces.
She makes her human."
Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote that "Jones presents a convincing, if monotonously self-serious, heroine", noting the actress' physical resemblance to Ridley and speculating that their characters could be related.
The Hollywood Reporter's Graeme McMillan criticized the character for her passive role in the film's plot, calling her "a void where the movie's heart should live".
McMillan speculated that the character was a possible "casualty" of Rogue One's reshoots.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Jyn Erso in the StarWars.com Databank
Jyn Erso on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Jyn Erso on IMDb
K-2SO (also referred to as K2 or Kay-Tuesso)
is a droid character in the Star Wars franchise, first appearing in the 2016 film Rogue One.
He is a CGI character voiced and performed through motion capture by Alan Tudyk.
In the film, K-2SO is a reprogrammed Imperial security droid and the co-pilot of Cassian Andor.

==
Character ==


===
Development ===
K-2SO was part of the initial line-up of spies in John Knoll's pitch for Rogue One, as an Imperial protocol droid.
Designs for the character's look focused on giving him both a unique silhouette as well as keeping him in tune with the Imperial aesthetic from A New Hope.
References of Imperial designs were used, and the character's chest plate draws on the armor of an AT-AT commander in The Empire Strikes Back.
Unused designs by Ralph McQuarrie for droids and stormtrooper helmets would influence his eventual headshape.
Originally designed as a "black protocol droid", further story development and drafts that "accentuated" his ties to the Empire turned K-2SO into an Imperial security droid.
His laid back personality became a "visually amusing" contrast to his "towering, monolithic form".
Director Gareth Edwards wanted K-2SO to be "appealing" despite his figure, and designs continued to reflect elements of his personality with his form; his stoop is one example, showing his "casual kind of personality".

===
Portrayal ===
K-2SO is voiced and portrayed via motion capture by Alan Tudyk.
Tudyk initially turned down the role as he felt he would be busy with Con Man, a webseries he had crowdfunded.
The droid's height meant Tudyk had to wear 13 in (33 cm) tall stilts to perform the character, which he had difficulty taking off and thus would take to the bathroom.
Tudyk called the stiltwalking the most challenging part of playing the droid, finding further difficulty in walking over things like sand and running.
K-2, when rendered, had a slightly hunched over look.
So, in order to prevent his own slouch from being added to the character, Tudyk had to force himself to stand up straight.
With K-2SO having an inanimate face, Tudyk tried to keep "emotion" in his body and his movement.
The actor worked with a mask teacher, Orlando Pabotoy.
Tudyk auditioned with three different accents: an American accent, a mid-Atlantic accent, and an English accent.
The English accent was chosen due to the character's Imperial roots, and as he was a droid Tudyk gave him a more formal "proper" accent.
Tudyk improvised or altered many of K-2SO's lines.
However, he was concerned about making the character an "outlier in his own movie", similar to Jar Jar Binks, hoping to keep K-2SO feeling like "part of the world".
Industrial Light & Magic used a modified Unreal Engine 4 in a scene to render the droid in real-time while filming.
This was the first time they had been able to "work with CGI in the moment".

===
Description ===
K-2SO is a KX-series security droid originally created by the Empire, reprogrammed by pilot Cassian Andor to serve the Rebel Alliance.
He is co-pilot and "sidekick" to Andor, and lends comic relief to the film.
Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post noted K-2SO's "angular, spidery limbed" appearance, calling him "snippily sarcastic".
IGN's Eric Goldman described the droid as "C-3PO's dark, amped up counterpoint.
Like Threepio, he has a knack for giving troubling statistics, but instead of speaking with a worried attitude, K-2SO ... has more of a resigned and often amusingly cruel and blunt approach.
"
Similarly, Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly called the character "C3PO's more sarcastic, less fey cousin."
Todd McCarthy described K-2SO as "a more useful, resourceful and sarcastic version of C-3PO" in The Hollywood Reporter.
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian compared the character to the titular robot from Ted Hughes' novel The Iron Man, writing:
K-2SO is hulking and dark, more like Ted Hughes's Iron Man in miniature, but with a droll way of objecting to orders; his style in backtalk involves a nicely timed deferred punchline.
The arms are long, resulting in an almost knuckle-dragging, simian way of walking.
In his taciturn way, K-2SO could almost be a quasi-Chewie presence.

==
Appearances ==


===
Rogue One ===
K-2SO, portrayed by Tudyk, appears in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, which was released in December 2016.
In the film, he is the second-in-command of Cassian Andor and rescues Jyn Erso from an Imperial labor camp on Wobani.
The three travel to Jedha to obtain a message from scientist Galen Erso, the father of Jyn.
K-2SO is told to stay on the ship, but later helps the rebels fight off stormtroopers and makes their escape from Jedha City as it is being destroyed by the Death Star.
Later, he joins a group of Rebel volunteers to acquire the Death Star plans on Scarif.
Accompanied by a disguised Cassian and Jyn, K-2SO infiltrates the planet's Imperial base and stays in the control room while Andor and Erso search for the schematics in the data vault.
Though he manages to fend off some attacking stormtroopers, K-2SO succumbs to multiple shots, but not before destroying the control panel of the vault door, locking the closed door.
His sacrifice would prevent Jyn and Cassian from being killed by stormtroopers and allow them to successfully steal the plans.
According to Tudyk, K-2SO had a different death in the original ending of Rogue One.
The character was to be shot and killed by Orson Krennic, the main villain of the film, but the writers thought that K-2SO deserved a more heroic demise to be more suitable for him.

===
Related works and merchandising ===
K-2SO appears in the novelization of Rogue One by Alexander Freed.
Tudyk reprises the role in the short film "The Good Stuff!"
during the first episode of LEGO Star Wars: All Stars.
A one-shot comic book, Star Wars: Rogue One – Cassian and K-2SO, was released in August 2017.
Set some time before the events of Rogue One, it tells the story of how Cassian Andor and K-2SO first met.

K-2SO also appears in Star Wars: Secrets of the Empire, a virtual reality experience produced by ILMxLAB and The VOID for Disneyland Resort; Alan Tudyk reprises his role as K-2SO, who accompanies the player throughout the experience.
He is also a major character in the junior novel
The Mighty Chewbacca in the Forest of Fear!
== Reception ==
Tudyk has been widely praised in the role.
Recounting fan reaction on Twitter, Megan McCluskey wrote for Time that "there seems to be one aspect of the standalone Star Wars story that the majority of viewers have agreed on: the excellence of K-2SO.
"
Justin Chang of Los Angeles Times dubbed the character "the requisite scene stealer" of the film, and A. O. Scott of The New York Times praised "the dry, sarcastic tones of the indispensable Alan Tudyk."
The Hollywood Reporter's Todd McCarthy called K-2SO the film's "most entertaining" character, complimenting his design and Tudyk's "droll wit and exquisite timing".
IGN's Eric Goldman praised the cast of the film but noted, "it's Tudyk's K-2SO who's often the standout", adding that the actor's performance gives the character "a sympathetic 'soul' (if such a word is appropriate for a droid)".
Goldman also wrote that "K-2SO looks so good
, it's easy to forget he's a CGI character".
The Washington Post's Michael Cavna praised K-2SO, calling him "a droid for social-media times ... freshly armed with comedic snark."
Ann Hornaday, also of The Washington Post, wrote that the character "provides precious comic relief in a film that is otherwise grim and unsmiling".
Richard Brody of The New Yorker described the droid as "the one character with any inner identity ... and the only performance with any flair at all".
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone and IndieWire's David Ehrlich dubbed K-2SO the best of the film's new characters, with Travers calling the robot "hilarious" and Ehrlich describing him as "a droll bot with killer comic timing
, he's as delightful and alive as any animated character you could find in a Disney film".

==
References ==


===
Sources ===
Kushins, Josh (2016).
The Art of Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story.
New York: Abrams.
ISBN 978-1-4197-2225-7.
==
External links ==
K-2SO in the StarWars.com Databank
K-2SO on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
K-2SO on IMDb
