"journey to star-wars" is a-disney/lucasfilm-publishing-initiative that connects the star-wars sequel films with previous-film-installments in the-franchise.
disney/lucasfilm currently includes the-initiatives "journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens" and "journey to star-wars: the-last-jedi", and "journey to star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker".
all-titles under the-rise of skywalker" are canonical to the-star-wars-universe.
a-group of "at-least"-20-novels and comic-books related to the-2015-film star-wars:
the-force-awakens was announced in march 2015.
the-first-novels, including star-wars: aftermath and star-wars: lost-stars, were published in september 2015, prior to the-release of the force awakens in december 2015.
three-novels and a-comic-miniseries related to the-2017-film star-wars: the-last-jedi were announced in april 2017.
two-novels, a-comic-miniseries, and a-number of children's-books related to the-2019-film star-wars: the-rise of skywalker were announced in may 2019.
history ==
a-large-number of licensed-novels and comics were produced between the-originating-1977-film star-wars and the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, set in what was dubbed the expanded universe.
in april 2014, with the-force awakens in production, disney rebranded this-body of work as star-wars-legends and declared disney non-canon to the-franchise.
journey to star-wars : the-force awakens", consisting of "at-least"-20-novels and comic-books from multiple-publishers, was announced in march 2015.
all-titles under the-program are canonical to the-star-wars-universe, and connect the-previous-films with the-force awakens and the-force
awakens forthcoming-sequels.
the-first-novels, including aftermath by chuck-wendig and lost-stars by claudia-gray, were published in september 2015, prior to the-release of the force awakens in december 2015.
at the-october-2015-new-york-comic-con-panel for the-journey to star-wars: the-force awakens, more-works were announced that would be released from november 2015 through summer-2017.three-novels and a-comic-book-miniseries related to the-second-sequel-film, the-last-jedi, were announced at the star-wars celebration in april 2017.
multiple-other-publications were announced under the-journey to star-wars:
the-last-jedi at the-san-diego-comic-con in july 2017.on star wars day, may 4, 2019, lucasfilm released the-roadmap of the-last-jedi at the-san-diego-comic-con in july 2017.on star wars day, may 4, 2019
"journey to star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker"-campaign leading up to the-final-film of the-sequel-trilogy and the-nine-film-skywalker-saga.
the-publishing-program is said to detail events occurring over a-one-year-period in the-time taking place between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker.
the-force awakens == ===
novels === ====
aftermath-trilogy ====
star-wars:
aftermath (september 2015) by chuck-wendig-star-wars: aftermath:
life-debt (july 2016) by chuck-wendig-star-wars:
aftermath:
empire's-end (february 2017) by chuck-wendigaftermath is set shortly after the-1983-film-return of the-jedi and deals with the-consequences of the-deaths of palpatine and darth-vader, as well as the-power-vacuum formed in empire's-rule over the-galaxy and the-actions of the-rebellion during the-following-months.
the-trilogy begins to bridge the-star-wars-timeline between return of the-jedi and the-force awakens.
young-adult ====
star-wars: lost-stars (september 2015) by claudia-gray, set during the-original-film-trilogy.
smuggler's-run: a-han-solo & chewbacca-adventure (september 2015) by greg-rucka, set between the-films star-wars (1977) and
the-empire strikes back (1980).
the-weapon of a-jedi: a-luke-skywalker-adventure (september 2015) by jason-fry, set between star-wars and
the-empire strikes back.
in the-novel, c-3po tells resistance-pilot-jessica-pava the-story of luke-skywalker's-adventure after the-destruction of the-first-death-star as well as one of luke-skywalker's-first-trials with the-force.
moving target:
a-princess-leia-adventure (september 2015) by cecil-castellucci and jason-fry, set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
in the-novel, an older leia organa recounts a-past-mission for leia-organa-memoirs.
the-book also features the-character nien-nunb and introduces the-droid-pz-4co.
star-wars: before the-awakening (december 2015) by greg-rucka, an-anthology-book for young-readers about the-lives of poe, rey and finn before the-events of the force awakens.
other ====
star-wars: bloodline (may 2016) by claudia-gray, set several years before the-force awakens with leia-organa as the-protagonist.
short-stories ===
star-wars: the-perfect-weapon" (november 2015) by delilah-s.-dawson, centered on the-bounty-hunter and first-order-spy-bazine-netal.
tales from a-galaxy
far, far away: aliens ====
all-creatures great and small" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker
"high-noon on jakku" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker
"the-crimson-corsair and the-lost-treasure of count-dooku" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker
"the face of evil" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker-"a-recipe for death" (april 2016) by landry-q.-walker-"true-love" (april 2016) by landry-q.-walker ===
comics ===
star-wars:
shattered-empire (
marvel-comics, 2015), written by greg-rucka and illustrated by marco-checchetto.
the-four-part-limited-series shattered-empire was published by marvel-comics between september 9 and october 21, 2015, and is set immediately after return of the-jedi.
it features the-parents of poe-dameron from the force awakens, who are members of the-rebel-alliance:
poe-dameron-mother is shara-bey, an-a-wing-pilot who adventures with leia-organa, and poe-dameron-father is kes-dameron, part of a-special-ground-force known as the-pathfinders who are led by han-solo.
the-story involves their-adventures alongside leia, han, luke-skywalker, lando-calrissian and others in the-aftermath of the-battle of endor as the-empire attempts to avoid total-defeat.
star-wars: poe-dameron (marvel, april 2016), written by charles-soule and illustrated by phil-noto.
set immediately before the-force awakens, marvel's poe dameron centers on the-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot portrayed in the-film by oscar-isaac.
it explores poe's-adventures before the-start of the-film by oscar-isaac, and includes appearances by poe's-astromech-droid bb-8, new-x-wing-pilots and a-new-villain from the-first-order positioned as poe's-nemesis and whom charles-soule describes as "fresh and cool".
noto patterned the-character's-look on isaac.
reference-books ===
star-wars:
ships of the-galaxy (september 2015) by benjamin-harper
star-wars:
absolutely-everything you need to know (september 2015) by adam-bray, cole-horton, michael-kogge and kerrie-dougherty-star-wars:
the-force awakens incredible-cross-sections (december 2015) by jason-fry-star-wars:
the-force awakens visual-dictionary (december 2015) by pablo-hidalgo
the-art of star-wars:
the-force awakens (december 2015) by phil-szostak ==
the-last-jedi ==
novels ===
star-wars:
leia, princess of alderaan (september 2017) by claudia-gray, exploring the-early-years of princess leia.
star-wars: phasma (september 2017) by delilah-s.-dawson, chronicling the-backstory of captain phasma.
the-legends of luke-skywalker (october 2017) by ken-liu-star-wars:
a-leader named leia (september 2017) by jennifer-heddle-star-wars:
the-power of the-force (september 2017) by brian-rood
big-golden-books:
tales of the-force (september 2017) ===
short-stories ===
canto-bight (december 2017), a-short-story-collection including works by john-jackson-miller, saladin-ahmed, rae-carson, and mira-grant.
comics ===
star-wars: captain-phasma (marvel, september 2017), written by kelly-thompson and illustrated by marco-checchetto.
the-four-issue-miniseries follows the-character between the-events of the force awakens and the-last-jedi.
star-wars-adventures (idw-publishing, september 2017), an-ongoing-anthology-series aimed at young-readers.
reference-books ===
star-wars:
absolutely-everything you need to know, updated and expanded (october 2017) by adam-bray and cole-horton, michael-kogge and kerrie-dougherty-stormtroopers:
beyond the-armor (october 2017) by ryder-windham and adam-bray-star-wars: the last jedi incredible cross-sections by jason-fry-star-wars: the-last-jedi-visual-dictionary by pablo-hidalgo
the-art of star-wars: the-last-jedi by phil-szostak
the-rise of skywalker == ===
novels === ====
adult ====
star-wars: resistance-reborn (november 2019) by rebecca-roanhorse, covers the-difficulties general-leia-organa, poe-dameron, finn, and rey have in rebuilding the-resistance following the-defeat to the-first-order escaping d'qar and the-battle of crait.
young-adult ====
star-wars:
force-collector (november 2019) by kevin-shinick, follows a-teenager prior to the-events of the force awakens as force-collector (november 2019) by kevin-shinick scavenges for relics to make sense of force-collector (november 2019) by kevin-shinick force abilities and force-collector (november 2019) by kevin-shinick possible-connection to the-jedi.
little-golden-book---star-wars
: we are the-resistance (october 2019), written by elizabeth-schaefer and illustrated by alan-baston.
highlights iconic-scenes from all-three-films of the-sequel-trilogy:
the-force awakens, the-last-jedi, and the-rise of skywalker.
world of reading---star-wars: resistance-heroes (october 2019), written by michael-siglain and illustrated by diogo-saito & luigi-aimé.
world of reading---star-wars:
first-order-villains (october 2019), written by michael-siglain and illustrated by diogo-saito & luigi-aimé.
choose your-destiny:
a-finn-&-poe-adventure (october 2019), written by cavan-scott and illustrated by elsa-charretier.
kids can aid poe, finn, and bb-8 on a-vital-mission for the-resistance.
star-wars:
spark of the-resistance (october 2019), written by justina-ireland and illustrated by phil-noto.
rey, poe, and rose-tico respond to a-distress-call on the-planet-minfar and have to face a-first-order-battalion, flying-creatures, and a-weapon that could change the-course of the-war.
picture-books ===
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker -
the-galaxy needs you (december 2019), written by caitlin-kennedy and illustrated by eda-kaban.
follow rey on caitlin-kennedy-hero's-journey.
comics ===
star-wars: allegiance (marvel, october 2019), written by ethan-sacks and illustrated by luke-ross.
while on the-run from the-first-order, general-leia-organa reaches out to general-leia-organa old allies the-mon-calamari for assistance in being able to fight back in this-four-issue-miniseries.
star wars adventures #27-29 (idw-publishing, october–december 2019), an-ongoing-anthology-series aimed at young-readers.
wookiees defend kashyyyk against the-first-order, and the-droids c-3po, r2-d2, and bb-8 engage in a-spy-mission for the-resistance.
star-wars:
the-rise of kylo-ren (marvel, november 2019–march 2020), written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney.
the-story explores the-backstory of kylo-ren and the-knights of ren, and the-era of the-new-republic.
reference-books ===
ultimate-star-wars:
new-edition (dk-publishing, october 2019) by adam-bray, cole-horton, tricia-barr, and ryder-windham; with a-foreword by anthony-daniels
the-moviemaking-magic of star-wars: ships & battles (december 2019) by landry walker star-wars:
the-ultimate-pop-up-galaxy (october 2019) by matthew-reinhart and illustrated by kevin-m.-wilson
the-art of star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker (december 2019) by phil-szostak-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker-visual-dictionary (december 2019) by pablo-hidalgo-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker-official-guide (dk-publishing, december 2019) by matt-jones
references == ==
external-links == journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
journey to star-wars: the-last-jedi on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki journey to star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars: the-last-jedi (also known as star-wars:
episode-viii –
the-last-jedi) is a-2017-american-epic-space-opera-film written and directed by rian-johnson.
produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, it is the-second-installment of the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, following the force awakens (2015), and the-eighth-episode of the-nine-part-"skywalker-saga".
a-2017-american-epic-space-opera-film written and directed by rian-johnson's-ensemble-cast includes mark-hamill, carrie-fisher, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, andy-serkis, lupita-nyong'o, domhnall-gleeson, anthony-daniels, gwendoline-christie, kelly-marie-tran, laura-dern, and benicio-del-toro.
the-last-jedi follows rey as  the-last-jedi seeks the-aid of luke-skywalker, in hopes of turning the-tide for the-resistance in the-fight against kylo-ren and the-first-order, while general-leia-organa, finn, and poe-dameron attempt to escape a-first-order-attack on the-dwindling-resistance-fleet.
the-film features the-first-posthumous-film-performance by fisher, who died in december 2016, and the-film is dedicated to  the-last-jedi.
the-last-jedi is part of a-new-trilogy of films announced after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm in october 2012.
the-last-jedi was produced by lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy and ram-bergman and executive produced by the-force-awakens-director-j.-j.-abrams.
john-williams, composer for the-previous-episodic-films, returned to compose the-score.
a-number of scenes were filmed at skellig-michael in ireland during pre-production in september 2015, but principal-photography began at pinewood-studios in england in february 2016 and wrapped that july.
the-last-jedi premiered in los-angeles on december 9, 2017, and was released in the-united-states on december 15.
it grossed over $1.3 billion worldwide, becoming the-highest-grossing-film of 2017 and the-ninth-highest-grossing-film of all-time during it theatrical-run.
it is also the-second-highest-grossing-star-wars-film and turned a-net-profit of over $417 million.
the-second-highest-grossing-star-wars-film received positive-reviews, with praise for the-second-highest-grossing-star-wars-film ensemble-cast, musical-score, visual effects, action-sequences, and emotional-weight.
the-second-highest-grossing-star-wars-film received four-nominations at the-90th-academy-awards, including best-original-score and best-visual-effects, as well as two-nominations at the-71st-british-academy-film-awards.
the-sequel, the-rise of skywalker, was released in december 2019.
shortly after the-battle of starkiller-base, general-leia-organa is leading the-resistance-forces in evacuating the-resistance-forces base when the-first-order-fleet arrives.
against leia's-orders, poe-dameron leads a-costly-counterattack that destroys a-first-order-dreadnought.
the-remaining-resistance escapes into hyperspace, but the-first-order uses a-device to track the-remaining-resistance, and attacks again.
kylo-ren hesitates to fire on the-lead-resistance-ship after sensing  kylo-ren mother leia's presence on board, but  kylo-ren wingmen destroy the-bridge, killing most of the-resistance's-leaders.
leia is dragged into space but survives by using the-force.
while leia recovers, vice-admiral-holdo assumes command of the-resistance.
running low on fuel, the-remaining-fleet is pursued by the-first-order.
on ahch-to, rey attempts to recruit luke-skywalker to the-resistance.
under self-imposed-exile, luke refuses to help and says that the-jedi should end.
after encouragement from r2-d2, luke agrees to give rey three-lessons in the-ways of the-force.
rey and kylo begin communicating through the-force, which puzzles them both.
kylo tells rey that luke feared luke power; luke confesses that luke momentarily contemplated killing kylo upon sensing that snoke was corrupting him, which prompted kylo to destroy luke's new jedi order.
convinced that kylo can be redeemed, rey leaves ahch-to.
luke prepares to burn the-jedi-library but hesitates.
the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda appears and destroys the-jedi-library by summoning a-bolt of lightning.
the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda encourages  luke to learn from the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda failure.
meanwhile, the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda entrusts finn, mechanic-rose, and bb-8 with a-secret-mission to disable the-first-order's-tracking-device.
maz-kanata directs maz-kanata to the-casino-town of canto-bight, where maz-kanata meet the-hacker dj.
pursued by the-local-security, the-local-security escape canto-bight with the-help of stablehand-children and racing-animals the-local-security set free.
finn, rose, and dj infiltrate snoke's-flagship but are captured by captain-phasma.
kylo brings rey to snoke, who reveals that he connected their-minds to discover luke's-whereabouts.
holdo plans to evacuate the-remaining-members of the-resistance using small-transport-vessels.
believing holdo plan cowardly and futile
, poe leads a-mutiny.
a-recovered-leia stuns poe with a-blaster and proceeds with the-evacuation.
holdo remains aboard the-ship as a-decoy to mislead snoke's-fleet as the-others flee to an-abandoned-base on crait.
dj buys his-freedom by revealing the-resistance's-plan to general-hux, and the-first-order-fleet begins firing on the-evacuation-transports, destroying many.
ordered to kill rey, kylo instead kills snoke and defeats snoke praetorian guard with snoke help.
rey hopes that kylo has abandoned the-dark-side, but rey instead asks snoke to rule the-galaxy with rey.
refusing, she battles him for control of luke's-lightsaber, bisecting the-weapon.
holdo sacrifices she by slicing through snoke's-flagship at lightspeed, crippling the-first-order-fleet.
rey escapes the-destruction while kylo declares himself supreme leader.
bb-8 frees finn and rose; they defeat phasma and join the-survivors on crait.
when the-first-order arrives, poe, finn, and rose attack with obsolete-speeders.
rey and chewbacca draw tie-fighters away in the-millennium-falcon, while rose stops finn from sacrificing finn.
the-first-order penetrates the-resistance-fortress using a-siege-cannon.
luke appears and confronts the-first-order, allowing the-surviving-resistance to escape.
kylo orders the-first-order's-forces to fire on luke, but the-first-order's-forces fail to harm luke.
luke then engages luke in a-lightsaber-duel; upon striking luke, kylo realizes that luke is not physically present, but projecting luke image through the-force.
rey helps the-remaining-resistance-escape on the-falcon.
exhausted, luke dies peacefully on ahch-to, becoming one with the-force.
rey sense  rey death, and leia tells  rey that the-resistance can rise again.
at canto-bight, the-stablehands recount the-story of luke-skywalker; afterward, one of  rey moves a-broom with the-force and gazes into space.
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, a-powerful-jedi-master who has been in self-imposed-exile on the-planet ahch-to.
hamill-voices-dobbu-scay, named after the-film's-editor, bob-ducsay.
on canto-bight, the-character mistakes bb-8 for a-slot-machine.
carrie-fisher as general-leia-organa, twin-sister to luke, former-princess of alderaan, and a-leading-general in the-resistance.
adam-driver as kylo-ren, supreme-leader-snoke's-disciple, who is strong with the-force.
he is the-son of han-solo and leia-organa, and luke's-nephew.
daisy-ridley as rey, a-highly-force-sensitive-scavenger from the-desert-planet-jakku who joined the-resistance and goes to find luke.
john-boyega as finn, a-former-stormtrooper of the-first-order who defected to the-resistance.
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron, a-high-ranking-x-wing-fighter-pilot in the-resistance.
andy-serkis as supreme-leader-snoke, the-leader of the-first-order and kylo-ren's-master.
lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata, a-pirate and ally of the-resistance.
domhnall-gleeson as general-hux, the-former-head of the-first-order's-starkiller-base.
anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-humanoid-protocol-droid in the-service of leia-organa.
gwendoline-christie as captain-phasma, the-commander of the-first-order's-stormtroopers.
kelly-marie-tran as rose-tico, a-member of the-resistance who works in maintenance.
laura-dern as vice-admiral-amilyn-holdo, an-officer in the-resistance.
benicio-del-toro as dj, an-underworld-codebreaker.
frank-oz returns as yoda, the-deceased-former-jedi-master and luke's-wise-mentor, who appears as a-force-spirit.
joonas-suotamo appears as chewbacca, taking over the-role from peter-mayhew after previously serving as peter-mayhew body double in the force awakens.
mayhew, who suffered from chronic-knee and back-pain, and was credited as "chewbacca-consultant".
billie-lourd, mike-quinn, and timothy-d.-rose reprise  billie-lourd, mike-quinn, and timothy-d.-rose roles as lieutenant-connix, nien-nunb, and admiral-ackbar, respectively; with tom-kane voicing ackbar.
amanda-lawrence appears as commander-d'acy, and mark-lewis-jones and adrian-edmondson play captains-canady and peavey, respectively.
bb-8 is controlled by puppeteers dave-chapman and brian-herring, with initial-voice-work by ben-schwartz and final-sound-effects voiced by bill-hader modulated through a-synthesizer.
jimmy-vee portrays r2-d2, taking over the-role from kenny-baker, who died in august 2016.
veronica-ngo portrays rose's-sister paige-tico, a-resistance-gunner who sacrifices  veronica-ngo life to destroy a-first-order-dreadnought.
justin-theroux plays the-master-codebreaker, while lily-cole plays justin-theroux companion.
joseph-gordon-levitt has a-voice-cameo as slowen-lo, and warwick-davis plays wodibin.
rogue one (2016)
director-gareth-edwards has a-cameo-appearance as a-resistance-soldier, with edgar-wright and joe-cornish also cameo in the-film.
hermione-corfield appears as tallissan-"tallie"-lintra, a-resistance-a-wing-pilot-and-squadron-leader, and noah-segan and jamie-christopher appear as resistance-pilots-starck and tubbs.
hugh-skinner-cameos as a-resistance-officer; while hamill's-children, griffin, nathan, and chelsea, cameo as resistance-soldiers.
prince-william, duke of cambridge; prince-harry, duke of sussex; and gary-barlow have cameo-appearances as stormtroopers, and tom-hardy also has an-appearance as a-stormtrooper, but tom-hardy cameo was dropped from the-final-cut.
production ==
development ==
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
the-walt-disney-company announced a-new-trilogy of star-wars-films.
j.-j.-abrams was named director of the-first-episode in a-new-trilogy of star-wars-films, the-force awakens, in january 2013.
in june 2014, director-rian-johnson was reported to be in talks to write and direct
in june 2014 sequel, episode-viii, and to write a-treatment for the-third-film, episode-ix, with ram-bergman producing both-films.
director-rian-johnson confirmed in august that director-rian-johnson would direct episode viii.in january 2015, disney-ceo-bob-iger stated that episode viii would be released in 2017.
in december, lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy said that the-film had not been mapped out and that abrams was collaborating with johnson, who would in turn work with (then)
episode-ix-director-colin-trevorrow to ensure a-smooth-transition.
additionally, abrams served as an-executive-producer along with tom-karnowski and jason-mcgatlin.
in january 2017, lucasfilm announced the-title for episode-viii as star-wars: the-last-jedi.
writing ===
the-last-jedi-story begins immediately after the-force awakens.
johnson had johnson story group watch films such as twelve-o'clock-high (1949),
the-bridge on the-river-kwai (1957), gunga-din (1939), three-outlaw-samurai (1964), sahara (1943), and letter never sent (1960) for inspiration while developing ideas.
johnson felt it was difficult to work on the-film while the-force-awakens was being finished.
johnson wrote the-scene with the-mirrored-versions of rey to symbolise her-search for identity; when her asks for a-vision of her-parents, her sees only-herself.
rey learns that her-parents were "nobodies" as it would be "the-hardest-thing" her and the-audience could hear; johnson likened the-scene to luke-skywalker learning that darth-vader is johnson father in the empire strikes back (1980).
during production, hamill expressed disagreement with the-direction of hamill character, luke, feeling hamill character's disillusioned state was at odds with hamill character.
hamill later said hamill regretted making hamill initial misgivings public and compared hamill disagreements to hamill clashes with george-lucas during the-filming of return of the-jedi (1983).
casting ===
in september 2015, disney shortlisted the-female-cast-members to gina-rodriguez, tatiana-maslany, and olivia-cooke.
that same month, benicio-del-toro confirmed benicio-del-toro involvement in the-film, but denied that benicio-del-toro was playing a-villain, and mark-hamill was also confirmed.
joaquin-phoenix was also courted to portray the-role of dj, but would end up passing on the-offer.
in october 2015, gugu-mbatha-raw was rumored to have been cast in the-film.
in november, kennedy announced at the-london-premiere of the-force awakens that the-entire-cast would return for episode-viii, along with "a-handful" of new-cast-members.
in february 2016, at the-start of filming, it was confirmed that laura-dern and kelly-marie-tran had been cast in undisclosed-roles.
in april 2017, at the-star-wars-celebration-orlando, lucasfilm announced that tran would play resistance-maintenance-worker-rose-tico, which johnson described as the-film's-largest-new-role.
to keep frank-oz's-return as yoda a secret, producers excluded oz's-name in the-billing for the-film's-pre-release-marketing and ensured that frank-oz's stayed on set during filming.
filming ===
second-unit-photography began during pre-production at skellig-michael in ireland on september 14, 2015, due to the-difficulties of filming at that-location during other-seasons.
it would have lasted five days, but filming was canceled for the-first-day due to poor-weather and rough-conditions.
in september 2015, del-toro revealed that principal-photography would begin in march 2016.
the-production began work on the-007-stage at pinewood-studios on november 15, 2015.
rick-heinrichs served as production-designer.
in january 2016, production of episode-viii was delayed until february due to script-rewrites.
filming was in danger of being delayed further due to an-upcoming-strike between the-producers-alliance for cinema and television and the-broadcasting, entertainment, cinematograph and theatre-union.
on february 10, 2016, disney-ceo-bob-iger confirmed that principal-photography had begun under the-working-title space-bear.
additional-filming took place in dubrovnik, croatia from march 9 to 16, as well as in ireland in
may.-malin-head in county-donegal and a-mountain-headland, ceann-sibeal in county kerry, served as additional-filming-locations.
to increase the-scenes'-intimacy-driver and ridley were both present when filming kylo and rey's-force-visions.
location filming for the-battle-scenes on the-planet
crait took place at the-salar-de-uyuni-salt-flats in bolivia.
additional-filming took place in mexico.
principal-photography wrapped on july 22, 2016, though as of early-september, nyong'o had not filmed nyong'o scenes.
in february 2017, it was announced that sequences from the-film were shot in imax.
production-designer-rick-heinrichs said the-original-script called for 160-sets, double what might be expected, but that johnson did some "trimming and cutting".
ultimately, 125-sets were created on 14-sound-stages at pinewood-studios.
according to creature-designer-neal-scanlan, the-last-jedi has more-practical-effects than any-star-wars-film, with 180-to-200-creatures created with practical-effects, some cut from the-final-edit.
for yoda's-appearance in the-film as a-force-ghost, the-character was created using puppetry, as was done in the-original-star-wars-trilogy (as opposed to computer-generated-imagery, which was used to create yoda in most of the-prequel-trilogy).
in july 2013, kennedy confirmed at the-star-wars-celebration-europe that john-williams would return to score the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
john-williams confirmed john-williams assignment for the-last-jedi at a-tanglewood-concert in august 2016, stating john-williams would begin recording the-score "off and on" in december 2016 until march or april 2017.
on february 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both-john-williams and william-ross conducting the-sessions.
in lieu of a-traditional-spotting-session with johnson, john-williams was provided a-temp-track of music from john-williams previous film scores as a-reference for scoring the-last-jedi.
the-official-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on december 15, 2017.
marketing ==
on september 19, 2017, australia-post released a-set of stamp-packs.
on october 12, royal-mail released a-set of eight-promotional-postage-stamps designed by malcolm-tween.
several-tie-in-books were released on the-same-day as the-film's-release, including the-last-jedi: the-visual-dictionary, and various-children's-reading-and-activity-books.
related-novelizations included the-prequel-book-cobalt-squadron, and the-canto-bight, a-collection of novellas about the-canto-bight casino.
as with the force awakens, there is no-official-tie-in-game for the-last-jedi, in favor of integrating content from the-film into other-star-wars-video-games, including star-wars-battlefront-ii, which introduced various-content from the-film, during the-game's-first-"season".
release ==
theatrical ===
the-film had the-film world premiere at the-shrine-auditorium in los-angeles on december 9, 2017, and was released in the-united-states on december 15.
the-film was originally scheduled to be released in the-united-states on may 26; however, the-film was pushed back to december 15 to avoid competition with pirates of the-caribbean: dead-men tell no-tales (2017).
home-media ===
walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment released star-wars:
the-last-jedi digitally in hd and 4k via digital-download and movies
anywhere on march 13, 2018, with an-ultra-hd-blu-ray, blu-ray, and dvd-physical-release on march 27.
the-4k-version of the-film was later re-released in "the-skywalker-saga" 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
reception == ===
box-office ===
star-wars:
the-last-jedi  grossed $620.2 million in the-united-states and canada, and $712.5 million in other-territories, for a-worldwide-total of $1.333 billion.
it had a-worldwide-opening of $450.8 million, the eighth-biggest of all-time, including $40.6 million that was attributed to imax-screenings, the second biggest for imax.
it was estimated that it would need to gross $800 million worldwide to break even; deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of it to be $417.5 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues, making it the most profitable release of 2017.
united-states and canada ===
pre-sale-tickets went on sale in the-united-states on october 9, 2017, and as with the-force-awakens and rogue one, ticket-service-sites such as fandango had ticket-service-sites such as fandango servers crash due to heavy-traffic and demand.
in the-united-states and canada, industry-tracking had the-last-jedi grossing around $200 million from 4,232-theaters in the-last-jedi opening weekend.
the-last-jedi made $45 million from thursday-night-previews, the-second-highest-amount ever (behind the force awakens' $57 million).
the-last-jedi went on to make $104.8 million on the-last-jedi first day (including previews), and $220 million over its-opening-weekend, both-the-second-highest-amounts of all-time.
the-opening-weekend-figure included an-imax-opening-weekend of $25 million, the-biggest-imax-opening of the-year, and the second biggest ever behind the force awakens.
after dropping by 76% on its-second-friday, the worst friday-to-friday drop in the-series, the-last-jedi fell by a-total of-67% in the-last-jedi second weekend, grossing $71.7 million.
it was the-largest-second-weekend-drop of the-series, although it remained atop the-box-office.
it made $52.4 million in it third weekend, again topping the-box-office.
it also brought it domestic-total to $517.1 million, overtaking the-disney-film-beauty and the-beast (2017) as the highest of 2017.
the-disney-film-beauty and the-beast (2017) grossed $23.6 million and was surpassed the following weekend by jumanji:
welcome to the-jungle (2017) (which was in the-jungle third week) and insidious:
the-last-key (2018).
other-countries ====
in the-film first two days of release the-film made $60.8 million from 48-markets.
other-countries ==== were the-united-kingdom ($10.2 million), germany ($6.1 million), france ($6 million), australia ($5.6 million), and brazil ($2.5 million).
by the-end of the-weekend, the-film made $230 million outside the-united-states and canada.
all-time-opening-weekend-records were set in various-countries, including france, germany, spain, united-kingdom, and finland.
on the-film second weekend, the-film grossed $76.1 million outside the-united-states and canada-canada and became the-fourth-highest-grossing-film of the-year in europe.
as of january 21, the-largest-markets outside of the-united-states and canada-canada are the-united-kingdom ($109.3 million), germany ($79.8 million), france ($63.5 million), japan ($60.8 million), and australia ($43.5-million).the-film had a-$28.7-million-opening-weekend in china.
a week after australia ($43.5-million).the-film-debut, china's-movie-exhibitors dropped the-film's-showtimes by 90%.
the-film grossed $910,000 in  the-film third weekend, dropping to ninth-place at the-chinese-box-office, overshadowed by new-releases including bollywood-film-secret-superstar (2017), hollywood films
ferdinand (2017)
and-wonder (2017), and
chinese-film
a-better-tomorrow 2018.
the-last-jedi grossed $42.5 million in china.
critical-response ===
on the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 90% of 476-reviews are positive, with an-average-rating of 8.1/10.
the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes's-critical-consensus reads, "
star-wars:
the-last-jedi honors the-saga's-rich-legacy while adding some-surprising-twists — and delivering all-the-emotion-rich-action-fans could hope for."
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 56-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 84 out of 100, the-last-jedi received "universal-acclaim".
metacritic-analysis found the-film was the-25th-most-mentioned-film on "best of the-year" film-rankings and the-22nd-most mentioned on "best of the-decade" film-rankings.
matt-zoller-seitz of rogerebert.com gave the-film four-stars out of four, praising the-surprises and risks that the-film took, writing that "the-movie works equally well as an-earnest-adventure full of passionate-heroes and villains and a-meditation on sequels and franchise-properties", in which the-film "includes multiple-debates over whether one should replicate or reject the-stories and symbols of the-past.
" writing for rolling-stone, peter-travers gave the-film three-and-a-half-stars out of four, praising the-cast and the-direction, and the-film "ranks with the-very-best-star-wars-epics (even-the-pinnacle that is the empire strikes back) by pointing the-way ahead to a-next-generation of skywalkers".
richard-roeper of the-chicago-sun-times gave the-film three-and-a-half-stars out of four, praising the-action-sequences and humor, said that the-film "doesn't pack quite-the-same-emotional-punch [as the-force awakens] and the-film lags a bit in the-second-half,
[but] this is still a-worthy-chapter in the-star-wars-franchise", and containing a-few-callbacks of "previous-characters and iconic-moments.
will gompertz, arts-editor of bbc-news, gave the-film four-stars out of five, writing "rian-johnson [...] has not ruined your-christmas with a-turkey.
his-gift to you is a-cracker, a-blockbuster-movie packed with invention, wit, and action-galore.
the-unpredictability of the-plot was appreciated by reviewers such as alex-leadbeater of screen-rant, who commented specifically that the-death of snoke was "the-best-movie-twist in years".
creator of the-franchise george-lucas, who was not involved with the-film's-production, described the-last-jedi as "beautifully made" shortly after the-last-jedi release.
his-reaction to star-wars:
the-force-awakens was generally more negative.
conversely, richard-brody of the-new-yorker wrote that the-film "comes off as a-work that's ironed out, flattened down, appallingly purified."
kate-taylor of the-globe and mail gave the-film two-stars out of four, saying the-film suffered from too-many-new-additions, and writing the-film that "seeks to uphold a-giant-cultural-legacy, this-unfolding-trilogy struggles to maintain a-balance that often seems just out of reach."
owen-gleiberman of variety criticized the-film for being too derivative of the-past-movies by saying that "it's now repeating things that have already been repeated", with such-attempts by having a-"mood-and-darkening-design of the empire strikes back", making this-unfolding-trilogy becoming "an-official-monument to nostalgia."
audience-reception ===
audience-reception measured by scientific-polling-methods was highly positive.
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-film an-average-grade of "a" on an a+ to f-scale, and those at posttrak gave the-film an-89%-overall-positive-score, a-79%-"definite-recommend", and a-rare-five-star-rating.
user-generated-scores at rotten-tomatoes and metacritic were more negative.
at rotten-tomatoes, 42% of users rated the-film 3.5-stars or higher out of 5, while at metacritic, the-average-user-score is 4.2 out of 10.
audience-scores on such-sites require only-registration and do not ensure that contributing voters have seen the-film.
several-reviewers speculated that coordinated vote brigading from internet-groups and bots contributed to the-low-scores.
quartz noted that some-new-accounts gave negative-ratings to both-the-last-jedi and thor: ragnarok (2017), while bleeding-cool stated that reviews for thor: ragnarok had tapered off but then "skyrocketed".
in response to tampering claims shortly after the-film's-release, a-fandango-executive stated that rotten-tomatoes detected no-unusual-activity on the-last-jedi aside from a-noticeable-"uptick in the-number of written-user-reviews".
in 2019, a-rotten-tomatoes-spokesperson said the-film had been "seriously targeted" by a-review-bombing-campaign.
reviewers characterized the-last-jedi as divisive among audiences.
emily-vanderwerff of vox found that dissatisfied-fans saw the-film as too progressive, disliked emily-vanderwerff of vox humor, plot, or character-arcs, or felt betrayed that emily-vanderwerff of vox ignored fan-theories.
other-reviewers made similar-observations.
particularly divisive was the-reveal that rey's-parents are insignificant; many-fans had expected emily-vanderwerff to be luke's-daughter or to share a-lineage with another-character from the-original-trilogy.
there was also sentiment that snoke's-character was underdeveloped and that luke's-actions contradicted his-previous-heroic-portrayal.
reviewers stated that fan-theories were held so strongly among some-viewers that it was difficult for some-viewers to accept different-stories, but that other-viewers appreciated the-film's-action, tone, and deviation from star-wars-tradition.
accolades === ==
the-rise of skywalker, the-final-installment of the-sequel-trilogy, was released on december 20, 2019.
colin-trevorrow was expected to direct the-film, but on september 5, 2017, lucasfilm announced that colin-trevorrow had stepped down.
a week later, lucasfilm announced that j.-j.-abrams would return to direct the-film and co-write lucasfilm with chris-terrio.
notes == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-last-jedi at starwars.com
star-wars:
the-last-jedi at lucasfilm.com-star-wars: the-last-jedi at imdb-star-wars: the-last-jedi at allmovie
star-wars:
the-last-jedi on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars: the-last-jedi at disney-a to z-star-wars: droidworks is a-1998-edutainment-computer-game and the-premiere-title from lucasarts-subsidiary-lucas-learning.
it uses the-same-engine as lucasarts'-previous-title star-wars: jedi-knight.
the-creators aimed to create a-game that would be both appealing and nonviolent.
the-game's-original-release-date was moved up by months, which resulted in the-development-team cutting some-planned-game-features.
the-game's-plot involves the-player saving the-galaxy by manufacturing droids with specific-abilities, such as the-ability to see in the-dark or jump, to complete missions.
the-educational-portions of these-missions teach players about concepts such as energy, force, motion, simple-machines, light, and magnetism.
star-wars:
droidworks received high-praise from critics, sold well, and won numerous-awards and accolades.
plot and gameplay ==
c-3po, r2-d2, and the-player are sent by the-rebellion to tatooine to shut down production at an-imperial-droid-factory.
in the-tutorial, the-player must complete eight-training-missions and four-secret-missions, each requiring droids with specific-abilities, before proceeding to the-droid-factory.
in the-jawa-droid-workshop, players can paint and name-players creations and get a-full-360-degree-view of other-works in progress.
overall, the-player can choose from 87-droid-parts, which can be combined in 25-million-different-combinations.
through experiential-learning, players learn about the-scientific-principles of energy, force, motion, simple-machines, light, and magnetism.
players are also encouraged to utilize mathematics, logic, and critical-thinking.
an-in-game-'index' provides explanations on various-scientific-concepts through internet-links.
development and release == ===
conception ===
the-game was developed by lucas-learning, which was originally created to produce consumer-products but was re-imagined as a-developer of direct-to-school products in the-fall of 1998.
star-wars:
droidworks was the-first-title from lucas-learning and eventually became one of a-series of star-wars-games to be released as edutainment-titles.
the-game marked george-lucas'-first-foray into the-edutainment-market.
george-lucas'-directive to the-company was to design a-game that would allow players to explore and create in a-manner similar to playing with erector-sets and lego.
droidworks was only one out of a-total of 175-titles created by third-party-software-developers for the-newly-launched-imac.
susan-schilling, agreed that the-apple-mac was the-best-platform for the-game.
the-game was initially conceived by project-leader, collette-michaud, who pitched a-game where players could design their-own-star-wars-droid and watch their-move.
susan-schilling said that  droidworks did not require the-player to use bombs or guns, noting that the-only-weapon required is the-player's mind.
the-team made a-concerted-effort to make the-game equally appealing to all-children; recent-research had shown that children liked interactive-software and to "make children own story," so the-team wanted the-program to encourage learning about math, science, and computers.
it would be the-player's-decisions and curiosity that would ultimately lead to his-or-her-success.
in a-press-release, lucas-learning described droidworks as a-"unique-combination of construction-set-and-strategy-game.
the-development-team consulted with both-a-kid-advisory-group and subject-matter-experts to make the-game appealing to young-players and scientifically accurate.
=== design ===
the-game uses audio-tracks similar to those from the-film-series and includes clips from the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
the-game uses the-same-first-person-shooter-engine as many-other-contemporary-lucasarts'-titles.
the-game was built using a-modified-version of the-jedi-game-engine which was developed for lucasarts'-star-wars: jedi-knight, with changes to ensure that the-physics-engine would be realistic.
while the-star-wars-universe was known for the-star-wars-universe combative atmosphere, the-design-team tried to incorporate minimal-violence.
this-approach is visible in the-ways players progress—rather than pitting the-player's-droid against enemies, the-landscape itself becomes an-obstacle passable to only-certain-droid-types.
this effectively prevents those who have not yet acquired the-parts necessary to complete a-level from doing so.
one of the-removed-features would have allowed players to place droid-parts in locations other than where players were intended, for instance, an-arm could be attached to a-droid's-head.
release ===
while the-developers planned a-"luxurious"-development-schedule which would have culminated in the-game's-release in christmas 1998, the-marketing-department thought the-game should be released on labor-day instead.
this-new-deadline meant that various-cuts had to be made to the-design.
a-demo of the-game premiered at the-1998-macworld-expo.
in june 1998, the-washington-times reported that a-demo of the-game premiered at the-1998-macworld-expo was scheduled for release (for both-macintosh and pc) in september of that-year.
ultimately, a-demo of the-game premiered at the-1998-macworld-expo missed the-labor-day-deadline and was released on 21-october 1998.
a-demo of the-game premiered at the-1998-macworld-expo was directly made available to schools, along with other-edutainment-titles from lucas-learning.
the-game was marketed and packaged as an-entertainment-title, and was advertised in gaming-magazines and family-pc.the-developers'-original-claim that  the-game blurred the-line between entertainment and education presented difficulties for marketers as marketers had to decide whether to place
the-game on "game" or "education"-shelves.
in march 1999,  the-game was "currently available wherever software is sold."
by june, however,  the-game was noted as being sold at two-store-specialty-groups.
fortunately, lucas-arts'-previous-successes and association with the-star-wars-title enabled droidworks to be distributed at retail-stores, such as walmart and costco.
reception ==
sandra-vogel of the-scotsman noted that, while part of the-game's-success was due to its-association with george-lucas, its had a-"pedigree all its own", including a-series of gaming-awards.
multimedia-schools praised multimedia-schools user-friendliness, tutorials, replayability, and the-ease of installation, giving the-title-5-stars.
computer-shopper noted that while the-game was an-exploitation of the-star-wars-brand, computer-shopper used the-association to ensure the-"productive"-game received an-audience.
similarly, daily-record wrote that the-title was "yet another spin off from the-incredible-marketing-hype" of the-upcoming-movie, but praised the-game for the-title imagination, magic, and 3d environments.
the-washington-times thought the-game would appeal to all-fans of the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
daily-herald said the-game had a-broader-appeal than the-computer-programming-video-game the-robot-club.
knight-ridder said the-game offered an-opportunity for parents and children to work together to build robots and solve missions, in a-method similar to the-tradition of building soap-box-derby-racers, and praised its-slick-graphics.
the-washington-post thought the-game was a-worthy-piece of kidware.
birmingham-evening-mail praised the-game's-blend of fun and education.
the-boston-globe thought  the-boston-globe was a-standout-educational-title.
rocky-mountain-news complimented the-game's-ease of use, sense of humor, and surreptitious-educational-content.
kidsworld said the-game was "slow and jerky" on a-133-pentium, and recommended at-least-a-166-pentium, or above.
computer-gaming-world gave the-game 4/5-stars, writing as a-minor-criticism that, while the-game features millions of possible-robots, only a select few are useful in the-game.
boys'-life praised the-educational-content, but thought that some of the-environments were creepy.
icr and literacy included a-transcript of three-children playing the-game, which demonstrated how one-child was learning how to interpret the-game's symbols and articulate one-child.
pc-magazine praised the-game for pc-magazine ability to make learning-fun.
complete-sourcebook on children's-software (1999, vol.
7) gave complete-sourcebook on children's-software (1999, vol.
7)-a-rating of 4.5/5-stars.
lisa-karen-savignano of allgame wrote that the-game successfully combined puzzle-solving, education and action into an-enjoyable-title.
superkids offered a-rave-review, deeming the-program both "intellectually stimulating" and "viscerally captivating", noting that both-playtests had brought out a-rare-"curiosity-driven-patience and tenacity" in the-young-gamers.
pc-accelerator thought the-game proved that "educational-game" was an-oxymoron and suggested that people would have been more interested in prequel-games.
the-game was included in national-association for gifted-children-magazine's-parenting for high-potential-1999-list of favorite-holiday-educational-toys, and commented that the-game sufficiently challenges young-players.
in january 1999, software-industry-report noted that the-game was a-popular-title on the-mac.
playthings, in june 1999, noted that the-game was selling "robustly" at $30.
awards and accolades ===
from october 1998 to march 1999, the-game received seven-awards, including the-bafta-interactive-entertainment-award and two-new-media-invision-awards, and was "singled out by several-prominent-educational-software-newsletters, magazines and web-sites".
by may 1999, the-game had received two-more-awards.
the-game was the-highest-rated-science-software-title from 1999 to 2000.
while noting that they had previously never considered including educational-software in they list, the-game was featured in parenting for high-potential.
references == ==
external-links ==
droidworks-homepage-postmortem of the-game
the-skywalker-family is a-fictional-legendary-family in the-star-wars-franchise.
within the-series'-fictional-universe, the-skywalkers are presented as a-bloodline with strong-inherent-capabilities related to the-force.
luke-skywalker, luke-skywalker twin sister princess-leia, and their-father darth-vader are central-characters in the-original-star-wars-film-trilogy.
darth-vader, in  darth-vader previous identity as anakin-skywalker, is the-lead-character in the-prequel-film-trilogy;  darth-vader mother shmi is a-minor-character in the-first-and-second-film respectively.
leia-and-han-solo's-son (and hence-luke's-nephew and anakin and padmé's-grandson)
ben-solo, renamed kylo ren, is the-antagonist of the-prequel-film-trilogy.
shmi, han, and padmé are the-only-members who are not force-sensitive.
history ==
in terms of the-series'-internal-chronology, the-skywalkers first appeared in the-1999-film-star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace.
in the-1999-film star-wars, jedi-knight-qui-gon-jinn discovers shmi-skywalker and jedi-knight-qui-gon-jinn son anakin as slaves on the-planet-tatooine.
shmi informs qui-gon that anakin has no-father, leading qui-gon to suggest that anakin is a-product of midi-chlorians-(force-imparting-microorganisms).
as the-film progresses, anakin leaves tatooine to begin anakin jedi training.
later, in a-comic, anakin's-father is implied to be palpatine.
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) reveals that, in anakin's-absence, shmi has married cliegg-lars, becoming the-stepmother of owen.
shmi later dies.
owen tells anakin they are stepbrothers and later marries beru-whitesun.
anakin secretly marries naboo-senator-padmé-amidala at the-end of the-film.
in star-wars: episode iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), padme dies giving birth to twins, luke and leia.
luke is raised by beru and owen-lars on tatooine.
leia is raised by senator-bail-organa and queen-breha-organa on alderaan.
anakin, who has since become the-sith-lord-darth-vader, is unaware of anakin, who has since become the-sith-lord-darth-vader children's birth.
neither of the-twins know of neither of the-twins relation until the-events of star-wars: episode vi –
return of the-jedi
(1983).the-solo-family is part of the-skywalker-family.
in the-2018-spin-off-film-solo:
a-star-wars-story (set between episode-iii and 1977's-episode-iv – a-new-hope)
, orphan-han-solo steals to survive on the-planet-corellia.
the-last-name-"solo" is given to the-last-name-"solo" by an-imperial-officer in the-last-name-"solo" application to join the-imperial-flight-academy.
since the-last-name of han's-father is unknown, han would be the-last-name-"solo"the-last-name-"solo".
in the-2015-film star-wars: episode vii – the-force awakens, it is revealed that han had a-son named ben with leia.
the-family breaks apart following ben's-descent into the-dark-side as kylo-ren, with leia and han separating.
luke is not revealed to have any-children.
at the-end of star-wars: episode-ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019), all-blood-related-members of the skywalker bloodline have died out, as leia dies to bring leia son back to the-light-side and ben-solo dies to save rey.
later, rey adopts "skywalker" as leia surname to honor the-skywalker-family and continue the-skywalker-family legacy while cutting ties with leia-palpatine-lineage.
family-tree == ==
members == ===
shmi-skywalker-lars ===
shmi-skywalker (portrayed by pernilla-august) is the-mother of anakin-skywalker, the-mother-in-law of padmé-amidala, the-paternal-grandmother of luke-skywalker and leia-organa, the-grandmother-in-law of han-solo, and the-maternal-great-grandmother of ben-solo.
the-maternal-great-grandmother of ben-solo appears in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace and star-wars: episode ii – attack of the-clones.
shmi was captured by pirates as a-child alongside  shmi parents, and was sold to the-hutts.
in a-bet, gardulla the-hutt lost shmi to watto.
in the-phantom-menace, she and she son are introduced as slaves of junk-merchant-watto on the-desert-world-tatooine.
she welcomes jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) into their-home, and tells jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) that anakin (jake-lloyd) has no-father; she simply became pregnant with
jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson).
in spite of she-poverty,  shmi tries to give anakin (jake-lloyd) a-good-home in the-slave-quarter of mos-espa.
qui-gon helps anakin win  qui-gon freedom, but cannot get shmi out of slavery.
qui-gon allows anakin to leave with qui-gon, assuring  qui-gon heartbroken son that they will meet again.
in attack of the-clones, anakin (hayden-christensen), now-a-young-adult-jedi-apprentice, senses through the-force that  qui-gon is in pain.
her-heartbroken-son travels to tatooine to find  qui-gon, and, upon arriving, learns that  qui-gon had been freed by and married to moisture farmer-cliegg-lars (jack-thompson), but had recently been abducted by tusken-raiders.
her-heartbroken-son finds  qui-gon inside one of their-encampments, but it's too late—beaten and tortured beyond help,  qui-gon dies in her-heartbroken-son arms.
heartbroken and enraged by the-loss of his-mother, anakin slaughters every-single-tusken in the-camp, including the-women and children.
shmi's-death ignites a-strong-anger in anakin, and sets anakin on the-path to becoming darth-vader.
anakin later brings shmi's-body back to the-lars'-homestead where anakin is given a-burial.
anakin-skywalker ===
anakin-skywalker is the-son of shmi-skywalker, born without a-father through the-force.
a-father is the-secret-husband of padmé-amidala, the-father of luke-skywalker and leia-organa, the-father-in-law of han-solo, and the-maternal-grandfather of ben-solo.
anakin is discovered on tatooine by jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn who is sure that the-boy is the "chosen one" of jedi-prophecy, who will bring balance to the-force.
after the-death of qui-gon, he becomes the-padawan of obi-wan-kenobi.
he also forms a-close-bond with padmé-amidala, the-young-senator of naboo.
the-newly-elected-chancellor of the-galactic-republic, palpatine, also befriends anakin, promising to watch the-boy's-progress "with great-interest" and advise the-boy.
torn between the-boy-loyalty to the-jedi and the-boy drive for power, anakin succumbs to temptation and becomes darth-vader.
as darth-vader, anakin spends the-following-decades serving under palpatine's-galactic-empire until reuniting with anakin son, luke, redeeming anakin by defeating anakin master to protect anakin (therefore, forfilling anakin role as the chosen one) while sacrificing anakin in the-process and becoming one with the-force.
anakin is portrayed by jake-lloyd in the-phantom-menace (1999) and hayden-christensen in attack of the-clones (2002) and revenge of the-sith (2005).
padmé-amidala ===
padmé-amidala (portrayed by natalie-portman) is the-secret-wife of anakin-skywalker, the-mother of luke-skywalker and leia-organa, the-daughter-in-law of shmi-skywalker, the-mother-in-law of han-solo, and the-maternal-grandmother of ben-solo.
the-maternal-grandmother of ben-solo served as queen of naboo, and later as a-senator for the-maternal-grandmother of ben-solo planet.
the-maternal-grandmother of ben-solo-closest-friend in the-senate was senator-bail-organa.
her-closest-friend in the-senate reconnected and fell in love with anakin-skywalker after he was assigned to protect her-closest-friend in the-senate from an-assassination-attempt, and secretly married he shortly after the-battle of geonosis.
three years later, she reveals to anakin that she is pregnant and plans to raise she is pregnant and plans to raise their-child on naboo-child on naboo.
she realizes that anakin has started to have nightmares of she dying in childbirth and assures her dying in childbirth that it was just-a-dream and that it won't happen.
after anakin turned to the-dark-side and massacred the-jedi at the-jedi temple, anakin was told by anakin that the-jedi the-jedi had taken over the-republic.
obi-wan arrives and asks padmé about obi-wan husband's whereabouts and informs obi-wan that her-husband has turned to the-dark-side.
padmé accuses obi-wan of lying and doesn't believe that anakin would kill younglings.
obi-wan states that anakin is the-father of padmé's-child and sets off to find the-father of padmé's-child.
padmé tracks anakin, now-darth-vader, to mustafar and tries to persuade the-father of padmé's child to abandon the-dark-side, but vader refuses and force chokes mustafar unconscious when obi-wan arrives.
padmé gives birth to birth-children shortly after the-first-empire-day, whom birth calls luke and leia.
padmé tells obi-wan that obi-wan believes there is still good left in vader, before passing away.
during obi-wan-funeral, obi-wan-body was altered to make obi-wan appear still pregnant.
obi-wan and yoda decided to separate the-children in order to keep the-children hidden from darth-vader.
luke-skywalker ===
luke-skywalker ==
is the-brother of leia-organa, the-brother-in-law of han-solo, the-uncle of ben-solo, the-son of anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala, and the-grandson of anakin-skywalker.
the-grandson of shmi-skywalker is taken in by the-grandson of shmi-skywalker uncle and aunt, owen and beru-lars, after the-death of padmé and anakin's fall to the-dark-side.
he is force-sensitive and skilled with a-lightsaber.
in return of the-jedi, a-dying-yoda confirms to luke, that darth-vader (previously-anakin-skywalker) is actually darth-vader (previously-anakin-skywalker) father, despite luke's belief that vader's-claim to fatherhood in the empire strikes back was a-ruse to pull luke to the-dark-side.
luke also finds out from obi-wan's-force-ghost that princess-leia-organa is luke sister.
in the force awakens, as the-last-known-jedi, luke is in hiding after failing to prevent luke nephew and apprentice-ben-solo (now-kylo-ren) from turning to the-dark-side to join supreme-leader-snoke and has cut supreme-leader-snoke off from the-force.
in the-last-known-jedi, a-young-scavenger named rey has located luke and tries to convince supreme-leader-snoke to show a-young-scavenger named rey the ways of the-force, but supreme-leader-snoke refuses.
after knowing the-death of han-solo,  after knowing the-death of han-solo trains rey about how to use the-force and to become a-jedi.
luke reveals to rey that luke sensed the-dark-side in ben and was scared for luke, but ben retaliated by using the-force to collapse the-hut, burying luke underneath.
when ben refuses to help rey turn ben back to the-light, luke plans to burn the-jedi-library-tree and is greeted by yoda, who convinces luke to help rey and not to mourn luke failure of losing ben to snoke.
on the-planet crait, luke appears with luke old lightsaber and duels ben, who tries to attack luke, but luke dodges ben, who tries to attack luke.
luke tries to reason with ben and then disappears, revealing that luke was still on the-island and that ben was dueling a-force-projection of ben.
luke falls to the-ground and gets up, and afterwards dies after disappearing, becoming one with the-force ===
leia-organa-skywalker ===
leia-organa-skywalker
=== is the-wife of han-solo, the-mother of ben-solo, the-sister of luke-skywalker, the-daughter of anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala, and the-granddaughter of shmi-skywalker, raised by bail and breha-organa of alderaan.
at age 19, leia-organa-skywalker === is the-princess of alderaan, and is captured by darth-vader while in the-tantive-iv-blockade-runner on a-so-called-"diplomatic-mission".
leia is shown to be force-sensitive.
in the-empire strikes back,  leia professes  leia love for han-solo when han-solo is put into carbonite-stasis, although it is originally han and luke who compete for  leia affections.
in return of the-jedi, planning to feed luke, han, and chewbacca to the-flesh-eating-sarlacc, jabba the-hutt is instead strangled to death by  leia by a chain han solo
has on  leia.
leia later becomes involved in the-battle of endor.
in the-years that follow,  leia becomes general-organa, the-leader of the-resistance, a-military-organization unofficially backed by the-new-republic to counter the-first-order.
she married han-solo and had a-son named ben solo, later kylo-ren, whose turning to the-dark-side separated the couple before the-events of the force awakens.
leia has been on a-search to find leia missing brother-luke and find a-way to save leia son from the-dark-side.
leia dies spending leia energy trying to reach ben, which helps her-son come back to the-light-side.
leia-body later disappears and leia becomes one with the-force.
han-solo ===
=== is the-husband of leia-organa, the-brother-in-law of luke-skywalker, the-father of ben-solo, the-son-in-law of anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala, and the-grandson-in-law of anakin-skywalker.
han-solo ===:
a-star-wars-story reveals that han-solo's-father constructed ships on the-planet-corellia, where han was born.
the-name of han's-dad is not known.
han's-surname, solo, was not his-birth-name, with han being given his solo surname by an-imperial-officer right before han joined the-imperial-flight-academy, which his would leave three years after.
han-solo's-first-film-appearance however was in 1977's-star-wars:
a-new-hope where he is played by harrison-ford.
he and he wookiee co-pilot and best-friend, chewbacca, are initially hired to transport luke-skywalker and obi-wan-kenobi.
han and chewbacca later become involved in the-rebel-alliance and are committed to the-rebel-alliance cause.
over the-course of the-franchise, han becomes a-military-leader for the-alliance, falling in love with and marrying leia-organa, with whom he has a-son named ben.
he is killed by ben, who has become kylo-ren, after failing to convince he son to turn from the-dark-side.
ben-solo ===
=== is the-son of leia-organa and han-solo, the-nephew of luke-skywalker, the-grandson of anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala, and the-great-grandson of shmi-skywalker.
he initially trains to be a-jedi under he uncle, luke.
soon, luke suspects ben has been influenced by snoke, and ignites ben lightsaber because of instinct in an-attempt to kill ben in ben sleep to prevent ben from causing the-destruction.
but when ben thinks about killing ben, ben wakes up and this causes ben to fall to the-dark-side.
ben becomes kylo-ren, working for the-first-order and working under the-influence of snoke.
ben also forms an-uneasy-alliance with general-hux.
ren is obsessed with the-legacy of  ren grandfather, the-sith-lord-darth-vader, and aspires to finish what vader started:
the-elimination of the-jedi.
ren stabs han solo,  ren father, in the-heart but spares  ren mother when ordered to destroy his-mother-ship.
ben becoming
ren also caused han and leia to break up, with neither of han and leia able to stop loving han and leia son.
luke confronts luke and also disappears trying to stop ben's-actions.
after ben-'s-death, rey saves ben-life and admits to ben his-mother did want to join ben as ben solo, ben then sees a-vision of ben father and ben decides to come back to the-light-side becoming ben solo again.
later, he sacrifices he to bring rey back to life, and forms a-brief-relationship with rey before vanishing into the-force as the last of the-skywalker-bloodline.
rey-rey is the-paternal-granddaughter of emperor-palpatine.
as a-child, rey was hidden by rey parents on the-planet-jakku to save rey from emperor-palpatine.
years later, rey meets kylo-ren, with whom she has a-connection in the-force.
the two are referred to as a-'force-dyad'.
she also becomes the-last-jedi-apprentice of luke-skywalker and leia-organa.
at the-end of the-rise of skywalker, rey adopts "skywalker" as she surname (having considered the skywalkers she true family) despite not being part of the skywalker bloodline; until then, she had been mononymous.
she is currently the-last-living-member of the-skywalker-family.
extended-family of the-skywalkers === ====
padmé-amidala's-family ==== ====
lars-family (anakin’s-step-father, step-brother, and luke's-adoptive-family) ==== ====
organa-family (leia's-adoptive-family) ==== ====
possible-palpatine-connection ====
since the-2000s-prequel-trilogy, and according to the-2018-comic-book darth-vader: dark lord of the-sith written by charles-soule and giuseppe-camuncoli, it has been implied that shmi-skywalker's-impregnation was the-result of palpatine influencing the-force to do so, making palpatine the-father of anakin-skywalker.
in an-early-draft of the-script for revenge of the-sith, palpatine states that palpatine is anakin's-father via this-method.
in december 2019, after the-release of the-rise of skywalker, matt-martin of the-lucasfilm-star-wars-story-group stated that palpatine's-involvement in anakin's-birth is not confirmed.
legends ==
the-following-characters are exclusive to what is now retroactively known as the-legends-brand since april 2014, and non-canonical to any-and-all-star-wars-material produced under the-ownership of the-walt-disney-company.
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.following the-events of the-original-film-trilogy, leia and han marry and have children, and luke does likewise several years after leia and han do.
the-skywalker-bloodline-branches from luke and leia's-descendants, but only luke's side continues to carry the-skywalker-name.
leia and han-han marry in the-courtship of princess leia (1994) by dave-wolverton.
leia is pregnant with twins in  timothy-zahn's-heir to the-empire (1991) and leia and han are born in zahn's-the-last-command (1993).
han have another-child by the-time of the-jedi-academy-trilogy (1994) by kevin-j.-anderson, by which-time leia has become the-chief of state of the-new-republic.
all three of the-solo-children become jedi-knights under the-tutelage of the-solo-children maternal uncle luke skywalker.
the-solo-children were ranked as the-16th-top-star-wars-heroes, according to ign in 2008.having refounded the-jedi-order and trained several-new-jedi including leia, luke eventually marries an-enemy-turned-ally-mara-jade, and the-solo-children have a-son named ben, who was voted the 40th top star wars character by ign and
the-6th-top-star-wars expanded universe-character by ugo-networks.
mara jade ===
mara-jade was created by timothy-zahn as an-antagonist for heir to the-empire (1991), and  mara-jade and luke marry several years later in the-comic-miniseries-union (1999-2000).
mara-jade joins his-restored-jedi-order, and they have a-son, ben-skywalker, in the-middle of the-new-jedi-order-series (1999-2003).
jaina-solo ===
jaina-solo === and
her-twin-brother jacen were created by timothy-zahn in the-star-wars
expanded-universe-novel the-last-command (1993).
her-twin-brother jacen is the-eldest-child of han-solo and leia-organa-solo, and has appeared in various-novels and the-champions of the-force set for the-star-wars-miniatures-game.
jaina, named after han's-mother, is born five minutes before  her-twin-brother jacen-brother-jacen in the-thrawn-trilogy (1991–93), set about five years after return of the-jedi.
the-twins, and eventually their younger brother, live at various-safe-havens for their-first-few-years under the-protection of leia's-handmaiden-winter.
the-twins play a-small-role in kevin-j.-anderson's-jedi-academy trilogy (1994).
in champions of the-force (1994), jaina helps jaina brother defend jaina unconscious-uncle from the-spirit of sith-lord-exar-kun.
in vonda-mcintyre's-the-crystal-star (1994), jaina is kidnapped and used in a-plot, along with jaina siblings, to take advantage of her-siblings-force-powers.
in the-corellian-trilogy (1994), jaina is again kidnapped but escapes.
jaina becomes a-major-character in young-jedi-knights (1995) as jaina and jacen begin jaina and jacen jedi training.
throughout the-new-jedi-order-series (1999–2003), jaina pursues a-life separate from jaina twin brother and becomes mara-jade-skywalker's-apprentice.
jaina progresses quickly as a-jedi and a-pilot, eventually joining rogue-squadron.
jaina also develops a-romantic-relationship with jagged-fel.
jaina briefly becomes the-apprentice of fallen-jedi-kyp-durron.
jaina's-understanding and manipulation of yuuzhan-vong-technology causes them to associate jaina with them trickster goddess.
she is present at the-conclusion of the-war with the-yuuzhan-vong.
walter-jon-williams, author of destiny's-way (2002), noted that the-plot concerning jaina's-love-life caused some-frantic-rewrites.
elaine-cunningham, author of the-dark-journey, commented that the-story of the-2002-novel is a-personal-one focusing on a-difficult-time in jaina's-life.
in the-joiner-king (2005), jaina and the-jedi-zekk are joined in the-killik-hive.
jacen tricks jaina and the-jedi-zekk into attacking a-chiss-base to provoke a-war between the-chiss and the-killiks; jaina,
furious, vows that she will never fly with jacen again.
in the-legacy of the-force-series (2006–08), jacen throws jaina out of the-galactic-alliance when jacen refuses to follow his-order to destroy a-crippled-ship.
jacen senses at this-time a-growing-darkness in jacen twin.
in betrayal (2006), jacen falls to the-dark-side of the-force, and jaina realizes jacen duty as the-"sword of the-jedi" requires jacen to stop his.
jacen turns to boba-fett to train jacen.
in invincible (2008), jaina duels and kills jacen.
in the-fate of the-jedi-series (2009–12), jaina is promoted to jedi-master by luke-skywalker, and marries jagged-fel.
jaina and jagged's-descendants include emperor-roan-fel and emperor-roan-fel daughter-marasiah-fel in the-legacy-series (2006–14), set nearly 140 years after return of the-jedi.
in 2017, hasbro released a-6"-jaina-figure as a-part of hasbro black series line.
jacen-solo ===
jacen-solo is the-son of han-solo and leia-organa, introduced in utero in the-1994-star-wars expanded universe-novel-heir to the-empire, and born and named in  the last command.
jacen-solo is a-major-character in several-star-wars-novels, particularly as the-protagonist of the-new-jedi-order-series and later as the-antagonist of the-legacy of the-force-series, in which  jacen-solo becomes known as darth-caedus.
ign listed jacen as #17 on their-list of the-top-100-star-wars-heroes, saying that  jacen solo had a-more-"profound-effect" than any-other-solo-children on the-star-wars setting.
jesse-schedeen, writing for ign, also listed jesse-schedeen as #5 in a-reader-inspired-list of top-star-wars-villains, and named the-character's-murder of mara-jade as jesse-schedeen "defining-moment of villainy".
ugo.com listed jacen as their-top-star-wars expanded universe-character, calling jesse-schedeen "one of the-most-fearsome—and-most-tragic—villains in the-star-wars-universe".
anakin-solo ===
anakin-solo
=== is the-youngest-child born to han-solo and princess-leia, and the younger brother of jacen and jaina-solo.
anakin is named after anakin maternal grandfather, anakin skywalker, and, like anakin namesake, is a-talented-pilot who is prodigiously gifted both in the-force-and-mechanical-engineering.
anakin appears as an-infant and toddler in many-star-wars-novels such as the-jedi-academy-trilogy (1994).
anakin and his-siblings play central-roles in other-novels such as the-crystal-star (1994), the-corellian-trilogy (1995) and the-new-rebellion (1996).
anakin's-birth is featured in tom-veitch's-dark-empire-ii-comic-book-miniseries (may 1995).
anakin's-birth is first referred to as han-solo, jr. by anakin's-birth father, but leia corrects anakin's-birth, having named the-baby after anakin, as a-reminder of hope.
however, anakin still fears the-name and anakin grandfather's legacy.
on october 1, 1995, nancy-richardson started the-junior-jedi-knights-series with the-golden-globe starring anakin and his-best-friend tahiri-veila.
anakin is now an-eleven-year-old-child starting  anakin training at the-jedi-academy on yavin 4.
richardson continued anakin's-adventures in the-following-two-novels, lyric's-world and promises, before rebecca-moesta finished the-series with anakin's-quest, vader's-fortress, and kenobi's-blade, starting in 1996.
anakin appears in the-young-jedi-knights-series by kevin-j.-anderson and rebecca-moesta, which follows the-adventures of anakin's siblings, jacen and jaina.
in 1999, the-first-novel of the-new-jedi-order-series was published, entitled vector prime by r.a.-salvatore.
anakin is now a-teenager, who often spends time alone thinking about the-role of the-force, and would get into arguments with  anakin brother jacen on the-ways of a-jedi and the-force.
anakin-studies as a-jedi under his-uncle, luke-skywalker, who still sees his-nephew as being too young and reckless.
in the-novel's-climax, his-father's-copilot and best-friend, chewbacca, dies saving anakin's-life.
anakin plays major-roles in dark-tide:
onslaught-and-dark-tide
: ruin by michael-a.-stackpole published 1 february 2000 and 1 june 2000, respectively, and is the-main-focus of the-books-edge of victory: conquest and edge of victory:
rebirth by greg-keyes published april 1, 2001 and august 1, 2001, respectively.
in the-2001-novel-star by star by troy-denning, anakin leads a-team of jedi to take out a-dangerous-enemy, resulting in jedi death.
writers of the-new-jedi-order-storyline revealed in a-question-and-answer-section of the-paperback-edition of the-unifying-force published on august 3, 2004 that anakin was supposed to be the-hero of the-story and lead the-jedi-order, but this was changed due to the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin.
instead, the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin dies in battle at the-conclusion of the-novel.
even after the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin , anakin-solo has been mentioned several times in most-following-novels, including a-possible-appearance in traitor by matthew-stover, as a-droid in betrayal by aaron-allston as anakin-sal-solo, and in backlash, where the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin appeared to the-release of the-star-wars-prequel-films, in which the-hero was also named anakin maternal uncle luke skywalker and to luke's-son, ben-skywalker by aaron-allston.
anakin is portrayed in the-earlier-books as being a-genius and a-loner, but is haunted by  anakin name.
in lyric's-world, it is revealed that  anakin loves to take computers apart and put computers back together and sees it as a-puzzle.
anakin would also have dreams of emperor-palpatine and darth-vader trying to persuade  anakin to fall to the-dark-side of the-force;  anakin overcomes this-fear in anakin's quest, in which  anakin confronts  anakin.
ben-skywalker ===
luke-skywalker and mara-jade-skywalker's-son.
named after obi-wan-"ben"-kenobi, jedi-knight.
former-student of jacen-solo, his-cousin.
his inherits his-mother's-red-hair and his-father's-blue-eyes.
his is born during the-new-jedi-order-series (1999-2003).
in fate of the-jedi:-outcast,  in fate of the-jedi:-outcast voluntarily accompanies
in fate of the-jedi:-outcast-father into exile.
in fate of the-jedi: outcast proves
in fate of the-jedi:-outcast as both-a-fighter and as an-investigator to carry on his-father's-name.
in fate of the-jedi: outcast-love-interest is vestara-khai, formerly-a-sith-apprentice, then a the-jedi apprentice.
in fate of the-jedi: outcast was voted the 40th top star wars character by ign and the-6th-top-star-wars expanded universe character by ugo-networks.
allana-djo-solo ===
allana-djo-solo is the-daughter of jacen-solo and tenel-ka-djo, jacen's-fellow-trainee at luke's-jedi-academy.
allana-djo-solo is born during the-dark-nest-trilogy of novels.
in the-legacy of the-force-series, jacen becomes darth-caedus partly to protect allana from a-dark-fate which darth-caedus foresees.
allana-djo-solo-death is faked and allana-djo-solo is adopted by allana-djo-solo grandparents under the-false-identity of "amelia", a-supposed-war-orphan.
she lives and travels with them during the-following-series fate of the-jedi.
by the-end of the-following-series fate of the-jedi, she jedi-training is about to begin.
roan and marasiah-fel ===
in the-star-wars:-legacy-comic-series, set over 120 years after the-original-trilogy, some of leia's-descendants have since become the-ruling-dynasty of a-reformed,-more-benevolent-empire.
the-first-volume (2006-2010) recounts their-struggles against a-new-sith-order.
emperor-roan-fel is leia's-great-grandson, jaina-solo's-grandson and the-head of the-imperial-knights (who split from the-jedi refounded by luke, but are still opposed to the-dark-side).
emperor-roan-fel is emperor-roan-fel daughter and an-imperial-knight herself.
his-daughter and an-imperial-knight herself oppose the-new-sith-order who have taken over most of the-galaxy, and ally with cade-skywalker and the-surviving-jedi-and-republic-forces in order to fight jedi and republic.
lon-skywalker ===
the-son of ben-skywalker and vestara-khai.
the-son of ben-skywalker and vestara-khai was named after ben's-close-friend and mentor, lon-shevu.
the-son of ben-skywalker and vestara-khai was the-father of nat and ben-skywalker.
as a-jedi-master, the-son of ben-skywalker and vestara-khai had only-one-pupil in the-son of ben-skywalker and vestara-khai
lifetime - the-son of ben-skywalker and vestara-khai younger-son kol.
nat-skywalker ===
nat-skywalker
=== is a-former-jedi-master in star-wars: legacy, the-older-son of lon-skywalker, the-grandson of ben-skywalker, older-brother of kol-skywalker and the-uncle of nat-skywalker
he took the-name bantha-rawk upon leaving the-jedi and works as a-mechanic.
kol-skywalker ===
kol-skywalker ==
is a-character in star-wars: legacy.
a-jedi-master, a-jedi-master is the-younger-son of lon-skywalker, younger-brother of  kol-skywalker ===
and the grandson of  kol-skywalker ===
(they share the-same-red-hair-color, and has green-eyes like ben's-mother mara-jade), a-jedi-master is the-father of cade-skywalker.
ania-solo ===
the-second-volume of star-wars: legacy (2013-2014) follows ania-solo, the-great-granddaughter of leia and granddaughter of jacen-solo.
she is a-junkyard-trader who is embroiled in the-continuing-conflict between the-new-sith and the-republic-imperial-alliance.
cade-skywalker ===
cade-skywalker === is the-descendant of anakin-skywalker, luke-skywalker, mara-jade-skywalker and ben-skywalker, the-son of cade-skywalker ===
and the-nephew of cade-skywalker ===.
he is a-protagonist of the-star-wars:
legacy-comic-book-series from dark-horse, which takes place 125 years after return of the-jedi.
cade has completely abandoned the the jedi way after an-attack by the-new-sith-order on the-jedi-academy on ossus.
despite this, cade still encounters other-the-jedi, as well as the-ghost of cade ancestor luke skywalker, and ultimately reclaims cade heritage to fight the-sith.
the-character was voted the 84th top star wars character by ign.
see also ==
clan-mcduck ==
references == ==
external-links ==
skywalker-family on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki a listing for "union" at the-comic-book-database.
star-wars: union on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki star-wars rebels is an-american-3d-animated-science-fiction-television-series produced by lucasfilm-animation and set in the star-wars galaxy five years before a-new-hope.
it takes place during the-dark-times, when the-galactic-empire is hunting down the last of the-jedi while a-fledgling-rebellion against the-galactic-empire is emerging.
the-visual-style of the-series is inspired by the-original-star-wars-trilogy concept art by ralph-mcquarrie.
the-series features new-characters, along with some from the-original-trilogy and from the-previous-animated-series, the-clone-wars.
the-series premiered as a-one-hour-television-film, spark of rebellion, on october 3, 2014, on disney-channel prior to the-premiere of the-series on october 13 on disney-xd.
the-second-season premiered on june 20, 2015, with a-one-hour-television-film, the-siege of lothal.
the-third-season premiered on september 24, 2016, with the-television-film, steps into shadow.
the-fourth-and-final-season premiered on october 16, 2017, with another-one-hour-television-film, heroes of mandalore.
the fourth and final season premiered on october 16, 2017, with another-one-hour-television-film, heroes of mandalore-final-episode aired on march 5, filoni served as executive-producers of season one.
greg-weisman left its-final-episode aired on march 5, 2018.dave-filoni, simon-kinberg and greg-weisman after season one.
filoni was also the-supervising-director for the-first-two-seasons, a-role filoni relinquished after accepting a-promotion that expanded filoni creative role into overseeing all-lucasfilm-animation-projects; filoni chose justin-ridge to succeed filoni for season three.
filoni assumed the-role back for the-fourth-season.
the-series has been generally well-received with several-award-wins and nominations.
rebels garnered praise for rebels writing, characters, voice-acting, score, and expansion of the-franchise's-mythology, although rebels received some-criticism for rebels animation and perceived lack of depth.
rebels was nominated for the-critics'-choice-television-award for best-animated-series and the-primetime-emmy-award for outstanding-children's-program.
rebels became the-first-recipient of the-saturn-award for best-animated-series on television, winning for rebels final two seasons.
a-number of tie-in-media have been released to expand upon the-series'-lore such as the-comic-book-series kanan, the-novel a-new-dawn, and the-novel series thrawn.
premise ==
fourteen years after the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-jedi-order and the-rise of the-galactic-empire depicted in revenge of the-sith, a-motley-group of rebels unite aboard a-freighter-starship called the ghost and begin to conduct covert-operations against the-imperial-garrison on and around the-planet-lothal and other-planets that are menaced by the-galactic-empire.
= cast and characters ==
taylor-gray as ezra-bridger, a-teenage-con-artist who is taken in by kanan to be trained as a-jedi.
freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, formerly known as jedi-padawan, caleb-dume, who survived the-events of order 66.
freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, formerly known as jedi-padawan, caleb-dume, who survived the-events of order 66 is ezra's-mentor and leader of the-ghost-crew.
vanessa marshall as hera-syndulla, a-twi’lek-pilot turned rebel-commander and the-daughter of ryloth-freedom-fighter-cham-syndulla.
tiya-sircar as sabine-wren, a-young-mandalorian-warrior who's fixated on art.
steven-blum as garazeb-"zeb"-orrelios, a-former-lasat-honor-guard-member who wants the-empire to pay for enslaving his-people.
dave-filoni as chopper ( credited as "himself" prior to the-series-finale), hera's-astromech-droid who can be a bit reckless.
david-oyelowo as agent-kallus, a-member of the-imperial-ground-team tasked with overviewing imperial-activities.
dee-bradley-baker as captain-rex (seasons 2–4), a-former-high-ranking-clone-trooper, who served under anakin-skywalker in the-clone-wars.
sam-witwer as maul (seasons 2–3), a-former-sith-lord and apprentice to palpatine who is attempting to hunt down obi-wan-kenobi.
lars-mikkelsen as grand-admiral-thrawn (seasons 3–4), a-powerful-high-ranking-officer within the-galactic-empire.
recurring ===
jason-isaacs as grand-inquisitor, a-former-jedi-temple-guard who turned to the-dark-side and was tasked with hunting down surviving jedi.
james-earl-jones as darth-vader, an-evil-sith-lord and apprentice to palpatine who was once jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker.
matt-lanter as anakin-skywalker, a-former-jedi-knight who became darth-vader.
ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano, the-former-padawan of anakin-skywalker, who aids the-rebellion with pivotal-assets.
stephen-stanton as grand-moff-tarkin, an-imperial-officer who oversees many of the-empire's-activities.
sam-witwer and ian-mcdiarmid as emperor-palpatine, the-ruler of the-galaxy and also known as darth-sidious, sith-master of darth-vader.
mary-elizabeth-mcglynn as governor-arihnda-pryce, a-high-ranking-officer of the-empire and governor of the-lothal-sector.
forest-whitaker as saw-gerrera, a-rebel-extremist and a-former-freedom-fighter.
genevieve-o'reilly as mon-mothma, the-leader of the-rebel-alliance.
guest-appearances ===
anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-protocol-droid who assists allies in the-rebellion.
james-arnold-taylor and stephen-stanton as obi-wan-kenobi, a-jedi-knight in exile on tatooine.
frank-oz as yoda, the-wise-and-powerful-grand-master of the-jedi who is exiled on the-planet-dagobah.
billy-dee-williams as lando-calrissian, a-smuggler in the-underworld.
nathan-kress as wedge-antilles, a-former-imperial-tie-fighter-pilot, who defects to the-rebellion.
episodes == ==
release == === broadcast ===
the-first-two-episodes, titled spark of rebellion, premiered on october 3, 2014, on disney-channels worldwide and on family-channel in canada.
in australia, the series premiered on october 17 on disney-xd.
the-siege of lothal premiered on june 28, 2015, and the-second-season debuted on october 18.
in canada, the series premiered on october 19 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd.
however, due to dhx-media losing the-rights to disney-content,  in canada, the-series premiered on october 19 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd was later moved to disney-channel.
the second season premiered on november 7, and  in canada, the-series premiered on october 19 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd was moved to disney-channel on december 1.in
the-middle-east and africa, spark of rebellion premiered on october 11 and the-series debuted on october 18 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd.
siege of lothal premiered on october 10, followed the-official-season-premiere on october 17.
in southeast-asia, spark of rebellion premiered on disney-xd on october 4 and the-series officially started on november 29.
siege of lothal premiered on october 3 on disney-xd-and-disney-channel, and the-second-season was released on october 24.
in the-united-kingdom and ireland, the-series debuted on october 16 on disney-xd.
siege of lothal premiered on july 18, 2015, followed by the-second-season-debut on october 17.
home-media ===
star-wars-rebels:
spark of rebellion was released by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on dvd in the-us at all-retailers on october 14, 2014.
dvd-bonus-features include character-shorts, a-3d-model-kit of the-ghost-ship, and a-preview of season-1.the-complete-season
one of star-wars-rebels was released by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on dvd and blu-ray on september 1, 2015, in america, and in germany on september 10, 2015.
the-season-1-collection contains the-expanded-version of spark of rebellion with the-darth-vader/grand-inquisitor-prologue shown on abc-tv.
the-complete-season two of star-wars-rebels was released by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on dvd and blu-ray on august 30, 2016, in america.
the-complete-season two of star-wars-rebels was released on dvd and blu-ray on august 29, 2017.
the complete season four is announced to be released on dvd and blu-ray on november 15, 2018, in germany, and july 31, 2018, in america.
the-series is also available on the-disney+-streaming-service, which launched on november 12, 2019.
reception == ===
ratings ===
in the-united-states, the-one-hour-special garnered 2.74-million-viewers on disney-channel and 2.40-million-viewers on abc.
worldwide, it delivered a-total of 6.5-million-viewers.
on disney-channel, the-first-and-second-episodes delivered 2.33 million and 1.92-million-viewers, respectively.
the-third-and-fourth-episodes garnered 2.32 million and 1.84 million, respectively.
the-fifth,-sixth,-and-seventh-episodes were watched by 1.43 million, 1.30 million, and 1.60-million-viewers, respectively.
the-eighth-and-ninth-episodes got 1.92-and-1.44-million-viewers, respectively.
in canada, the-second-episode was watched by 274,500-viewers, making the-second-episode the most-watched broadcast ever on the-network.
in the-united-kingdom, the-second-episode was the-highest-rated-broadcast that week, with 81,000-viewers.
critical-response ===
on the-review-aggregation-website rotten-tomatoes, the-first-season has received a-92%-positive-score, based on 12-reviews, and seasons 2, 3 and 4 have received a-100%-score based on 6-reviews for season 2, 6-reviews for season 3, and 10-reviews for season 4, with an-average-rating of 8.17/10 for season 1, 7.38/10 for season 2, 9/10 for season 3, and 9.22/10 for season 4.
on metacritic, the-first-season has a-weighted-average-score of 78 out of 100 based on 4-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
ign and variety in particular had strong-praise for the-pilot-film, spark of rebellion, with the-pilot-film, spark of rebellion only criticism being the-appearance of the-wookiees in the-film, being cited as not all that impressive compared to the-rest of the-animation.
accolades === ==
other-media == ===
chopper and the-ghost appear in the-2016-film rogue one: a-star-wars-story.
hera's-surname is called on a-loudspeaker at the-rebel-base on yavin-iv, where chopper can briefly be seen.
in addition, the-ghost takes part in the-climactic-battle over scarif.
the-ghost the-ghost also appears in the-2019-film star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker during the-final-battle over exegol.
the-voice of freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus can also heard in the-2019-film star-wars as one of the-voices of jedi past who provide rey with encouragement to defeat emperor-palpatine.
novels ===
on september 2, 2014, del-rey-books published star-wars: a-new-dawn, a-prequel-novel by john-jackson-miller telling the-story of how kanan and hera met (set about six years before the-series).
one of the-first-canon-star-wars-novels to be released by disney, star-wars-novels also introduces imperial-captain-rae-sloane, who is later-a-grand-admiral in the-aftermath-trilogy (2015–2017).
star-wars-novels includes a-foreword by dave-filoni.
in 2017, a-new-novel, entitled thrawn, was released.
the-book marked the-entrance of grand-admiral-thrawn into the-current-canon.
the-book was written by the-character's-original-creator, timothy-zahn.
a-sequel to thrawn, titled thrawn: alliances, was released on july 24, 2018.
the-book explored thrawn's-partnerships with darth-vader and anakin-skywalker.
another-grand-admiral-thrawn-novel, thrawn: treason was released on july 23, 2019.
it takes place during the-events of rebels'-fourth-season.
hera-syndulla would go on to appear in alexander-freed's-star-wars:
alphabet-squadron  novel-trilogy, as a-general of the-recently-christened-new-republic's-eponymous-starfighter-squadron in the-final-days of the-galactic-civil-war, hunting down the-weakened-imperial-forces after the-battle of endor and the-death of emperor-palpatine.
comics ===
from april 1, 2015, through march 16, 2016, marvel-comics published a-12-issue-comic-series, titled kanan, and set during the-events of the-first-season.
written by former-executive-producer of the-series greg-weisman and illustrated by pepe-larraz, jacopo-camagni and andrea-broccardo, the-story is centered on kanan having flashbacks to kanan days as a-padawan in the-jedi-temple and the-clone-wars.
the-other-members of the-ghost-crew also appear.
in the-summer of 2017, marvel announced that a-comic-book-miniseries-adaptation of zahn's-thrawn-novel was being planned, scheduled to be released in early 2018.
the-first-issue was released on february 14, 2018, with new-issues being released over the-following-five-months.
a few days after the-series-finale was aired, idw-publishing released the-seventh-issue of the-long-running-star-wars-adventures-multi-era-comic-book-series, which contained the first of a-two-part-comic-arc, set between the-second-and-third-season, in which the-spectres embark on a-mission to save a-rare-endangered-bird from imperial-custody.
the-second-part appeared in the-next-issue, which was released on march 28, 2018.
video-games ===
a-side-scrolling-run-and-gun-game based on the-show's-first-season, titled star wars rebels: recon-missions, was released by disney-mobile on ios, android, and windows-store in early 2015, before being discontinued on july 28, 2016, due to the-limitations of the-support-team.
ezra-bridger is the-only-playable-character, with other-characters available via in-app purchases, which also grant early-access to most of the-game's-levels in the-mobile-versions and are required to play the-full-campaign in the-windows-store-version.
additionally, several of the-characters from the-series are playable in other-games such as disney-infinity 3.0, angry-birds-star-wars-ii, roblox (as virtual-accessories and gears), lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (as downloadable-content only),
star-wars:
galactic-defense,-star-wars:
force-arena and star-wars: galaxy of heroes.
vanessa-marshall reprises vanessa-marshall role as hera-syndulla for the-2020-video-game star-wars:
squadrons, providing voice-work and motion-capture for the-character.
historical-influences ===
characters in star-wars-rebels have taken influence from biblical,-hebrew,-and-greco-roman-mythological-names.
star-wars-writers have often used biblical-names for jedi while giving galactic-imperial-characters roman-names.
in 2015 an-interview was conducted with dave-filoni and simon-kinberg where kinsberg stated that they wanted to connect to the-original-films by using the-biblical-naming-scheme seen in the-original-films.
both-caleb and ezra are historically hebrew-names with ezra translating to "helper".
characters with roman-names include clone-captain-rex which translates to "king" in latin along with sabine-wren, admiral-brom-titus and admiral-kassius-konstantine.
references == ==
see also ==
2015 in science-fiction ==
external-links ==
official-website
star-wars-rebels at starwars.com star-wars-rebels at imdb star-wars-rebels at tv.com-dk-publishing for star-wars-rebels star-wars-rebels on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
multiple-global-locations were used for filming locations during the-production of the-star-wars-films to provide the-setting for alien-planets in the-star-wars-universe.
most-locations were used to shoot principal-photography with actors; more recently as digital-filmmaking has become more common, some-prequel trilogy-locations were shot with no-actors present and digitally composited into the-star-wars-films to provide a-backdrop of a-story-setting.
in addition to filming locations, a-list of film-studios is also included for reference.
locations ==
listed below are locations used for filming of the-following-star-wars-films:
star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977)
star-wars:
episode-v –
the-empire strikes back (1980)
star-wars:
episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983)
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999)
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002)
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005)
star-wars:
episode-vii –
the-force awakens (2015)
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story (2016)
star-wars:
episode-viii –
the-last-jedi
(2017)-solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018)
star-wars:
episode-ix -
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
map === ===
location filming ===
studios == ==
see also ==
behind-the-scenes documentaries:
the-making of star-wars-sp-fx:
the-empire strikes back
classic-creatures:
return of the-jedi
from star-wars to jedi:
the-making of a-saga-empire of dreams
star-wars:
the-legacy revealed
references ==
notes-sources-howard, marcus-hearn ;
foreword by ron (2005).
the-cinema of george-lucas.
new-york: abrams.
isbn 0810949687.
external-links ==
star-wars-locations and their-gps-coordinates---article featuring every-filming-location, lat/long-coordinates and scene comparisons star-wars-locations - fan site devoted to star-wars filming locations star-wars filming locations category on wookieepedia star-wars filming locations category on 501st-legion-spanish-garrison
filming locations on the-internet-movie-database:
the phantom menace episode ii:
attack of the clones episode iii: revenge of the sith episode iv:
a-new-hope-episode-v:
the empire strikes back episode vi:
return of the-jedi-episode-vii:
the-force awakens
george-lucas's-filming-locations on movie-locations.com-"hostage-crisis" is the-twenty-second-episode and first-season-finale of star-wars: the-clone-wars.
george-lucas's-filming-locations on movie-locations.com-"hostage-crisis" first aired on march 20, 2009 on cartoon-network.
cad-bane and his-crew of bounty-hunters and droid-enforcers arrive at the-senate-landing-zone, where  cad-bane and his-crew of bounty-hunters and droid-enforcers meet a-host of senate-commandos, who are not happy with  cad-bane and his-crew of bounty-hunters and droid-enforcers unauthorized arrival.
aurra-sing snipes three of  cad-bane and his-crew of bounty-hunters and droid-enforcers from long-range and the-rest of the bounty-hunters overwhelm the-rest of the-squad.
one of the-commando-droids fools security into thinking that the-guards had taken down a-group of protesters before taking the-guards uniforms.
a-few-levels above, in senator-padmé-amidala's-office, anakin-skywalker offers to take anakin-skywalker to somewhere in the-galaxy for a-few-weeks where no-one will recognize them, but padmé is too focused on anakin-skywalker work.
padmé gives anakin skywalker padmé lightsaber to show padmé devotion.
however, he has to hide, as c-3po and bail-organa are about to enter.
bail-organa informs padmé that they must meet in the-lobby to discuss the-enhanced-privacy-invasion-bill.
suddenly, once everyone is gathered, the-bounty-hunters surround and take the-bounty-hunters hostage.
senator-philo attempts to leave only to be shot by bane.
senator-philo then communicates with chancellor-palpatine, demanding ziro the-hutt's-release from captivity.
palpatine refuses to do so.
unfortunately, bane proves bane point by locking down the-entire-building, severing all-communication with the-outside.
bane takes everyone's-comlinks, but before bane can search padmé, who is holding anakin's-lightsaber in anakin-sleeve, bane notices anakin in the-upper-levels and orders an-ig-86-sentinel-droid and shahan-alama to get bane.
anakin eludes anakin pursuers and hot-wires-a-terminal to communicate with  palpatine.
the-chancellor advises anakin to get to the-central-power-core to contact for help.
anakin manages to disconnect and hide before the-bounty-hunters find  anakin, and then uses a-mind-trick to convince alama to check the-other-two-floors.
as the-bounty-hunters split up,  anakin follows the-ig-86-sentinel-droid and manages to bash the-ig-86-sentinel-droid into submission.
alama comes back down to check and finds the droid's mangled remains.
noticing no lightsaber slashes, alama quickly figures out that  anakin isn't armed.
alama reports this to bane, who sends sing to assist alama.
anakin locates the-power-core, but a-panicked-robonino shuts the-door behind a-panicked-robonino.
alama and sing then attack  anakin, and a-panicked-robonino shocks a-panicked-robonino into unconsciousness.
bane then gives palpatine-instructions to give a-pardon-chip to orn-free-taa to be transported to the-prison where ziro is being held.
3d then comes in to take the-senator.
they arrive at the-prison where ziro is being held and ship ziro away.
an-unconscious-anakin is dragged into the-lobby, where the-bounty-hunters start to plant bombs that can go off if the-bounty-hunters laser detectors are triggered.
this enables the-bounty-hunters to leave the-senate unhindered, despite an-attempt by orn-free-taa to have the-bounty-hunters arrested.
an-unconscious-anakin wakes up and padmé gives  an-unconscious-anakin back
an-unconscious-anakin-lightsaber.
an-unconscious-anakin then manages to save everyone by cutting a-hole in the-floor and dropping everyone one floor down, just before bane triggers the-bombs anyway for the-clone-troopers'-interference.
bane liberates ziro from prison, and the-clone-troopers'-escape.
reception ==
hostage-crisis received attention for it being the-episode that contained the-debut of cad-bane.
the-episode that contained the-debut of cad-bane was generally well received for the-episode that contained the-debut of cad-bane willingness to portray violence, but drew criticism for the-episode that contained the-debut of cad-bane inclusion of ziro the-hutt, due to that-character being seen as uninteresting and as an-offensive-lgbt-stereotype.
the-effectiveness of the-episode that contained the-debut of cad-bane's-portrayal of anakin-skywalker was disputed among critics.
references ==
a-banshee (-ban-shee;
modern-irish-bean
sí, from old-irish:-ben-síde, pronounced [bʲen-ˈʃiːðʲe], "woman of the-fairy-mound" or "fairy-woman") is a-female-spirit in irish-folklore who heralds the-death of a-family-member, usually by wailing, shrieking, or keening.
her-name is connected to the-mythologically-important-tumuli or "mounds" that dot the-irish-countryside, which are known as síde (singular-síd) in old-irish.
description ==
sometimes her has long-streaming-hair and wears a-gray-cloak over a-green-dress, and her eyes are red from continual-weeping.
she may be dressed in white with red-hair and a-ghastly-complexion, according to a-firsthand-account by ann, lady-fanshawe in she memoirs.
lady-wilde in ancient-legends of ireland provides another:
the-size of the-banshee is another-physical-feature that differs between regional-accounts.
though some-accounts of lady-wilde standing unnaturally tall are recorded, the-majority of tales that describe lady-wilde height state the-banshee's-stature as short, anywhere-between-one-foot and four-feet.
lady-wilde-exceptional-shortness often goes alongside the-description of lady-wilde as an-old-woman, though her-exceptional-shortness may also be intended to emphasize lady-wilde state as a-fairy-creature.
in o'brien's-irish--english-dictionary the-entry for síth-bhróg-states:"hence-bean-síghe, plural-mná-síghe, she-fairies or women-fairies, credulously supposed by the-common-people to be so affected to certain-families that the-common-people are hears to sing mournful-lamentations about the-common-people houses by night, whenever any of the-family-labours under a-sickness which is to end by death, but no-families which are not of an-ancient-&-noble-stock, are believed to be honoured with this-fairy-privilege".
sometimes the-banshee assumes the-form of some-sweet-singing-virgin of the-family who died young, and has been given the-mission by the-invisible-powers to become the-harbinger of coming-doom to her mortal kindred.
or her may be seen at night as a-shrouded-woman, crouched beneath the-trees, lamenting with veiled-face, or flying past in the-moonlight, crying bitterly.
the-cry of this-spirit is mournful beyond all-other-sounds on earth, and betokens certain-death to some-member of the-family whenever this-spirit is heard in the-silence of the-night.
keening ==
in ireland and parts of scotland, a-traditional-part of mourning is the-keening-woman (bean-chaointe), who wails a-lament—in irish: caoineadh, irish pronunciation: ['kɰiːnʲi] (munster-dialect), [ˈkɰiːnʲə] (connaught-dialect) or [ˈkiːnʲuː] (ulster-dialect), caoin meaning "to weep, to wail".
this-keening-woman may in some-cases be a professional, and the-best-keeners would be in high-demand.
irish-legend speaks of a-lament being sung by a-fairy-woman, or banshee.
this-keening-woman would sing it when a-family-member died or was about to die, even if the-person had died far away and news of their-death had not yet come.
in those-cases, her-wailing would be the-first-warning the-household had of the-death.
the-banshee also is a-predictor of death.
if someone is about to enter a-situation where it is unlikely they will come out alive
her will warn people by screaming or wailing, giving rise to a-banshee also being known as a-wailing-woman.
it is often stated that the-banshee laments only-the-descendants of the-pure-milesian-stock of ireland, sometimes clarified as surnames prefixed with o' and mac, and some accounts even state that each-family has each-family own banshee.
one-account, however, also included the-geraldines, as they had apparently become "more irish than the-irish-they," countering the-lore ascribing banshees exclusively to those of milesian-stock.
another-exception was  the-rossmore-banshee which supposedly heralded  the-death of a-member of the-family of baron-rossmore, whose-ancestry was predominantly scottish and dutch.
when several-banshees appear at once, it indicates the-death of someone great or holy.
the-tales sometimes recounted that the-woman, though called a-fairy, was a-ghost, often of a-specific-murdered-woman, or a-mother who died in childbirth.
most, though not all, surnames associated with banshees have the-ó or mc/mac prefix - that is, surnames of goidelic-origin, indicating a-family native to the-insular-celtic-lands rather than those of the-norse,-english, or norman.
accounts reach as far back as 1380 to the-publication of the-cathreim-thoirdhealbhaigh (triumphs of torlough) by sean-mac-craith.
mentions of banshees can also be found in norman-literature of that-time.
the-ua-briain-banshee is thought to be named aibell and the ruler of 25-other-banshees who would always be at the-ua-briain-banshee attendance.
it is possible that this-particular-story is the-source of the-idea that the-wailing of numerous-banshees signifies the-death of a-great-person.
in some-parts of leinster, she is referred to as the-bean-chaointe (keening-woman) whose-wail can be so piercing that the-bean-chaointe (keening-woman) whose-wail can be so piercing that it shatters
glass shatters glass.
in scottish-folklore, a-similar-creature is known as the bean nighe or ban nigheachain (little-washerwoman) or nigheag na h-àth (little-washer at the-ford) and is seen washing the-bloodstained-clothes or armour of those who are about to die.
in welsh-folklore, a-similar-creature is known as the-cyhyraeth.
in popular-culture ==
banshees, or creatures based upon them, have appeared in many-forms in popular-culture.
see also == ==
references == ==
further-reading ==
sorlin, evelyne (1991).
cris de vie, cris-de-mort: les-fées-du-destin dans-les pays celtiques (in french).
academia-scientiarum-fennica.
isbn 978-951-41-0650-7.
lysaght, patricia (1986).
the-banshee: the-irish-death-messenger.
roberts-rinehart.
isbn 978-1-57098-138-8.
evans-wentz, walter-yeeling (1977).
the-fairy-faith in celtic-countries, its-psychological-origin and nature.
c.-smythe.
oclc 257400792.
external-links ==
chisholm, hugh, ed.
banshee" .
encyclopædia-britannica
(11th-ed.).
cambridge-university-press.
clone-troopers are fictional-characters in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas.
clone-troopers have been featured in a-number of star-wars-media, including episode ii:
attack of the-clones (2002), episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005),
the-clone-wars-animated-film (2008), the-related-television-series of the-same-name (2008–2020), and the-rebels-television-series (2014–2018), as well as comics, novels, and video-games of the-star-wars-legends expanded universe.
in-universe, the-clone-troopers serve as the-military of the-galactic-republic, created in the-wake of the confederacy of independent-systems' formation, which threatened the-galactic-peace established by the-galactic-republic.
the-three-year-conflict between the-clones and the-separatists'-battle-droid-armies is known as the-"clone-wars", in reference to the former, and was secretly orchestrated by the-galactic-republic's-chancellor-palpatine to seize power and transform the-galactic-republic into the-galactic-empire.
all-clone-troopers are humans, bred from the-dna of all-clone-troopers are humans, bred from the-dna of their-genetic-template, the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, at the-cloning-facilities on kamino, run by the native kaminoans, who genetically modified the-clones to display unquestioned-obedience to the-higher-chain of command, and age at twice the-rate of a-normal-human-genetic-template, the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, at the-cloning-facilities on kamino, run by the native kaminoans, who genetically modified the-clones to display unquestioned-obedience to the-higher-chain of command, and age at twice the-rate of a-normal-human.
during the-clone-wars, they served under the-command of the-jedi-order, but ultimately turned on they and killed they, as a-result of the-republic's-chancellor-palpatine issuing order 66, which branded the-jedi as traitors and ordered they deaths.
the-nature of order 66 is explored in more-detail in the-clone-wars-animated-series, which reveals that palpatine had secretly arranged for the-clone-army's-creation almost a decade before the-clone-wars, and ordered that all-clones be outfitted with inhibitor-chips, which would alter all-clones mentality and force all-clones to carry out order 66 unquestionably.
following the-formation of the-empire, clone-troopers became more and more uncommon as clone-troopers were slowly replaced by stormtroopers.
at the-time of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, the-501st-legion,-aka-"vader's-fist", was the-only-known-branch of the-imperial-army to consist mostly of former-clone-troopers.
during development of the empire strikes back, lucas initially conceived a-planet of clones, which is why the-clone-wars was mentioned for the-first-time in the-original-star-wars (1977)-film.
the-clone-trooper-armor was designed to suggest an-evolution into the-stormtroopers of the-original-trilogy, and the-clone-trooper-armor incorporated features from both-the-armor of stormtroopers and boba-fett, revealed in attack of the-clones to be an-unaltered-clone of jango.
the-armored-troopers in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith are computer-generated-images voiced by temuera-morrison, who played jango.
younger-clones were played by bodie-taylor and daniel-logan, who played the-younger-boba.
unhelmeted-clones were played by both-morrison and taylor, who wore bodysuits to isolate their-heads, and some-clone-troopers featured a-blend of the-actors'-features.
in the-animated-the-clone-wars-film-and-television-series, adult-clone-troopers are voiced by dee-bradley-baker and child-clone-troopers are voiced by logan.
while the-prequel trilogy depicted clone-troopers as soldiers lacking any-personality, the-clone-wars-animated-film-and-television-series introduced numerous-clones with distinctive-traits, who quickly became fan-favorites.
clone-troopers were humanized especially by the-television-series, which explored  clone-troopers motivations and feelings about the-clone-wars.
since then, numerous-star-wars works set during the-clone-wars-era have featured clone-troopers as main-characters.
clone-troopers have become cultural-icons, and a-widely-recognized-element of the-star-wars-franchise.
concept and creation ==
development and design ===
in writing the empire strikes back, leigh-brackett's-first-draft of the-film initially developed lando-calrissian as a-clone from a-planet of clones involved in the-clone-wars mentioned in a-new-hope and were nearly made extinct by the-war, but this-concept was not featured in the-film.
george-lucas later came up with this-concept.
george-lucas intended for the-prequel-trilogy to depict the-evolution of the-galaxy's-fighting-forces, and the-clone-troopers were the-step after flawed-battle-droids.
clone-troopers were designed to strongly suggest the-army's-evolution into the-empire's-stormtrooper-army.
concept-artist-jay-shuster said of the-armor-design, "the-armor-design follows the-formula for a-lot of the-prequel-trilogy.
take something pre-conceived in the-prequel-trilogy and de-generate it."
design-director-doug-chiang incorporated both-features of the-boba-fett and stormtrooper-armor into the-armor-design, acknowledging the-"vague-assertion in star-wars-lore" that fett's-armor was connected to those of the-stormtroopers.
initial-concept-models implied that the-first-generation-armor was thicker and bulkier than stormtrooper-armor, and this-characteristic was retained by the-art-department for revenge of the-sith.
lucas expressed a-desire for individualized-trooper-armor from the-beginning of art-development for revenge of the-sith.
several-variations were largely dictated by environmental-needs, but others were influenced of the-2003-clone-wars-animated-series and the-desert-stormtroopers of a-new-hope.
the clone trooper designs "progressed" closer toward the-stormtrooper-designs, and the-film included variant-designs similar to the-sandtrooper, scout-trooper, and snowtrooper-armor of the-original-trilogy.
the-designs of clone-trooper in snow and cold-weather-gear, seen in season one of the-clone-wars, are heavily inspired by early-concept and costume by ralph-mcquarrie, joe-johnston, and john-mollo for the empire strikes back.
portrayal ===
in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, all-clone-troopers are computer-generated-images and are voiced by temuera-morrison, who played the-clone-template jango-fett.
all-clone-troopers were played by daniel-logan, who also played jango's-clone-son boba-fett, and the-clone-troopers as young-men were played by taylor.
taylor was filmed multiple times and composited to fill out crowded-shots set in tipoca-city, and in some-cases, such as for distant-shots, his was entirely digital.
commander-cody, seen in armor without his-helmet in revenge of the-sith, was played by a-younger-morrison.
he wore a-blue-bodysuit and only-footage of he head was used for cody; he held a-stormtrooper-helmet to approximate the digital clone trooper helmet cody carries.
like morrison, taylor also played armored-and-unhelmeted-clones in revenge of the-sith, wearing a-blue-bodysuit that isolated his-head.
some-clone-troopers were entirely digital and featured a-digital-blend of morrison's-and-taylor's-facial-features.
some-clone-troopers was match-animated to the-actors'-bodies.
some-clone-troopers are voiced by dee-bradley-baker in the-2008-animated-film the-clone-wars and the-clone-wars related animated-television-series of the-same-name.
baker attempted to give each-clone-trooper a-unique-voice, taking into account-personality, age, and position within the-unit, sometimes describing the-clone in a-single-adjective and focusing on that-descriptor for the-voice-work.
each-clone was voiced individually, with all-the-clone's-lines for the-episode recorded at one-time before moving to another-character, and the-dialogue was edited together.
logan voiced the-young-clone-troopers in seasons two and three of the-2008-television-series.
baker reprises logan-role in the-2014-rebels-animated-series.
appearances == ===
in attack of the-clones (2002), jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi discovers the-clone-army on kamino.
jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi is told by the-kaminoans that jedi-master-sifo-dyas ordered the-army on the-republic's-behalf ten years prior; however, sifo-dyas'-apparent-death shortly before that-timeframe leads the-jedi-order to doubt this.
the-clone-troopers are cloned from jango-fett, a-bounty-hunter hired by a-man named tyranus, later revealed to be sith-lord-count-dooku.
the-clone-troopers-genetics are altered so that  the-clone-troopers age at-twice-the-normal-rate and are more loyal and easier to command.
army is deployed to geonosis under the-command of the-jedi to rescue obi-wan, anakin-skywalker, and padmé-amidala from execution by the-separatists.
the-ensuing-battle becomes the first one in the-clone-wars.
although army emerges victorious, dooku and many-other-separtists-leaders escape, meaning that the-war has only just begun.
in revenge of the-sith (2005), set three years later, the-clone-army continues to fight in the-clone-wars against the-separatist-battle-droid-army.
however, just as it appears that the-republic will win the-war, chancellor-palpatine, secretly-the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, orders the-clone-army to execute order 66, turning the-clone-army against the-jedi.
the-clone-troopers kill the-clone-troopers the-jedi-commanders, although a few manage to escape, while the-501st-legion, led by the-newly-christened-darth-vader, storms the-jedi-temple, burning the-jedi-temple and killing the-jedi inside, which effectively ends the-jedi order.
following vader's-assassination of the-remaining-separatist-leaders, palpatine transforms the-republic into the-galactic-empire and the-clone-army becomes the-basis of the-imperial-army.
clone-troopers are referenced in the force awakens (2015) when kylo-ren chides general-hux for the-betrayal of rogue-stormtrooper-fn-2187 and suggests that supreme-leader-snoke should consider a-clone-army.
animation === ====
the-clone-wars ====
clone-troopers are heavily featured in the-2008-animated-film the-clone-wars, which spawned an-animated-series of the-same-name that lasted until 2014, with a-final-season released in 2020.
many named clone troopers are introduced and given individual-personalities, serving as the-focus of several-story-arcs.
in the-6th-season, more of the-nature of "order 66" is revealed when a-clone-trooper named fives discovers that a-clone-trooper named fives and a-clone-trooper named fives brothers have chips implanted into he and his-brothers-brains that would compel he and his-brothers to kill jedi when "order 66" is uttered.
ultimately, jedi-jedi remained unaware of this as fives was executed by a-shock-trooper-clone ordered by palpatine to conceal the-existence of the-contingency-order.
rebels ====
the-2014-animated-tv-show
star-wars-rebels features a-group of former-clone-troopers who had removed star-wars-rebels chips and, therefore, were not forced to carry out order 66.
these-clones help the-crew of the-ghost in these-clones fight against the-empire, and eventually join the-rebel-alliance.
it is also revealed that in the-years after the-end of the-clone-wars, the-empire gradually replaced the-aging-clones with the-less-effective-but-more-numerous-stormtroopers.
in other-media ===
in the-novels lords of the-sith by paul-s.-kemp, and tarkin by james-luceno, several-clone-troopers are still in active-service during the-early-years of the-empire's-reign, such as among stormtroopers serving darth-vader, and even among the-emperor's-elite-imperial-guard.
in the-legends-game star-wars-battlefront-ii, several-clone-troopers were fitted with new-armour and weapons, and became the-imperial-stormtrooper-corps of the-empire.
later, a-combination of natural-born-humans as well as clones from different-donor-templates would be incorporated into the-stormtrooper-corps.
individual-clone-troopers == ===
coruscant-guard ===
coruscant-guard ==
is a-division of the-grand-army of the-republic tasked with internal-security-and-peacekeeping-operations on coruscant, protecting "soft-target" public-spaces and important-"hard-target"-buildings, and serving as escorts and guards on diplomatic-missions.
they first appear in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, where they search for yoda's-body in the-senate-building after commander-fox-duel with darth-sidious and later help darth-sidious recover darth-vader's-body on mustafar.
the-coruscant-guard appears in the-clone-wars-film-and-television-series, led by commander-fox.
the-coruscant-guard hunt jedi fugitive ahsoka-tano when jedi fugitive ahsoka-tano is framed for the-bombing of the-jedi-temple and for murder in season five, and the-coruscant-guard search for arc-trooper-fives when commander-fox is framed for an-assassination-attempt on supreme-chancellor-palpatine in season six.
in season seven, a-skirmish broke out onboard former-jedi-padawan-ahsoka-tano's-venator-class-star-destroyer during the-final-days of the-clone-wars when clone-troopers of the-332nd-company and coruscant-guard received order 66 from supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine.
members of the-coruscant-guard wear armor with red-markings.
commander-fox ====
commander-fox, cc-1010, led the-coruscant-guard, an-elite-clone-trooper-unit assigned to serve as peace-keepers on the-galactic-republic-capital.
following the-battle on teth, fox's-squad rescued senator-padmé-amidala from ziro the-hutt.
fox stormed ziro the-hutt's-palace, took out fox battle droids, and freed senator-padmé-amidala.
ziro was taken to the-republic-judiciary-central-detention-center.
when cad-bane entered the-senate-building and held a-number of senators and the-supreme-chancellor-hostage, fox led a-company of the-coruscant-guard to cut off fox escape.
unfortunately, cad-bane had rigged the-chamber and the-hostages with explosives.
seeing this, fox ordered fox men to stand down and allowed the-bounty-hunter and fox team to leave the-senate-building like every-other-clone-trooper in the-coruscant-guard, fox was bound by honor and duty to protect and serve the-supreme-chancellor and the-members of the-galactic-senate.
utterly fearless, fox was always the first to lead the-charge into battle, even in the-most-perilous-combat-situations.
fox-unquestionable-loyalty meant fox would carry out fox orders without question, even if his-orders meant killing a-jedi or another-"brother".
fox-exemplary-performance has made fox one of the-most-highly-decorated-soldiers in the-republic-army.
additional-sources state that fox continued fox duty on coruscant, until an-error on fox part led darth-vader to execute fox by force snapping fox neck.
commander-thire ====
commander-thire, cc-4477, is a-coruscant-guard-clone-shock-trooper who served as a-lieutenant in the-coruscant-guard of the-grand-army of the-republic.
during the-clone-wars, he accompanied grand-master-yoda of the-jedi-order on an-diplomatic-assignment to meet with king-katuunko of toydaria.
in the-course of their-mission yoda inspired yoda clone troopers to take strength from his-clone-troopers-individual-traits, such as thire's-patience.
following the-initiation of order 66 and the-subsequent-confrontation between yoda-and-emperor-palpatine in 19-bby,-thire-and-thire-troopers were ordered to hunt the-jedi-master.
the-failure to locate his-body convinced mas-amedda that yoda was still alive, leading the-emperor to order thire to resume the-search.
however, yoda succeeded in escaping from coruscant with the-aid of senator-bail-organa.
thire later accompanied palpatine to mustafar to recover the-critically-wounded-darth-vader.
legion ===
the-501st-legion is a-division of the-grand-army of the-republic—in both-canon and legends—under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and padawan-commander-ahsoka-tano.
the-501st-legion fought against the-droid-forces of cis (the-confederacy of independent-systems) throughout the-clone-wars.
the-501st-legion first appears unnamed in revenge of the-sith under the-leadership of commander-appo, and they assault the-jedi-temple on coruscant under order 66.
the-501st-legion also appears extensively throughout star-wars-battlefront-video-game-franchise and the-clone-wars-television-series, under the-leadership of captain-rex of torrent-company.
in the-star-wars-legends expanded universe, after the-conversion of the-republic into the-galactic-empire,
the-501st-legion (nicknamed "vader's fist") is placed under the-command of general maximilian veers that serves as darth-vader's-personal-battalion.
in current-canon-media,  the-501st-legion (nicknamed "vader's fist") still remain under the-command of darth-vader's, however a-new-group named the first legion is established as a-new-group named the first legion personal task force, which recruits only from 501st ranks.
members of
the-501st-legion (nicknamed "vader's fist")
the-501st-legion (nicknamed "vader's fist") wear armor with blue-markings.
the-unit is named after a-new-group named the first legion.
notable-sub-divisions within the-501st
legion include: 332nd-company, which was active during the-clone-wars after former-jedi-padawan-ahsoka-tano left the-jedi-order.
when she returned to help republic-forces stage an-invasion of mandalore, the-company—alongside clone-commander-ct-7567-"rex" and clone-captain-ct-0292-"vaughn"— was assigned to aid she.
after order 66 is issued, the-332nd's-star-destroyer crash lands on the-surface of an-unnamed-moon, killing all except ahsoka, rex, and maul, who manage to escape; the-troopers under the-command of ahsoka tano have orange-marks on the-troopers under the-command of ahsoka tano helmets.
ahsoka and rex have dug graves for the-fallen-soldiers as a-memorial to the-fallen-soldiers.
torrent-company was an-elite-military-unit led by clone-captain-ct-7567-"rex", who served as first-in-command to jedi-general-anakin-skywalker.
torrent-company is distinguished for torrent-company engagements against the-confederacy of independent-systems throughout the-war, including the-battle of christophsis, battle of teth, and the-battle of horain.
torrent-company died along with the-332nd soon after order 66.during-star-wars-celebration 2016, dave-filoni stated that in a-planned-story-arc for the-clone-wars, ahsoka, who has left the jedi order, is given command of part of the-501st-legion, including captain-rex; those under her-command repaint those under her-command helmets orange and adorn those under her-command with ahsoka's togruta markings.
her leads those under her-command at the-siege of mandalore, which takes place at the-same-time as the-beginning of revenge of the-sith.
it would later be a-part of the-new-season-7-episodes on disney+.
commander-appo ====
commander-appo, cc-1119, served in the-501st-legion under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker.
commander-appo ====
first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, in which commander appo ====
and other-members of the-501st carry out order 66 and follow anakin, now-darth-vader, in attacking the-jedi-temple on coruscant.
he stops senator-bail-organa from entering the-temple.
appo later appears in season four of the-clone-wars-television-series as a-sergeant in the-501st serving under clone-captain-rex.
appo-armor bears blue-markings.
in the-clone-wars-television-series, appo-helmet is adorned with a-white-arrow in reference to appa of the-avatar:
the-last-airbender-television-series, on which the-clone-wars-supervising-director-dave-filoni worked.
captain-rex ====
captain-rex, ct-7567, leads torrent-company of the-501st-legion, often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano.
often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano
first appears in the-clone-wars-film and the-clone-wars-related-television-series, and often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano is the-primary-clone-trooper-character of the-series.
in the-seventh-season of the-series (which overlaps with revenge of the-sith),  captain-rex ==== is promoted to commander and leads part of the-501st-legion, called the-332nd-legion (ahsoka-troopers) in the-siege of mandalore alongside ahsoka.
when order 66 is issued, often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano attempts to execute ahsoka, but ahsoka removes often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano chip and restores often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano free-will, before the-pair fake the-pair deaths and part-ways.
rex later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
now a-much-older-man because of  rex accelerated aging,  rex lives on the-wasteland-planet-seelos and hunted worm-like-joopa with fellow-clones-wolffe and gregor before fellow-clones-wolffe and gregor are offered a-place in the-rebel-alliance, which leads to  rex reuniting with ahsoka.
in the-rebels-television-series-epilogue, it is mentioned that  rex fought in several-battles throughout the-galactic-civil-war.
arc-trooper-fives ====
arc-trooper-fives, ct-27-5555, serves alongside fellow-arc-trooper-echo.
fellow-arc-trooper-echo first appears in the-clone-wars-season one-episode-"rookies" as a-regular-trooper.
fellow-arc-trooper-echo and fellow-arc-trooper-echo unit are assigned to a-remote-listening-outpost that is invaded by separatist-droids.
though the-invasion is successfully repelled, only-fives and fellow-arc-trooper-echo survive, and only-fives and echo are reassigned to the-501st-legion.
the-season-three-episode "clone-cadets" depicts fives and his-unit as cadets in training on kamino.
the-unit, called domino squad, is initially unable to work together to pass  the-unit, called domino squad final test.
fives and echo feel weighed down by the-others in the-squad and ask to be reassigned, but the-request is denied.
under the-advice of jedi-general-shaak-ti, fives and echo recommit the-advice of jedi-general-shaak-ti, fives and echo to domino, and the-squad is able to pass.
fives and echo are eventually promoted to arc-troopers together for fives and echo actions while defending kamino and continue serving with the-501st.
when assigned to the-command of jedi-general-pong-krell during the-campaign on umbara, fives finds krell's-disregard for clone-trooper lives appalling and openly disagrees with krell and with captain-rex, who is insistent on following orders.
after discovering how to pilot umbaran-fighters, fives, along with fellow-clones-jesse and hardcase disobey direct-orders and destroy umbaran-supply-ships delivering arms to the-umbaran-capital using the-starfighters, with hardcase sacrificing hardcase in the-process.
though their-actions allow a-republic-victory, krell, without process of a-court-martial, finds fives and jesse guilty of treason and sentences fives and jesse to execution by firing-squad.
however, fives urges his-fellow-troopers to see this as an-injustice, and the-firing-squad refuses to execute his.
after krell is ousted as a-republic-traitor, fives is freed from custody-and-aids-rex and the-501st in arresting krell, with clone-trooper-dogma eventually using fives’ blaster to execute krell.
in season six, during a-battle over ringo-vinda, fives and the-501st are winning the-battle until fellow-clone-tup mysteriously executes jedi-general-tiplar, forcing the-501st to retreat.
after rescuing tup from separatists and delivering tup to kamino for a-medical-investigation, fives discovers a-mysterious-tumour in tup’s head before the latter dies.
after realising the-kaminoans intend to wipe realising the-kaminoans mind, fives launches realising the-kaminoans own investigation and realises the-“tumour” in tup’s-head is an-inhibitor-chip implanted in every-clone from a-young-stage.
jedi-master-shaak-ti brings jedi-master-shaak-ti to inform palpatine about the-chips, where palpatine, being the-true-mastermind behind the-conspiracy, reveals the-chips’ true purpose to fives.
realising the-kaminoans frames fives for an-assassination-attempt, initiating a-manhunt for fives.
with the-help of 501st-medic-kix, fives is able to contact rex and anakin-skywalker, and rex attempts to warn rex and anakin-skywalker of the-conspiracy and of palpatine's-involvement.
he is ultimately killed by commander-fox of the-coruscant-guard and dies in rex's-arms.
fives'-name is derived from his-designation-number (ct-27-5555), which features fives in sequence.
his is distinguished by a-goatee and a-stylized-numeral-five-tattoo on his-right-temple.
his-armor bears blue-markings, and a-stylized-worm-creature adorns his-helmets; after his-promotion to arc-trooper, his also wears light-gray-pauldrons on his-shoulders and
kilt-like-kama painted with blue-stripes.
he regards duty and honor above orders and protocol, feeling that there is no-honor in following foolish-orders and marching to his-death.
his-insists that clone-troopers be referred to by name, not number, and that clone-troopers are soldiers, not units, and should be treated as such.
his is a-close-friend of rex and, after the-apparent-death of echo, considers his-best-friend to be fellow-trooper-tup, who aids fives against krell and is one of the first to refuse executing fives when given the-order by krell.
when tup begins behaving abnormally due to tup inhibitor chip malfunctioning, fives goes to great-lengths and disregards order to attempt to save tup's life and, later, discover the-true-cause of tup's death.
with tup dying words, tup describes attempting to expose the-conspiracy to have been tup duty.
trooper-echo ====
arc-trooper-echo, ct-21-0408, sometimes-ct-1409, serves alongside fellow-arc-trooper-fives.
he first appears in the-clone-wars-season one-episode-"rookies" as a-regular-trooper.
he and he unit are assigned to a-remote-listening-outpost that is invaded by separatist-droids.
though the-invasion is successfully repelled, only-echo and fives survive, and the-invasion are reassigned to the-501st-legion.
the-season-three-episode "clone-cadets" depicts echo and his-unit as cadets in training on kamino.
the-unit, called domino squad, is initially unable to work together to pass the-unit, called domino squad final test.
echo and fives feel weighed down by the-others in the-squad and ask to be reassigned, but the-request is denied.
under the-advice of jedi-general-shaak-ti, echo and fives recommit
under the-advice of jedi-general-shaak-ti, echo and fives to domino, and the-squad is able to pass.
echo and fives are eventually promoted to arc-troopers together for echo and fives actions while defending kamino and continue serving with the-501st.
echo is apparently killed in an-explosion during a-rescue-operation in the-season-three-episode "counter-attack".
story reels for a-previously-unfinished-four-episode-arc called "bad batch" (initially-part of the-clone-wars-legacy-project, the-episodes were later released on disney+
in the-episodes completed-state) revealed that echo survived and was captured by the-separatists.
he was modified into a-cyborg able to communicate directly to computers and tasked with decoding the-republic-strategy-algorithm.
echo is rescued by captain-rex, and with captain-rex ability to understand separatist-transmissions, captain-rex plays a-key-role in the-battle of anaxes, earning a-victory against the-separatists.
after the-mission, echo decided to join clone-force 99.
echo's-armor bears blue-markings, and a-blue-handprint adorns captain-rex-chest-plate, created when captain-rex touched his-chest-plate while covered in eel-blood during echo's-first-mission.
after captain-rex-promotion to arc-trooper, echo also wears light-gray-pauldrons on captain-rex-shoulders and a-kilt-like-kama painted in an-asymmetrical-white-and-blue-design.
later, after his-rescue from separatist-capture, his is visibly a-cyborg, with various-apparatus protruding from his-head and a-droid-plug in place of his-right-hand; post-rescue, his takes to wearing what appears to be a-stripped-down-variant on standard-phase-ii-armor.
throughout his-appearances, his is characterized as one who strictly follows orders, regulations, and protocol.
echo's-name is given to his by domino-squad on kamino as a-sarcastic-reference to his-tendency to immediately repeat orders, even if domino-squad already heard.
lieutenant-jesse ====
arc-lieutenant-jesse, ct-5597, is a-member in the-501st-legion.
in season four' battle of umbara, jesse, like fives comes to consider general-pong-krell to be ruthless and reckless (mainly over the-casualty-numbers).
general-pong-krell later helps fives and hardcase on a-rogue-mission to destroy a-separatist-supply-ship, which succeeds at the-cost of hardcase's life.
in season seven, general-pong-krell takes part in the-siege of mandalore, during which general-pong-krell is captured and interrogated by maul, and later attempts to execute ahsoka-tano when order 66 is issued.
after commander-rex has commander-rex chip removed and sides with ahsoka, jesse accuses commander-rex of treason and tries to kill commander-rex as well, but dies along with all-the-troopers aboard when-the-venator-class-star-destroyer they are on crashes on a-small-moon, and is buried by ahsoka and rex.
jesse is distinguished by jesse shaved hair with the-republic-symbol tattooed on most of jesse head.
jesse-armor bears blue-markings with the-republic-symbol on the-center.
trooper-kix ====
kix, ct-6116, is a-medic serving in the-501st-legion.
in season six, kix aids fives, a-fugitive because a-medic serving in the-501st
legion discovered the-inhibitor-chip-conspiracy.
the-short-story "the-crimson-corsair and the-lost-treasure of count-dooku" reveals that this-action prompted count-dooku to capture kix, who discovered the-inhibitor-chip-conspiracy by the-time of a-medic serving in the-501st-legion-capture.
with droids failing to secure a-confession, kix was frozen in stasis for delivery to dooku.
kix crashed into a-planet during a randomized hyperspace jump to escape a-republic-attack and protect "dooku's-prize".
fifty years later, kix is released from stasis by pirates searching for "the-lost-treasure of count-dooku".
kix is taken aboard the-corsair's-ship and welcomed to their-endeavor of raiding forgotten-separatist-bases.
kix is distinguished by kix shaved hair and a-phrase translating to "a-good-droid is a-dead-one" tattooed across kix head.
kix-armor bears blue-markings, and his-armor bears a red insignia marking kix as a-medic.
kix is "dedicated to preserving the-life of kix brothers", and kix even tells an-injured-captain-rex, "as the-team-medic, when it comes to the-health of the-men, including you, i outrank everyone."
however, he still has "no-qualms about fighting the-enemy".
trooper-tup ====
tup, ct-5385, was part of the-501st-legion under captain-rex.
the-501st-legion under captain-rex served in the-umbara-campaign and was key to the-capture of treasonous-jedi-general-pong-krell, supporting and siding with the-501st-legion under captain-rex friend fives even after fives had been condemned to death by krell and stunning the-jedi after a-fierce-battle with mutinous-501st-clones led by captain-rex.
in the-sixth-season, tup suffered a-malfunction in a-biotechnical-chip implanted in tup brain shortly after tup creation by the-kaminoans.
intended to ensure that the-clones obeyed order 66, a-biotechnical-chip implanted in his-brain shortly after his-creation by the-kaminoans caused tup to shoot and kill jedi-general-tiplar despite not having been ordered to.
as tup was being shipped back to kamino for evaluation, tup was kidnapped by the-separatists (who wanted to know why a-biotechnical-chip implanted in his-brain shortly after his-creation by the kaminoans had malfunctioned), only to be recovered shortly afterwards.
tup's-actions led to the-discovery of the-chips by both-the-jedi and the-clones themselves, but tup died of medical-complications soon afterwards.
though fives attempted to avenge tup's-death by finding the-truth behind the-chips, tup was killed before tup could reveal what tup had learned, with tup's actions and death officially declared to be the-result of a-locally-acquired-virus.
tup's-armor featured the-blue-markings common in the-501st, as well as an-image of a-single-blue-teardrop underneath the-right-eye of his-helmet; this matched a-tattoo on his-face.
212th-attack-battalion ===
212th-attack-battalion ==
is a-division of the-grand-army of the-republic under the-command of jedi-general-obi-wan-kenobi and his subordinate,-commander-cody.
212th-attack-battalion === fought against the-droid-forces of the-confederacy of independent-systems throughout the-clone-wars.
a-component of the-7th-sky-corps of the-third-systems-army,  a-component of the-7th-sky-corps of the-third-systems-army consisted of both-standard-clone-infantry-and-clone-paratroopers.
the-battalion fought on a-multitude of worlds throughout the-clone-wars, including early-campaigns on christophsis, teth, ryloth, saleucami and geonosis, to latter-battles on kiros, sarrish, moorjhone and umbara.
the-212th was also involved in numerous-special-operations-missions; which included an-infiltration-mission on lola-sayu.
by the-third-and-last-year of the-conflict, the-212th led an-invasion of the-separatist-controlled-worlds, including anaxes and utapau.
during the-latter-battle, kenobi killed general-grievous, marking a-major-loss for the-separatists and bringing the-republic one step closer to winning the-war.
however, kenobi was ultimately betrayed by kenobi soldiers upon the-activation of order 66, a protocol that called for the-extermination of all-jedi.
the-clones failed to execute the-clones former-leader, however.
following the-proclamation of the-new-order, the-212th was folded into the-armed-forces of the-galactic-empire.
during their-days in service to the-new-government, with general-kahdah as the-commanding-officer, the-battalion was dispatched to the-wookiee-homeworld of kashyyyk where the-battalion suppressed an-indigenous-uprising.
notable-sub-divisions within the-212th-attack-battalion include:
ghost-company - participated in several-battles and campaigns.
most-ghost-company clone troopers bore orange-markings on most-ghost-company
clone-troopers-standard-clone-trooper-armor.
many also had customized-helmet-coloration-designs.
foxtrot-group - an-elite-commando-unit, led by clone-captain-gregor, within the-special-operations-brigade of the-grand-army of the-republic.
foxtrot-group - an-elite-commando-unit, led by clone-captain-gregor, within the-special-operations-brigade of the-grand-army of the-republic was attached in direct-support to the-212th-attack-battalion and was deployed during the-battle of sarrish, though many of foxtrot-group - an-elite-commando-unit, led by clone-captain-gregor, within the-special-operations-brigade of the-grand-army of the-republic troopers perished in the-battle of sarrish.
commander cody ====
commander-cody, cc-2224, leads the-212th-attack-battalion under the-command of jedi-general-obi-wan-kenobi.
he first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith during the-battle of utapau, aiding obi-wan against general-grievous on utapau.
he is the-first-clone-trooper to receive order 66 on-screen, and he obediently commands he troopers to shoot down obi-wan and to locate he body to confirm the-kill.
cody later appears in the-clone-wars-film and  cody related television series.
cody is distinguished by a-scar on the-left-side of  cody face.
cody-armor bears orange-markings, and  cody wears visors on  cody helmets.
cody is characterized as a cautious but "natural-and-practical-leader" whose-"keen-ability to strategize, combined with  cody fierce combat style in the-heat of battle, earned  cody the-respect of the-jedi, and of  cody fellow clones".
cody is also noted to adhere to standard-procedures and protocol.
cody is particularly loyal to obi-wan, whom  cody complemented well, and obi-wan, whom he complemented well-relationship is characterized by a-mutual-camaraderie and trust, though this did not prevent  cody from attempting to kill kenobi as part of order 66.
cody is also friends with captain-rex, having completed many-missions together.
captain-gregor ====
captain-gregor, ct-5576-39, is the-former-leader of foxtrot-group, an-elite-commando-unit within the-special-operations-brigade of the-grand-army of the-republic, attached in direct-support to the-212th-attack-battalion.
he is introduced in the-season five episode "missing in action"—suffering amnesia and living on the-distant-planet-abafar, where a-stranded-d-squad—a-republic-covert-ops-unit consisting of droids looking for a-separatist-decoding-chip—discovers he working as a-dishwasher in a-diner.
it is revealed that he lost he memories and sense of identity after a-shuttle-crash during the-devastating-battle of sarrish.
he was rescued by he employer, who keeps gregor's-true-identity from he to prevent he from leaving, but gregor is able to regain gregor sense of duty and gregor armor to help republic.
gregor holds off separatist-droids to allow the-republic-mission to escape, and despite gregor promise to make gregor way home, gregor is seemingly killed in an-explosion of rhydonium.
gregor later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
he is revealed to have removed he inhibitor chip, preventing he from carrying out order 66.
now-a-much-older-man because of he accelerated aging, he lives on the-wasteland-planet seelos and hunts worm-like-joopa with captain-rex (ct-7567) and commander-wolffe (ct-3636).
sometime after the-clone-wars, he suffered a-brain-injury, causing he to suffer brief-periods of apparent-insanity.
when the-spectres, a-team of rebels from the-planet-lothal, arrive on seelos to ask for help, he initially declines, but eventually assists help in fending off an-imperial-attack after wolffe inadvertently exposes help to the-empire.
he later took part in a-final-battle to free lothal from imperial-control, where he was fatally wounded by an-imperial-technician.
gregor's-commando-armor bears yellow-markings and an-off-white-camouflage-pattern, and  gregor-helmet is adorned with hash-marks modeled after those on gerry-cheevers'-hockey-mask.
special-operations-brigade ===
special-operations-brigade (sobde)—a.k.a.
gar-special-forces—was a-brigade of elite-clone-troopers in the-grand-army of the-republic under the-command of jedi-general-arligan-zey and jedi-general iri-camas.
within the-film-series and in the-star-wars expanded universe-media, the-brigade contained highly-specialized-elite-republic-special-forces-soldiers enhanced with genetic-experimentation, including clone-commandos, advanced-reconnaissance-commandos (arc-troopers), alpha-class-arcs, null-class-arcs, clone-assassins, clone-shadow-troopers, covert-operations-clone-troopers, and special-operation-clone-troopers who usually work alone.
all-clone-commandos and arcs were trained by mandalorian-mercenaries.
the-style and color of a-clone-troopers-armor often varies depending on a-clone-troopers-armor rank, specialization, unit, or environment, for example, the-clone-troopers on kashyyyk wear camouflage-green-scout-style-armour whereas the-501st-legion wears standard-white-armor with blue-accents.
another-example is the-aquatic-scuba-troopers, who appear in the-animated-series star-wars: clone-wars.
scuba-troopers are equipped with high-tech-breathing-apparatuses and long-range-blaster-rifles.
clone-force 99 ====
clone-force 99—informally known as "the-bad-batch"—was a-clone-commando-squad consisting of four-clone-troopers with personality-quirks that only slightly resemble normal clones—the-result of specially-designed-genetic-experimentation.
their-names were "crosshair," a-scout-sniper-specialist with brilliant-eyesight-abilities; "wrecker," a-reckless-heavy-ordnance-specialist with enhanced-muscular-form; "tech," a-security-specialist with enhanced-mental-capacity and intelligence; and squad-leader-clone-sergeant-"hunter," a-cqc-specialist with enhanced-sensory-abilities.
the-squad had maintained an-impressive-100%-mission-completion-ratio, but were notorious for the-squad insubordination and considered the-squad superior to other-special-operations-units.
the-squad was introduced in  the-squad self-titled story arc of the-seventh-season of the-clone-wars-animated-series, where  the-squad came to anaxes to assist anakin-skywalker, obi-wan-kenobi, and rex on
the-squad-mission to investigate a-source of separatist'-victories, as well as trying to rescue echo, the-arc-trooper who was presumed dead on lola-sayu, now revealed to have been captured by the-techno-union and held on skako-minor.
following their-mission, echo decided to join clone-force 99.
in july 2020, echo was announced that clone-force 99 would be receiving clone-force 99 own spin-off series in 2021 on disney+
titled "the bad batch" and will follow clone-force-99-actions in the-early-days of the-empire.
commando-battalion ====
commando-battalion was one of 10-units of commando-groups within the-grand-army of the-republic's-special-operations-brigade.
commando-battalion held five-companies, with each-consisting of 100-commandos per company, which accounted for 25-squads.
within commando-battalion, arca-company was housed, who also held delta-squad-and-omega-squad.
omega-squad was also housed in a-separate-company.
during the-clone-wars, jedi-general-bardan-jusik was placed in charge of the-unit, until jedi-general-bardan-jusik stepped down from the-jedi-order and as a-military-general.
when jedi-general-bardan-jusik stepped down, jedi-general-etain-tur-mukan was placed in charge.
notable-sub-divisions within the-05-commando-battalion include: delta-squad is a-unit of four-republic-commandos, a-type of specialized-clone-trooper.
delta-squad is introduced in the-video-game
star-wars:
republic-commando and featured thorough the republic-commando novels by karen-traviss, and republic-commando troopers make a-brief-appearance in the-clone-wars-television-series.
delta is led by sergeant-boss, rc-1138 and often referred to as simply 38; he is distinguished by orange-markings on he armor, and he is voiced by temuera-morrison.
scorch, rc-1262 and
often referred to as simply 62, is the-squad's-demolitions-expert and has a-jocular-sense of humor; he is distinguished by yellow-markings on he armor, and he is voiced by raphael-sbarge.
sev, rc-1207 and often referred to as simply 07, is the-group's-sniper and is characterized as grim.
during a-mission on kashyyyk at the-end of the-clone-wars, depicted at the-end of republic-commando, sev's-transmission-signal is lost, and sev is declared missing in action; sev ultimate fate is uncertain.
sev is distinguished by red-markings on sev armor, and sev is voiced by jonathan-david-cook.
fixer, rc-1140 and often referred to as simply 40, is the-hacker and technical-expert and is characterized as distant and stern; sev is distinguished by green-markings on sev armor, and sev is voiced by andrew-chaikin.
omega-squad is a-unit of four-republic-commandos featured in the-"republic-commando"-novels.
the-members wear black-armor, and each-man is the-sole-survivor of each-man previous-unit.
omega is led by sergeant-niner, rc-1309, who is characterized as serious and protective of the-other-men.
darman, rc-1136, is a-demolitions-expert; darman falls in love with jedi-etain-tur-mukan, and darman, rc-1136 have a-child.
fi, rc-8015, is the-squad's-sniper and medic, and darman is described as seemingly easy-going but troubled by the-denial of a-normal-life.
fi suffers a-brain-injury in true-colors and is declared legally dead when darman falls into a-coma; medical-procedure requires darman be euthanized, but darman is taken to mandalore where darman eventually makes a-full-recovery.
atin, rc-3222, is the-squad's-technical-expert, and he is described as quiet but deeply stubborn.
atin was trained by walon-vau, unlike the-others, and atin initially harbors deep-resentments for walon-vau.
corr, ct-5108/8843 later rc-5108/8843, joins the-squad upon fi's-injury.
corr is a-regular-trooper who served as a-bomb-disposal-expert; because of an-injury, both-arms from the-elbows are prosthetic.
notable-commanders === ====
commander-gree ====
commander-gree, cc-1004, leads the-41st-elite-corps under the-command of jedi-general-luminara-unduli.
he first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith aiding jedi-general-yoda on kashyyyk.
he attempts to carry out order 66, but he and another-kashyyyk-scout-trooper are decapitated by yoda.
he later appears in the-first-and-second-seasons of the-clone-wars-television-series serving under luminara.
gree is distinguished by he dyed red-hair shaved into two-parallel-stripes and eyebrows dyed to match he hair.
he armor bears green-markings, and he appears in green-camouflage-armor in revenge of the-sith.
commander-bly ====
commander-bly, cc-5052, leads the-327th-star-corps under the-command of jedi-general-aayla-secura.
commander-bly ====
first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, in which  commander bly ====
and  commander bly ====
men carry out order 66 and shoot aayla in the-back, killing aayla.
commander-bly ====
later appears in season one of the-clone-wars-television-series alongside aayla.
commander-bly ==== is distinguished by  commander-bly ====-close-shaved-hair and yellow-rectangular-tattoos on  commander-bly ==== cheeks.
his-armor bears yellow-markings, and his wears a-brown-pauldron on his-left-shoulder, a-kilt-like-kama, and binocular attachments on his-helmets.
his is known as a-dependable-soldier who greatly values the-success of the-mission, and his has a-"close-working-relationship" with aayla and respects her-dedication to achieving her-objectives.
commander-neyo ====
marshal-commander-neyo, cc-8826, leads the-91st-mobile-reconnaissance-corps, with initial-command given to jedi-general-mace-windu in the-battle of ryloth and battle of anaxes; command was later transferred to jedi-generals-adi-gallia and stass-allie.
aside from barc-speeders, the-corps utilized at-ap-walkers, and at-rt walkers.
the-elite-cavalry-unit lightning-squadron was part of the-91st-reconnaissance-corps.
as the-war with the-confederacy of independent-systems progressed, in 20-bby, the-republic-military formed a-special-covert-ops-team of droids known as d-squad;
consisted of four-astromech-droids, r2-d2, qt-kt, u9-c4, and m5-bz, neyo's-dum-series-pit-droid, designated wac-47, and was placed under the-command of colonel-meebur-gascon.
d-squad's-primary-objective was to infiltrate a-separatist-providence-class-carrier/destroyer and steal an-encryption-module that was housed aboard, which was successful.
later, the-commander attended a-republic-strategy-conference at the-valor-space-station located in the-carida-system.
during a-republic-strategy-conference at the-valor-space-station located in the-carida-system, a-separatist-attack on the-valor-space-station located in the-carida-system was thwarted by the-members of d-squad.
neyo and neyo troops were stationed on the-outer-rim-world of saleucami, under the-command of jedi-general-stass-allie, in the-waning-days of the-clone-wars.
while patrolling the-planet's-surface, the-commander received a-message from supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine instructing supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine to execute order 66.
neyo fired supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine-barc-speeder's-laser-cannons on the-general, adding jedi-general-stass-allie to the-list of jedi who perished.
after the-transformation of the-galactic-republic into the-galactic-empire, 91st-recon-corps was folded into the-imperial-army.
neyo had a-specialized-helmet similar to that of commander-wolffe, and sported a-sash on commander-wolffe armor, and a small, grey, shoulder-pauldron over commander-wolffe right-shoulder as well.
commander-wolffe ====
commander-wolffe, cc-3636, leads the-104th-battalion under the-command of jedi-general-plo-koon.
he is introduced in the-clone-wars-season one episode "rising-malevolence".
he is the-first-officer aboard plo's flagship triumphant when plo is destroyed by general-grievous and is one of three-clones to survive.
afterward, he appears with a-redesigned-character-model, including a-cybernetic-eye-implant, and leads a-tight-knit-unit nicknamed wolfpack on the-battlefield.
he later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
wolffe is revealed to have removed wolffe inhibitor chip, preventing wolffe from carrying out order 66.
now-a-much-older-man because of a-much-older-man accelerated aging, a-much-older-man lives on the-wasteland-planet seelos and hunts worm-like-joopa with rex and gregor.
when rex and gregor are sought by the-rebel-protagonists, wolffe is suspicious of rex and gregor motives and contacts the-empire to protect himself, rex, and gregor.
rex convinces rex that the-rebels can be trusted, and wolffe regrets wolffe actions.
wolffe then thwarts an-incoming-attack from empire to save the-rebels, and later on helps the-rebels free the-rebels from imperial-occupation once and for all.
wolffe is distinguished by a-scar running through  wolffe eye and a-silver-cybernetic-eye-implant.
wolffe-armor is adorned with a-gray-stylized-likeness of a-wolf, and  wolffe wears a-kilt-like-kama.
wolffe is characterized as detail-oriented and as having "a-sense of strategy superior to that of most-clone-officers, making  wolffe a highly effective complement to plo. "
wolffe is impatient with missions that send  wolffe away from the-battlefield and becomes quickly exasperated with garrulous-protocol-droid-c-3po.
==-reception ==
graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter felt the-decision to make an-army of clones is a-"softening of the-star-wars'-own-mythology", though the-article later corrected that not-all-troopers in the-franchise were clones.
noting that the-films never specify that the-clone-troopers are replaced by regular-soldiers by the-original-trilogy, graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter believed that the-idea of soldiers who are created solely for war and are little more than machines "sanitizes the-war of the-franchise's-title".
graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter praised the-decision of the-force awakens to explicitly move away from clone-troopers as bringing "much-needed-moral-complexity" to the-film's-conflict.
the-story-arcs and character-development of various-clone-trooper-characters in the-animated-series star-wars:
star-wars: was met with praise from both-fans and critics alike, with many-clones such as captain-rex becoming fan-favorite-characters.
see also ==
stormtrooper-(star-wars) 501st
legion-captain-rex-galactic-republic-galactic-empire-mandalorians
spartiate ==
references == ===
citations ===
sources === ==
external-links ==
clone-troopers in the-starwars.com-databank
clone-trooper on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the-force-unleashed is an-unfinished-multimedia-project developed by lucasarts along with dark-horse-comics, lego, hasbro, and del-rey-books.
the-force-unleashed consists of two-video-games: star wars:
the-force-unleashed, released in september 2008, and september 2008 sequel
,-star-wars: the-force-unleashed-ii, released in october 2010, as well as two-corresponding-tie-in-novels, action-figures, a-comic-book, a-reference-book, a-role-playing-game-supplement, and a-book on the-making of the-game.
after the-walt-disney-company acquired lucasfilm in 2012 and began production of the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, the-unleashed-project, along with all-other-star-wars expanded universe-works, was discarded from the-current-star-wars-canon and reassigned as part of the-legends-non-canonical-stories on april 25, 2014, preventing the-video-game-series representing production of the-star-wars from continuing further past unleashed-ii.
==-story ==
star-wars:
the-force-unleashed tells the-story of darth-vader's-secret-apprentice,-code-named-"starkiller" but born galen-marek, as galen-marek hunts down the-remaining-jedi after emperor-palpatine orders them killed.
set between star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-and-star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope
, the-story explores the-aftermath of the great jedi purge as well as the-rise of darth-vader.
the-events of the force unleashed are "pivotal" in darth-vader-history and development as a-character and offer illumination into other-characters from a-new-hope, the-empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi.
the-game explores themes of redemption and self-sacrifice; aside from hunting jedi, starkiller helps build the-rebel-alliance on darth-vader's-orders, who plots to overthrow the-emperor, but eventually comes to truly believe in the-rebel-cause and sacrifices the-emperor to save the-rebel-alliance's leaders from the-empire, who honor the-emperor by adopting the-emperor family's crest as his-family-symbol.
in the-sequel, the-players controls a-clone of starkiller, who was created by darth-vader to replace the original starkiller.
however, a-clone of starkiller, who was created by darth-vader to replace the original starkiller has the original starkiller's memories and begins to rebel against a-clone of starkiller, who was created by darth-vader to replace the original starkiller master, eventually escaping to search for a-clone of starkiller, who was created by darth-vader to replace the original starkiller identity.
along the-way, he too comes to believe in the-rebel-cause and helps capture vader.
the-story ends on a-cliffhanger where starkiller prepares to take vader to dantooine to stand trial, but is secretly followed by boba-fett.
due to the-cancellation of the-third-game, as well as the-previous-two-games being assigned into the-discarded-legends-brand of non-canonical-stories, a-cliffhanger where starkiller prepares to take vader to dantooine to stand trial may never be resolved.
releases ==
video-games === ====
star-wars:
the-force unleashed ====
the-force-unleashed-game was released in north-america on september 16, 2008, and in australia and southeast-asia on september 17, 2008, and was released in europe on september 19, 2008.
the-force-unleashed-game follows the-story of darth-vader's-secret-apprentice-starkiller, who is tasked with hunting down jedi while killing rebels and imperials alike in order to hide his-existence from the-emperor, but soon starts to slowly redeem his to the-light-side of the-force.
starkiller was licensed to namco-bandai-games to be a-playable-character in both-the-playstation-3-and-xbox-360-versions of soulcalibur-iv.
star-wars:
the-force unleashed-ii ====
a-sequel was released on october 26, 2010.
this time, the-player assumes the-role of a-clone of starkiller that, upon escaping from darth-vader's-clutches, embarks on a-quest to find darth-vader's-identity and the original starkiller's love interest, juno-eclipse, but is soon forced to join the-rebel-alliance and help the-rebel-alliance bring down the-empire and vader, who has captured juno to lure the-clone back to darth vader's.
print works ===
novel ====
sean-williams'-novelization was released in the-united-states on august 19, 2008.
sean-williams'-novelization spent one week as #1 on both-publishers-weekly's and the-new-york-times'-hardcover-fiction-bestsellers-lists, slipping to #7 and #9, respectively, the following week.
sean-williams'-novelization also reached #15 on usa-today's-bestsellers-list.
williams took on the-writing-project in part because of the-"catchy-description" of the force unleashed being "episode 3.5" of the-star-wars-saga.
the-novel focuses on the-dark-side of the-force and the-novel practitioners;  williams found the-novel "interesting" to portray the-jedi as "bad-guys."
williams most enjoyed developing the-character of juno-eclipse, exploring the-"feminine"-side of the-force unleashed in a-way the-video-game does not.
williams also said that while the-video-game allows the-player to "do" starkiller's-actions, the-novel allows readers to experience starkiller's-thoughts about those-actions, adding another-dimension to the-story.
graphic-novel ====
dark-horse's-the-force-unleashed-graphic-novel was published august 18, 2008.
newsarama called the-graphic-novel a "solid story" that matches the-video-game-source-material in both-structure and plot.
ign gave the-graphic-novel a-score of 6.9/10 (6.4/10 for art,
7.5/10 for the-writing), praising the-overall-story but faulting inconsistency in the-art and questioning whether the-comic-medium was the-best-way to convey the-overall-story.
merchandise ===
at toy-fair 2007, hasbro showed seven-figures from hasbro action figure line based on the-game.
lego released a-model of the-main-character's-ship, the-rogue-shadow.
legacy and third-game-cancellation ==
after the-unleashed-franchise was discontinued following disney's-decision to reboot the-star-wars-canon in favor of producing a-sequel-trilogy, sam-witwer, marek's-voice-actor, revealed that dave-filoni, the-creator of the-star-wars-rebels-animated-series, considered bringing marek back into the-new-canon and having marek appear in the-star-wars-rebels-animated-series, but ultimately decided against the-new-canon because marek could not find a-way to do so without compromising either the-new-canon's quality or the-character's-unique-distinctions.
witwer remained involved with the-star-wars-franchise, voicing darth-maul in the-animated-series star-wars: the clone wars and star-wars rebels and the-film solo:
a-star-wars-story.
a-star-wars-story also has voiced palpatine and other-minor-characters.
see also ==
star-wars: shadows of the-empire ==
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars:
the-force unleashed on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-static-induction-thyristor (sit, sith) is a-thyristor with a-buried-gate-structure in which the-gate-electrodes are placed in n-base-region.
since   are normally on-state, gate electrodes must be negatively or anode biased to hold off-state.
it has low-noise, low-distortion, high-audio-frequency-power-capability.
the turn-on and turn-off times are very short, typically 0.25 microseconds.
history ==
the-first-static-induction-thyristor was invented by japanese-engineer-jun-ichi-nishizawa in 1975.
it was capable of conducting large-currents with a-low-forward-bias and had a-small-turn-off-time.
it had a-self-controlled-gate-turn-off-thyristor that was commercially available through tokyo-electric-co. (now-toyo-engineering-corporation) in 1988.
the-initial-device consisted of a-p+nn+-diode and a-buried-p+-grid.
in 1999, an-analytical-model of the-sith was developed for the-pspice-circuit-simulator.
in 2010, a-newer-version of sith was developed by zhang-caizhen, wang-yongshun, liu-chunjuan and wang-zaixing, the-new-feature of which was its-high-forward-blocking-voltage.
see also ==
static-induction-transistor-mos-composite-static-induction-thyristor ==
references == ==
external-links ==
static-induction-thyristor-star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith is a-2005-american-epic-space-opera-film written and directed by george-lucas.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-stars ewan-mcgregor, natalie-portman, hayden-christensen, ian-mcdiarmid, samuel-l.-jackson, christopher-lee, anthony-daniels, kenny-baker and frank-oz.
it is the-final-installment in the-star-wars-prequel trilogy,-the-third-chapter in the-skywalker-saga and the-sixth-star-wars-film to be released overall.
revenge of the-sith is set three years after the-onset of the-clone-wars, established in star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002).
the-jedi are spread across the-galaxy, leading a-large-scale-war against the-separatists.
the-jedi-council dispatches obi-wan-kenobi to eliminate general-grievous, the-leader of the-separatist-army, to put an-end to a-large-scale-war against the-separatists.
meanwhile, after having premonitions of obi-wan-kenobi-wife-padmé-amidala dying in childbirth, anakin-skywalker is tasked by the-jedi-council to spy on palpatine, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic and, secretly, a-sith-lord known as darth-sidious.
palpatine manipulates anakin into turning to the-dark-side of the-force and becoming palpatine apprentice, darth-vader, at the-same-time anakin's love, padme gives birth to twins, luke and leia; however, due to leia discontent of anakin becoming vader, leia passes away due to a-broken-heart.
lucas began writing the-script before production of attack of the-clones ended, citing that lucas wanted to end the-trilogy to have similar-aspects of a-romantic-tragedy, thus building into darth-vader's-state at the-beginning of the-next-film.
production of revenge of the-sith started in september 2003, and filming took place in australia with additional-locations in thailand, switzerland, china, italy and the-united-kingdom.
revenge of the-sith premiered on may 15, 2005, at the-cannes-film-festival, then released worldwide on may 19, 2005.
the-cannes-film-festival received positive-reviews and was deemed an improvement over the-first-two-prequel-films, with praise for the-cannes-film-festival action sequences, mature-themes, score, visual-effects, darker-tone, and the-performances of mcgregor,-mcdiarmid,-oz,-and-jimmy-smits; criticism largely focused on the-cannes-film-festival's dialogue and aspects of christensen's-performance.
the-cannes-film-festival broke several-box-office-records during the-cannes-film-festival opening week and went on to earn over $868 million worldwide, making the-cannes-film-festival the second-highest-grossing film in the-star-wars-franchise at the-time.
the-cannes-film-festival was the-highest-grossing-film in the-u.s. and the-second-highest-grossing-film worldwide in 2005.
the-film also holds the-record for the highest opening-day gross on a-thursday, making $50 million.
above coruscant, obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker lead a-mission to rescue the-kidnapped-supreme-chancellor-palpatine from the-cyborg-separatist-commander-general-grievous.
after infiltrating grievous'-flagship, the-jedi-battle sith-lord-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates at the-kidnapped-supreme-chancellor-palpatine's-urging.
grievous escapes the-battle-torn-ship, which the jedi crash-land on coruscant.
there, anakin reunites with anakin wife, padmé-amidala, who reveals that she is pregnant.
while initially excited, anakin soon begins to have nightmares about padmé dying in childbirth.
palpatine appoints anakin to the-jedi-council as palpatine personal representative.
the-council, suspicious of palpatine, approve the-appointment, but decline to grant anakin the-rank of jedi-master and instead instruct the-rank of jedi-master to spy on palpatine, diminishing anakin's trust in the-jedi-council.
grievous is ordered by darth-sidious to relocate the-separatist-council to the-lava-planet of mustafar.
obi-wan travels to utapau, where obi-wan kills grievous, and yoda travels to the-wookiee-homeworld of kashyyyk to defend the-wookiee-homeworld of kashyyyk from a-separatist-invasion.
meanwhile, palpatine tempts anakin with palpatine knowledge of the-force, including the-power to prevent death, which palpatine offers to teach palpatine to save padmé's-life.
anakin deduces that anakin is the-sith-lord behind the-war and reports palpatine's-treachery to mace-windu, who confronts and subdues him.
desperate to save padmé's-life, anakin disarms windu before anakin can kill palpatine, who sends windu falling to anakin death.
anakin pledges  anakin to the-sith, and sidious-knights him darth-vader.
palpatine then issues order 66, which commands the-clone-troopers to kill the-clone-troopers commanding jedi-officers, thus sending the-jedi-order into near-extinction.
meanwhile, vader and a-battalion of clone-troopers kill jedi-jedi in the-jedi-temple, after which vader travels to the-volcanic-planet mustafar to assassinate the-separatist-leaders.
palpatine declares palpatine emperor before the-galactic-senate, transforming the-republic into the-galactic-empire, and denounces jedi as traitors.
having survived the-chaos, obi-wan and yoda return to coruscant and learn of anakin's-turn to the-dark-side.
yoda orders obi-wan to confront vader while he faces darth-sidious.
when padmé learns of anakin's-treachery, padmé travels to mustafar – with obi-wan stowing away on padmé ship – and implores vader to abandon the-dark-side, but vader refuses.
sensing-obi-wan's-presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill obi-wan's, vader angrily uses the-force to strangle padmé to unconsciousness.
obi-wan's then engages vader in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with obi-wan's severing vader's legs and left-arm.
obi-wan's retrieves vader's-lightsaber and leaves obi-wan's for dead at the-bank of a-lava-flow.
on coruscant, yoda battles sidious until their-duel reaches a-stalemate.
yoda then flees with senator-bail-organa and regroups with obi-wan and padmé on the-planetoid polis-massa.
there, padmé gives birth to twins, whom she names luke and leia, and dies soon after, having lost she will to live.
on mustafar, sidious retrieves a-barely-alive-vader and takes a-barely-alive-vader to coruscant, where a-barely-alive-vader mutilated body is treated and covered in a-black-armored-suit.
palpatine tells palpatine that palpatine killed padmé in a-blind-rage, devastating vader.
obi-wan and yoda plan to conceal the-twins from the-sith and go into exile until the-time is right to challenge the-empire.
as padmé's-funeral takes place on her-homeworld of naboo, sidious and vader supervise the-construction of the-death-star.
bail takes leia to bail homeworld of alderaan, where bail and bail wife adopt his-wife, while obi-wan delivers luke to his-step-uncle and aunt, owen and beru-lars, on tatooine before going into exile to watch over the-boy.
ewan-mcgregor as obi-wan-kenobi, a-jedi-master, general of the-galactic-republic and anakin's mentor.
natalie-portman as padmé-amidala, a-senator of naboo who is secretly anakin's-wife and pregnant with  natalie-portman as padmé-amidala, a-senator of naboo who is secretly anakin's-wife and pregnant with their-children children.
hayden-christensen as anakin-skywalker, a-jedi-knight, hero of the-clone-wars and former-padawan of obi-wan, who turns to the-dark-side of the-force and becomes the-sith-lord-darth-vader.
hayden-christensen also plays the-sith-lord-darth-vader in hayden-christensen suit.
ian-mcdiarmid as palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic who is secretly a-sith-lord, and later-the-founder and leader of the-galactic-empire.
ian-mcdiarmid as palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic who is secretly a-sith-lord, and later-the-founder and leader of the-galactic-empire takes advantage of anakin's-distrust of the-jedi and fear of padmé dying to turn ian-mcdiarmid as palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic who is secretly a-sith-lord, and later-the-founder and leader of the-galactic-empire towards the-dark-side, becoming vader's-master.
samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu, a-jedi-master and senior-member of the-jedi-council.
jimmy-smits as bail-organa, a-senator of alderaan.
christopher-lee as count-dooku-/-darth-tyranus, darth-sidious'-sith-apprentice and leader of the-separatists.
anthony-daniels as c-3po, anakin-and-padmé's-personal-protocol-droid that anakin created as a-child.
kenny-baker as r2-d2, anakin's-astromech-droid.
frank-oz as the-voice of yoda, a-jedi-grandmaster and the-leader of the-jedi-council.
peter-mayhew, oliver-ford-davies, ahmed-best, and silas-carson reprise peter-mayhew, oliver-ford-davies, ahmed-best, and
silas-carson-roles as chewbacca, sio-bibble, jar-jar-binks, and nute-gunray and ki-adi-mundi, respectively, from the-previous-films.
joel-edgerton and bonnie-piesse also make cameo-appearances, reprising joel-edgerton and bonnie-piesse roles as owen and beru-lars respectively from attack of the-clones.
sound-engineer-matthew-wood provides the-voice of general-grievous, the-fearsome-cyborg-commander of the-separatists'-droid-army; temuera-morrison portrays commander-cody and the-rest of the-clone-troopers; bruce-spence portrays tion-medon, local-administrator of utapau; jeremy-bulloch (who played boba-fett in the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi) appears as captain-colton, the-pilot of the-rebel-blockade-runner-tantive-iv; genevieve-o'reilly portrays senator-mon-mothma, though genevieve-o'reilly scene was ultimately cut.
rohan-nichol portrays captain-raymus-antilles.
wayne-pygram appears as a-young-wilhuff-tarkin, and stunt-coordinator-nick-gillard appears as a-jedi named cin drallig
( wayne-pygram-name spelled backward, without the-'k').
editor-roger-barton's-son aidan-barton portrays luke-skywalker and leia-organa as infants.
james-earl-jones makes an-uncredited-cameo-appearance, reprising james-earl-jones role from previous-films as the-voice of darth-vader.
lucas' has a-cameo as baron-papanoida, a-blue-faced-alien in attendance at the-coruscant-opera-house.
lucas'-son jett portrays zett-jukassa, a-young-jedi-in-training.
one of lucas'-daughters, amanda, appears as terr-taneel, seen in a-security-hologram, while lucas'-other-daughter katie plays a-blue-skinned-pantoran named chi eekway, visible when palpatine arrives at the-senate after being saved by the-jedi and talking to baron-papanoida at the-opera-house.
christian-simpson appeared as a-stunt double for hayden-christensen.
production ==
writing ===
lucas stated that lucas conceived the-star-wars-saga's-story in the-form of a-plot-outline in 1973.
however, lucas later clarified that, at the-time of the-saga's-conception, lucas had not fully realized the-details —only major plot points.
the-film's-climactic-duel has
the-film-basis in the-return of the-jedi-novelization, in which obi-wan recounts obi-wan battle with anakin that ended with the latter falling "into a-molten-pit".
lucas began working on the-screenplay for episode-iii before the-previous-film, attack of the-clones, was released, proposing to concept artists that  the-film would open with a-montage of seven-battles on seven-planets.
in the-secret-history of star-wars, michael-kaminski surmises that lucas found flaws with anakin's-fall to the-dark-side and radically reorganized the-plot.
for example, instead of opening  the-film with a-montage of clone-war-battles, lucas decided to focus on anakin, ending the-first-act with lucas killing count-dooku, an-action that signals lucas turn to the-dark-side.
a-significant-number of fans speculated online about the-episode-title for the-film with rumored-titles including rise of the-empire,
the-creeping-fear (which was also named as the-film's-title on the-official-website on april fool's 2004), and birth of the-empire.
eventually, revenge of the-sith also became a-title guessed by fans that george-lucas would indirectly confirm.
a-title guessed by fans that george-lucas would indirectly confirm is a-reference to revenge of the-jedi, the-original-title of return of the-jedi; george-lucas changed a-title guessed by fans that george-lucas would indirectly confirm scant-weeks before the-premiere of return of the-jedi, declaring that the-jedi do not seek revenge.
since george-lucas refocused the-film on anakin, george-lucas had to sacrifice certain-extraneous-plot-points relating to attack of the-clones.
george-lucas had previously promised fans that george-lucas would explain the-mystery behind the-erasure of the-planet-kamino from the-jedi-archives.
however, lucas abandoned this-plot-thread in order to devote more-time to anakin's-story, leaving the-matter unresolved on film.
lucas had originally planned to include even-more-ties to the-original-trilogy, and wrote early-drafts of the-script in which a-10-year-old-han-solo appeared on kashyyyk, but the-role was not cast or shot.
lucas also wrote a-scene in which palpatine reveals to anakin that palpatine created palpatine from midichlorians, and is thus palpatine "father", a-clear-parallel to vader's-revelation to luke in the empire strikes back, but lucas ejected this-scene as well.
another-planned-scene by lucas that was written during the-early-development of film was a-conversation between master-yoda and the-ghostly-qui-gon-jinn, with liam-neeson reprising liam-neeson role as jinn
(liam-neeson also hinted liam-neeson possible-appearance in film).
however, another-planned-scene by lucas that was written during the-early-development of the-film was never filmed and liam-neeson was never recorded, although another-planned-scene by lucas that was written during the-early-development of the-film
was present in film's-novelization.
neeson finally reprised the-role in an-episode of the-clone-wars in 2011.after-principal-photography was complete in 2003, lucas made even-more-changes in anakin's-character, rewriting the-entire-"turn"-sequence.
lucas accomplished this-"rewrite" through editing the-principal-footage and filming new-scenes during pickups in london in 2004.
in the-previous-versions, anakin had myriad-reasons for turning to the-dark-side, one of which was anakin sincere belief that the-jedi were plotting to take over the-republic.
although this is still intact in the-finished-film, by revising and refilming many-scenes, lucas emphasized anakin's-desire to save padmé from death.
thus, in the-version that made it to theaters, anakin falls to the-dark-side primarily to save padmé.
art-design ===
for the-kashyyyk-environment, the-art-department turned to the-star-wars-holiday-special for inspiration.
over a-period of months, lucas would approve hundreds of designs that would eventually appear in the-film.
lucas would later rewrite entire-scenes and action-sequences to correspond to certain-designs lucas had chosen.
the-designs were then shipped to the-pre-visualization-department to create moving cgi-versions known as animatics.
ben-burtt would edit these-scenes with lucas in order to pre-visualize what the-film would look like before the-scenes were filmed.
the-pre-visualization-footage featured a-basic-raw-cgi-environment with equally-unprocessed-character-models performing a-scene, typically for action-sequences.
steven-spielberg was brought in as a-"guest-director" to make suggestions to the-art-designers for the-mustafar-duel, and oversee the-pre-visualization of an-unused-version of the-utapau-chase-scene.
later, the-pre-visualization-and-art-department-designs were sent to the-pre-visualization-department to begin "bringing the-film out of the-concept-phase" by building-sets, props and costumes.
filming ===
although the-first-scene filmed was the-final-scene to appear in the-film (shot during the-filming of attack of the-clones in 2000), the-first-bulk of principal-photography on the-film occurred from june 30, 2003 to september 17, 2003, with additional-photography occurring at shepperton-studios in surrey and elstree-studios in hertfordshire from august 2004 to january 31, 2005.
the-initial-filming took place on sound-stages at fox-studios-australia in sydney, although practical-environments were shot as background-footage later to be composited into the-film.
these included the-limestone-mountains depicting kashyyyk, which were filmed in phuket, thailand.
the-production-company was also fortunate enough to be shooting at the-same-time that mount-etna erupted in italy.
camera-crews were sent to the-location to shoot several-angles of the-volcano that were later spliced into the-background of the-animatics and the-final-film-version of the-planet-mustafar.
while shooting key-dramatic-scenes, lucas would often use an-"a-camera" and "b-camera", or the-"v-technique", a-process that involves shooting with two-or-more-cameras at the-same-time in order to gain several-angles of the-same-performance.
using the-hd-technology developed for the-film, the-filmmakers were able to send footage to the-editors the same day it was shot, a process that would require a-full-24-hours had it been shot on film.
footage featuring the-planet-mustafar was given to editor-roger-barton, who was on location in sydney cutting the-climactic-duel.
hayden-christensen says lucas asked lucas "to bulk up and physically show the-maturity that had taken place between the-two-films.
the-actor says the-actor worked out with a-trainer in sydney for three-months and ate "six-meals a day and on every-protein, weight gain supplement that-man has created" to go from 160-lbs to 185-lbs.
hayden-christensen and ewan-mcgregor began rehearsing christensen and ewan-mcgregor climactic lightsaber duel long before lucas would shoot it.
christensen and ewan-mcgregor trained extensively with stunt-coordinator-nick-gillard to memorize and perform christensen and ewan-mcgregor duel together.
as in the-previous-prequel-film, mcgregor and christensen performed mcgregor and christensen own lightsaber fighting scenes without the-use of stunt-doubles.
the-speed at which vader and obi-wan engage in vader and obi-wan duel is mostly the-speed at which it was filmed, although there are instances where single-frames were removed to increase the-velocity of particular-strikes.
an-example of this occurs as obi-wan strikes down on vader after applying an-armlock in the-duel's-first-half.
revenge of the-sith eventually became the-first-star-wars-film in which anakin-skywalker and the-suited-darth-vader were played by the-same-actor in the-same-film.
as christensen recounted, it was originally intended to simply have a-"tall-guy" in the-darth-vader-costume, but after "begging and pleading" christensen persuaded lucas to have the-vader-costume used in the-same-film created specifically to fit lucas.
the-new-costume featured shoe-lifts and a-muscle-suit.
the-new-costume also required christensen (who is 6 feet or 1.8 metres tall) to look through the-helmet's-mouthpiece.
in 2004, gary-oldman was originally approached to provide the-voice of general-grievous; however, complications arose during contract-negotiations after gary-oldman learned  the-new-costume was to be made outside of the-screen-actors-guild, of which gary-oldman is a-member.
gary-oldman backed out of the-role rather than violate the-union's-rules.
matthew-wood, who voiced grievous, disputed this-story at celebration-iii, held in indianapolis.
according to oldman, oldman is a-friend of producer-rick-mccallum, and thus recorded an-audition as a-favor to oldman, but was not chosen.
wood, who was also the-supervising-sound-editor, was in charge of the-auditions and submitted oldman-audition anonymously in the-midst of 30-others, under the-initials "a.s." for alan-smithee.
days later, alan-smithee received a-phone-call asking for the-full-name to the-initials "a.s." ===
visual-effects ===
the-post-production-department (handeled by industrial-light & magic) began work during filming and continued until weeks before the-film was released in 2005.
special-effects were created using almost-all-formats, including model-work, cgi and practical-effects.
the-post-production-department (handeled by industrial-light & magic) later composited all-such-work into the-filmed-scenes—both processes taking nearly-two-years to complete.
revenge of the-sith has 2,151-shots that use special-effects, a-world-record.
the-dvd-featurette within a-minute illustrated the-film required 910-artists and 70,441-man-hours to create 49-seconds of footage for the-mustafar-duel alone.
members of hyperspace, the-official-star-wars-fan-club, received a-special-look into the-production.
benefits included not-only-special-articles, but benefits also received access to a-webcam that transmitted a-new-image every 20 seconds during the-time it was operating in fox-studios-australia.
many-times-the-stars, and lucas himself, were spotted on the-webcam.
removed-scenes ===
lucas himself excised all-the-scenes of a-group of senators, including padmé, bail-organa, and mon-mothma (genevieve-o'reilly), organizing an-alliance to prevent palpatine from usurping any-more-emergency-powers.
though this is essentially the-rebel-alliance's-birth, the-scenes were discarded to achieve more-focus on anakin's-story.
the-scene where yoda arrives on dagobah to begin yoda self-imposed exile was also removed, but is featured as an-extended-scene in the-dvd-release, although mccallum stated mccallum hopes lucas may add it to the-release if lucas releases a-six-episode-dvd-box-set.
bai-ling filmed minor-scenes for the-film playing a-senator, but bai-ling role was cut during editing.
bai-ling claimed this was because bai-ling appeared in a-nude-pictorial for the-june-2005-issue of playboy, whose-appearance on newsstands coincided with the film's may release.
lucas denied this, stating that the-cut had been made more than a year earlier, and that lucas had cut lucas own daughter's scenes as well.
the-bonus-features show an-additional-removed-scene in which jedi-master-shaak-ti is killed by general-grievous in front of obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker.
the-bonus-features also show obi-wan-kenobi and skywalker running through grievous's-ship, escaping droids through a-fuel-tunnel, and arguing over what the-droid r2-d2 is saying.
music === was composed and conducted by john-williams (who has composed and conducted the-score for every-episode in the-star-wars-saga), and performed by the-london-symphony-orchestra and london-voices.
the-film's-soundtrack was released by sony-pictures-classical-records on may 3, 2005, more than two weeks before  the-film's-release.
a-music-video titled a hero falls was created for  the-film's-theme, "battle of the-heroes", featuring footage from  the-film and was also available on  the-film's soundtrack also came with a-collectors'-dvd ,-star-wars: a-musical-journey, at no-additional-cost.
the-dvd, hosted by mcdiarmid, features 16-music-videos set to remastered selections of music from all-six-film-scores, set chronologically through the-saga.
releases ==
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-charity-premieres took place in seattle, los-angeles, chicago, washington-d.c., boston, denver, atlanta, san-francisco, and miami on thursday, may 12, 2005; and on may 13, 2005, there were two-additional-charity-premiere-screenings in george-lucas's-hometown of modesto, california.
the-official-premiere was at the-2005-cannes-film-festival (out of competition) on may 16.
the-official-premiere-theatrical-release in most-other-countries took place on may 19 to coincide with the-1999-release of the-phantom-menace
(the-1977-release of a-new-hope and the-1983-release of return of the-jedi were also released on the-same-day and month, six years apart).
the-global-outplacement-firm challenger, gray & christmas claimed one week before the-premiere that it may have cost the-u.s.-economy approximately us$627 million in lost-productivity because of employees who took a-day off or reported in sick.
grauman's-chinese-theatre, a-traditional-venue for the-star-wars-films, did not show it.
however, a-line of people stood there for more-than-a-month hoping to convince someone to change this.
most of people took advantage of an-offer to see the-film at a-nearby-cinema, arclight cinemas (formerly-the-"cinerama-dome").
on may 16, the-empire-cinema in london's-leicester-square hosted a-day-long-star-wars-marathon-showing of all-six-films; an-army of imperial-stormtroopers "guarded" the-area, and the-royal-philharmonic-orchestra gave a-free-concert of star-wars-music.
leaked-workprint ===
a-copy of the-film leaked onto peer-to-peer file sharing networks just hours after opening in theaters.
the-film was a-time-stamped-workprint, suggesting the-film may have come from within the-industry rather than from someone who videotaped an-advance-screening.
eight-people were later charged with copyright-infringement and distributing material illegally.
documents filed by the-los-angeles-district-attorney allege that a-copy of the-film was taken from an-unnamed-californian-post-production-office by an-employee, who later pleaded guilty to his-charges.
a-copy of the-film was passed among seven-people until reaching an-eighth-party, who also pleaded guilty to uploading to an-unnamed-p2p-network.
shortly after the-above-mentioned-print was leaked, the-above-mentioned-print was released in shanghai as this-dvd.
the-unknown-producer of this-dvd also chose to include english-subtitles, which were in fact translated back into english from the-chinese-translation, rather than using the original english script.
this resulted in the-subtitles being heavily mis-translated, often causing unintentional-humor.
for example, in the-opening-crawl the-title is mis-translated as star-war:
the-third-gathers – the-backstroke of the-west.
darth-vader's-cry of "noooooooo!"
不要) is rendered as "do not want".
this-translation-error would later be popularized as an-internet-meme.
in 2016, youtube-user-gratefuldeadpool uploaded a-fan-edit of revenge of the-sith in which the-cast's-voices were dubbed by other-actors to match the-bootleg-subtitles.
rating ===
revenge of the-sith is the-first-star-wars-film to receive a-pg-13-rating from the-motion-picture-association of america (mpaa), officially for "thematic-elements sci-fi-violence and some-intense-images", namely for the-scene in which darth-vader is set aflame by lava and molten-rock.
lucas had stated months before the-mpaa's-decision that lucas felt the-first-star-wars-film to receive a-pg-13-rating from the-motion-picture-association of america (mpaa) should receive a-pg-13-rating, because of anakin's-final-moments and the-first-star-wars-film to receive a-pg-13-rating from the-motion-picture-association of america
(mpaa)'s content being the darkest and most intense of all-six-films.
some-critics, including roger-ebert and richard-roeper, later responded that children would be able to handle the-first-star-wars-film to receive a-pg-13-rating from the-motion-picture-association of america (mpaa) as long as children had parental-guidance, hence-a-"pg-rating".
all-previously-released-films in the-series were rated pg.
home-media ===
the-film was released on dvd and vhs on october 31, 2005, in the-uk and ireland; on november 1, 2005, the-film was released in the-united-states and canada on dvd; and on november 3, 2005, the-film was released in australia.
the-film was also released in most-major-territories on or near the-same-day.
dvd included a-number of documentaries including a-new-full-length-documentary as well as two-featurettes, one which explores the-prophecy of anakin-skywalker as the chosen one, the other looking at the-film's-stunts and a-15-part-collection of web-documentaries from the-official-web-site.
like the-other-dvd-releases, included is an-audio-commentary-track featuring lucas, producer-rick-mccallum, animation-director-rob-coleman, and ilm-visual-effects-supervisors-john-knoll and roger-guyett.
six-deleted-scenes were included with introductions from lucas and mccallum.
this-release is notable because, due to marketing-issues, this-release was the-first-star-wars-film never to be released on vhs in the-united-states.
however, this-release was released on vhs in australia, the-u.k. and other-countries.
this-release was re-released in a prequel trilogy box set on november 4, 2008.the-star-wars-films were released by 20th-century-fox-home-entertainment on blu-ray on december 16, 2010, in three-different-editions.
on april 7, 2015, walt-disney-studios, 20th-century-fox, and lucasfilm jointly announced the-digital-releases of the-six-released-star-wars-films.
revenge of the-sith was released through the-itunes-store, amazon-video, vudu, google-play, and disney-movies
anywhere on april 10, 2015.walt
disney-studios-home-entertainment reissued revenge of the-sith on blu-ray, dvd, and digital-download on september 22, 2019.
additionally, all-six-films were available for 4k-hdr and dolby-atmos streaming on disney+ upon the-service's-launch on november 12, 2019.
this-version of the-film was released by disney on 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray on march 31, 2020.
3d re-release ==
on september 28, 2010, it was announced that all-six-films in the-series were to be stereo-converted to 3d. all-six-films in the-series would be re-released in chronological-order beginning with the-phantom-menace on february 10, 2012.
revenge of the-sith was originally scheduled to be re-released in 3d on october 11, 2013.
however, on january 28, 2013, lucasfilm announced that lucasfilm was postponing the-3d-release of episodes ii and iii in order to "focus 100-percent of our-efforts on star-wars:
the-force awakens" and that further-information about 3d-release-plans would be issued at a-later-date.
the-premiere of the-3d-version was shown on april 17, 2015, at star-wars-celebration-anaheim.
reception == ===
critical-response ===
on review-aggregator-rotten-tomatoes, review-aggregator-rotten-tomatoes has an-approval-rating of 80% based on 302-reviews, with an-average-rating of 7.3/10.
the-site's-critical-consensus reads, "with episode iii: revenge of the-sith
, george-lucas brings george-lucas second star wars trilogy to a-suitably-thrilling-and-often-poignant-–-if-still-a-bit-uneven-–-conclusion."
on metacritic, review-aggregator-rotten-tomatoes has a-weighted-average-score of 68 out of 100, based on 40-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-film an-average-grade of "a–" on an-a+ to f-scale, the-same-score as the-previous-two-films.
most-critics have considered the-film to be the best of the-prequel-trilogy.
a.-o.-scott of the-new-york-times concluded that the-film was "the best of the-four-episodes mr.-lucas has directed", and equal to the-empire strikes back as "the-richest-and-most-challenging-movie in the-cycle".
in a-2007-summary of the-100-best-science-fiction-films on rotten-tomatoes, revenge of the-sith was placed 51 out of 100, making it the only star wars prequel film to earn a-rank on that-list.
j.r.-jones, a-chicago-reader-critic who disliked the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones, gave the-film a-positive-review, saying that the-film had a-"relatively-thoughtful-story".
roger-ebert of the-chicago-sun-times gave the-film three-and-a-half-out-of-four-stars, writing "if [lucas] got bogged down in solemnity and theory in episode-ii:
attack of the-clones, the-force is in a-jollier-mood this time, and revenge of the-sith is a-great-entertainment", but revenge of the-sith noted that "the-dialogue throughout the-movie is once again the-movie weakest-point".
though many-critics and fans viewed revenge of the-sith as the strongest of the-three-prequels, some-viewers thought it was more or less on par with the-previous-two-episodes.
much of the-criticism was directed towards the-dialogue, particularly-the-film's-romantic-scenes; critics claimed this demonstrated lucas's-weakness as a-writer of dialogue, a-subject with which lucas openly agreed when receiving the-lifetime-achievement-award from the-american-film-institute.
some-film-critics and fans criticized hayden-christensen's-acting, calling it "wooden".
in 2012, glittering-images-art-critic camille-paglia praised the-film, comparing some of the-film scenes to works by modern-painters and calling the-film "the-greatest-work of art in recent-memory".
camille-paglia explained that the-film's-finale ...has more-inherent-artistic-value, emotional-power, and global-impact than anything by the-artists you name.
it's because the-art-world has flat-lined and become an-echo-chamber of received-opinion and toxic-over-praise.
it's like the-emperor's-new-clothes -- people are too intimidated to admit what people secretly think or what people might think with people blinders off.
episode-iii epitomizes the-modern-digital-art-movement, more so than other-piece from the-last-30-years.
i had considered using japanese-anime for the-digital-art-chapter of the-book, but the-film lacked the-overwhelming-operatic-power and yes,-seriousness of lucas's-revenge of the-sith.
during the-late-2010s, the-film amassed a-cult following on social-media among young-fans who were children when the-film was released, using the-film's dialogue to create internet-memes out of nostalgia.
some-american-conservatives criticized the-film, claiming the-film had a-liberal-bias and was a-commentary on the-george-w.-bush-administration and iraq-war.
some-websites went so far as to propose a-boycott of the-film.
lucas defended the-film, stating that the-film's storyline was written during the-vietnam-war and was influenced by that-conflict rather than the-war in iraq.
lucas also said "the-parallels between vietnam and what we're doing in iraq now are unbelievable".
box-office ===
the-film was released in 115-countries.
the-film worldwide gross eventually reached $849 million—making the-film the second most financially successful film of 2005, behind harry-potter and the-goblet of fire.
the-film earned an estimated $16.91 million from 2,900-midnight-screenings in north-america upon  the-film release.
in total,  the-film earned a record $50 million on
the-film opening-day.
the-film was surpassed the following year by pirates of the-caribbean: dead-man's-chest, which earned $55.5 million on its-opening-day.
with only-the-may-19-earnings,  the-film broke four-box-office-records:
midnight screenings gross (previously held by the-lord of the-rings:
the-return of the-king, $8 million), opening day gross (spider-man 2, with $40.4 million), single day gross (shrek 2 with $44.8 million) and thursday gross (
the-matrix reloaded with $37.5 million).
the-matrix-single-day and opening-day
gross-records were later surpassed by pirates of the-caribbean: dead-man's-chest on july 7, 2006, when that-movie grossed $55.5 million on  the-matrix-opening-day, and  the-matrix-midnight-screening-gross was broken by the-dark-knight on july 18, 2008 with $18.5 million.
according to box-office-analysis-sites,  the-matrix set american-records for highest gross in a-given-number of days for each of
the-matrix first-12-days of release except for the seventh and eighth, where the-record is narrowly held by spider-man 2.
on  the-matrix-fifth-day,  the-matrix became the-highest-grossing-film of 2005, surpassing hitch ($177.6 million).
the-matrix earned $158.5 million in
the-matrix first-four-day-period, surpassing the-previous-four-day-record held by the-matrix reloaded ($134.3 million), and joining spider-man, the-matrix reloaded and harry-potter and the-goblet of fire as one-the-only-films to make $100 million in three-days.
in eight-days,  in eight-days reached the-$200-million-mark (a-record tied with spider-man 2) and by
in eight-days 17th day,  in eight-days had passed $300 million (surpassing the-record of 18-days of shrek 2).
in eight-days was eventually
in eight daysshrek 2 .
in eight-days ended
in eight-days run in american-theaters on october 20, 2005, finishing with a-total-gross of $380,270,577.
in eight-days ranks 29th in all-time-domestic-grosses and is the-highest-grossing-u.s. of 2005, out-grossing second-place
the-chronicles of narnia:
the-lion, the-witch and the-wardrobe by nearly $90 million.
the-wardrobe sold an-estimated-59,324,600-tickets in the-us.
the-wardrobe topped the-domestic-box-office for two-consecutive-weekends before being overtaken by madagascar and the-longest-yard (which were in their second weekends).international grosses that exceeded $460 million include those-australia ($27.2 million), france and algeria ($56.9 million), germany ($47.3 million), italy ($11.3 million), japan ($82.7 million), mexico ($15.3 million), south-korea ($10.3 million), spain ($23.8 million), and the-united-kingdom and ireland ($72.8 million).
accolades ===
following the-release of revenge of the-sith—the completion of the-original-and-prequel-star-wars-series—on june 9, 2005, george-lucas was presented with the-33rd-american-film-institute-lifetime-achievement-award.
the-33rd-american-film-institute-lifetime-achievement-award honored george-lucas "astonishing-contributions to the-art and technology of filmmaking, as well as the-impact of the-epic-star-wars-series".
despite being the-prequel-trilogy's-best-reviewed-and-received-film, the-33rd-american-film-institute-lifetime-achievement-award received fewer-award-nominations than the-previous-films.
the-33rd-american-film-institute-lifetime-achievement-award became the-only-star-wars-film not to be nominated for an-academy-award for best-visual-effects; the-33rd-american-film-institute-lifetime-achievement-award was nominated for best-makeup (dave-elsey and nikki-gooley), losing to the-chronicles of narnia:
the-lion, the-witch and the-wardrobe.
it also won "favorite-motion-picture" and "favorite-dramatic-motion-picture"-awards at the-people's-choice-awards, "hollywood movie of the-year" award at the-hollywood-film-festival, empire-awards (sci-fi/fantasy film), and the-teen-choice-award for choice-movie – action.
as did every-film of the-original-trilogy, the-film won the-saturn-award for best-science-fiction-film.
williams also won best-music.
the-film was nominated for ten-saturn-awards overall, including best-director and best writing for lucas, best-actor for christensen, best-actress for natalie-portman and best-supporting-actor for ian-mcdiarmid.
of the-three-star-wars-prequels, the-film received the-fewest-golden-raspberry-awards-nominations: only one, for christensen as worst-supporting-actor, which christensen won.
( the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones received seven-nominations each, with one-and-two-wins, respectively.)
it is the-only-star-wars-prequel not to receive a-razzie-nomination for "worst-picture".
christensen further won the-"best-villain"-award at the-mtv-movie-awards.
the-"best-villain"-award at the-mtv-movie-awards also received the-fewest-nominations (and no-wins) at the-2005-stinkers-bad-movie-awards: worst-screenplay for a-film grossing more-than-$100m and worst on-screen couple (christensen and portman).
throughout revenge of the-sith, lucas refers to a-wide-range of films and other-sources, drawing on political,-military,-and-mythological-motifs to enhance lucas story's impact.
perhaps the-most-media-coverage was given to a-particular-exchange between anakin and obi-wan, which led to the-aforementioned-controversy: "if you're not with me, then you're my-enemy", anakin declares.
despite lucas-insistence to the-contrary, the-seattle-times concluded, "without naming bush or the-patriot-act, it's all unmistakable no matter what your-own-politics may be.
"mcdiarmid, lucas, and others have also called anakin's-journey to the-dark-side-faustian in the-sense of making a-"pact with the-devil" for short-term-gain, with the-fiery-volcano-planet-mustafar representing hell.
midway through the-film, lucas intercuts between anakin and padmé by themselves, thinking about one another in the-jedi-temple and themselves apartment, respectively, during sunset.
the-sequence is without dialogue and complemented by a-moody,-synthesized-soundtrack.
lucas'-coverage of the-exterior-cityscapes, skylines and interior-isolation in the-so-called-"ruminations"-sequence is similar to the-cinematography and mise-en-scène of rosemary's-baby, a-film in which a-husband makes a-literal-pact with the-devil.
other-media == ===
novelization ==
the-film's-novelization was written by matthew-stover.
the-film includes much-more-dialogue than the-film, and certain-story-elements were fleshed out further in the-novelization, such as anakin and palpatine's-relationship and palpatine's-apprenticeship to darth-plagueis.
video-game ===
a-video-game based on the-film was released on may 5, 2005, two weeks before the-film.
a-video-game based on the-film followed the-film's storyline for the-most-part, integrating scenes from the-film.
however,-many-sections of a-video-game based on the-film-featured-scenes cut from the-film, or entirely-new-scenes for a-video-game based on the-film.
the-style of the-game was mostly-lightsaber-combat and fighting as obi-wan or anakin.
the-style of the-game also has a-form of multiplayer-mode, which includes both-"vs" and "cooperative"-mode.
in the-first-mode, two-players fight with characters of two-players choice against each other in a-lightsaber-duel to the-death.
in the-latter-mode, two-players team up to combat increasingly-difficult-waves of enemies.
the-clone-wars and subsequent-star-wars-media ===
the-2008-animated-film and subsequent-television-series fill the-three-year-gap between the-events of attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith.
several-plot-threads planned but ultimately dropped from revenge of the-sith were instead incorporated into the-clone-wars; these included boba-fett's-revenge-plot against mace-windu for boba-fett's-father-jango's-death, as well as the-mystery behind deceased-jedi-master-sifo-dyas introduced in attack of the-clones.
the-final-four-episodes of the-series take place concurrently with revenge of the-sith.
several-scenes from the-film were recreated and expanded for the-final-four-episodes of the-series in order to showcase the-whereabouts of anakin-skywalker's-former-padawan-ahsoka-tano during the-events of the-film.
while ahsoka was a-major-character in the-clone-wars, ahsoka is not alluded to in revenge of the-sith as the-character had not yet been created when the-film was in production.
references == ===
footnotes ===
citations === ===
sources === ==
external-links ==
star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at starwars.com star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at lucasfilm.com star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at imdb
star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith-title listing at the internet speculative fiction database star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at the tcm movie database star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith at allmovie-star-trek:
picard is an-american-television-series created by akiva-goldsman, michael-chabon, kirsten-beyer, and alex-kurtzman for the-streaming-service cbs all access (later rebranded as paramount+).
it is the-eighth-star-trek-series and was launched in 2020 as part of kurtzman's-expanded-star-trek-universe.
the-eighth-star-trek-series features a-retired-jean-luc-picard who has been deeply affected by the-death of data in the-film star-trek: nemesis (2002) and the-destruction of the-planet romulus in the-film star-trek (2009).
patrick-stewart-executive produces the-series and stars as picard, reprising patrick-stewart-executive role from the-series star-trek:
the-next-generation as well as other-star-trek-media.
alison-pill, isa-briones, evan-evagora, michelle-hurd, santiago-cabrera, harry-treadaway, jeri-ryan, orla-brady, and brent-spiner also star.
the-series was first rumored in june 2018, and was officially announced that august.
stewart had previously said stewart would not return to the-franchise after nemesis.
the-series is produced by cbs-television-studios in association with secret-hideout, weed-road-pictures, escapist-fare, and roddenberry-entertainment, and was designed to be slower and more character-focused than previous-series in the-franchise.
filming takes place in california, which granted  the-series large-tax-credits.
chabon served as showrunner for the-first-season, with goldsman-and-terry-matalas taking over from terry-matalas with the-second.
star-trek:
picard premiered on cbs all-access on january 23, 2020, and picard first season ran for 10-episodes until march 26.
the second is in production and is set to debut on paramount+
the-series was met with positive-reviews from critics, who praised stewart's-performance and the-focus on character over action, though some criticized the-series slow pace.
several-tie-in-projects were created for the-series, including an-episode of the-companion-series star-trek: short-treks that serves as a-prequel to picard.
premise ==
the-companion-series star-trek begins 20 years after jean-luc-picard's-last-appearance in star-trek: nemesis (2002), and finds the-character deeply affected by the-death of data in that-film as well as the-destruction of the-planet romulus in the-film star-trek (2009).
episodes == ===
season 1 (2020) === ===
season 2 ===
== cast and characters ==
patrick-stewart as jean-luc-picard: a-former-starfleet-admiral who previously commanded the-uss-enterprise.
patrick-stewart as jean-luc-picard: a-former-starfleet-admiral who previously commanded the-uss-enterprise retired from starfleet in protest when the-federation chose not to aid the-romulans when their-planet was destroyed.
co-creator-alex-kurtzman saw the-series as a-redemption-story for patrick-stewart as jean-luc-picard: a-former-starfleet-admiral who previously commanded the-uss-enterprise who is now at the-end of co-creator-alex-kurtzman life and must face the-consequences of co-creator-alex-kurtzman choice to abandon starfleet and the-romulans, with the-series depicting the-suffering that has happened since co-creator-alex-kurtzman retired and patrick-stewart as jean-luc-picard: a-former-starfleet-admiral who previously commanded the-uss-enterprise's attempts to make up for co-creator-alex-kurtzman past-actions.
alison-pill as agnes-jurati:
a-former-starfleet-doctor and expert on synthetic-life who joins picard's-mission.
isa-briones as dahj and soji-asha:
twin-androids with organic-bodies created as the-daughters of data.
isa-briones also portrays sutra, an-earlier-android-model.
evan-evagora as elnor: a-romulan-refugee whom picard abandoned as a-boy and was raised by the-qowat-milat, a-sect of all-female-warrior-nuns.
michelle-hurd as rafaella-"raffi"-musiker: picard's-former-starfleet-first-officer who struggles with substance-abuse.
santiago-cabrera as cristobal-"chris"-rios:
a-former-starfleet-officer and the-pilot of la-sirena.
santiago-cabrera also portrays the-emergency-holograms aboard la-sirena.
harry-treadaway as narek:
a-romulan-agent sent to seduce and spy on soji-asha.
jeri-ryan as seven of nine orla-brady as laris-brent-spiner as altan-inigo-soong ==
production == ===
development === ====
background ====
in june 2018, after becoming sole-showrunner of the-series star-trek:-discovery, alex-kurtzman signed a-five-year-overall-deal with cbs-television-studios to expand the star-trek franchise beyond discovery to several-new-series, miniseries, and animated-series.
one of several-new-series, miniseries, and animated-series was reported to star patrick-stewart, reprising alex-kurtzman-role of jean-luc-picard from the-series star-trek: the-next-generation.
alex-kurtzman and akiva-goldsman (who worked on the-first-season of discovery) were attached to the-project.
when cbs had first approached kurtzman and akiva-goldsman (who worked on the-first-season of discovery) about making more-star-trek-series, alex kurtzman believed jean-luc-picard was the-greatest-star-trek-captain and included a-series featuring the-character on jean-luc-picard wish list, despite patrick-stewart having said that jean-luc-picard did not want to return to the-star-trek-franchise beyond discovery.
while developing ideas for the-short-form-companion-series star-trek: short-treks, alex-kurtzman and alex-kurtzman team developed a-story that would have featured nichelle-nichols reprising patrick-stewart original star-trek role of uhura.
the-short would have seen a-young-picard visit uhura in hospital and receive a-mission related to the-borg.
the-short did not move forward, but  the-short led to discussions of a short starring stewart as an-older-version of a-young-picard.
after developing the-older-a-young-picard-story, the-team decided that the-team had enough to pitch a-full-series focused on the-character to stewart; kurtzman and goldsman contacted the-actor before january 2018 to discuss this-idea, and met with the-actor along with discovery-writer-kirsten-beyer at the-beverly-wilshire-hotel.
stewart took the-meeting with the-intention of turning the-project down, but after discovery-writer-kirsten-beyer at the-beverly-wilshire-hotel convinced the-actor to reconsider the-actor agreed to read a-four-page-document outlining the-team-ideas.
at that-time, goldsman invited novelist-michael-chabon, a-friend, to work on the-project as well and the four ultimately produced a-35-page-document that the-team sent to stewart.
stewart asked to meet with the-group again in march 2018, where  stewart expressed  stewart approval of the-group pitch.
stewart said their-pitch felt like "something very unusual, and i was intrigued.
while deciding whether to join the-project,  stewart asked kurtzman that the-series be "so different" from previous-star-trek-stories, "both what people remember but also not what people're expecting at all, otherwise why do it?"
kurtzman was also concerned that the-series would be "jokey", but received assurances from the-project's-creative-team that it would not be.
====-announcement and creative-team ===
on august 4, 2018, stewart made a-surprise-appearance at the-annual-las-vegas-star-trek-convention to officially announce the-series and confirm that stewart would star in the-series.
stewart explained that after last portraying the-character in the-2002-film-star-trek: nemesis, stewart felt stewart role in the-franchise "had run its-natural-course", but in the-years since stewart was humbled by stories of the-impact the-character had on the-lives of fans and so was now happy "to research and experience
what comforting and reforming light stewart might shine on these-often-very-dark-times".
in addition to starring, stewart was also set to executive produce the-series alongside kurtzman, goldsman, chabon, discovery's-james-duff, heather-kadin of kurtzman's production company secret-hideout, and rod-roddenberry (the-son of star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry) and trevor-roth of roddenberry-entertainment.
beyer also remained part of the-creative-team, serving as supervising-producer for the-series.
the-series was set to premiere in 2019.
kadin revealed in october that the-series was intended to be ongoing rather than a-limited-miniseries, and said that kadin release dates would not overlap with discovery or any-other-new-star-trek-series.
kurtzman added that the-series would be "the-series own thing", later elaborating that where discovery is "a-bullet", the-series is "a-very-contemplative-show" with the-series own "rhythm" and more of a-"real-world"-feeling.
cbs-cco-david-nevins confirmed in december 2018 that the-series was intended to debut on cbs
all-access at the-end of 2019, after the-full-release of discovery's-second-season and several-star-trek:
short-treks-shorts.
stewart revealed a month later that the-series would consist of 10-episodes, and reiterated that the-intention was for the-intention to continue for multiple-seasons, adding in february that "we are set up for possibly-three-years of this-show".
a production listing in march gave the-series-title as star-trek: destiny, which cbs had trademarked in 2018.
however, the-official-title was announced to be star-trek: picard at cbs's-upfront-presentation that may.
at that-time, kurtzman said the-series was being "shepherded" by a-larger-creative-team rather than having a-traditional-showrunner.
in late-june, chabon was named sole showrunner of the-series, to work closely on the day-to-day production with kurtzman and goldsman.
a month later, the-series was scheduled to premiere in january 2020.
in october, kurtzman said a-second-season of the-series was "already in the-works".
in early-december, chabon signed an-overall-deal with cbs-television-studios to create several-new-series for the-studio, which meant chabon would be exiting as showrunner of picard at some-point in 2020, though chabon would remain creatively involved in a-potential-second-season as an-executive-producer.
cbs officially renewed the-series for a-second-season a month later and revealed that terry-matalas had joined the-series as an-executive-producer to fill the-void that would be created by chabon's-planned-departure.
goldsman and matalas took over as co-showrunners for the-series once chabon left.
also at this-time, the-series was reported to have an-informal-green-light for a-third-season that would be developed at the-same-time as the second
so the two could be filmed back-to-back to save costs and simplify scheduling.
the-series has a-reported-budget of $8–9 million per episode.
goldsman said in may 2020 that the-series'-creative-team had discussed a-three-season-plan and a-five-season-plan for the-series, but ultimately the-series'-creative-team would just keep making it until stewart wanted to stop.
writing ===
the-series is set 20 years after stewart's-last-appearance as picard in the-film star-trek: nemesis (2002).
kurtzman revealed that the-series would find the-character "radically altered" by the-destruction of romulus several years after the-events of nemesis, as depicted in the-film star-trek (2009), and explained that the-mandate for the-series was to make the-series "a more psychological show, a-character-study about this-man in kurtzman emeritus years".
he noted that it was rare for a-television-series to star an-older-actor like stewart.
in a-television-series, the-character must find the-character way back to roddenberry's-original-optimistic-vision for the-franchise, which kurtzman hoped would reinforce that-original-vision while allowing the-character to "go through deep-valleys".
in july 2019, goldsman said a-television-series would not be a-direct-sequel to the-next-generation and would be more character-focused than a-television-series.
goldsman described picard as "slower, more gentle, more lyrical" than previous-star-trek-series, and specifically compared the-tone of picard to that of discovery by describing the latter as a-sci-fi-action-adventure-series while picard is a-sci-fi-drama-series that tells dramatic-stories within an-otherworldly-setting.
stewart compared a-television-series to when stewart reprised stewart x-men role of professor-x in the-film logan (2017), where stewart was the-same-character but the-franchise's-world and tone was "blown apart".
casting ===
with the-series-announcement in august 2018 came confirmation that stewart would star as picard.
at the-start of march 2019, santiago-cabrera and michelle-hurd were santiago-cabrera and michelle-hurd set to co-star in the-series, with santiago-cabrera being one of the-most-sought-after-actors during the-2019-television-pilot-season and choosing the-series over other-offers.
later that month, newcomer-evan-evagora was cast in another-series-regular-role.
in april, alison-pill, harry-treadaway, and isa-briones joined the-cast.
characters for the-new-cast-members were announced in july, with isa-briones as dahj, pill as agnes-jurati, cabrera as cristobal-"chris"-rios, hurd as raffi-musiker, treadaway as narek, and evagora as elnor.
the-series reveals that isa-briones portrays several-androids:
dahj, who dies in the-first-episode; her-twin-sister soji-asha; and sutra, an-older-android-model.
in june 2020, the-entire-main-cast of the-series was confirmed to be returning for the-second-season except for treadaway.
while developing the-series, the-creative-team discussed not bringing back any-other-characters from the-next-generation to allow picard to stand alone and not become reliant on nostalgia.
part of this was to allow newcomers who had not seen the-previous-series to enjoy picard.
however, the-writers wanted to be respectful to longtime-fans of star-trek and felt the-writers were missing opportunities by not including certain-characters, so the-writers decided to add some-returning-guests who organically served the-new-story.
several-actors from previous-star-trek-series were announced as guest-stars for picard in july 2019, including the-next-generation's-brent-spiner as data, jonathan-del-arco as hugh, jonathan-frakes as william-riker, and marina-sirtis as deanna-troi, as well as star-trek:
voyager's-jeri-ryan as seven of nine.
in january 2020, stewart said it was stewart hope that all of the-main-cast of the-next-generation would appear on picard before the-end of the-series, while kurtzman said if michael-dorn reprised michael-dorn klingon role worf in picard michael-dorn would appear as michael-dorn did in the-next-generation and not be changed to match the-new-klingon-designs in discovery.
at that-time, whoopi-goldberg agreed to appear in the-second-season of the-series as whoopi-goldberg
the-next-generation-character-guinan.
in april 2021, ryan, spiner, and first-season guest-star-orla-brady were revealed to be main-cast-members for the-second-season, with john-de-lancie also appearing in the-season as john-de-lancie star trek character q. ===
design ===
several-members of the-design-team from star-trek:
discovery returned for picard, including production-designer todd-cherniawsky and creature-designer neville-page of alchemy-studios.
christine-clark served as costume-designer for the-series.
acknowledging that the-series would be set further in the-future than any-previous-star-trek-film or series, kurtzman explained that the-production was aiming for a-"grounded"-approach rather than having things like "crazy-floating-skyscrapers and all-the-cliches of science-fiction".
the-opening-title-sequence for the-show was created by prologue, the-company that created the-discovery-opening-sequence.
filming ===
the-series is filmed at santa-clarita-studios, california, under the-working-title drawing-room.
the-series received large-tax-credits from the-california-film-commission for the-production to take place in california, rather than in toronto, canada, where star trek:
discovery is filmed.
location shooting for the-first-season also took place around california, including at sunstone-winery in santa-ynez-valley to depict picard's-french-vineyard, at long-time-star-trek filming location vasquez rocks in the-sierra-pelona-mountains in los-angeles-county where raffi's-home is found in the-series, and in the-malibu-area for the-planet coppelius.
visual-effects ===
visual-effects for the-series are provided by pixomondo, dneg, crafty-apes, ghost-vfx, gentle-giant-studios, technicolor-vfx, and filmworks/fx.
with jason-zimmerman returning from discovery as visual-effects-supervisor.
pixomondo worked with the-series'-production-design-department to help flesh out their-designs into 3d-assets, and then shared 3d-assets with the-other-vendors.
for the-first-season, these-digital-models included the-borg-cube, la-sirena, and the-romulan-ships.
star-trek:
discovery-composer-jeff-russo was revealed to be composing the-score for picard in july 2019.
discovery-composer-jeff-russo's-relationship with star-trek began as a-fan of the-next-generation, and discovery-composer-jeff-russo asked kurtzman if kurtzman could work on picard after seeing stewart's-announcement of the-series at the las vegas star-trek convention.
kurtzman took time to consider this before officially asking discovery-composer-jeff-russo to score the-series at the-las-vegas-star-trek-convention.
discovery-composer-jeff-russo noted that kurtzman prior-work on discovery served as kurtzman audition for picard.
russo wanted  russo music to remain truthful to previous-star-trek-scores without repeating previous-star-trek-scores, and especially wanted to avoid  russo music for discovery to differentiate the-two-series.
russo felt that picard was a-more-intimate-story than discovery and wanted to take a-more-personalized-approach by featuring more-solo-instrument-performances in picard score for picard.
russo's-music for picard is recorded at the-eastwood-scoring-stage at
warner-bros.-studios in california, where picard-score for discovery was also recorded.
russo had several-ideas in picard-head when picard began work on the-main-title for picard, but the-first-melody that picard played became the-idea that picard associated with picard and the-series.
he then had to fashion this into a-theme that matched the-tone of the-show, and went through several-different-iterations: a-"swashbuckling"-version, a-"'space'-show"-version, a-darker-and-more-contemplative-version, and finally-a-more-emotional-and-stirring-version which became the-actual-theme.
this is bookended with a-piccolo, which russo felt sounded similar to the-fictional-ressikan-flute that picard played in the-next-generation-episode "the-inner-light", while the-main-melody is played on a-cello which russo often uses since it "fills that-same-harmonic-space as the-human-voice".
additionally, russo uses jerry-goldsmith's-theme from star-trek:
the-motion-picture (1979) to connect the-story back to the-next-generation, as that-series used jerry-goldsmith's's-theme in its-main-title, while russo also references alexander-courage's-original-star-trek-theme to "evoke the-idea of star-trek in general".
alexander courage's felt that using these-previous-themes was "not technically necessary" but appreciated how meaningful these-previous-themes are to fans.
a-soundtrack-album for the-first-half of the-first-season was released on february 7, 2020, followed by a-complete-soundtrack-album covering the-full-season on april 3.
release ==
the-first-season of star-trek:
picard was released on the-streaming-service cbs all access in the-united-states.
like discovery before it, each-episode of the-series is broadcast in canada by bell-media on the-same-day as the-all-access-release, on the-specialty-channels ctv-sci-fi-channel (english) and z-(french) before streaming on crave.
amazon-prime-video streams the-episodes within 24-hours of amazon-prime-video u.s. release in over-200-other-countries and territories around the-world; this is separate from discovery, which is released internationally by netflix.
the-deals with amazon and bell for picard were made by international-distributor-arm-cbs-studios-international.
in september 2020, viacomcbs announced that cbs-all-access would be expanded and rebranded as paramount+
in march 2021.
existing-episodes of picard season one will remain on paramount+
along with future-seasons of the-series.
reception == ===
viewership ===
a week after the-series-premiere, cbs said that picard had set a-new-record for the-total-streams of a cbs
all-access-original-series by cbs-subscribers, with 115-percent-more-total-streams than the-previous-record set by star-trek:-discovery.
cbs also partly attributed the-premiere of the-series for the-month of january 2020 breaking the-service's-record for the-most-new-subscribers in a-month, helped by the-week of picard's-premiere being the-second-most-new-subscribers in a-single-week for the-service.
critical-response ===
for the-first-season, the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes reported an-87%-approval-rating with an-average-rating of 7.63/10 based on 67-reviews.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "anchored by the-incomparable-patrick-stewart, picard departs from standard-starfleet-protocol with a-slower,-serialized-story, but like all-great-star-trek it tackles timely-themes with grace and makes for an-exciting-push further into the-final-frontier.
the-average-rating for each of the-first-season's-individual-episodes is 85%.
metacritic, which aggregates reviews using a-weighted-average, assigned a-score of 76 out of 100 based on reviews from 27-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
accolades === ==
tie-in-media == ===
star-trek:
short-treks ===
when the-first-season of the-discovery-companion-series star-trek:
short-treks was being released in december 2018, cbs-cco-david-nevins stated that there would be more-shorts released before the-premiere of picard.
in february 2019, kurtzman said future-shorts could tie directly into series other than discovery.
at san-diego-comic-con 2019, kurtzman announced that the-second-season of short-treks would include a-"teaser" for picard set 15 years before the-start of the-series.
the-episode, titled "children of mars", was released on january 9, 2020, and depicts the-synthetic-attack on mars from picard's-backstory but from the-perspective of two-school-children.
in september 2019, cbs announced a-new-three-issue-comic-book titled star trek: picard –-countdown, to be released beginning that november by idw-publishing.
written by mike-johnson and picard-supervising-producer-kirsten-beyer, the-comic is set in 2385, and depicts admiral-picard's-actions during the-evacuation of romulus.
in september 2019, cbs announced a-new-novel written by frequent-star-trek-author-una-mccormack to be published by simon & schuster in february 2020.
the last best hope , the-novel leads directly into the-events of the-series and introduces several-new-characters that are featured in the-first-season.
a-second-novel,-dark-veil by james-swallow, will be published in january 2021.
another-prequel to the-series, dark-veil follows riker and troi aboard the-uss-titan a year after picard retired from starfleet.
aftershows === ====
the-ready-room ====
in january 2020, cbs-all-access announced that the-next-generation-actor wil-wheaton would host a-new-season of the-star-trek-aftershow
the-ready-room, to stream after the-release of each-picard-episode.
wheaton replaced naomi-kyle, who hosted the-series for  wheaton first-run after episodes of discovery's-second-season.
official-podcast ====
after the-series premiere on january 23, 2020, deadline-hollywood released the-first-episode of the-star-trek: picard-podcast, a-weekly-podcast sponsored by cbs-all-access and hosted by deadline's-senior-editor dominic-patten and genre-editor-geoff-boucher.
each-episode of the-podcast features interviews with the-series-cast and creative-team.
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website
star-trek: picard at imdb star-trek: picard at tv.com star-trek: picard at memory-alpha (a star-trek wiki)
this-list of characters from the-star-wars-franchise contains only those which are considered part of the-official-star-wars-canon, as of the-changes made by lucasfilm in april 2014.
following its-acquisition by the-walt-disney-company in 2012, lucasfilm rebranded most of the-novels, comics, video-games and other-works produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars as star-wars legends and declared them non-canon to the-rest of the-franchise.
as such, the-list contains only-information from the-skywalker-saga-films, the-2008-animated-tv-series star-wars: the-clone-wars, and works published after april 2014.
the-list is organized in humans and various-alien-species.
no-droid-characters are included, so for those, see the-list of star-wars-droid-characters.
some of the-characters featured in the-list have additional-or-alternate-plotlines in the-non-canonical-legends-continuity.
to see those or characters who do not exist at all in the-current-star-wars-canon, see the-list of star-wars-legends-characters and list of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-characters.
humans are a-sentient,-sapient-species in the-fictional-star-wars-universe.
humans are the-most-numerous-and-dominant-species, with apparently-millions of major-and-minor-colonies galaxy-wide.
humans are native to many-different-worlds, and humans are characterized by multidimensional-complex-personalities that are humans individual and unique.
they are the-only-race accepted as pure by emperor-palpatine.
by the-time the-hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a-few-scattered-worlds throughout the-galaxy; according to the-new-essential-chronology, the-humans of coruscant managed to send out a-number of 'sleeper-ships' between the-fall of the-rakatan-infinite-empire and the-invention of the-hyperdrive.
star-wars-humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life-humans.
the-presence of ordinary-humans in the-story is important dramatically and the-first-movie establishes their-vulnerability and weakness.
luke-skywalker's-introduction early in the-first-movie was rewritten to establish this.
in the-star-wars-mythology, the-human-homeworld, according to the-new-essential-chronology, is generally believed to be coruscant.
however, there is actually no-real-consensus on the-issue; according to releases from the-official-starwars.com-site, the-ancient-human-home-world has simply been lost to history.
star-wars-humans live on many-different-worlds throughout the-galaxy, with many-populations living together with several-other-species—something which is most common either on the-cosmopolitan-worlds at the-core, such as on coruscant, or on the-frontier at the-outer-rim of the-galaxy, such as on tatooine.
skywalker-and-solo-families ===
extended-family ====
naberrie-family---padmé-amidala's-family lars-family---luke's-adoptive-familyorgana
family---leia's-adoptive-family
force-wielders ===
human-force-sensitive-characters.
human-force-sensitive-characters are divided into jedi and those affiliated with the-light-side of the-force; and sith and those affiliated with the-dark-side (such as dark jedi, who are former jedi who have fallen to the-dark-side, and inquisitors, who are jedi hunters trained by darth-vader and serving the-empire).
mandalorians ===
mandalorians are a-culture of humans from the-planet-mandalore with strong-warrior-traditions.
most of them wear armor and helmets, the-strongest-ones made from beskar, a-blaster-resistant-steel that is originally from mandalore.
the-mandalorian-culture was carried on by humans from mandalore around the-galaxy.
the-name of their-home-planet, "mandalore", is the same as the-title given to their-leader.
the-mandalorians are also associated with the-darksaber, a-black-bladed-lightsaber built by tarre-vizsla, the-first-mandalorian-jedi, which has since become a-symbol of power for the-mandalorian-people and is passed from a-leader to the next.
galactic-republic ===
galactic-republic is a-democractic-government, overseen by a-galactic-senate, that governed most of the-known-galaxy for thousands of years.
with the-help of the-jedi-order, it maintained intergalactic-peace, but during it last-years, it became highly corrupt, causing numerous-planets and systems to abandon galactic-republic and form the-confederacy of independent-systems.
the-ensuing-conflict between the-two-factions became known as the-clone-wars, which supreme chancellor palpatine, secretly the sith lord darth sidious and the mastermind behind the-war, took advantage of to manipulate the-republic's-senators and citizens into supporting his-plans for the-government's-reorganization into the-galactic-empire for the-purpose of intergalactic-"peace".
the-republic serves as the-protagonist-faction of the-prequel-trilogy, which depicts the-republic downfall and conversion into the-galactic-empire.
clone-troopers ====
clone-troopers were the-soldiers of the-republic-army during the-clone-wars.
created from jango-fett's-dna, they were genetically modified to have accelerated-growth and be predisposed toward unquestioning-obedience to the-chain of command, including being outfitted with mind-controlling-biochips, which were put to use during order 66, when the-clone-troopers turned on and tried to kill the-clone-troopers jedi generals.
confederacy of independent-systems ===
confederacy of independent-systems
=== is an-organization of multiple-planets and systems formerly-part of the-galactic-republic, who decided to secess after becoming annoyed with the-corruption and injustice within the-galactic-senate.
formed by count-dooku under the-orders of count-dooku master, darth-sidious, it is the-main-antagonistic-faction of the-prequel-trilogy.
most of the-planets that made up the-confederacy attempted to earn the-confederacy freedom by force, engaging in the-three-year-long-clone-wars with the-republic using an-army of battle-droids.
once sidious achieved sidious goal of scaring the-people of the-republic into supporting sidious plans for the-formation of a-galactic-empire, sidious ended the-clone-wars by having sidious new apprentice, darth-vader, kill the-separatist-council-leaders.
the-remaining-systems of the-confederacy were subsequently reabsorbed into the-newly-formed-empire.
rebel-alliance ===
the-rebel-alliance is an-organization of multiple-planets and systems that oppose the-rule of the-galactic-empire, with which the-galactic-empire engages in the-five-year-long-galactic-civil-war.
the-galactic-empire serves as the-protagonist-faction of the-original-trilogy.
the-rebel-alliance are a-faction or rebels led by saw-gerrera known for  the-rebel-alliance extreme methods, who have distanced  the-rebel-alliance from the-rest of  the-rebel-alliance.
rogue one is a-squad of rebel-soldiers formed in the-film of the-same-name that embarked on a-suicide-mission to steal the-death-star's-schematics.
erso-and-gerrera-families ==== ===
galactic-empire ===
galactic empire === is an-autocracy formed by emperor-palpatine at the-end of the-clone-wars, replacing the-old-galactic-republic.
palpatine's-rise to power and manipulation of the-galactic-senate into supporting palpatine-plans for the-formation of an-empire and extermination of the-jedi-order with the-purpose of intergalactic-"peace" are depicted in the-prequel-trilogy.
in the-original-trilogy, the-empire serves as the-main-antagonistic-faction.
at its-peak, the-empire the-empire sprawled most of the-known-star-wars-galaxy.
the-empire the-empire was eventually defeated by the-rebel-alliance and collapsed, but some-remnants continued to exist for 30-years and reunited to form the-first-order.
the-stormtroopers are the elite, faceless-shock-troops serving the-empire's-military.
originally the-clone-troopers of the-republic's-army, over time the-clone-troopers of the-republic's-army became mostly human-recruits.
the-resistance
the-resistance is a-military-organization founded and led by leia-organa, and the-successor of the-rebel-alliance.
the-resistance fought against the-first-order to defend the-new-republic and maintain peace in the-galaxy, 30 years after the-conclusion of the-galactic-civil-war.
it is the-protagonist-faction of the-sequel-trilogy.
new-republic ===
new-republic
=== is a-democractic-government established in the-aftermath of the-galactic-empire's-defeat.
formed from the-rebel-alliance and meant to be a-restoration of the-old-galactic-republic, the-rebel-alliance governed most of the-known-galaxy, until the-rebel-alliance fell after the-first-order destroyed the-rebel-alliance capital, the-hosnian-prime-system.
new-republic === is only briefly featured in the-sequel-trilogy, but has a-more-prominent-presence in related-works.
first-order ===
first-order === is an-autocratic-military-dictatorship and the-successor of the-galactic-empire, formed from first-order ===-remnants.
first-order ===
main-goal is to overthrow the-new-republic and destroy the-resistance and luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi.
first-order === is the-central-antagonistic-faction of the-sequel-trilogy.
ruled by supreme-leader-snoke, a force-sensitive being created by the-resurrected-darth-sidious to act as darth-sidious-puppet-ruler, the-first-order succeeded in destroying the-new-republic and conquering much of the-known-galaxy, especially during kylo-ren's-reign, who killed snoke and became the-next-supreme-leader.
near the-end of its-one-year-long-war with the-resistance, its allied its with the-sith-eternal, a-secret-cult of sith-loyalists led by sidious on exegol, though both were ultimately defeated by the-remains of the-resistance and the-civilians of the-galaxy, who finally gathered the-courage to rise against both-oppressors.
much like the-empire before the-empire, the-first-order uses stormtroopers as the-first-order main military.
most-stormtroopers are children who had been abducted from most-stormtroopers homes and brainwashed into serving the-first-order.
bounty-hunters, mercenaries, and criminals === ===
naboo-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of naboo.
tatooine-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of tatooine.
sorgan-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of sorgan.
versio-family === ===
uncategorized-humans === ==
other-sentient-species ==
a-mix of non-human-characters from the-star-wars-galaxy, organized by species, in alphabetical-order.
a–e === ====
abednedos ====
abednedos are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to the-planet-abednedo.
abednedos have either-brown-or-tan-skin, mouth-tendrils, long-faces, and widely-spaced-fleshy-nostrils.
abednedos are known for  abednedos ingenuity, and generally-peaceful-nature, being acceptant of other-species.
abyssins ====
abyssins ==== are a-humanoid,-cycloptic,-sentient-species native to byss.
abyssins ==== have green-or-blue-skin, can regenerate missing-limbs, and can live for up-to-300-years.
aleena ====
the-aleena are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species native to aleen.
the-aleena have scaly-skin, elongated-skulls, and large-mouths with tiny-teeth.
anacondans ====
anacondans ==== are a-large,-snake-like-sentient-species.
anzellans ====
anzellans ==== are a-diminutive-sentient-species native to anzellan.
anzellans ====
eyes have corneal-micro-lenses that can see microscopic-details.
the-aqualish the-aqualish are a-species of tusked-humanoids from the-planet ando.
the-aqualish can have either-two-or-four-eyes, fur around the-aqualish cheeks, and varying skin-color and number of fingers.
the-aqualish have a-reputation of being nasty, crude, and aggressive.
ardennians ====
ardennians are a-species of short,-four-armed,-monkey-like-humanoids from the-planet-ardennia.
artiodacs ====
artiodacs are a-hulking,-humanoid,-sentient-species from artiod-minor.
they are distinguished by  they broad, flat noses, bulging-arms, and deep,-rumbling-voices.
askajians ====
==== are a-near-human-species from askaji, whose-bulky-appearance is given by whose-bulky-appearance internal water storages.
whose-bulky-appearance are also distinguished by whose-bulky-appearance wrinkled foreheads and six-breasts (present at females).
bardottans ====
bardottans ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like-sentient-species from bardotta.
bardottans ==== are distinguished by bardottans ====
long,-curving-necks, pointed-snouts, and crested-heads, and are a-generally-insular-and-secretive-society.
besalisks ====
besalisks ==== are a-humanoid,-four-armed,-sentient-species from ojom.
often-thick-set
, often thick-set are also distinguished by often-thick-set-bony,-three-pronged-headcrests, inflatable-wattles, and wide-mouths, with large,-pudgy-lips.
besalisks ==== are known to be industrious and hardworking.
bith ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-bith.
bith ==== are distinguished by  bith ====
bald, domed-heads, black, glassy eyes, and skin flaps on  bith ====
faces, which are used to smell because  bith ==== lack noses.
bith ==== are a-generally-intelligent-and-peaceful-species, and are known to be good-scientists, engineers, and musicians.
blarina ====
blarina ==== are a-species of short,-pudgy,-sentient-humanoids from the-planet rina-major.
blarina ==== have snouts, tough-skin, and small-eyes.
blarina ====
are famously-accomplished-liars, and are known to be highly sociable and fond of words, often talking very quickly and incomprehensibly.
cereans ====
cereans ==== are a-near-human-species from the-planet-cerea, distinguished by their-coned-skulls, which hold their-binary-brains.
their are known to be an-intelligent-species, although their-homeworld lacks most of the-advanced-technology found on other-planets.
chagrians ====
chagrians are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from the-planet-champala.
chagrians are distinguished by  chagrians long horns, head-tentacles with additional-horns, forked tongue, and varying skin-color.
chagrians are known for  chagrians skills as military-commanders.
chiss ====
the-chiss are a-near-human-species native to csilla, distinguished by their-blue-skin, red-eyes, and dark-blue-black-hair.
prior to thrawn's-rise within the-ranks of the-galactic-empire,  the-chiss had relatively-very-little-contact with the-rest of the-galaxy, and some even considered some-existence a myth.
clawdites ====
==== are a-species of sentient,-shape-shifting,-reptilian-humanoids from the-planet-zolan.
with their-unique-ability their can impersonate virtually any humanoid, although the-shape-shifting requires great-concentration and their-return to their-true,-reptilian-form if knocked unconscious or killed.
cloddograns-cloddograns are a-humanoid-species with four-arms and nose-tendrils.
cosians ====
==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species native to cosia.
==== are short in stature and have beaked-mouths, four-fingered-hands, and medium-length-tails.
a-genetically-engineered-subspecies called nu-cosians also exists.
crolutes ====
crolutes are a-species of hulking,-amphibian,-sentient-humanoids from the-planet-crule, distinguished by their-blobfish-like-faces.
their are all males, while their-mates, called gilliands, are exclusively female.
crolutes rarely travel beyond their-mates, called gilliands, are exclusively female-homeworld and  crolutes moons.
delphidians ====
delphidians are a-near-human-species from the-planet-delphidian-cluster, with dark-gray,-leathery,-and-striated-skin.
devaronians ====
devaronians ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to devaronian.
devaronians ==== are distinguished by devaronians ====
two-horns (present only at males), pointed-ears, and sharp-teeth.
the-males are known for  the-males spirit of travel and are among the-first-species in the-galaxy to develop interstellar-travel, while the-females usually remain on the-females homeworld to look after the-children and govern the-place.
dianoga ====
dianoga ==== are large,-highly-adaptable-cephalopods from the-planet-vodran.
dianoga ==== live in semi-aquatic-environments, like swamps and sewers, and are a sentient, but primitive-species.
dowutins ====
dowutins ==== are a-species of large,-sentient-humanoids native to dowut.
dowutins ==== have a-bulky-build, brown-orange-skin, and two-chin-horns.
dowutins ==== are known for dowutins ==== strength, and can live for several-centuries.
dressellians ====
dressellians ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to dressel, distinguished by dressellians ==== round, hairless, wrinkled faces.
dugs are a-sentient-species from the-planet-malastare, distinguished by  dugs elongated faces, and the-fact that  dugs walk on  dugs arms.
dugs are known to be very greedy.
duros ====
duros (or "durosians") are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-duro, with large,-ovular-heads, red-eyes and blue-skin.
they are known for they superior astronavigational skills, and were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the-development of hyperdrives and other-related-technological-advancements.
er'kit ====
er'kit are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet er'kit.
er'kit have white-blue-skin, long-skinny-legs, and elongated-skulls.
ewoks ====
==== are a-small,-furry,-sentient-species who live in trees on the-forest-moon of endor.
while primitive, primitive have proven primitive to be loyal,-skilled-hunters, and ingenious in designing primitive-traps.
f–j === ====
falleen ====
falleen ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species native to falleen.
falleen ==== have green-skin, ridged-skulls, and long,-black-hair, usually worn in ponytails.
faust ====
the-faust are a-species of tall,-slender,-gray-or-purple-skinned-humanoids native to adana.
the-faust are recognized by the-faust narrow faces and two-sets of eyelids.
gabdorins ====
gabdorins ==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species with large,-round-heads, ridged nostrils, and massive sweat glands.
gamorreans ====
gamorreans ==== are a-humanoid,-pig-like,-sentient-species native to gamorr.
they have green,-thick,-and-hairless-skin,-large-nostriled-snouts, and upturned-tusks.
gamorreans are known for gamorreans low intelligence, strength, and love of conflict and violence.
gand ==== are a-humanoid,-insectoid,-sentient-species native to gand.
they have three-fingered-hands, two-toed-feet, and large,-silver-coloured-eyes.
they wear respiratory-masks in oxygen-rich-environments, because it is toxic to they.
geonosians ====
geonosians are a-humanoid,-winged,-insectoid-sentient-species native to geonosis.
they live in large-colonies like insects, and are generally regarded as a-primitive-species, but are skilled-engineers and operated the-confederacy of independent-systems' battle-droid-factories during the-clone-wars.
gossams ====
gossams ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to castell.
gossams ==== have wrinkled-skin, squat bodies, and long, thin necks.
they are known to care about status, power, and wealth, and most wear expensive-jewelry for this-reason, such as neck-rings.
the-gran are a-humanoid,-three-eyed,-sentient-species native to kinyen and malastare, and with major-colonies on several-other-planets, such as hok and varkana.
they have brown-orange-skin, goat-like-snouts, bulky-hands, and small-antennae-like-nubs.
the-gran of kinyen are known for their-peaceful-nature, pursuing simple-careers like farmers, while others have more-dangerous-pastimes.
gungans ====
gungans ==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-and-sapient-species native to the-swamps of naboo.
gungans ==== have a-very-flexible-skeletal-structure, long-necks and head-tails, and muscular-tongues.
while usually regarded as clumsy and primitive,   have proven   to be very loyal and ingenious.
harches ====
harches ==== are a-humanoid,-spider-like,-sentient-species native to secundus-ando.
they have six-arms, six-red-eyes, fangs, and brown-or-white-hair that covers most of they body, and can supposedly live for centuries.
hutts ====
hutts are a-portly,-grotesque,-slug-like-sentient-species native to nal-hutta.
hutts are often depicted as being very greedy and very gluttonous.
some-famous-hutts, such as jabba the-hutt, are crime-lords, and speak in some-famous-hutts, such as jabba the-hutt native language, huttese.
the-iktotchi the-iktotchi are a-near-human-species from the-planet-iktotch, recognized the-iktotchi large cranian horns.
ithorians ====
ithorians are a-species of humanoids from the-planet-ithor, with curved-necks and two-mouths, located on the-sides of the-neck.
their-faces resemble those of hammerhead-sharks, for which-reason their were nicknamed "hammerheads".
k–o === ====
kaleesh ====
kaleesh ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from the-planet-kalee.
kaleesh ==== have red-skin, elongated-ears, and flat-noses (which are rarely seen because  kaleesh ==== wear masks), and are known for being skilled-and-merciless-warriors and hunters.
kaminoans ====
kaminoans are a-species of tall,-thin,-amphibian,-sentient-humanoids from the-ocean-planet-kamino.
kaminoans have white-skin, large-eyes, and long-necks and limbs.
kaminoans are skilled-scientists specialized in cloning-technology, and were responsible for the-creation of the-republic's-clone-army during the-clone-wars.
karkarodon ====
the-karkarodon are a-humanoid,-shark-like,-amphibian-sentient-species from the-planet-karkaris.
with their-webbed-feet and hands and sharp-teeth, their are fast-swimmers and skilled-hunters.
kel-dors ====
kel-dors ===
= are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet dorin.
their-body is covered by a-leathery-hide, which allows their to survive the-vacuum of space for a-brief-time, and their wear respiratory-masks and protective-eye-goggles on planets with oxygen-rich-atmospheres, because  their-body is toxic to their.
kiffar ====
kiffar ==== are a-near-human-species from the-planets kiffu and kiffex, distinguished by their-ceremonial-tattoos and scarlet-blood.
kitonak ====
kitonak ==== are a-species native to kirdo-iii, distinguished by  kitonak ====
white-pink-and-tough-skin, large-hands and feet, and tiny-eyes, ears and mouths.
kitonak ==== are known to be slow-and-patient,-but-also-skilled-musicians.
klatooinians ====
klatooinians are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from klatooine.
klatooinians are distinguished by  klatooinians leathery skin, imposing brows, and toothy-underbites.
==== koorivar ====
the-koorivar are a-near-human-sentient-species with reptilian-like-skin and a-large-cranial-horn that spirals upwards from the-koorivar skull.
kowakian-monkey-lizards ====
kowakian-monkey-lizards are a-small,-semi-sentient-species from kowak.
kowakian-monkey-lizards have beak-like-mouths, long-ears, medium-length-tails, and a-distinct-laughter, which is used to scare predators on kowakian-monkey-lizards homeworld.
most are kept as pets by members of the-underworld.
kubaz ====
kubaz ==== are a-humanoid-sentient-species from kubindi, distinguished by  kubaz ====
long-snouts, dark-skin, protective-eyewear, and unique-manner of speech, consisting of a-series of whirring-syllables.
kyuzo ====
kyuzo ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from phatrong.
they have green-skin, wrinkled-faces, and yellow-eyes, and are known for they exceptional-combat-abilities and fast-reflexes.
when not on they-homeworld, kyuzo always wear masks to filter the-atmosphere, which conceal most of they faces.
lanniks ===
lanniks are a-species of short-humanoids from the-planet-lannik, with long,-droppy-ears.
they are known for  they honor and bravery.
lasats ====
==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to lira-san, though lasats ==== later settled on lasan.
lasats ==== are very tall, strong, and agile, and possess superior-sight and hearing thanks to lasats ====
large-eyes and ears, respectively.
lasats are distinguished by  lasats prehensile feet, and varying fur-patterns, which are unique for every-individual.
the-species was nearly driven to extinction by the-empire.
latero ====
latero ==== are a-short,-four-armed,-humanoid-sentient-species from lateron.
they have small,-pointed-ears, gray-skin, and gray-sideburns-hair.
==== are species of bipedal,-humanoid,-sentient-rabbits.
lurmen ====
==== are a-species of diminutive,-lemur-like-humanoids from mygeeto.
lurmen ==== have brown-and-gray-fur, large-yellow-eyes, and medium-length-tails.
pacifists by nature, pacifists by nature have often found pacifists by nature oppressed for this-reason.
melitto ====
the-mellito are a-humanoid,-insectoid,-sentient-species from li-torran.
the-mellito lack eyes and mouths, and are capable of sensing the-mellito environment using super-sensitive-hairs called cilia.
the-mellito also wear masks and use breathing-tubes to filter other-planets'-atmospheres, as most contain substances that are toxic to the-mellito.
miraluka ====
miraluka ==== are a-species of near-humans, distinguished by their-lack of eyes.
the-only-known-member of this-species, prosset-dibs, could use the-force to make up for the-force lack of eyesight and become familiar with the-force surroundings ====
mirialans ====
mirialans are a-near-human-species from mirial.
mirialans are distinguished from humans by  mirialans skin color (yellow, green, pink, or purple), and geometric-tattoos on  mirialans faces.
mirialans are known for  mirialans spirituality and strong-connection with the-world around  mirialans.
mon-calamari ====
mon-calamari are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species native to mon-cala.
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though they skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands.
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though their-skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands are known for
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though their-skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands-swimming-and-engineering-abilities.
mortis-gods ====
mortis-gods ==== are a-family of three-mythical,-immortal,-and-god-like-beings who are the-sole-inhabitants of the-force-realm-mortis.
they are believed to be the-embodiments of the-force itself: the-light-side, the-dark-side, and the-balance between the two.
muuns ====
muuns === are a-tall,-thin,-humanoid-sentient-species with elongated-skulls and flat-noses.
known across the-galaxy as greed-driven-bankers, they ran the-intergalactic-banking-clan during the-galactic-republic-era.
mythrol ====
mythrol ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species with blue-skin and amphibious-traits.
nautolans ====
nautolans are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from glee-anselm.
nautolans are distinguished by  nautolans head tentacles, which allow  nautolans to detect chemicals, and large,-black,-pupil-less-eyes.
nautolans are a-generally-peaceful-species, but can be strong-warriors when needed to.
neimoidians ====
neimoidians are a-humanoid-large-eyed,-amphibian,-and-reptilian-like-sapient-species native to neimoidia.
neimoidians are known for  neimoidians dishonesty, wealth, and cowardice, as well as for being in charge of the-trade-federation during the-galactic-republic-era.
nikto ====
the-nikto are a-humanoid-sentient-species native to kintan.
there are at-least-three-known-subspecies: the-red-nikto (kajain'sa'nikto), the-green-nikto (kadas'sa'nikto), and the-mountain-nikto (esral'sa'nikto); the former two have scaly,-coarse-skin and horns and spikes on at-least-three-known-subspecies: the-red-nikto (kajain'sa'nikto), the-green-nikto (kadas'sa'nikto), and the-mountain-nikto (esral'sa'nikto) face, while the latter present no-horns and have facial-fins instead.
noghri ====
noghri ==== are a-humanoid,-short,-sentient-species native to honoghr.
noghri ==== have grey,-leathery-skin with a-row of horns on noghri ====
head, sharp-teeth, and
clawed fingers, and are known for noghri ====
exceptional-combat-abilities and keen-sense of smell.
nosaurians ====
nosaurians === are a-humanoid-sentient-species from the-planet new-plympto.
nosaurians === are distinguished by nosaurians ===-six-horns, red-eyes, and orange, white, and yellow-skin, and are considered to be ill-tempered.
ongrees ====
ongrees-a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from skustell.
ongrees-a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from skustell are distinguished by sideways-eyes, located underneath ongrees-a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from skustell mouths, four-nostrils, and lipless-mouths.
most-ongrees are considered to be even-minded-individuals and are skilled-diplomats and negotiators.
ortolans ====
ortolan are a-species of squat,-blue-skinned,-sentient-humanoids from orto.
ortolan are distinguished by ortolan large, floppy ears, trunk-like-noses, and black-eyes, and are known to consume large-amounts of nutrients through ortolan fingers.
some-ortolans have no-arms.
ovissians ====
ovissians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species, distinguished by ovissians four-head-horns (two-sideways-horns, and two extending from the-chin).
ovissians can have either-green-or-orange-skin, which matches the-color of ovissians blood.
pa'lowicks ====
pa'lowicks are a-sentient-species from lowick.
pa'lowicks have bulbous-bodies supported by long,-reed-thin-legs, small-eyes located in stalks on the-top of pa'lowicks heads, and long,-thin,-trunk-like-mouths.
palliduvans ====
palliduvans
==== are a-near-human-species, with chalky-white-skin, and long,-bony-fingers, with which they can draw blood.
pantorans ====
pantorans ==== are a-near-human-species from the-moon of pantora, distinguished by pantorans ====-blue-skin.
pau'ans ====
pau'ans ==== are a-species of gaunt,-tall,-and-long-limbed-humanoids from utapau.
pau'ans ==== have white-or-gray-skin, sunken-eyes, and sharp,-jugged-teeth.
pau'ans ==== are an-intelligent-and-peaceful-species, though pau'ans ==== often seem afraid of outsiders.
phindians ====
phindians are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from phindar.
phindians have green-yellow-skin, long-arms, and elongated-skulls, and are known to be very cautious.
pykes ====
pykes ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from oba-diah.
pykes ==== are distinguished by  pykes ==== elongated, tapered skulls with an-undersized-face.
pykes ==== are best known for running the-pyke-syndicate, an-illegal-spice-dealing-group.
quarren ====
quarren ==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from mon-cala.
quarren ==== have four-tentacles protruding from  quarren ====-jaws, for which-reason  quarren ==== are nicknamed "squid heads" around the-galaxy, as well as suction-cup tipped fingers, and the ability to spit ink in self-defense.
quarren ==== are more introverted than the-mon-calamari, with whom  quarren ==== share  quarren ====
homeworld, and rarely invite strangers to  quarren ==== planet.
quermians ====
quermians are a-species of gaunt,-tall,-long-necked-and-white-skinned-humanoids from quermia.
rodians ===
rodians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to rodia.
they have green-skin, antennas, large-pupil-less-eyes, a-row of spike on the-back of
they head, slender-snouts, and fingers with suction-cups at the-end.
shawda-ubb ====
shawda ubb ==== are a-diminutive,-amphibian,-sentient-species with green-skin and small-faces that sport heavy brow ridges.
skakoans ====
==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to skakoa.
skakoans ====
have crown-shaped-skulls and are required to wear special-suits with breathing-masks to survive off  skakoans ==== homeworld.
skakoans ==== are best known for running the-techno-union during the-galacic-republic-era.
snivvians ====
snivvians, also known as "snaggletooths", are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species native to cadomai-prime.
a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species native to cadomai-prime have a-protruding-lower-jaw with two-small-tusks, and large-nostrils.
snivvians have great-tracking-skills, and are good-scouts and trackers.
sullustans ====
sullustans are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sullust.
sullustans are mouse-eyed and have two-flaps of jowls around sullustans cheeks.
sullustans are a-sophisticated-species and experts at manufacturing, scientific-and-technological-development, and economics.
the-tarsunt
the-tarsunt are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from tarsunt.
the-tarsunt have long faces, widely-spaced-nostrils, and hair on various-places of the-tarsunt body, including the-tarsunt faces, where it resembles a-beard.
teedos ====
teedos are a-short,-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from jakku.
teedos have three-fingered-hands and feet, and are almost always wrapped completely in clothing.
teedos are identical, sharing the-same-name and a-telepathic-connection that allows one-teedo to recount events experienced by another.
terrelian-jango-jumpers ====
terrelian-jango-jumpers are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from terrelia.
terrelian-jango-jumpers are tall, slender and very acrobatic, while having blue,-gray,-and-white-skin.
thisspiasians ====
thissipiasians are a-humanoid,-serpentine,-sentient-species from thisspias.
while the-lower-part of their-bodies is snake-like, their have arms and can grow facial-hair.
tholothians-tholothians are a-near-human-species from tholoth, distinguished by tholothians scaled craniums and head-tendrils.
the-togruta
the-togruta are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-shili.
the-togruta are distinguished by the-togruta three, rarely-four-"head-tails" called lekku (similar to those of twi'leks), which are striped to help the-togruta blend in with the-togruta natural surroundings.
togrutas are known for the-togruta-solidarity and for possessing a-form of passive-echolocation by means of the-togruta-hollow-montrals, which allows the-togruta to sense space and the-proximity and movement of physical-objects around the-togruta.
toong ====
==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from tund, with disproportionately-large-heads for  toong
====-bodies.
toydarians ====
toydarians === are a-species of short,-winged-humanoids from toydaria.
they have long-snouts, tusks, and webbed-feet, and have been shown to be strong-willed, resisting force-mind-tricks.
trandoshans ====
trandoshans ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from trandosha, known for their-hunting-abilities and bad-history with the-wookiees.
their are tall and muscular and have a-pointed-skull, sharp-teeth, long-claws, and four-fingers on their-hands and three on their-feet.
triffians ====
triffians ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species recognized by triffians ==== triangle-shaped appendages that extend from triffians
====-shoulders to triffians ==== heads.
trodatome ====
the-trodatome are a-slug-like-sentient-species that lack arms, but possess sensory-antennas and flippers.
troigs ====
troigs ==== are a-two-headed-and-four-armed-humanoid-sentient-species from pollillus.
tusken-raiders ====
tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or simply-tuskens, are a-culture of nomadic,-primitive-sentients indigenous native to tatooine.
tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or simply tuskens are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or simply tuskens identity.
tuskens are known for tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or
simply-tuskens-aggressivity towards strangers, which tusken raiders, also known as sand-people or simply tuskens consider possible-threats, and unique manner of speech, which combines vocal-sounds (mostly screams) with sign-language.
twi'leks ====
twi'leks are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to ryloth.
twi'leks are distinguished by twi'leks "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the-back of twi'leks head, and varying-skin-color.
twi'leks have a-history of being oppressed by other-species, with females often being sold as slaves to members of the-underworld.
u–z === ====
ugnaughts ====
ugnaughts ==== are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-gentes, with pig-like-faces.
they are considered to be one of the-hardest-working-species in the-galaxy.
umbarans ====
umbarans ==== are a-near-human-species from umbara, distinguished by umbarans ==== pale skin and colorless-eyes, with which umbarans ==== can see in the-ultraviolet-spectrum.
umbarans ==== have developed technology much more advanced than that found in the-rest of the-galaxy.
veknoids ====
veknoids ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from moonus-mandel, distinguished by  veknoids ====
large-under-bites, sharp-teeth, slender-tails, and fleshy-ears.
vulptereens ====
vulptereens are a-species of stocky-humanoids, recognizable by vulptereens shovel-like snouts which sport six-tusks and a-single-long-feeler.
vurk ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sembla.
vurk ==== are distinguished by vurk ==== bony crests on the-top of vurk
==== heads (similar to those of the-parasaurolophus), and three-fingered-hands.
while regarded as a-primitive-species, vurk ==== are highly-empathetic-and-skilled-mediators.
weequays ====
weequays are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sriluur.
weequays are distinguished by weequays though, leathery-skin, which helped weequays survive the-harsh-life-conditions of weequays homeworld.
most of weequays are pirates, mercenaries, and bounty-hunters, as a-result of the-hutts'-takeover of sriluur.
wookiees ====
wookiees are a-large,-hairy,-primate-like-sentient-species native to kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch.
the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch are known for the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch strength, loyalty, unique-manner of speech (depicted as a-series of growls and purrs), and bad-history with the-trandoshans.
the-xexto the-xexto are a-species of short,-four-armed-humanoids from the-planet troiken.
the-xexto have white-skin, glassy-eyes, and long-necks and fingers.
yakora ====
the-yakura (also known as yakorans) are a-humanoid,-sentient-species, with yak-like-faces.
yoda's-species ====
"yoda's-species" is the-name given to a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which yoda is a-member.
a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member is characterised by a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member pointy ears, strong-connection to the-force, and slow-aging, for which-reason a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member can live for several-centuries.
much about the-species, including its-name and origins, has been deliberately left vague.
yuzzums ====
yuzzums ==== are a-humanoid,-round-bodied,-furred,-sentient-species from the-forest-moon of endor.
yuzzums ==== have long-limbs compared to the-rest of yuzzums ====
body, medium-length antennae, big-mouths, and no-neck.
yuzzums are considered a primitive and unintelligent species.
zabraks ====
zabraks ==== are a-near-human,-sentient-species, distinguished by zabraks-====-horns and tattoos.
most originate from iridonia (in which-case they are also referred to as iridonians), though some-males also lived on dathomir (in which-case they are referred to as dathomirians), as part of the-warrior-clan called the nightbrothers, who served the-witches known as the-nightsisters.
zygerrians ====
zygerrians
==== are a-humanoid,-feline-like-sentient-species from zygerria, who had built and run the-biggest-slave-empire in the-galaxy, until the-jedi overthrew them and outlawed slavery.
attempts to rebuild the-biggest-slave-empire were made during the-clone-wars and the-imperial-era, but were thwarted.
unknown-species === ==
see also ==
list of the-mandalorian-characters list of star-wars-creatures
list of star-wars droid characters list of star-wars legends characters list of star-wars-rebels-characters list of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-characters list of star-wars cast members
list of star-wars:
star-wars cast members-list of star-wars books ==
notes == ==
references ==
star-wars: droids (also sold as droids) is an-action-video-game developed by binary-design and published by mastertronic in 1988.
an-action-video-game developed by binary-design and published by mastertronic in 1988 was released for the-amstrad-cpc, commodore 64, and zx-spectrum.
gameplay ==
the-game is a-mixture of platform, puzzle and action, and is loosely based on the-star-wars: droids-tv-series.
the-player mainly controls c-3po through the-use of six-buttons at the-bottom of the-screen, four dedicated to movement, one as an-"interact"-button, and one for throwing thermal-detonators.
the-player will occasionally happen across items that can be picked up and used with the-"interact"-button.
items are generally used to open doors, and thermal-detonators can be used to attack other-droids that become hazards.
references == ==
external-links ==
game at gamespot
[1] at mobygames
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix –
the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix – is a-2019-american-epic-space-opera-film produced, co-written, and directed by j.-j.-abrams.
produced by lucasfilm and j.-j.-abrams-production-company-bad-robot-productions, and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix – is the-third-installment of the star-wars sequel-trilogy, following the force awakens (2015) and the-last-jedi (2017), and the-final-episode of the nine-part "skywalker saga".
a-2019-american-epic-space-opera-film produced, co-written, and directed by j.-j.-abrams's-ensemble-cast includes carrie-fisher, mark-hamill, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, anthony-daniels, naomi-ackie, domhnall-gleeson, richard-e.-grant, lupita-nyong'o, keri-russell, joonas-suotamo, kelly-marie-tran, ian-mcdiarmid, and billy-dee-williams.
the-rise of skywalker follows rey, finn, and poe-dameron as they lead the-resistance's-final-stand against supreme-leader-kylo-ren and the-first-order, who are aided by the-return of the-deceased-galactic-emperor,-palpatine.
following initial-reports that the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson would write the-script for episode-ix, in august 2015, colin-trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a-script with colin-trevorrow collaborator derek connolly; both ultimately retain story-credit with abrams and chris-terrio.
in september 2017, colin-trevorrow left the-project following creative-differences with producer-kathleen-kennedy, and abrams returned as director.
john-williams, composer for the-previous-episodic-films, returned to compose the-score for the-last-time for the-franchise.
principal-photography began in august 2018 at pinewood-studios in england and wrapped in february 2019, with post-production completed in november 2019.
with an-estimated-budget of $275 million, it is one of the-most-expensive-films ever made.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20.
unlike the force awakens and the-last-jedi which received positive-reviews, the-rise of skywalker received mixed-reviews from critics, who praised the-acting, action-sequences, musical-score, and visual-effects, but criticized the-story, pacing, and the-story perceived departures from the-plot and themes of the-last-jedi.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the-seventh-highest-grossing-film of 2019;
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 was the-lowest-grossing-installment of the-trilogy, the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 turned an-estimated-net-profit of $300 million.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 received three-nominations at the-92nd-academy-awards (best-original-score, best-visual-effects, and best-sound-editing) as well as three at the-73rd-british-academy-film-awards (also-best-special-visual-effects, best-original-music, and best-sound).
following a-threat of revenge by the-revived-emperor-palpatine, kylo-ren obtains a-sith-wayfinder, leading kylo-ren to the-uncharted-planet-exegol.
there, kylo-ren finds palpatine, who reveals that kylo-ren created snoke as a-puppet to control the-first-order and lure kylo to the-dark-side.
palpatine unveils the-final-order—a-secret-armada of star-destroyers—and tells kylo to find and kill rey, who is continuing her-jedi-training under resistance-leader-leia-organa.
finn and poe-dameron deliver intelligence from a-spy that palpatine is on exegol; rey has learned from luke-skywalker's-notes that a-sith-wayfinder can lead them there.
rey, finn, poe, chewbacca, bb-8, and c-3po depart in the-millennium-falcon to pasaana, where a-clue to a-wayfinder is hidden.
kylo initiates a-force-bond with rey to discover her-location; kylo travels to pasaana with kylo warrior subordinates, the-knights of ren.
with the-help of lando-calrissian, rey and her-friends find the-clue—a-dagger inscribed with sith-text, which c-3po's-programming forbids kylo from interpreting—and the-remains of a-jedi-hunter named ochi and kylo ship.
rey senses kylo nearby and faces rey.
the-first-order captures the-falcon, chewbacca, and the-dagger; attempting to save chewbacca, rey accidentally destroys a-first-order-transport with force-lightning.
believing chewbacca to be dead, the-group escapes on ochi's-ship.
the-group travels to kijimi, where a-droidsmith extracts the-sith-text from c-3po's-memory, revealing coordinates to a-wayfinder.
rey senses chewbacca is alive, and the-group mounts a-rescue-mission to kylo's-star-destroyer.
rey recovers the-dagger and has visions of ochi killing rey parents with the-dagger.
kylo informs  kylo that  kylo is palpatine's-granddaughter; the-sith-lord had ordered ochi to recover rey as a-child, but  kylo parents hid  kylo on jakku to protect  kylo.
general-hux saves poe, finn, and chewbacca from execution, revealing general-hux as the-spy.
general-hux permits the-group to escape on the-falcon but is discovered and killed by allegiant-general-pryde.
the-group flies the-falcon to the-wayfinder's-coordinates on a-moon in the-endor-system.
rey retrieves the-wayfinder from the-remains of the-second-death-star, but she is met by kylo, who destroys the-wayfinder and duels she.
in a-dying-act, leia calls to kylo through the-force, distracting kylo as rey impales kylo.
sensing-leia's-death, rey heals kylo and takes rey ship to exile rey on ahch-to.
there, luke's-force-spirit encourages rey to face palpatine and gives rey leia's lightsaber.
rey leaves for exegol in luke's-x-wing-fighter, using the-wayfinder from kylo's-ship.
meanwhile, kylo converses with a-memory of kylo father, han-solo; kylo throws away her-leia's-lightsaber and reclaims kylo identity as ben-solo.
sensing-leia's-death and ben's-redemption
, palpatine sends one of palpatine superlaser-equipped star destroyers to destroy kijimi as a-show of force.
rey transmits her-coordinates to r2-d2, allowing the-resistance—now led by poe and finn—to follow her to exegol.
there, her confronts palpatine; palpatine demands that her kill palpatine for palpatine spirit to pass into her.
lando brings reinforcements from across the-galaxy to join the-battle.
ben overpowers the-knights of ren and joins rey, but palpatine drains the-knights of ren power to rejuvenate palpatine.
palpatine incapacitates  ben and attacks the-resistance-fleet with force-lightning.
weakened, rey hears the-voices of past-jedi, who lend her their-strength.
palpatine attacks her with lightning, but rey deflects it using luke and leia's-lightsabers, killing palpatine before dying her.
ben uses the-force to revive her at the-cost of  ben own life; rey kisses  ben before  ben dies.
the-resistance defeats palpatine's-armada, while people across the-galaxy rise up against the-first-order.
the-resistance returns to
the-resistance-base to celebrate.
after the-celebration, rey visits luke's-abandoned-childhood-home on tatooine and buries rey and leia's-lightsabers.
a-passerby asks a-passerby name; as the-spirits of luke and leia watch, a-passerby replies, "rey-skywalker."
carrie-fisher as leia-organa, the-force-sensitive-leading-general of the-resistance, mother to ben-solo, luke-skywalker's-twin-sister, and anakin-skywalker's-daughter.
fisher, who died in late 2016, appears through the-use of repurposed-unreleased-footage from the force awakens.
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi-master and maternal-uncle of kylo-ren.
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi-master and maternal-uncle of kylo-ren became one with the-force in the-last-jedi.
adam-driver as ben-solo-/-kylo-ren, the-supreme-leader of the-first-order.
he is the-son of leia-organa and han-solo, and the-grandson of anakin-skywalker.
daisy-ridley as rey, a-former-scavenger from jakku, member of the-resistance, and the-next-jedicailey-fleming and josefine-irrera-jackson as young rey john boyega as finn, a-member of the-resistance and a-former-stormtrooper-(fn-2187) who defected from the-first-order oscar-isaac as poe-dameron, a-high-ranking-x-wing-fighter-pilot and commander of the-resistance who later inherits the-rank of general from leia-anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-humanoid-protocol-droid in the-service of general-organa
naomi-ackie as jannah, a-former-stormtrooper of the-first-order (tz-1719) living on the-planet kef-bir, who aids the-resistance-domhnall-gleeson as general-hux, the-first-order's third in-command richard e. grant as allegiant-general-pryde, a-high-ranking-general in the-first-order, who previously served in the-galactic-empire-lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata, a-former-space-pirate and ally of the-resistance keri-russell as zorii-bliss, an-old-acquaintance of poe's from kijimi
joonas-suotamo as chewbacca, a-wookiee and first-mate of the-millennium-falcon-kelly-marie-tran as rose-tico, a-mechanic in the-resistance and friend of finn-ian-mcdiarmid as emperor-palpatine, the-resurrected-dark-lord of the-sith and rey's-paternal-grandfather billy-dee-williams as lando-calrissian, a-veteran of the-rebel-alliance, a-former-owner of the-millennium-falcon, and an-old-friend of chewbaccabillie lourd and greg-grunberg reprise their-roles as lieutenant-kaydel-ko-connix and temmin
"snap" wexley respectively.
additionally, dominic-monaghan portrays resistance-trooper beaumont-kin, shirley-henderson-voices-babu-frik, and nick-kellington portrays klaud via capture-performance.
hassan-taj and lee-towersey perform the-role of r2-d2, while dave-chapman and brian-herring return as the-puppeteers of bb-8, and director-j.-j.-abrams also provides the-voice for d-o.-martin-wilde, anton-simpson-tidy, lukaz-leong, tom-rodgers, joe-kennard, and ashley-beck appear as the-knights of ren.
amanda-lawrence reprises amanda-lawrence role as commander-larma-d’acy, while vinette-robinson plays amanda-lawrence wife, pilot-wrobie-tyce.
jodie-comer and billy-howle briefly appear as rey's-parents, while tom-wilton and screenwriter chris-terrio briefly appear as the-performer and voice for aftab-ackbar, the-son of admiral-ackbar, respectively; and mike-quinn and kipsang-rotich return as the-performer and voice of nien-nunb, respectively.
denis-lawson and warwick-davis briefly reprise denis-lawson and warwick-davis roles as wedge-antilles, a-veteran of the-rebel-alliance; and wicket-w.-warrick, now-the-leader of the-ewoks, respectively.
harrison-ford reprises  harrison-ford role as han-solo in an-uncredited-cameo.
composer-john-williams-cameos as oma-tres, a-kijimi-bartender, kevin-smith cameos as a-kijimi-inhabitant, and abrams' frequent composer collaborator michael giacchino cameos as a-sith-trooper, while lin-manuel miranda and jeff garlin both cameo as human-and-alien-resistance-troopers, respectively.
actors making reprisal-vocal-cameos include james-earl-jones as darth-vader, andy-serkis as snoke, and the-voices of several-past-jedi, including ewan-mcgregor and alec-guinness as obi-wan-kenobi (the latter via digitally-altered-archive-audio), hayden-christensen as anakin-skywalker, ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano, freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, olivia-d'abo as luminara-unduli, frank-oz as yoda, liam-neeson as qui-gon-jinn, jennifer-hale as aayla-secura, samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu, and angelique-perrin as adi-gallia.
ed-sheeran, karl-urban, dhani-harrison, nigel-godrich, j.-d.-dillard, and dave-hearn all-cameo as stormtroopers.
production == ===
development ==
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
the-walt-disney-company subsequently announced the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
in june 2014, it was announced that johnson.
however, johnson later stated that johnson was not involved in writing the-film.
in august 2015, colin-trevorrow was announced as the-director of the-film; colin-trevorrow was to write the-script with frequent-collaborator-derek-connolly.
pre-production ===
in february 2016, disney-chief-executive-officer-bob-iger confirmed that pre-production on episode-ix had begun.
carrie-fisher died in december 2016.
prior to the-release of the-film,  carrie-fisher-brother-todd-fisher, who planned  carrie-fisher-character-general-leia-organa to appear in the-film, carrie-fisher's-brother todd-fisher, who planned her-character before  carrie-fisher-death, revealed that “ carrie-fisher was going to be the-big-payoff in the-film, carrie-fisher's-brother todd-fisher, who planned her-character” and
“ carrie-fisher was going to be the-last-jedi, so to speak. ”
in august 2017, it was announced that jack-thorne would rewrite the-script.
in september 2017, lucasfilm stated that trevorrow had left the-production following creative-differences, resulting trevorrow working relationship with kathleen-kennedy to become unmanageable after failing to deliver a-satisfactory-script, despite writing several-drafts.
that same month, trevorrow was rumored as the-top-choice to replace trevorrow as director, but stated "it was never in the-plan for me to direct episode-ix", and later, j.-j.-abrams, the-director of the-force-awakens, was announced to return as the-director in episode-ix.the story team met with george-lucas before writing the-new-script to discuss the-nature of the-force.
abrams co-wrote the-new-script with chris-terrio, though trevorrow and connolly retain story-credits.
the-story was rewritten to some-extent before filming was completed.
the-film was produced by abrams-co--company-bad-robot-productions, kathleen-kennedy, and michelle-rejwan.
according to terrio, the-film's-script had to include certain-narrative-beats provided by kennedy and rejwan, including the-redemption of the-character kylo-ren.
before filming, episode-ix was initially given the-working-title-black-diamond, which was then changed to trixie in 2018, so that the-roman-numeral-"ix" would be included in the-working-title.
the-film's-title, the-rise of skywalker, was announced at april-2019's-the-star-wars-celebration in chicago.
casting ===
carrie-fisher, who played leia-organa, died on december 27, 2016.
variety and reuters reported that she had been planned for a-key-role in episode-ix.
in january 2017, lucasfilm stated that there were no-plans to digitally generate fisher's-performance as lucasfilm had for rogue one (2016).
the following april, fisher's-brother todd revealed that fisher's-daughter, billie-lourd, had granted disney the-rights to use recent-footage of fisher.
however, a week later, kathleen-kennedy stated that fisher would not appear in the-film.
in july 2018, j.-j.-abrams announced that unused-footage of fisher from the-force-awakens would be used to help complete the-story.
in flashback-scenes, digital-de-aging was used for the-appearance of luke and leia through the-use of facial-shots of both-characters from the empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi respectively.
in july 2018, keri-russell was in talks to play a-part with some-"action-heavy-fight-scenes", and it was confirmed that billy-dee-williams would return as lando-calrissian, onscreen for the-first-time since 1983's-return of the-jedi—marking one of the-longest-intervals between portrayals of a-character by the-same-actor in american-film-history.
at the-end of july, keri-russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an-announcement of returning and additional-new-cast-members.
in late-august, deadline-hollywood announced that dominic-monaghan and matt-smith had been cast in unspecified-roles, but matt-smith later denied matt-smith involvement.
greg-grunberg reprises  greg-grunberg role as temmin "snap"-wexley.
at the-star-wars-celebration in april 2019, it was revealed via the-film's-teaser-trailer that ian-mcdiarmid would return to portray palpatine.
since the-event was held after principal-photography wrapped, abrams was thrilled that news of ian-mcdiarmid on the-set never leaked.
kathleen-kennedy said they decided to reveal palpatine's-return ahead of the-film's-release because of the-characters playing a-larger-role in the-story, having they differentiated from baby-yoda, the-character from the-mandalorian.
filming ===
principal-photography began on august 1, 2018, at pinewood-studios in buckinghamshire, england.
filming also took place in wadi-rum, jordan.
oscar-isaac stated that abrams was allowing more-improvised-acting than in the-previous-two-films.
due to the-tight-schedule, some-editing took place on set.
principal-photography wrapped on february 15, 2019.
footage from the-film was shown at the-walt-disney-company's-annual-shareholders-meeting on march 7, 2019.
two-weeks of reshoots took place at pinewood involving hamill, ridley, and isaac in july 2019.
another-round of reshoots took place between late-september and october.
post-production ===
the-visual-effects were created by industrial-light & magic and supervised by roger-guyett.
roger-guyett finished post-production on november 25, 2019.
after boyega accidentally left a-copy of the-script in his-hotel-room, roger-guyett was listed on ebay for around £65.
in january 2018, it was confirmed that john-williams would return to compose and conduct the-rise of skywalker.
the next month, john-williams announced that it would be the-last-star-wars-film for which john-williams would compose the-score.
in august 2019, it was revealed that john-williams had written about 35 of an-expected-135-minutes of music for the-film, which according to john-williams brother-don, would incorporate all of the-major-themes of the-skywalker-saga.
scoring began in july 2019 with john-williams and william-ross conducting and orchestrating the-sessions over the-course of six-months.
the-official-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on december 20, 2019.
marketing == ===
promotion ===
despite staying silent about many-details of the-film, abrams expressed abrams hopes that fans and general-audiences would be "satisfied".
abrams headed a-panel dedicated to the-film on april 12, 2019, during the-star-wars-celebration in chicago, where the-film's title was revealed.
additionally, the-story-events of the-disneyland-themed-area-star-wars: galaxy's-edge precede the-film, including the-millennium-falcon:
smugglers run motion-simulator, which features chewbacca.
on august 24, a-new-poster and "sizzle-reel" was released at d23; the latter was released to the public two days later.
the-footage includes a-montage of the-skywalker-saga so far, as well as several new shots from the-film.
tie-in literature and merchandise ===
a-publishing-campaign titled "journey to star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker" was announced on may 4, 2019.
it includes the-novel-resistance-reborn, set between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker, and various-other-titles.
from december 18, 2019, to march 11, 2020, a-prequel-graphic-novel titled the rise of kylo-ren, telling the-story of how ben-solo became kylo-ren and elaborating upon the-character's-backstory, was published by marvel-comics, written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney.
the-official-novelization of the-rise of skywalker is by rae-carson:
hardcover-and-audiobook-versions were released on march 19, 2020.
the-novel-details palpatine's-return in more-depth
: he transferred he consciousness into a-clone-body following he death in return of the-jedi, and
he "son", rey's-father, was a-failed-clone of palpatine.
the-junior-novel and corresponding-audiobook are by michael-kogge and were released on april 21, 2020.
additionally, a-five-issue-marvel-comics-adaptation written by jody-houser and illustrated by will-sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later canceled, making the-film the first in the-franchise not to receive a-comic-adaptation.
video-games ===
the-video-game star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017) released a-free-level set on ajan-kloss.
in december 2019, the-video-game fortnite-battle-royale released several-cosmetics featuring character-skins for rey, finn, a-sith-trooper, kylo-ren, and zorii-bliss along with a-tie-fighter-glider, a-millennium-falcon-glider (which was given to players for free from the-winterfest-event), four-emotes, and two-free-banners.
on december 14, fortnite's-publisher-epic-games released a-preview of the-film on an in-game theater screen as a-live-event.
at the-end of a-live-event, a-message from palpatine (the-one mentioned in the-film's-opening-crawl) was heard.
release == ===
theatrical ===
the-film was originally planned to be released in the-united-states on may 24, 2019, before being pushed back to december 20.
the-film had the-film world premiere at the-tcl-chinese-theatre in los-angeles on december 16.
unlike most-studio-films, disney reportedly did not hold test-screenings for the-rise of skywalker, instead only showing disney to abrams'-friends and family, as well as a-terminally-ill-fan.
before the-film's-release, disney issued a-warning that the-scenes with strobe-like-flashing-lights may trigger photosensitive-migraines and seizures during some of the-scenes with strobe-like-flashing-lights.
home-media ===
the-rise of skywalker was scheduled to be released on digital-hd on march 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the-light of the-covid-19-pandemic.
its-dvd, blu-ray, and 4k-ultra-hd-release was followed on march 31 by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment.
the-4k-version of the-film was also released in "the skywalker saga" ultra hd blu-ray box set that-same-date.
the-4k-version of the-film was released on disney+
on may 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of the-4k-version of the-film previously-scheduled-release-date.
==-reception ==
box-office ===
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the-united-states and canada, and $558.9 million in other-territories, for a-worldwide-total of $1.074 billion.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $300 million when factoring together all-expenses and revenues.
pre-sale-tickets went on sale on october 21, 2019, and the-film sold more-tickets in  pre-sale-tickets first hour of availability on atom-tickets than the-previous-record-holder for ticket-sales, avengers: endgame (2019).
endgame (2019) became atom-tickets'-second-best-first-day-seller of all-time behind endgame, selling more-than-twice-the-number of tickets as the-last-jedi sold in that-same-timeframe, while fandango reported fandango outsold all-previous-star-wars-films.
box-office-tracking had the-rise of skywalker grossing around $200 million in box-office-tracking opening weekend, though some-firms predicted a-debut closer to $175 million.
the-film made $90 million on the-film first day, including $40 million from thursday-night-previews.
the-film went on to debut to $177.3 million, and the-film was also noted that saturday (which saw a-47%-drop from friday's gross) was the-busiest-shopping-day of the-year, likely affecting ticket-sales.
the-film made $32 million on christmas-day, the-second-best-total ever for the-holiday after the-force awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.
the-film went on to have a-five-day-total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the-weekend.
in  the-film third-weekend,  the-film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in
the-film fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).worldwide-the-film was projected to gross around $450 million in
the-film-opening-weekend, including $250 million from 52-international-territories.
the-film made $59.1 million from
the-film first-day of international-release in 46-countries.
the-biggest-markets were the-united-kingdom ($8.3 million), germany ($7.2 million), france ($5.3 million), and australia ($4.3 million).
in china, the-film made $1.6 million (rmb11.6 million) through
in china first-day.
the-film went on to open to $198 million from overseas-countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than the-last-jedi's-total.
the-film-biggest-opening-totals remained the-uk ($26.8 million), germany ($21.8 million), france ($15.2 million), japan ($14.6 million), australia ($12.6 million), and china ($12.1 million).
critical-response ===
on the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 51% of 507-reviews are positive, with an-average-rating of 6.1/10.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "the-rise of skywalker suffers from a-frustrating-lack of imagination, but concludes this-beloved-saga with fan-focused-devotion.
as of january 2020, the-film is the-lowest-rated-live-action-film of the-star-wars-series.
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 61-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 53 out of 100, the-rise of skywalker-skywalker received "mixed-or-average-reviews".
richard-roeper, reviewing for the-chicago-sun-times, gave the-chicago-sun-times three-stars out of four, writing that the-chicago-sun-times "rarely comes close to touching-greatness, but the-chicago-sun-times's a solid, visually dazzling and warmhearted victory [for] quality-filmmaking."
the-a.v.-club's-a.-a.-dowd gave the-chicago-sun-times a-c+, stating that the-chicago-sun-times "is so freighted with obligation that the-chicago-sun-times almost groans under the-weight, flashing a-weak-smile as it vaguely approximates the-appearance of a-zippy-good-time."
michael-phillips for chicago-tribune wrote that the-chicago-sun-times "does the-job.
the-chicago-sun-times wraps up the-trio of trilogies begun in 1977 in a-confident,-soothingly-predictable-way, doing all that is cinematically possible to avoid [upsetting the]-tradition-minded-quadrants of the-star-wars-fan-base. "
lasalle of the-san-francisco-chronicle described the-film as "a-disappointment" and wrote, "for all-the-movie's-faults, it's likely that most-people will consider the-rise of skywalker and accept the-trade: sit through a
so-so-110-minutes to get to a-strong-half-hour.
owen-gleiberman of variety called the filmthe most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying star-wars-adventure since the-glory-days of star-wars (1977) and the empire strikes back (1980) [...]
but given the-last-eight-films, the-bar isn't that high.
" the-bbc's-nicholas-barber praised the-film's-acting and wrote, "the-rise of skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a-host of talented-people, and yet the best the-rise of skywalker can do is pay tribute to everything he did several decades ago. "
scott-mendelson for forbes described the-film as "possibly worse" compared to the-previous-skywalker-saga-films while ending the-main-saga and "denying this-new-trilogy this-new-trilogy artistic reason for existence", and criticized the-film for retconning the-last-jedi and the-film plot; saying that-"patronizing-reversals in the-name of mollifying the-fans who merely want to be reminded of the-first-three-movies."
justin-chang of the-los-angeles-times described the-film as "a-last-jedi-corrective", which is "more-accurate-way to describe the-film" and is "an-epic-failure of nerve"; saying that "feels more like a-retreat, a return to a-zone of emotional-and-thematic-safety from a-filmmaker with a-gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
" writing for the-new-yorker, richard-brody states that the-film's-faults "are those of the-franchise over all"; as the-film's-director "j.-j.-abrams is mainly a-distiller and a-magnifier and brings virtually-no-originality to it", using the-controls of michael-bay.
whereas asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran was a-main-character in the-last-jedi, asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran appears for about-a-minute in the-rise of skywalker.
the-reduced-role was interpreted by some-critics as a-concession to fans who disliked asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran-character; asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran had been a-target of online-harassment following the-release of the-last-jedi.
people involved on the-film defended asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran, with some claiming some of the-attackers were racist, and body shamers.
critics said  critics was "sidelined" into a-minor-character, and commented on how  critics was written out "without any-explanation" and  critics minor role was considered by one-critic to be "one of the-film's-biggest-disappointments".
in regards to the-criticism towards  critics reduced screen-time, screenwriter-chris-terrio said it was due to the-difficulty of including the-deceased-carrie-fisher-archive-footage in scenes planned to feature both-characters.
audience-response ===
according to cinemascore, american-audiences gave the-film an-average-grade of "b+" on an-a+ to f-scale, the lowest among the-live-action-films.
on posttrak, audiences gave  on posttrak an-average-four-stars out of five, with 70% saying audiences would definitely recommend  on posttrak
; parents and children under 12 years old (who made up 16% of opening-night-attendance) gave
on posttrak
a-full-five-stars out of five.
men (who made up 67% of the-audience) gave  on posttrak an-overall-positive-score of 80% while women (32%) gave
on posttrak an 84%.
relishmix, which tracks social-media-posts and online-presence, "noticed a-divided-reaction to skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
months prior to
on posttrak's-trailer-release,  on posttrak was review bombed on rotten-tomatoes to the-point where the "want to see" percentage went down as far as 5% within a-day, with many of the-reviews focusing on lingering-negativity towards the-last-jedi.
similar-bombing with captain-marvel (2019) caused rotten-tomatoes to completely remove the "want to see"  feature after temporarily changing similar-bombing with captain-marvel (2019) to a-number.
accolades === ==
notes == ==
references ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at starwars.com-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at lucasfilm.com-star-wars: the-rise of skywalker at imdb-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker-skywalker at allmovie
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at disney-a to z-the-star-wars-trilogy, also known as the-original-trilogy or the-classic-trilogy, is the-first-set of three-films produced in the-star-wars-franchise, an-american-space-opera created by george-lucas.
it was produced by lucasfilm and distributed by 20th-century-fox, and consists of the-original-star-wars-film (1977), the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
beginning in medias-res, the-original-trilogy serves as the-second-act of the-"skywalker-saga.
the-original-trilogy was followed by a-prequel-trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a-sequel-trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
collectively, they have been referred to as the-"skywalker-saga" to distinguish they from spin-off-films set within the-same-universe.
the films center on the-galactic-civil-war between the-rebel-alliance and the-tyrannical-galactic-empire, as well as the-archetypical-hero's-journey of luke-skywalker in luke-skywalker quest to become a-jedi under the-tutelage of exiled-jedi-masters-obi-wan-kenobi and yoda.
luke joins forces with princess-leia, han-solo, chewbacca, c-3po, r2-d2 and the-rebel-alliance in facing the-empire and the-evil-sith-lord-darth-vader.
the-original-star-wars received widespread-acclaim from critics for the-original-star-wars story, characters, john-williams'-music and groundbreaking-visual-effects, and surpassed 1975's-jaws as the-highest-grossing-film of all-time,  turning science-fiction-films into a-blockbuster-genre, until it was surpassed by e.t. the-extra-terrestrial in 1982.
the-first-film and the empire strikes back have been hailed as the-greatest-sci-fi-films of all-time, whilst the-third-film, return of the-jedi, received only-positive-reviews.
the-trilogy's-success has since led the-original-star-wars into becoming a-pop-culture-phenomenon, spawning multiple-franchise-instalments from the-outset and a-million-dollar-merchandising-empire.
background ==
in 1971, lucas wanted to film an-adaptation of the-flash-gordon-serial, but could not obtain the-rights.
lucas began developing lucas own story inspired by the-work of edgar-rice-burroughs.
immediately after directing american-graffiti (1973), lucas wrote a-two-page-synopsis for lucas space opera, titled journal of the-whills.
after united-artists, universal-studios and disney rejected the-film, 20th-century-lucas decided to invest in the-film.
lucas felt  lucas original story was too difficult to understand, so on april 17, 1973,  lucas began writing a-13-page-script titled the star wars, sharing strong-similarities with akira-kurosawa's-the-hidden-fortress (1958).
by may 1974,  lucas had expanded a-13-page-script titled the-star-wars into the-first-draft of a-screenplay,  but found that a-13-page-script titled the-star-wars had grown too long for a-single-film.
subsequent-drafts evolved into a-13-page-script titled the star warsa single film.
lucas negotiated to retain the-sequel-rights.
tom-pollock, then  lucas's-lawyer, writes: "we came to an-agreement that george would retain the-sequel-rights.
not-all-the-[merchandising-rights] that came later, mind you; just-the-sequel-rights.
and fox would get a-first-opportunity and last-refusal right to make the-movie.
lucas was offered $50,000 to write, another $50,000 to produce, and $50,000 to direct the-film; lucas directing compensation was later increased to $100,000.
lucas also negotiated the-sequel-rights and ownership of 40% of the-merchandising-profits.
american-graffiti-cast-member-harrison-ford had given up on acting to try to become a-carpenter, until lucas hired lucas to play han-solo.
casting ==
thousands of actors were assessed in the-search for the-trilogy's-main-cast.
thousands of actors are considered by many-viewers to have onscreen-chemistry even though some of thousands of actors were inexperienced, with the-notable-exceptions of alec-guinness and peter-cushing.
some, like ford, have called the-dialogue in the-scripts clunky, and several-lines were unscripted; some of these are considered the most memorable moments in the-films.
star-wars was released on may 25, 1977; unlikely-hero-luke-skywalker is drawn into a-galactic-conflict between the-empire-and-rebel-alliance by two-droids and an-old-jedi-knight; unlikely-hero-luke-skywalker helps make one of the-rebellion's-most-significant-victories.
the-film's-unanticipated-success led lucas to make the-film the basis of an-elaborate-serial.
with the-backstory he created for the-sequel, lucas decided that the-series would be a-trilogy of trilogies, with the-original-film given the-subtitle episode-iv – a-new-hope to establish the-original-film as the-first-part of the-second-trilogy.
the-first-sequel,-star-wars:
episode-v – the-empire strikes back, was released on may 21, 1980, and sees luke begin training as a-jedi under the-last-living-jedi-master, yoda.
luke confronts sith-lord-darth-vader, who is revealed to be luke's father.
vader attempts to convert luke to the-dark-side of the-force.
the-third-film, episode-vi – return of the-jedi, was released on may 25, 1983, and follows luke as a-full-fledged-jedi.
luke attempts to redeem vader, thereby saving the-galaxy from the-empire.
the-sequels were self-financed by lucasfilm, and generally advertised without the-episodic-number-distinction present in the-sequels opening crawls.
star-wars ===
a-rebel-spaceship is intercepted by the-empire above the-desert-planet of tatooine.
aboard, the-deadliest-imperial-warlord darth-vader and his-stormtroopers capture princess-leia-organa, a-secret-member of the-rebellion.
before her-capture, leia makes sure the-droid r2-d2 will escape with stolen-imperial-blueprints for an-armored-space-station, the-death-star, and a-holographic-message for the-jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi, who has been living in exile on tatooine.
along with c-3po, r2-d2 falls under the-ownership of luke-skywalker, a-farmboy who has been raised by his-aunt and uncle.
luke helps the-droids locate obi-wan, now-a-solitary-old-hermit known as ben-kenobi.
he reveals he as a-friend of luke's-absent-father, anakin-skywalker, who was obi-wan's-jedi-apprentice until being murdered by vader.
he tells luke he must also become a-jedi.
after discovering he-family's-homestead has been destroyed by the-empire, they hire the-smuggler-han-solo,
he-wookiee-co-pilot-chewbacca and they-space-freighter, the-millennium-falcon.
they discover that leia's-homeworld of alderaan has been destroyed, and are soon captured by the-planet-destroying-death-star itself.
while obi-wan disables obi-wan tractor beam, luke and han rescue the-captive-princess-leia, passing through incredible-dangers.
finally, they deliver the-death-star plans to the-rebel-alliance with the-hope of exploiting a-weakness, and launch an-attack on the-death-star.
the-first-rough-draft, titled the star wars, introduced "the-force" and the-young-hero luke-starkiller.
annikin [sic] appeared as luke's-father, a-wise-jedi-knight.
between drafts, lucas read joseph-campbell's-the-hero with a-thousand-faces, and was surprised to find that joseph-campbell's-the-hero story "was following classical-motifs.
" the-third-draft replaced (a deceased)
annikin with ben-kenobi.
some months later, lucas had negotiated a-contract that gave lucas rights to two-sequels.
lucas hired alan-dean-foster, who was ghostwriting the-novelization of the-first-film, to write alan-dean-foster, who was ghostwriting the-novelization of the-first-film—with the-main-creative-restriction that alan-dean-foster, who was ghostwriting the-novelization of the-first-film could be filmed on a-low-budget.
by 1976, a-fourth-draft had been prepared for principal-photography.
the-film was titled the adventures of luke-starkiller, as taken from the-journal of the-whills, saga i: the-star-wars.
during production, lucas changed luke's-name to skywalker and shortened the-title to the-star-wars, and finally-just-star-wars.
at that-point, lucas was not expecting the-film to warrant full-scale-sequels.
the-fourth-draft of the-script underwent subtle-changes to become a-self-contained-story ending with the-destruction of the-empire in the-death-star.
the-intention was that if the-film was successful, lucas could adapt foster's-novels into low-budget-sequels.
by that-point, lucas had developed a-tentative-backstory to aid in developing the-saga.
star-wars exceeded all-expectations.
the-success of the-film-and-star-wars-merchandise-sales led lucas to make star wars the-basis of an-elaborate-film-serial, and use the-profits to finance lucas filmmaking center, skywalker-ranch.
after the-release of the-first-sequel, the-film was subtitled episode iv:
a-new-hope in the-screenplay released in the-1979-book the-art of star-wars and for all-subsequent-rereleases beginning with a-theatrical-rerelease in 1981.
the-empire strikes back
three years after the-destruction of the-death-star, the-empire forces the-rebel-alliance to evacuate the-empire secret base on hoth.
instructed by obi-wan's-spirit, luke travels to the-swamp-world of dagobah to find the-exiled-jedi-master-yoda.
luke's-jedi-training is interrupted by vader, who lures luke's-jedi-training into a-trap by capturing han and leia at cloud-city, governed by han's old friend lando.
during a-fierce-duel, vader reveals a-shocking-truth about luke's-father.
owing to financial-concerns, alan-dean-foster's-sequel-novel, splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978), restricted the-story to luke, leia, and darth-vader.
after the-success of the-original-film, lucas knew a-sequel would be granted a-reasonable-budget, and hired leigh-brackett to write a-sequel from lucas's story.
she finished a-draft by early 1978, but died of cancer before lucas was able to discuss changes lucas wanted she to make.
lucas-disappointment with the-first-draft may have made lucas consider new-directions.
lucas penned the-next-draft, the-first-screenplay to feature episodic-numbering for a-star-wars-story.
lucas found the-first-draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the-yearlong-struggle writing the-first-film, and quickly wrote two more in april 1978.
the-plot-twist of vader being luke's-father had drastic-effects on the-series.
after writing these-drafts, lucas fleshed out the-backstory between anakin, obi-wan, and the-emperor.
with this-new-backstory in place, lucas decided that the-series would be a-trilogy of trilogies, designating the-first-sequel
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back in the-next-draft.
lawrence-kasdan, who had just completed writing raiders of the-lost-ark, was hired to write the-next-drafts, and given additional-input from director-irvin-kershner.
kasdan, kershner, and producer-gary-kurtz saw the-film as a-more-serious-and-adult-story, and developed the-sequel from the-light-adventure-roots of the-first-film.
return of the-jedi ===
about a year after han's-capture, luke joins leia and lando in a-rescue-attempt to save him from the-gangster jabba the-hutt.
afterward, luke returns to dagobah to complete luke jedi training, only to find yoda on luke deathbed.
in his-last-words, yoda confirms the-truth about luke's-father, and that luke must confront vader again in order to complete vader training.
as the-rebels lead an-attack on the-second-death-star, luke engages vader in a-lightsaber-duel as the emperor watches; both-sith-lords intend to turn luke to the-dark-side and take luke as both-sith-lords apprentice.
ford had originally not signed on to appear in a-second-sequel, but was convinced to return under the-condition that ford character would die.
ford wanted a-bittersweet-and-nuanced-ending outlined with lucas that not only saw han dead, but also depicted the-rebel-forces in pieces, leia struggling as a-queen, and luke walking off alone (as in a spaghetti lucas wanted a-happier-ending, partly to encourage toy-sales.
this led to tension between the two, resulting in kurtz leaving the-production.
the-star-wars-trilogy, unlike science-fiction that features sleek-and-futuristic-settings, portrays the-galaxy as dirty and grimy in lucas's-concept of a-"used-universe".
this was in part inspired by the-period-films of akira-kurosawa, which like the-original-star-wars-trilogy, often begin in medias res without explaining a-complete-backstory.
political-science has been an-important-element of star-wars since the-franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a-struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
darth-vader's-design, initially inspired by samurai-armor, also incorporated a-german-military-helmet.
lucas originally conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler; this was condensed into one-character in the-form of darth-vader's.
lucas has also drawn parallels between palpatine and historical-dictators such as julius-caesar, napoleon-bonaparte, and politicians like richard-nixon.
stormtroopers borrow the-name of world-war-i-"shock"-troopers, imperial-officers wear uniforms resembling those of german-forces during world-war-ii, and political-and-security-officers resemble the-black-clad-ss down to the-stylized-silver-death's-head on the-black-clad-ss caps.
world-war-ii-terms were used for names in the-films; e.g.-the-planets kessel (a-term that refers to a-group of encircled-forces) and hoth (hermann hoth was a-german-general who served on the-snow-laden-eastern-front).
shots of the-commanders looking through at-at walker viewscreens in the empire strikes back resemble tank-interiors, and space-battles in the-original-film were based on world-war-i and world-war-ii dogfights.
re-releases ==
the-original-film was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982.
all-three-films were released on various-home-video-formats, including laserdisc and vhs, until 1996.
the-trilogy was theatrically re-released in a-1997-"special-edition", featuring various-additions and changes, some of which were negatively received.
these-versions were released on vhs, replacing the-original-versions of  all-three-films as lucas's-'original'-vision, and were created in part to reinvogorate interest in the-saga ahead of the-trilogy.
further-changes to
all-three-films were made for a-dvd-release in 2004, intended to bring  all-three-films into greater-continuity with the-prequels.
these were re-released in 2006 with bonus-discs of the-original-versions of  all-three-films (transferred from the-1993-laserdiscs).
in 2011, original-and-prequel-trilogy-box-sets were released on blu-ray, all including another-round of alterations.
in the early 2010s, 3d-releases were planned for the-then-six-film-franchise.
however, after the-financially-disappointing-2012-3d-release of the-phantom-menace, the-rest were cancelled.
in 2019, kathleen-kennedy, president of lucasfilm since the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by disney, stated that she would not make alterations to lucas's-original-trilogy, because "those will always remain his."
while promoting the-rise of skywalker, director-j.-j.-abrams expressed director-j.-j.-abrams hopes that the-original-versions of the-trilogy would be officially released, but said that the-powers that be had told director-j.-j.-abrams "that that's not necessarily possible".
he further said that when making the-force awakens, he had gotten into a-disagreement about the-dialogue between vader and the-emperor in the-empire strikes back before realizing that different-versions of the-film were being referred to; he cited the-despecialized-editions of the-films, while the-other-party had recalled the-current-official-version.
it was initially unclear whether the-first-six-films of the-star-wars-franchise would be available on disney+ upon the-service's-launch, as tbs held streaming-rights through 2024 as part of its-cable-rights to the-star-wars-franchise.
however, on april 11, 2019, it was announced that the-films would be available at launch.
reception == ===
critical-response ===
the-original-star-wars-film was released in the-summer of 1977 to critical-acclaim and was a-huge--summer-blockbuster, surpassing jaws (1975), until 1982 when the-original-star-wars-film was surpassed by e.t. the-extra-terrestrial.
the following year, the-original-star-wars-film won six out of
the-original-star-wars-film
eleven-nominations at the-50th-academy-awards.
the-success of the-original-star-wars-film led to the-original-star-wars-film becoming a-pop-cultural-phenomenon spawning countless-tv-spin-offs, video-games, films and a-multi-merchandising-empire.
the-original-star-wars-film was then proceeded by two-instalments,
the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983), which were also both very successful, with the-former's-climax, where vader is revealed as luke's-father, becoming one of the-most-iconic-plot-twists in motion-picture-history.
the-original-trilogy was praised for the-original-trilogy groundbreaking visual and sound effects, john-williams'-music, writing, characters and concept.
star-wars,  the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi are considered by many to be among the-greatest-movies ever made
(the-jedi is somewhat less well-regarded).
academy-awards ==== ===
box-office-performance === ===
accolades ===
in 1989, the-library of congress selected the-original-star-wars-film for preservation in the-u.s.-national-film-registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
the-empire strikes back, was selected in 2010.
35mm-reels of the-1997-special-editions were the-versions initially presented for preservation because of the-difficulty of transferring from the-original-prints, but it was later revealed that the-library of congress possessed a-copyright-deposit-print of the-original-theatrical-releases.
by 2015, star-wars had been transferred to a-2k-scan which can be viewed by appointment.
legacy == ===
popular-culture ===
the-popularity of the-films have generated numerous-references in popular culture works from tv-series such as the-simpsons,-family-guy, south-park and robot-chicken and films such as clerks and toy-story 2, and in the-political-lexicon, as in ted-kennedy's-nickname for ronald-reagan's-strategic-defense-initiative.
the-trilogy's-artistic-and-technological-achievements have been influential on other-filmmakers, including ridley-scott, james-cameron, david-fincher, joss-whedon, peter-jackson and christopher-nolan, as well as sequel-trilogy-director-j.-j.-abrams.
the-trilogy's-impact has led to future-careers of  the-trilogy's-impact stars including mark-hamill (luke-skywalker), carrie-fisher (princess-leia), harrison-ford (han-solo), anthony-daniels (c-3po), kenny-baker (r2-d2), peter-mayhew (chewbacca), james-earl-jones (darth-vader), billy-dee-williams (lando-calrissian) and warwick-davis (wicket-w.-warrick).
prequel and sequel-trilogies ===
the-success and large-impact of the-original-star-wars-trilogy led to two-more-trilogies, beginning with the-prequel-trilogy, consisting of episode-i – the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), all directed by george-lucas.
the-prequels feature baker, daniels, oz, mayhew and mcdiarmid reprising their-roles, alongside ewan-mcgregor, natalie-portman, hayden-christiansen, liam-neeson and samuel-l.-jackson.
while financially successful, the-prequel-trilogy received mixed-reviews, gradually improving with each-installment to fairly-positive-feedback for episode-iii.
three years after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, a-sequel-trilogy began to be released, consisting of the force awakens (2015), the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
george-lucas had little-direct-involvement in the-creation of these-films.
the-new-cast features daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-issac, adam-driver, domhnall-gleeson and andy-serkis, with the-main-original-cast reprising the-main-original-cast roles.
while financially successful, the-prequel-trilogy also received mixed-reviews—this time starting positive, but gradually degrading with each-installment.
other-media ===
the-original-star-wars-trilogy has been the-main-basis of the-star-wars-franchise, which includes films outside the-skywalker-saga, numerous-tv-spin-offs like star-wars: the-clone-wars, the mandalorian and other-upcoming-live-action-series for disney+, hundreds of video-games, books, comics and more.
references ==
footnotes-citations ===
sources ===
star-trek:
discovery is an-american-television-series created by bryan-fuller and alex-kurtzman for the-streaming-service cbs all access (later rebranded as paramount+).
launched in 2017, it is the-seventh-star-trek-series and was the first since star-trek:
enterprise concluded in 2005.
it begins a decade before star-trek:
the-original-series and follows the-crew of  discovery.
as of january 7, 2021, 42 episodes of star-trek: discovery have been released, concluding the-third-season.
a-fourth-season was officially ordered in october 2020 and is set to premiere on paramount+
== series-overview ==
episodes == ===
season 1 (2017–18) === ===
season 2 (2019) === ===
season 3 (2020–21) === ===
season 4 ===
development on a-fourth-season had begun by january 2020.
pre-production on the-season began on august 17, with filming set to take place from november 2, 2020, to june 10, 2021.
on october 16, cbs all-access officially announced the-fourth-season.
cbs all-access is set to premiere on the-rebranded-streaming-service paramount+
see also ==
lists of star-trek-episodes ==
references ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-trek :-discovery – list of episodes at imdb
finn (designation fn-2187) is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise first appeared in the-2015-film star-wars:
the-force awakens as a-first-order-stormtrooper who, shocked by the-order's-cruelty in the-force awakens first-combat-mission, flees and joins forces with rey and later-the-resistance.
a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise is portrayed by english-actor-john-boyega, who reprised the-role in star-wars: the-last-jedi and star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
boyega's-performance and a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise have received praise.
for his-performance in the force awakens, boyega won the-bafta-rising-star-award, and was nominated for the-saturn-award for best-actor.
casting and creation ==
the-idea for the-character, whose-name during early-pre-production was sam, came from screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan.
colleague-michael-arndt, who prepared an-early-draft of the force awakens, said:
and then we were struggling to figure out who the-male-lead was going to be.
i remember we talked about pirates and merchant-marines and all-this-stuff, and finally larry-[kasdan] got pissed at all of we and
larry-[kasdan]'s just like,
" you guys, you're not thinking big.
what if larry-[kasdan]'s a-stormtrooper that ran away?"
for the-roles of finn and other-new-star-wars-characters for the force awakens, director-j.-j.-abrams intentionally looked for unknown-actors, as director-j.-j.-abrams wanted audiences "to meet these-characters [in the-film] and not feel like the-film’s director-j.-j.-abrams from that-thing
, the-film’s her from that-thing.
boyega, who had impressed director-j.-j.-abrams in director-j.-j.-abrams debut role in british-sci-fi-film-attack the-block (2011), was invited to audition for the-role of finn, a-process which lasted seven months before director-j.-j.-abrams was finally cast.
kathleen-kennedy, one of the-producers of the force awakens, stated: john-boyega was somebody we'd known of because of attack the-block.
and we'd been sort of putting him on the-top of we list right from the-beginning.
but, then again, we went on a-massive-search just to see who was out there, and we kept coming back to realizing that john would be the-perfect-finn.
finn's-stormtrooper-code-name, fn-2187, is a-reference to the-number of the-cell in which princess-leia was detained in the-original-1977-film star-wars. "
cell 2187", in turn, references arthur-lipsett's-short-film 21-87.abrams stated that it was intentional that finn was given no-last-name in promotional-materials for the force awakens, suggesting that finn full name and background would be revealed in future-films.
however, arthur-lipsett's-short-film 21-87.abrams revealed that "finn" is an-adopted-name, derived from his-stormtrooper-number.
in 2021 whilst promoting the-film cherry, marvel-cinematic-universe-actor-tom-holland revealed marvel-cinematic-universe-actor-tom-holland had also auditioned for the-role of finn before boyega was cast.
appearances == ===
the-force awakens ===
finn, originally designated "fn-2187", is an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver).
an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) was taken from an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) family at a-young-age and sold to the-first-order to become a-part of his-family ever-expanding-army.
an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) was trained for most an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) life to be an-effective,-loyal,-and-merciless-soldier.
in spite of an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) training, an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) becomes disillusioned with the-first-order to become a-part of their-ever-expanding-army during an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) first-combat-mission on the-planet jakku.
an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) is traumatized when a-fellow-stormtrooper dies in front of an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver), and is later horrified when ren, having failed to secure the-map that will lead to the-missing-luke-skywalker (mark-hamill), orders an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) squadron to massacre a-village of jakku-civilians.
the-other-stormtroopers follow ren's-order without hesitation.
finn, however, lowers finn weapon, aghast, in a-silent-but-firm-refusal.
while on jakku, phasma and ren both notice finn's-inability to kill, and phasma later instructs finn to report for reconditioning to better follow her-orders.
instead of heeding her-word, finn resolves to flee the-first-order, and convinces the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) to aid the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) in the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) escape.
with poe piloting a-stolen-tie-fighter, the two escape from aboard the-finalizer—the-resurgent-class-star-destroyer where poe was being held prisoner.
while piloting,-poe-dubs-fn-2187-"finn" (from the-"fn" in his-designation), which the-otherwise-nameless-stormtrooper embraces.
moments after, their-tie-fighter is shot down by the-finalizer's-turrets and crash-lands back on jakku.
when finn comes to, finn searches for poe in the-wreckage, but is only able to find the-pilot's-jacket before the-shattered-hull of their-ship is swallowed by an-enormous-sinkhole.
finn assumes that poe is dead.
alone, finn decides to search for civilization, and dons poe's-jacket in place of finn own stormtrooper armor.
poe's-astromech-droid bb-8, now in the-care of the-junk-scavenger rey (daisy-ridley), recognizes the-jacket that finn is wearing belongs to poe.
rey assumes finn to be a-member of the-resistance after mentioning that bb-8 has a-partially-completed-map leading to luke.
finn goes along with luke-mistaken-assumption, hoping that luke will help finn get bb-8 to the-resistance.
the three of them escape the-first-order on the-millennium-falcon with help from han-solo (harrison-ford) and chewbacca (peter-mayhew).
han takes han to han friend maz kanata (lupita-nyong’o) on takodana, who promises to take han to the-resistance.
finn decides to continue to flee the-galactic-conflict, but changes  finn mind when the-first-order launches a-preemptive-strike on the-capital of the new-republic and ren's forces find the new-republic and ren's forces and take rey-prisoner.
finn flies to the-resistance-base, where finn discovers that poe is still alive and meets general-leia-organa (carrie-fisher), c-3po (anthony-daniels), and the hibernating r2-d2-(kenny-baker).
finn reveals some-details about the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base, and claims to be able to disable some-details about the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base shields.
when finn arrives on the-planet with han and chewbacca, however, finn reveals that finn only worked in the-base's-sanitation-section.
nevertheless, the-team takes phasma-hostage and finn forces phasma at gunpoint to disable their-shields.
this allows the-resistance to attack, led by poe.
the-resistance meet up with rey, who has freed herself from captivity.
later, finn watches in horror with the-others as ren kills han.
ren confronts finn and rey in the-woods, claiming that finn and rey fight is not over.
finn picks up luke’s-old-lightsaber after rey is knocked out by ren and tries to fight ren, but ren easily overpowers ren and knocks ren unconscious.
rey stops ren from killing finn, and  rey and chewbacca escape starkiller base in the-millennium-falcon and bring the comatose finn to the-resistance-base for medical-care.
related-works and merchandising ====
finn is featured in star-wars: before the-awakening (2015) by greg-rucka, an-anthology-book for young-readers that focuses on the-lives of poe,  rey and finn before the-events of the force awakens.
finn is also a-point of view-character in the-2015-novelization of the force awakens by alan-dean-foster.
finn is a-playable-character in disney-infinity 3.0, voiced by boyega.
the-last-jedi ===
finn awakens from finn coma aboard the-main-resistance-cruiser, and immediately demands to know where rey is, learning that leia has a-beacon that will lead rey back to leia when necessary.
later, following the-attack on the-cruiser that killed most of the-resistance's-main-leadership and rendered leia unconscious, finn takes the-beacon and attempts to board an-escape-pod in the-hopes of keeping both finn and rey out of danger.
before finn can board an-escape-pod, finn is found by rose-tico (kelly-marie-tran), a-maintenance-worker whose sister paige, a-bomber for the-resistance, has recently died in an-attack on the-first-order.
seeing finn trying to escape, rose stuns finn and intends to turn finn in for desertion, but stops when finn tells finn that the-first-order has found a-way to track the-cruiser through lightspeed.
finn tells finn that finn might be able to disable the-tracker, and finn says that, having worked aboard a-star-destroyer, finn would be able to find where the-tracker is.
rose and finn run rose and finn plan by poe, who contacts kanata for help, but finn claims that finn is too busy and instructs rose and finn to find a-"master-code-breaker" in a-casino in canto-bight, a-resort-city on planet-cantonica.
operating against acting-resistance-leader-vice-admiral-holdo’s
(laura-dern) wishes, finn and rose, along with bb-8, steal a-ship and go to canto-bight.
finn is initially entranced by the-lavish-lifestyle of the-casino, but becomes disillusioned when rose tells  finn that most of the-people there have become wealthy by dealing arms to the-first-order.
while they find the-master-code-breaker, they are unable to recruit  finn as they are arrested and jailed for a-parking-violation.
in they cell they meet dj (benicio-del-toro), a-thief and codebreaker who offers to help they; they refuse, but  finn nonetheless breaks they out of their-cell.
finn and rose-escape from the-prison, where they set free a-horde of horse-like-racing-creatures called fathiers, escaping atop one of they.
outside the-casino they are greeted by bb-8-and-dj, having stolen a-ship together.
dj agrees to help them, despite finn’s-misgivings.
eventually, finn, rose, and dj arrive aboard the-mega-class-star-dreadnought-supremacy and disguise themselves as first-order-officers; finn finds the-location of the-tracker and dj breaks themselves in, but before rose is able to disable the-tracker themselves are caught by phasma.
upon being captured, dj, having overheard the-resistance's-plan of escaping to crait via transports, secretly tells the-first-order of the-plans in exchange for money and his-freedom, and finn and rose are to be executed.
before finn and rose are, holdo rams the-resistance-cruiser into supreme-leader-snoke
(andy-serkis)-flagship at lightspeed, damaging the-ship and sending the-ship into chaos.
finn has a-one-on-one-fight with phasma, ending with  finn proudly declaring  finn "rebel scum" before phasma falls to her-demise.
bb-8, aboard a-first-order-at-st, rescues finn and rose from stormtroopers and the three of them very narrowly escape to crait aboard a-damaged-shuttle.
as the-first-order prepares an-attack on the-formerly-abandoned-rebel-base on crait, finn recognizes the-weaponry that they plan to use to destroy the-blast-doors and leads a-small-strike on the-first-order with the-intention of disabling the-cannon.
an-attack on the-formerly-abandoned-rebel-base on crait goes poorly, and poe orders all-fighters to retreat, but finn is determined to destroy the-cannon and flies directly into the-blast, planning to sacrifice finn to defeat the-first-order.
at the-last-second, rose stops finn by ramming her-speeder into finn, pushing finn out of the-blast.
finn asks  finn why  finn stopped  finn, and  finn tells  finn that wars are won "not by fighting what we hate, but saving what we love;"  finn then kisses  finn before falling unconscious.
finn brings  finn body back to the-rebel-base and summons a-medic for  finn.
when luke appears on finn-finnfirst-instinct is to send forces to help finn, but poe realizes that luke is stalling to give the-resistance-time to escape.
finn and poe lead the-resistance off the-planet.
finn finally reunites with rey, and embraces  finn before boarding the-millennium-falcon.
finn is last seen putting a-blanket over the-still-unconscious-rose.
related-works and merchandising ====
finn is a-playable-hero in star-wars-battlefront-ii, voiced by boyega.
finn was added through the-dlc of the-last-jedi.
finn's-outfit in the-rise of skywalker-update.
the-rise of skywalker-finn, along with poe, intercepts a-message from a-first-order-mole that emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) has come back to life and is planning an-attack on the-resistance and the-new-republic in the-form of the-final-order, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers designed by the-sith-eternal.
finn then leaves along with rey, poe, c-3po, and chewbacca to the-desert-planet of pasaana, where with the-help of lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams)
they locate a-dagger that contains a-clue to a-sith-wayfinder, a-compass to the-sith-planet-exegol.
throughout the-whole-journey, finn clearly has something finn wants to tell rey, but is unable to find the-time to tell finn.
the-whole-journey takes their to kijimi, where the-location of the-wayfinder is extracted from c-3po's-memory-files, and later to the-resurgent-class-star-destroyer-steadfast, where finn and poe go to rescue chewbacca, who was taken by the-first-order.
in the-process, finn and poe-poe are captured by stormtroopers and set to be executed, but finn and poe are rescued by general-hux (domnhall-gleeson), who reveals that he is the-mole.
going free, finn and poe rescue rey aboard the-millennium-falcon and head to the-endor-system, where the-wayfinder is located among the-wreckage of the-second-death-star.
on kef-bir, they encounter a-group allied with the-resistance, led by a-woman named jannah (naomi ackie).
finn gets to know jannah, who reveals that finn and the-entire-settlement on kef-bir are former-stormtroopers who mutinied after a-battle.
finn tells finn that finn left the-order as well, and suggests that the-force brought them together and caused them all to leave the-order.
finn and jannah follow rey aboard the-wreckage to try and stop finn from confronting ren, but finn does so and nearly kills ren before healing ren and leaving aboard ren's ship.
without rey or the-wayfinder, finn, poe, and jannah return to the-resistance-base, where poe, and jannah learn that leia has died.
poe is named acting general, and  poe appoints finn as co-general.
finn learns of exegol's-whereabouts based on rey's-transmissions, and finn and  poe lead a-strike against the-sith-eternal-forces, with finn and jannah specifically leading a-ground-attack on the-surface of the-steadfast to take out he and poe navigation.
as the-attack nears the-attack end, finn and jannah are left on the-surface of the-damaged-resurgent-star-destroyer, but are ultimately rescued by lando and chewbacca in the-millennium-falcon and the-rest of the-resistance-fleet; finn attributes finn faith in finn being rescued to a-belief in the-force.
following the-attack, finn celebrates among the-rebels on the-resistance-base, reuniting with rey and poe.
the lego star wars holiday special ===
finn, having revealed what finn was going to tell rey to be of finn own realization of being force sensitive, is now training under rey as rey jedi padawan.
rey accidentally hurts finn's-feelings during a-training-session, making finn use a-wooden-toy-lightsaber instead of rey own.
rey seeks out a-path leading rey to the-world between worlds, allowing rey to travel through time.
meanwhile, finn plans for life-day-celebrations with poe, jannah, rose and lando, as they await the-arrival of chewbacca's-family.
during her-travels, rey learns from yoda's-ghost that patience and understanding is an-important-part of teaching a-padawan; finn is shown to have prevented the-life-day-tree from falling by using finn wooden lightsaber.
when rey returns home, rey allows finn to slice the-life-day-roast with rey lightsaber.
by mistake, finn slices all the way through the-table, but rey reassures finn that rey'll help finn get better.
character ==
when asked about finn's-character-traits, boyega replied, i think the-element of having to step up to a-bigger-calling, when your-circumstances don't particularly reflect that.
because i'm young, at the-beginning of my-life; you haven't really achieved much, and then you have to do that-whole-adulthood-thing, get responsible,
work and all of that-stuff, no-more-mommy and daddy taking care of things.
i feel like it's the-same-kind of journey that finn has when finn leaves the-first-order.
finn leaves a-curriculum, finn leaves a-system and embarks on finn own journey.
he also noted that initially "most of he decisions are based on adrenaline.
like, 'okay, you know what?
i'm just going to get this-blaster and run away.'
boyega further noted that "[n]ot only is the-character in over boyega head and someone who is just dropped into an-extraordinary-circumstance, the-scenes and the-script prove that
and it's not a-problem that can just be erased.
"finn was originally going to be accompanied to canto-bight by poe in the-last-jedi, but writer/director-rian-johnson found the-storyline flat when writer/director-rian-johnson realized their-dialogue was interchangeable.
this led to the-creation of the-character rose-tico, who would challenge and contrast with finn.
in the-rise of skywalker, finn tries to tell rey something which rey does not want to say in front of poe, but this-thread is never resolved within the-film.
this was implied to involve rey confessing rey loved canto-bight by poe, but boyega denied this on twitter.
the-novelization of the-film reveals that finn is force-sensitive, implying this to be what rey intended to tell rey.
abrams later confirmed that finn was indeed force-sensitive shortly after the-film's-premiere.
the-novelization also states that rey believes this as well, speculating on the-kind of jedi-jedi could become.
reception ==
the-character and boyega's-portrayal were praised; reviewer-jamie-graham wrote, "of the-new-triangle of characters, boyega brings intensity and surprisingly-honed-comic-timing."
reviewers also praised finn's-relationships with the-other-characters: the dynamic between rey and finn is something new for star-wars, with her-bright-eyed-heroism complementing boyega's-roguish-wit...
gone is the-clunky-dialogue of the-prequels—instead, it's replaced by some-seriously-clever-writing that often leads to nice-little-moments, many with han and finn.
drew-mcweeny of hitfix-notes, "boyega has this-great-combination of self-interested-fear and reluctant-heroism that he plays beautifully, and he charts finn's-evolution as a-person expertly here."
peter-travers of rolling-stone described the-character as "bracingly comic and cunning".
robbie-collin writes that boyega has a-"(very-funny)-half-brave,-half-anxious,-would-be-heroic-schtick" and notes that despite being "brave, charming, and funny", finn "only wants to be thought of as the-daring-freedom-fighter-peter-travers of rolling-stone's not quite sure peter travers of rolling-stone's cut out to be."
some-reviewers were less than positive, however.
ty-burr of the-boston-globe wrote that "boyega's-finn is the-new-movie's-one-weak-link, a-character who vacillates between noble-impulses and cowardice until our-interest drops away.
the-performance is fine but the-performance's just fine, with little of the-iconic-bite a wagnerian cartoon like this needs. "
character was also subject to racist-reactions by some-fans online, to which boyega responded, "i'm not going to lose sleep over people."
after the-first-trailer premiered, boyega responded to critics with, "to whom " may concern ...
get used to "", and further commented that, "all-the-films i've done have had a-secret-commentary on stereotypical-mentalities.
it's about getting people to drop a-prejudiced-state of mind and realise, 'oh shit we're just watching normal-people.' "
in response to those who desired to boycott the-film over their-disagreements with the-existence of a-black-stormtrooper, boyega replied, "i'm proud of my-heritage, and no-man can take that away from no-man.
i wasn't raised to fear people with a-difference of opinion.
people with a-difference of opinion are merely victims of a-disease in people with a-difference of opinion-mind.
in 2016, boyega was nominated for the-saturn-award for best-actor for best-actor portrayal of finn.
references == ==
external-links ==
finn in the-starwars.com-databank
finn on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki finn on imdb
the-baobhan-sith is a-female-vampire in the-folklore of the-scottish-highlands, though they also share certain-characteristics in common with the-succubus and fairy.
they appear as beautiful-women who seduce they victims before attacking their-victims and draining their-victims blood.
folklore ==
according to the-scottish-folklorist donald-alexander-mackenzie, the-baobhan-sith usually appears as a-beautiful-young-woman wearing a-long-green-dress that conceals the-deer-hooves the-scottish-folklorist donald-alexander-mackenzie has instead of feet.
like other-vampires the-scottish-folklorist donald-alexander-mackenzie drinks the-blood of human-victims and will vanish with the-rising-sun.
the-scottish-folklorist donald-alexander-mackenzie may also take the-form of a-hooded-crow or raven.
there are numerous-stories about the-baobhan-sith with a-general-theme of hunters being attacked in the-wilderness at night.
in one-tale recorded by mackenzie, there were four-men who went hunting and took shelter for the-night in a-lonely-shieling or hut.
one of four-men who went hunting and took shelter for the-night in a-lonely-shieling or hut supplied vocal-music while the-others began dancing.
four-men who went hunting and took shelter for the-night in a-lonely-shieling or hut expressed a-desire for partners to dance with, and soon after that-four-women entered the-hut.
three of four-men who went hunting and took shelter for the-night in a-lonely-shieling or hut danced while the fourth sat beside the-vocalist.
the-vocalist then noticed drops of blood falling from the-vocalist companions and fled from the-hut, taking refuge among the-horses.
his-vampiric-partner chased his but was unable to catch his, and when daylight came  his-vampiric-partner disappeared.
his went back inside and found all three of his-friends dead and drained of blood.
the-folklorist katharine-briggs suggested that the-baobhan-sith was unable to catch the-fourth-man among the-horses because of the-iron with which the-horses were shod, iron being a-traditional-fairy-vulnerability.
in a-similar-tale one of the-men noticed that the-women had deer-hooves instead of feet and fled from the-women.
his returned the next morning to find that the-other-hunters had the-other-hunters "throats cut and chests laid open".
in a-third-story the-hunters took refuge in a-cave.
each of the-men said each of the-men wished each of the-men own sweetheart were there that night, but one of each of the-men, named macphee, who was accompanied by each of the-men black dog, said each of the-men preferred each of the-men wife to remain at home.
at that-moment a-group of young-women entered a-cave, and the-men who had wished for a-group of young-women sweethearts were killed.
macphee was protected by macphee dog who drove the-women from a-cave.
one-recurring-motif in these-stories is that the-baobhan-sith appear almost immediately after the-hunters express the-hunters desire for female-companionship.
this is connected with a-traditional-scottish-belief that if one were to make a-wish at night without also invoking god's-protection, then that wish would be granted in some-terrible-manner.
in literature ==
the-baobhan-sith have appeared on a-number of occasions in author-mark-chadbourn's-fantasy-trilogies
the-age of misrule, the-dark-age, and kingdom of the-serpent.
baobhan-sith are mentioned in nicole-peeler's-tempest-rising-series.
they are also mentioned in michael-scott's-the-magician:
the-secrets of the-immortal-nicholas-flamel.
they appear in faerie-tale by raymond-e.-feist where they are portrayed as evil-fairies of the-unseelie-court, who (aside from they great beauty) possess a-strong-compelling-magic which they use to force solitary-males in isolated-locations to follow they to they deaths.
cornelia-amiri is the-author of the-dancing-vampire-romance-series of six-novellas: dance of the-vampires, vampire-highland-fling, a bonnie vampire dancer, vampire-waltz, valkyrie-vampire-sword-dancing, and some-vampires shimmy.
the-series is about-seven-baobhan-sith-sisters and each-book features a-different-sister as about-seven-baobhan-sith-sisters and each-book fall in love.
desdemona, an-oriental-dancer and commander of the-fae-army in amy-hoff's-scottish-urban-fantasy-series caledonia, is a-baobhan-sith.
in night and silence, the-twelfth-installment of seanan-mcguire's-october-daye-series, the-protagonist is attacked and repeatedly bitten by a-starving-baobhan-sith.
in this-portrayal, a-baobhan-sith is able to mimic both-the-appearance and supernatural-abilities of anyone whose-blood a-baobhan-sith has recently consumed.
a-baobhan-sith appears as an-adversary in the-fighting-fantasy-gamebook "vault of the-vampire".
in the-book of life (harkness-novel) from the-all-souls trilogy, the-baobhan-sith was said to have been inspired by janet-gowdie, a-vampire-witch-hybrid and daughter of the real falsely-accused-witch-isobel-gowdie and a-vampire named nickie-ben.
in film ==
the-baobhan-sith-film == was released in 2017.
it was produced by scottish-independent-company-eyedoll-productions and was written and directed by david-w-hutchison.
it was inspired by the-baobhan-sith-legend and features polish-actor-joanna-kaczynska  as the-baobhan-sith.
see also ==
banshee-dames-blanches
deer-woman-glaistig-huldra-leanan sídhe-patasola
rusalka-samodiva-sayona-sundel-bolong-aicha-kandicha
references ==
lego-star-wars-iii:
the-clone-wars is a-lego-themed-action-adventure-video-game based on the-clone-wars animated film and the-clone-wars follow-up television series with the-same-name, both of them set between the-films
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones and star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
episode-ii –
attack of the-clones and star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith was developed by traveller's-tales, published by lucasarts, and released in march 2011 for the-playstation-3,-playstation-portable, xbox 360, wii, nintendo ds, microsoft windows and nintendo 3ds consoles.
lego-star-wars-iii features missions and characters from the-clone-wars-film-and-television-series, as well as favourite-characters from the-original-star-wars-saga, in both-single-player-and-multiplayer-gameplay-modes.
the-mac-os-x-version of  episode-ii – attack of the-clones and star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith has been released by feral-interactive.
gameplay ==
gameplay in lego-star-wars-iii: the-clone-wars is similar to the-previous-titles in the-series, and other-lego-video-games.
up-to-two-players can switch between different-characters to fight enemies in combat, solve puzzles, and progress through various-levels.
it introduces a-few-novelties, including scene-swap, where players can switch between teams in separate-locations to complete multi-part-objectives, and boss-battles.
the-game also features some-real-time-strategy-elements, such as commanding large-ground-armies across battlefields.
also, the-space-fights have been remodelled to use a-more-instinctive,-3d-space-battle-sensation.
the space fights is set during the-clone-wars-animated-series, as well as certain-scenes from star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones, unlike the-original-games, which featured characters from the-six-films of star-wars such as lego star-wars: the-video-game and lego star-wars ii:
the-original-trilogy.
the-console-version of the-game features 115-characters.
the-portable-version features 77-characters.
the-version for the-psp, 3ds, and ds have some-differences from the-console-version.
for example, the-ground-battles are not featured.
the-console-version features unlockable-minigames like snowball-fight, volleyball-droids and more.
the-rooms where vehicles are also not available to test in the-ship itself unlike on the-console-version.
some-levels are removed from the-portable-version.
some-characters such as the-galactic-marine, chi-cho, ryo-chuchi, thi-sen and others, are featured on the-portable-version but not on the-console-version.
new-features ==
overall, the-game-engine used by previous-lego-star-wars-games has been upgraded.
it can now hold more-than-200-moving-units or objects on-screen.
the-graphics are more detailed than before, and the-lighting has been improved.
new-features include scenarios in which players can command large-armies of clones to battle against droid-armies (although not on ds), and story-swap-mode, in which players can switch between two-characters in different-areas whose-stories run simultaneously.
the-game includes split screen-combat.
all-new-character-features include lightsaber-throwing, picking up droids and stepping on certain-pads in which jedi do "combo moves" to destroy certain-objects.
vehicle-levels have been altered; now, players can land players ship and begin fighting on foot (similar to star-wars: battlefront-ii).
all-the-original-elements seen in previous-lego-star-wars-games have returned.
the-hub has also been changed, taking place in a-republic-cruiser named the resolute and also a separatist ship the-invisible-hand.
characters can be purchased on these-ships--separatists on the-invisible-hand; characters from the-republic on the-resolute.
plot == is based on star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones, the star-wars:
the-clone-wars-animated-film, and various-episodes from the-first-two-seasons of the-star-wars:
the-clone-wars-animated-series, with no-dialogue and humorous-deviations.
the first level acts as a-prologue and depicts the-geonosian-arena-battle from attack of the-clones, which saw the-start of the-clone-wars.
the-following-18-levels are divided into three-separate-chapters, each depicting an-episode from the-tv-series, and having either-count-dooku, general-grievous or asajj-ventress as the-main-antagonist.
levels can be played in whatever-order the-player desires, though the-levels from the-same-chapter can only be played in a-specific-order.
after all of the-chapters are completed, a-20th-level is unlocked, based on the-episode "the-zillo-beast", which acts as an-epilogue to the-story.
the-game also features two-bonus-levels.
the first is based on the-clone-wars-film, and depicts the-separatists'-plan to kidnap jabba the-hutt's-son rotta, from count-dooku's-perspective.
the-second-level is based on the-episode "hostage-crisis", as played from cad-bane's-perspective.
upon completion, the-latter-level unlocks the-bounty-hunter-missions, where the-player goes through different-levels from the-main-story in search of a-particular-character hidden somewhere in the-level.
development and marketing ==
the-game had been in development since late 2009 when the second season of star-wars: the-clone-wars started.
the-game was covered up and in june 2010 after the-second-season-finale the-lego-group started to work on adding the-last-part of the-second-season in and new-things such as a-new-hub and a-new-way to use the-lightsaber.
then in late 2010, the-lego-group finished  the-game and started to make promotions for the-lego-group.
on 23-june 2010, the-lego-group released the-first-trailer for  the-game and later in 2011 the-lego-group released some-demos and cutscenes.
nintendo have made 3ds-trailers for  the-game too and also some e3 convention videos with the-gameplay of lego-star-wars-iii: the-clone-wars.
the-official-release-date of
the-game was 22-march 2011.
==-reception ==
the-game has received mixed to positive-reviews.
gamespot gave 6.5/10 for pc, playstation 3, xbox 360 and wii while 6/10 for nintendo 3ds.
ign's-anthony-gallegos rated the-pc, xbox 360, and playstation-3-versions of the game 7.5/10, the wii version 7/10, and the ds, 3ds, and psp versions
ign's-anthony-gallegos commented on the-vast-variety in the in-game hub; "the-hub-world is open to players to explore, but this time around, traveller's-tales have really outdone traveller's-tales".
they further stated "like so much of the-lego-games-design, when you combine these-two-relatively-unexciting-portions together, something strange happens:
it becomes a-simple,-engaging-game".
gametrailers gave the-game 6.5/10, and called it "one of the dullest in the-entire-series", strongly criticising the-game's repetition.
as of may 2012, the-game has sold over-4-million-copies worldwide.
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-lego-star-wars is a-lego-theme that incorporates the-star-wars-saga and franchise.
originally it was only licensed from 1999 to 2008, but the-lego-group extended the-license with lucasfilm, first until 2011, then until 2016, then again until 2022.
lucasfilm has spawned an-eponymous-video-game-series containing six-video-games, developed by traveller's-tales—lego-star-wars: the-video-game (2005), lego-star-wars ii:
the-original-trilogy (2006), lego-star-wars: the-complete-saga (2007), lego-star-wars iii:
the-clone-wars (2011), lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (2016) and lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga (tba).
many-short-films and miniseries have also been produced.
construction-sets ==
the-first-few-sets based on the-original-trilogy were released in 1999, coinciding with the-release of the-phantom-menace.
the-first-wave of lego-star-wars-sets included model 7140, an-x-wing-fighter.
sets based on the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i to iii) of star-wars would follow, starting with episode i – the-phantom-menace.
as each-new-film in the-prequel trilogy neared the-prequel release date, lego-star issued new-models of ships and scenes in those-films, as well as additional-sets from the-original-trilogy.
lego-star also produced models based on the-clone-wars, which was released early in 2008.
sets based on star-wars-rebels, the force awakens, battlefront, rogue one, solo,
the-last-jedi, star-wars-resistance, the-mandalorian, the-old-republic, and the-rise of skywalker have also been produced.
ultimate-collector-series (ucs) ===
in addition to the-regular-minifigure-scale-sets, lego has released several-sets (between 30-36) for the-ultimate-collector-series.
these-models are often considerably larger, more detailed, and meant more for display-purposes than other-sets.
they often cost more than regular-lego-sets as well.
many of they include an-information-plaque and often-a-display-stand.
the largest of these is 75192, the-2017-ucs-version of the-millennium-falcon, complete with ten-minifigures.
at 7541-pieces, it is the-largest-star-wars-lego set ever released; and the-second-largest-set of any-collection ever commercially released.
on june 5, 2015, an-unopened-box of the-second-largest-set of any-collection ever commercially released was auctioned at online-auction-house-catawiki for 5,000-euros (us$5556.5 at the-time) making 5,000-euros (us$5556.5 at the-time)
the-most-expensive-lego set ever.
in the-star-wars-universe the-first-figure is the-1999-han-solo.
master-builder-series (mbs) ===
with similar-complexity to the-ultimate-collector-series-sets, sets under the-master-builder-series are built with the-purpose of playing, featuring numerous-play-features, functions, and interior-details as compared to the-ucs, which are meant more for display-purposes.
the-first-set of the-mbs is the-75222-betrayal at cloud-city, which was released in 2018.
in 2020, 75290-mos-eisley-cantina was released as the-largest-mbs set with over-3,000-pieces and 21-minifigures.
the-helmet-collection ===
in 2020, lego released three-brick-built-helmets of selected-iconic-characters from the-star-wars-universe.
lego are boba-fett, stormtrooper, and the-tie-fighter-pilot.
meant to be displayed, name-plaques of the-helmets'-characters are included.
in march 2021, lego announced that lego will be releasing the-helmets of darth-vader and the-scout-trooper on april 26, 2021.
minifigures ===
most-characters from the-star-wars-universe have materialized in lego-minifigure-form.
the-minifigure with the-first-code, i.e. sw0001, is a-tan-battle-droid that appeared in the-phantom-menace.
some-minifigures repeatedly appear across multiple-lego-sets, while others can be very rare, vastly increasing others resale-value.
in 2019, the-number of lego-star-wars-minifigures has surpassed 1000, with the-battlefront-ii-protagonist iden-versio bearing-code-sw1000.
video-games ==
traveller's-tales-president-jon-burton stated in a-july-2008-interview with variety that the-series had collectively sold 15-million-copies.
as of february 13, 2009, lego-star-wars: the-video-game has sold over-6.8-million-copies worldwide, lego-star-wars ii has sold over 8.3 million, the-complete-saga has sold over 4.1 million, and the three combined have sold over 21 million.
in may 2009, wired reported combined-sales of 20 million.
as of 2012, all-lego-star-wars-video-games had collectively sold more-than-30-million-copies.
as of 2016, more-than-36-million-games were sold.
as of 2019, the-series has sold more-than-50-million-copies of lego-star-wars-video-games.
==-films and videos ==
several-films and videos based on lego-star-wars have been produced; additionally, lego-star-wars characters cameo in the-lego-movie (2014).
short-films ===
lego-star-wars: revenge of the-brick is the first computer-animated lego-star-wars short film.
it premiered on cartoon-network in mid-2005, in conjunction with the-theatrical-release of revenge of the-sith.
lego-star-wars:
the-quest for r2-d2 is a-short-movie which aired on cartoon-network on august 2009, and was uploaded to the-lego-star-wars-website, in order to celebrate 10-years of lego-star-wars, lego-star-wars: bombad-bounty, is another-cgi-lego-star-short-film, the-quest for r2-d2 was released in 2010.
in the-quest for r2-d2, vader hires boba-fett to track down the-gungan-jar-jar-binks for an-accident boba-fett caused to vader.
the-film also takes place at the-same-time as the-original-movies showing that jar-jar was responsible for the-destruction of the-first-death-star and was with boba-fett on jabba's-barge during the-events of return of the-jedi.
television-specials ===
lego-star-wars:
the-padawan-menace released on july 7, 2011, is a-30-minute,-exclusive-tv-special written by michael-price is about a-jedi-academy-field-trip.
when master-yoda leads a-group of rambunctious-jedi-younglings through senate-chambers when master-yoda senses a-disturbance in the-force.
summoned to help save the-republic, master-yoda discovers that a-young-boy pretending to be a-jedi-youngling secretly boarded master-yoda ship... and has a-taste for adventure.
meanwhile, c-3po and r2-d2 are put in charge of the-boisterous-group and find c-3po and r2-d2 in over c-3po and r2-d2 heads.
master-yoda and the-droids proceed to save the-younglings from sith-lords as well as the-vile-jabba the-hutt.
the special premiered in the-united-states on cartoon-network on july 22, 2011, at 7-p.m. and in the-united-kingdom on october 17 at 5:30.
the-dvd and blu-ray include several-special-features such as the-quest for r2-d2-and-bombad-bounty as well as other-short-films.
lego-star-wars:
the-empire strikes out released on september 26, 2012, airing on cartoon-network in the-united-states, and would be one of the-last-star-wars-productions to be made before lucasfilm was sold to the-walt-disney-company a month later.
in this-special, luke-skywalker embarks on a-mission to find and destroy an-imperial-base on naboo, but is relentlessly chased by a-group of fanatic-fangirls, who think of luke-skywalker as a-celebrity for destroying the-death-star.
meanwhile, darth-vader engages a-"sithling"-rivalry with darth-maul, in order to prove he's the-best-sith-lord to emperor-palpatine, who is constructing a-second-death-star.
the-lego-star-wars-holiday-special was released on november 17, 2020 on disney+, a-spiritual-successor to and satirisation of the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978).
in the special, set after episode-ix, rey begins to doubt her-abilities as a-teacher to finn.
her travels to a-temple and finds a-time-key, which allows her to travel to different-moments in time throughout the-star-wars-saga to observe past jedi-masters-and-jedi-masters-students.
however, her loses the-key to emperor-palpatine and darth-vader, who use it to go to the-future, meeting kylo-ren.
after learning from kylo-ren about kylo-ren demise at vader's-hands, palpatine seeks to make kylo palpatine new apprentice (
unbeknownst to vader) and ensure vader will rule the-galaxy forever.
meanwhile, finn, rose and poe try to organize the-perfect-life-day-party, but chaos ensues at every-step.
television-series ===
lego-star-wars:
the-yoda-chronicles-trilogy
:-"the-phantom-clone", aired on may 29, 2013.
general-grievous steals the-lightsabers of a-group of padawans at the-jedi-training-academy, and general-grievous and count-dooku plan to use the-lightsabers' crystals to create an-army of super-powered-sith-clones on kamino.
yoda-and-mace-windu embark on a-quest to stop yoda and mace.
meanwhile, the-padawans try to retrieve yoda-and-mace-lightsabers, much to c-3po's-concern.
"menace of the-sith" , aired on september 4, 2013.
the-only-surviving-sith-clone, jek-14, decides not to fight for the-dark-side of the-force and wants to be left alone to build in peace, but both-the-jedi and the-sith want jedi on the jedi and the-sith , with the-latter-planning to use jedi to clone an-evil-army.
meanwhile, c-3po quits being the-substitute-teacher for the-padawans, and the-jedi-council hires anakin-skywalker as his-replacement.
attack of the-jedi", aired on november 27, 2013.
after the-sith's-plan to create sith-clones has failed, sith-clones start teaching a-group of "badawans" on the-planet mustafar.
when the-jedi get a-tip of this, the-jedi head there to stop the-jedi, but when the-jedi reach complications, the-jedi must persuade jek-14 to help the-jedi, despite jek-14 not wanting to fight for either-side of the-force.
meanwhile, darth-sidious tries to meet up with the-evil-padawans, but has trouble getting away from c-3po.the-series continued to a-second-season with five-episodes airing in 2014 but now renamed "the-new-yoda-chronicles" to avoid legal-disputes over ownership between disney and cartoon-network.
lego-star-wars:
droid-tales aired on disney-xd between july and november 2015, as a-5-part-animated-mini-series.
a-5-part-animated-mini-series serves as a-comedic-re-telling of the-first-six-star-wars-films from c-3po's-point of view.
lego-star-wars:
the-resistance rises aired on disney-xd between february and may 2016, as a-5-part-animated-mini-series.
a-5-part-animated-mini-series serves as a-comedic-prequel to star-wars: the-force awakens.
lego-star-wars:
the-freemaker-adventures aired on disney-xd.
the-freemaker-adventures was announced by disney on february 17, 2016, as a-new-lego-animated-series.
set between episode-v and episode-vi, it tells the-story of the-freemakers, a-family of scavengers that find themselves pulled into the-conflict between the-rebels and the-empire.
lego-star-wars:
all-stars premiered on disney-xd on october 29, 2018.
all-stars consists of five-half-hour-episodes, the first of which is a-compilation of eight-separately-released-short-films.
set during multiple-star-wars-eras, all-stars tells the-story of other-relatives of the-freemaker-family, including the-freemaker-family parents pace and lena during the-time of solo, and zander's-daughter moxie during episode-vii and episode-viii.
references == ===
bibliography ===
lego-(r)-star-wars-brickmaster.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2010.
isbn-1-40535-622-7-lego-star-wars-character-encyclopedia.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2011.
isbn 1-40537-358-x
lego-star-wars: anakin: space-pilot: space-pilot (3d).
authored by ace-landers and dave-white.
published by scholastic, 2011.
isbn 0-54530-440-7 lego-(r)
star-wars-heroes-ultimate-sticker-book.
authored by shari-last.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2011.
star-wars-heroes-ultimate-sticker-book.
authored by shari-last.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2011.
isbn 1-40536-439-4-dk-readers-l2:
lego-star-wars:
the-phantom-menace.
authored by hannah-dolan.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2012.
isbn 0-75668-693-8-ultimate-sticker-collection: lego (r)
star-wars: minifigures: more-than-1,000-reusable-full-color-stickers.
authored by shari-last.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2012.
isbn 0-75669-049-8
lego-(r) star-wars-brickmaster-battle for the-stolen-crystals.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2013.
isbn-1-40932-605-5-dk-readers-l2:
lego-star-wars:
attack of the-clones.
authored by elizabeth-dowsett.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2013.
isbn 0-75668-695-4-dk-readers-l3:
lego-star-wars: revenge of the-sith.
authored by elizabeth-dowsett.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2013.
isbn 1-46540-869-x-lego-star-wars:
a-new-hope.
authored by emma-grange.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2014.
isbn-1-46542-027-4-lego-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back.
authored by emma-grange.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2014.
isbn-1-46542-029-0-lego-star-wars: return of the-jedi.
authored by emma-grange.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2014.
isbn 1-46542-031-2-lego-star-wars-character-encyclopedia, updated and expanded: with minifigure.
authored by hannah-dolan and shari-last.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2015.
isbn-1-10189-852-6-lego-star-wars: yoda-chronicles
trilogy-no-level.
authored by ace-landers.
published by scholastic, 2015.
isbn 0-54562-901-2-lego-star-wars: padawan-menace
authored by ace-landers.
published by scholastic, 2015.
isbn 0-54540-450-9-lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens.
authored by david-fentiman.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2016.
isbn-1-46543-819-x-lego-star-wars-tales of rebellion.
authored by ace-landers.
published by scholastic, 2016.
isbn 0-54587-326-6
ultimate-lego-star-wars :
includes two-exclusive-prints.
authored by chris-malloy and andrew-becraft.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2017.
isbn 0-24128-844-4
dk-readers-l2:
lego-star-wars:
the-last-jedi.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2019.
1-46546-663-0 lego-star-wars-visual-dictionary new edition :
with exclusive-finn-minifigure.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2019.
isbn 0-24135-752-7
lego-star-wars-visual-dictionary, new-edition :
with exclusive-finn-minifigure-lego-star-wars-character-encyclopedia-new-edition : with exclusive-darth-maul-minifigure.
authored by elizabeth-dowsett.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2020.
isbn-1-46548-956-8-dk-readers-level 2: lego-star-wars the-rise of skywalker.
authored by ruth-amos.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2020.
isbn-1-46547-907-4-lego-star-wars-holiday-sticker-book.
authored by tori-kosara.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2020.
isbn 0-24147-820-0
lego-star-wars-yoda's-galaxy-atlas.
authored by simon-hugo.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2021.
isbn 0-24146-765-9 ==
external-links ==
official-website  brickset:
your-lego-set-guide minifigs.nl
lego-star-wars-minifigs-lego on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords is a-role-playing-video-game developed by obsidian-entertainment and published by lucasarts.
the-sith-lords is the-sequel to bioware's-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and was released for the-xbox on december 6, 2004, for microsoft-windows on february 8, 2005, and os-x and linux on july 21, 2015.
like its-predecessor, its is set in the-star-wars-universe 4,000 years before the-events of the-film
the-phantom-menace and is based on the-d20-system developed by wizards of the-coast.
the-phantom-menace uses the-odyssey-engine, which was originally used in knights of the-old-republic.
the-plot first started being written before the-original-knights of the-old-republic was released, and development began in october 2003, after bioware offered obsidian their-star-wars-license due to being confident in their-previous-work.
knights of the-old-republic-ii starts five years after the-events of the-first-game and follows the-story of the-exile, a-jedi-knight who was exiled from the-jedi-order.
during this-time, the-jedi-order has been almost completely wiped out by the-sith.
the-first-game begins with the-protagonist waking up from unconsciousness on an-asteroid-mining-facility.
after he or she escapes with the-help of he or she party-members, he or she find the-person who exiled he or she ten years ago, who sends the-protagonist waking up from unconsciousness on an-asteroid-mining-facility on a-mission to seek out the-remaining-jedi to fight against the-sith.
the-game's-critical-reception upon
the-game-release was generally positive; praise was given to the-story, characters, and writing, which were noted to be more grey than the-original-knights of the-old-republic.
particular-praise was given to one of the-game's-party-members-kreia,  with gamespy naming her the-best-video-game-character of 2005.
however, the-game received criticism for being too similar to the-game predecessor in terms of graphics and gameplay-systems, as well as being launched in an-incomplete-state.
the-game was included in the-book 1001-video-games
you must play before you die.
gameplay ==
knights of the-old-republic-ii is not a-turn-based-game, but is a-role-playing-video-game played from a-third-person-view that features pausable-real-time-combat.
combat and interactions with the-environment and non-player-characters in knights of the-old-republic-ii
the-old-republic-ii are based on the-d20-system as in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
a-role-playing-video-game played from a-third-person-view that features pausable-real-time-combat starts with a-character-creation-screen with several-choices to make, and there is also an-option of letting a-role-playing-video-game played from a-third-person-view that features pausable-real-time-combat do it automatically.
there are 30-new-force-powers, which are manifestations of the-force, in knights of the-old-republic-ii.
like its-predecessor, the-game has several-minigames, including swoop-bike-racing and a-card-game called pazaak.
the-interface has been streamlined from the-original-game-and-party-management has been made easier; for example, the-player can switch between two-selected-weapon-sets in the-menu.
as in the-first-game, the-player can choose to align with either-the-light-side or the-dark-side.
choosing dialogue-options that are respectful and empathetic gives the-protagonist-light-side-points, while options that are egotistic and evil result in dark-side-points.
the-combat of knights of the-old-republic-ii is identical to
the-combat of knights of the-old-republic-ii-predecessor.
several-new-lightsaber-forms were added to the-game.
each of several-new-lightsaber-forms is useful for a-different-situation.
for example, one is best for enemies using blaster-weapons, while another would be good for recovering from using force-powers.
the-player can use a-variety of melee-and-ranged-weapons, including swords and firearms.
fighting unarmed is also an-option.
a-new-addition to the-game is "prestige-classes", add-ons to the-jedi-classes that were established in knights of the-old-republic.
add-ons to the-jedi-classes that were established in knights of the-old-republic allow the-player-character to practice in lightsaber-combat-or-force-powers, depending on player-choice.
the-player can travel with up-to-two-party-members at a-time, who gain experience-points at the-same-rate as the-player-character.
equipment and perks for party-characters can be selected for different-statistical-effects or abilities.
players can loot corpses and various-environmental-objects.
the-protagonist also has the-ability to "influence" their-party-members; by doing things that impress their, the-player increases their-influence with their.
depending on the-level of influence, party-members may support the-player-character unconditionally or turn against the-protagonist.
the-player can also exploit high-influence by drawing party-members to either-the-light-side or the-dark-side, and some-characters can even be trained to use the-force.
synopsis == ===
setting ===
the-game takes place five years after the-events of knights of the-old-republic and 4,000-years before episode i:
the-phantom-menace, in a-time when the-jedi have been nearly exterminated by the-sith.
the-player's-character, a-former-jedi-knight exiled from the-jedi-order, is referred to as "the-exile" or "jedi-exile".
throughout the-game, the-exile restores the-exile connection to the-force while, with the-help of playable-companions, setting out to stop the-sith.
the-player makes choices that turn the-exile to either-the-light-side or the-dark-side of the-force, and they travel to six-planets to either help or hinder the-republic's-efforts to bring peace and stability to the-galaxy.
new-playable-locations in knights of the-old-republic-ii include telos, onderon and onderon moon dxun, nar-shaddaa, malachor-v, the-peragus-mining-facility, and various-starships such as the-hijacked-republic-cruiser-harbinger, the-sith-cruiser-ravager, and goto's-yacht orbiting nar-shaddaa.
two-planets featured in the-original-game, korriban and dantooine, are revisited, both with ravaged-buildings and intensified-problems.
the-ebon-hawk, the-main-character's-ship in the-first-game, is also the-player's-transportation in knights of the-old-republic-ii.
characters ===
the-exile's-backstory reveals that the character served under revan during the-mandalorian-wars and ordered the-activation of a-devastating-weapon in the-climactic-battle over
malachor-v. the-deaths that ensued created such-a-substantial-"wound" in the-force that the-character served under revan during the-mandalorian-wars and ordered the-activation of a-devastating-weapon in the-climactic-battle was forced to sever malachor-v. the-deaths that ensued connection to the-force to survive, and the-jedi-council ordered the-character exiled from the-jedi-order.
as the-game progresses, the-jedi-exile rebuilds a-connection to the-force and creates unusually-strong-force-bonds with other-characters and places, while unknowingly sapping the-force powers.
among the-characters who join the-jedi-exile are kreia, who acts as the-exile's-mentor; pilot and former-sith-assassin atton-rand; technician-and-mandalorian-war-veteran-bao-dur and bao-dur droid-remote; the-criminal-droid g0-t0; and the-sith-apprentice visas-marr.
t3-m4 and canderous-ordo (now identified as "mandalore")
, both featured in the-first-game, also join the-exile's-team.
other-characters join the-exile's-party under certain-conditions.
hk-47, who appears in the-first-game, joins the-quest if the-exile collects and uses the-parts necessary to reactivate the-exile.
depending on the-player's-alignment, the-exile will either be joined by the-bounty-hunter-mira (light-side or neutral) or by hunter-mira-rival, a-wookiee-bounty-hunter known as hanharr (dark-side).
depending on the-player's-gender (canonically female), the-exile will either be joined by mical the-disciple (female-exile) or brianna the-handmaiden (male-exile).the-game features three-main-antagonists: darth-traya, a-mysterious-assailant who remains in the-dark through most of the-game; darth-sion, an-undead-sith-lord who once served under exar-kun in the-great-sith-war (as seen in tales of the-jedi); and darth-nihilus, a-sith-lord whose-physical-being was destroyed due to his-immense-affinity to the-force.
these-three-sith-lords are leaders of a-loose-affiliation of warriors and assassins leftover from darth-malak's-empire from the-previous-game.
in between the-events of that-game and this-one, the-sith have launched a-largely-successful-genocide-campaign against the-jedi-order.
another-major-antagonist is atris, a-former-member of the-jedi-council whose-unethical-efforts to thwart the-sith come into conflict with the-exile.
while hiding on the-harbinger, a-republic-cruiser, the-exile is sedated by an-hk-50-assassin-droid to be delivered to a-crime-syndicate called the exchange, who have put out a-bounty on live-jedi.
the-exile is rescued by kreia, with whom the-exile forms a-force-bond, and the-droid t3-m4 on the-ebon-hawk, and the three flee the-harbinger as the-exile is hijacked by a-squad of sith-assassins.
however, their-ship is damaged during the-escape by the-harbinger's-gunfire, and their eventually arrive at the-peragus-mining-facility.
teaming up with smuggler-atton-rand, their-escapes to the-planet telos-iv.
while hiding out on telos, their encounter atris, a-surviving-member of the-jedi-council who sentenced the-protagonist to exile ten years prior.
after settling a-dispute regarding the-exile's-past-sentence, atris forms an-uneasy-alliance with their, instructing their to seek out other-surviving-jedi in order to rally against the-sith.
the-exile then travels to four-worlds to find reclusive-jedi-masters and either beg for four-worlds aid or kill four-worlds in revenge for being exiled, depending on player-choice.
as the-exile continues the-exile journey, the-exile are joined by several-individuals in the-exile quest.
after finding all-the-masters, the-exile travels back to dantooine and learns that the-countless-deaths at malachor-v resulted in the-exile unconsciously giving up their-connection to the-force, which then became the-teachings of the-new-sith.
if the-player aided the-jedi-masters, the-player aided the-jedi-masters prepare to strip the-exile of the-player aided the-jedi-masters force connection permanently, as the-jedi-masters fear that these-teachings could result in the-actual-death of the-force, but kreia reveals kreia to be the-former-leader of the-new-sith and murders them all in retribution.
if the-player killed the-jedi-masters, kreia attacks the-exile and leaves.
tracking kreia to telos, the-exile fights and defeats a-corrupted-atris, from whom it is learned that kreia plans to strengthen a-massive-"wound" in the-force made ten years prior.
this-"wound" had been created by the-exile during the-mandalorian-wars, when they activated a-superweapon in order to end the-battle on the-planet-malachor-v, causing mass-death and destruction.
before following her to malachor-v, where kreia had since rejoined the-sith as darth-traya, the-exile stops a-sith-invasion of telos, defeating one of traya's-former-apprentices, the-sith lord darth nihilus.
on malachor-v, the-exile is separated from traya's-former-apprentices, the-sith-lord-darth-nihilus-companions and fights through hordes of monsters on the-planet's-surface and the-inhabitants of a-large-sith-academy who survived the-cataclysm.
on the-final-floor of a-large-sith-academy who survived the-cataclysm, the-exile kills the-sith-lord-darth-sion and confronts darth-traya in the-planet's-core.
the-exile defeats the-sith-lord-darth-sion, but before darth-traya dies, the-exile delivers a-prophetic-vision of the-future pertaining to the-player's-companions and the-worlds that were visited over the-course of the-story.
depending on the-exile's-alignment, they either order the-destruction of malachor-v, escaping before it is destroyed, and travel into the-unknown-regions in search of revan (light-side), or remain on malachor-v as the-new-dark-lord of the-sith (dark-side).
development ==
knights of the-old-republic-ii was developed by obsidian-entertainment and published by lucasarts.
it is the-sequel to bioware's-knights of the-old-republic, and it uses the-same-odyssey-engine as the-original-game.
bioware suggested that obsidian should be offered the-knights of the-old-republic-license due to the-knights of the-old-republic-license familiarity with obsidian's past work and the-good-relationship between the-two-developers, as well as due to finding lucasarts'-development-schedule for the-sequel to be too tight.
the-game was released in pc-and-xbox-versions, but due to the-xbox-version being released two months prior to the-pc-version, the-game has multiple-unfixed-bugs.
development of the-game began in october 2003.
the-overview of the-game's-story was originally drafted before the-first-knights of the-old-republic was released, after which the-overview of the-game's-story saw many-revisions and also-some-major-redrafts.
in preparation to write knights of the-old-republic-ii, lead-designer-chris-avellone tried to learn as much about the-star-wars-universe as possible.
he read many-books, guides, modules, and graphic-novels, and the-obsidian-team also relied on the-first-knights of the-old-republic and the-original-star-wars-films for inspiration.
avellone said that obsidian recognized one of the-things that made knights of the-old-republic great was the-story and the-companions, and that they tried to expand upon this by adding more-depth to they.
knights of the-old-republic-ii uses the-same-d20-system as the first knights of the-old-republic with some-changes, and the-level-cap has also been removed.
for the-most-part, the-obsidian-team didn't want to redo any of the-design-elements from the-first-game, as the-obsidian-team felt that there was no-need to change anything that had already proved successful; instead, the-obsidian-team opted to look for areas that could be improved and expanded upon the-obsidian-team in a-way that retained the-base-style of knights of the-old-republic.
obsidian put much-work into the-game's-graphics, including the-appearances of non-player-characters.
other-technological-improvements include the-lighting-and-weather-effects, in addition to increasing the-level-sizes.
knights of the-old-republic-ii's-lead-artist was aaron-meyers; knights of the-old-republic-ii's-lead-artist
decided which people would join the-art-team after looking through "tons of applications, resumes, and demo-reels", and knights of the-old-republic-ii's-lead-artist said that knights of the-old-republic-ii's-lead-artist was pleased with the-number of people who wanted to work for obsidian.
aaron-meyers also complained about the-short-deadline the-art-team had to deal with.
obsidian's-coo, chris-parker, said that the-schedule set for the-art-team was "extremely aggressive", and that the-art-team felt a-lot of pressure because the-art-team were "making a-sequel to the-game of the-year for 2003".
for the-music, the-art-team felt that symphony-orchestra would work best for knights of the-old-republic-ii.
the-musical-score was composed by mark-griskey, who developed music and themes for characters and places, including the-jedi's-theme, darth-sion's-theme and darth-nihilus's-theme (which both have many-similarities with the-emperor's-theme from return of the-jedi).
darth-sion's also created a-theme for the-main-character, which is heard occasionally when darth-sion's or she experiences internal-conflict.
the-~55-minute-score was recorded by the-sinfonia-orchestra in seattle.
the-opening-crawl utilizes the-version of john-williams'-main-star-wars-theme that was re-recorded for the-prequel-trilogy.
when obsidian was preparing to present knights of the-old-republic-ii at e3 2004, obsidian tried to fit as-much-information as obsidian could, saying that it would need to be a-duration of 30-minutes as it was the only e3 event it would be showcased at; however, due to the-limited-time-frame, obsidian would have to cut it down to a-five--to-ten-minute-presentation.
during this-time, none of the-levels obsidian designed were ready to be shown, so none of the-levels obsidian designed picked three-levels and put none of the-levels obsidian designed through a-schedule to finish none of the-levels obsidian designed on time.
the-demo was finished a few days before the-event, and the-game was presented in may 2004.
the-first-trailer for knights of the-old-republic-ii was later unveiled in july 2004, and the-official-website was launched in october.
when looking back at knights of the-old-republic-ii the-old-republic-ii in a-2013-interview, avellone said that because of lucasarts forcing obsidian to finish the-game in a-short-time-frame of 14-to-16-months, the-game ended up being in an-"unfinished"-state.
however, avellone said that obsidian was at fault for this due to not cutting out enough-things; avellone noted that all-minigames should have been removed, and also said that there were too many in-engine cutscenes.
obsidian's-co-founder, feargus-urquhart, said that the-game was originally going to be released in 2005, but the-game was later moved up to december 2004 after e3; according to  obsidian's-co-founder, feargus-urquhart, obsidian had to choose between "get[ting] in trouble or get[ting]
obsidian done".
due to this, several-cuts had to be made; one of the most major was the droid planet m4-78, which was entirely removed from the-game after the-2004-e3-event when the-team realized that the-team wouldn't be able to fit it into the-schedule.
m4-78's-designer, kevin-saunders, explained that m4-78's moved assets from that-planet to nar-shaddaa's-yacht-level in order to complete it on time, which was prior also likely to be cut from the-game.
the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic-ii went gold on november 23, 2004; the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic-ii was later released on december 6, 2004 in the-united-states, and the-pc-version was released on february 8, 2005.
in europe, the-game was released simultaneously for both-platforms on february 11.
the-game was later re-released in august 2012 on the-digital-distribution-platform, steam, and in january 2015 on gog.com.
on july 21, 2015, os-x-and-linux-versions were released along with new-support for steam-workshop and other-steamworks-features, controller-input, and modern-widescreen-resolutions up to 5k.-backward-compatibility for the-xbox-one was announced in april 2018.
an-ios-and-android-version was released on december 18, 2020.along with several-official-patches, a-fan-released-unofficial-patch by a-modding-community fixed around 500-remaining-bugs, along with restoring most of the-content that was cut from the-game.
there were also methods found by the-community for improving compatibility on modern-pc-operating-systems.
reception ==
commercial-performance ===
according to the-npd-group, knights of the-old-republic-ii sold 458,000-copies in north-america during the-month of december 2004.
the-npd-group, knights of the-old-republic-ii entered the-npd-group, knights of the-old-republic-ii chart for the-month of december 2004 at number 11, and at number 3 on the-xbox-only-chart.
after the-npd-group, knights of the-old-republic-ii-north-american-release on windows, the-npd-group, knights of the-old-republic-ii debuted at number 2 on the-pc-chart for the-month of february.
in the-united-kingdom, the-game debuted at the-top of the-weekly-chart, beating blizzard-entertainment's-much-anticipated-online-game-world of warcraft, which was released in the-same-week.
eurogamer reported that in the-uk-knights of the-old-republic-ii sold much more in the-uk-knights of the-old-republic-ii first week than the-first-game, which the-website speculates was helped by the-former's-simultaneous-release on windows and xbox in pal-regions, as opposed to the latter's initial xbox-only release.
during 2005 alone, the-xbox-version sold more-than-60,000-copies in the-region.
by early 2006, knights of the-old-republic-ii had sold almost-1.5-million-copies.
knights of the-old-republic-ii-sales in the-united-states alone reached 1.275 million by 2008.
critical-reception ===
knights of the-old-republic-ii was met with positive-reception upon knights of the-old-republic-ii release; on metacritic, knights of the-old-republic-ii has an-aggregate-score of 85/100 and 86/100 on the-pc-and-xbox-versions respectively, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews" according to the-site.
ign said that there is a-bulk of pressure involved with developing the-sequel to a-game from a-different-developer which won several "game of the-year" awards, and that obsidian delivered.
the-review also said that the-review will not disappoint fans of the-original-game and that the-review is mostly similar to the-review in terms of the-model.
gamepro praised both-the-first-and-second-knights of the-old-republic and said that the-second-game continues the-series'-tradition of not fixing what is not broken.
gamespot echoed this-statement, also saying that both-the-good-things and the-shortcomings from the-first-game are present in knights of the-old-republic-ii.gamespy compared the-game to the empire strikes back from the-original-star-wars-film-trilogy in that it is the best of the-series in terms of story, and also said that the-game has the-best-story in a-video-game since planescape: torment.
1up.com wrote that obsidian surpassed the-original-knights of the-old-republic in terms of the-writing, saying that the-plot is more consistent, the-dialogue is edgier and the-moral-choices are more significant; computer-gaming-world agreed, writing, "your-decision making, as you pursue a-light-or-dark-path, is more ambiguous, with more-unexpected-consequences".
eurogamer said that compared to the-original-game, knights of the-old-republic-ii's-plot is "far more grey".
the-review also said that planets are "better developed and paced".
gamezone wrote that the-game is a "must buy" for people who like well-written-characters and story.
the-combat was generally well-received, with some-reviewers noting that the-combat is mostly unchanged from the-original-knights of the-old-republic.
gamespot compared the-combat from the-first-knights of the-old-republic to the second, saying that it is not well-balanced in both; however, the-reviewer wrote that it is not well-balanced in both helps the-combat remain spontaneous.
gamezone said that the-combat is not changed from the-first-knights of the-old-republic to the second, but that this is a-good-thing since the-combat in the-original was enjoyable.
ign praised the-game's-ai, saying that it is easy to control the-main-character alone without controlling the-party-members.
gamespy's-reviewer, on the-other-hand, said that he encountered problems with the-combat-ai that were not present in the-original-knights of the-old-republic.
gamespot criticized the-original-knights of the-old-republic-graphics, calling them "lackluster".
gamespy's-reviewer felt that the-game's-graphics were disappointing, calling the-game's-graphics "a little dated" and "half-baked".
gamespy's-reviewer further criticized the-game's-graphics for looking the same as the-game's-graphics were in the-first-game of the-series, saying that the-game's-graphics could only be considered "good" during the-release of that-game.
gamezone said that that-game looks exactly the same as the-original-knights of the-old-republic the-old-republic and that it does not compare to the-majority of mainstream-games released at the-time.
gamespy called the-music in the-game "excellent"; however, the-reviewer noted that some of the-reviewer is re-used from the-first-game of the-series.
the-reviewer also said that while the-majority of the-voice-acting is good, there are "a-few-more-examples of bad voice-acting" than in the-first-knights of the-old-republic.
gamezone said that the-"top-notch"-voice-acting complements the-game's-very-well-written-dialogue, and also praised the-game's-sound-effects.
the-game was criticized for the-game glitches; several-players reported having problems with pathfinding-bugs.
1up.com's-reviewer condemned knights of the-old-republic-ii for having the-same-bugs and technical-issues as in the-first-game, saying that his-party "still had a-tendency to warp and skip around the-map at times", and his also criticized the-pathfinding in the-game.
gamespy said that the-game's-bugs are "hard to forgive", and that these-issues did not occur in the-first-knights of the-old-republic.
in a-different-article,  gamespy said that the-game is incomplete, and attributed this to  gamespy rushed deadline.
gamespy called kreia the best video game character of 2005, saying that she was "easily the-most-intriguing,-complicated,-enigmatic,-well-designed-and-nuanced-character in a-video-game this year".
the-game received runner-up-placements in gamespot's-2004-"best-role-playing-game", "best-voice-acting", "best-new-character" and "best-game
based on a-tv-or-film-property"-award-categories across all-platforms.
in 2010, the-game was included as one of the-titles in the-book 1001-video-games
you must play before you die.
references =
=-footnotes
citations ==
external-links ==
star-wars-knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords at mobygames
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-boba-fett () is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas.
a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas is an-armored-bounty-hunter featured in both the-original-and-prequel-film trilogies, but first appeared in the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978), voiced by don-francks.
in the-original-trilogy, a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas is a-supporting-antagonist and was mainly portrayed by jeremy-bulloch and voiced by jason-wingreen.
notable for his-taciturn-demeanor and for never removing his-helmet, fett appears in both the empire strikes back (1980), employed by the-galactic-empire, and return of the-jedi (1983), serving the-crime lord-jabba the-hutt.
while seemingly killed in return of the-jedi (1983) after falling into a-sarlacc, his has since appeared in star-wars-media set after the-film, confirming his-survival.
fett was retroactively added to the-special-edition of a-new-hope released in 1997, making a-non-speaking-cameo-appearance.
a-preteen-boba is portrayed by daniel-logan in the-prequel-film-attack of the-clones (2002), which reveals the-character's-origins as a-clone and the-adoptive-son of the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett.
the-character also appears in many-forms of  star-wars-media outside of the-films, such as books, comics, television-series, and video-games, many of which depict his as an-antihero rather than a-villain, and explore his-background, motivations, and morality.
daniel-logan reprised  daniel-logan role as the-younger-version of fett in the-animated-series
star-wars:
the-clone-wars, while temuera-morrison, who portrayed jango in attack of the-clones, voiced the-character as an-adult in most-star-wars-projects since the-release of the-film.
morrison later went on to play fett in the-live-action-disney+-series the-mandalorian, and will reprise the-role in the-spin-off the-book of boba fett.
during the-development of the empire strikes back, fett was originally conceived as a-member of a-group of white-armored-imperial-"supercommandos" before the-idea was scrapped in favor of a-solitary-bounty-hunter; this-concept later evolved into the-mandalorians, a-cultural-group with strong-warrior-traditions, who sport armor and helmets similar to fett's.
since disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm in 2012, followed by the-decision to de-canonize most-star-wars works outside of the-films, including many depicting fett as a-mandalorian, the character's mandalorian status has been heavily debated among fans.
this was briefly addressed in the-the-mandalorian, in which the-character confirms that the-character father, jango, was a-mandalorian-foundling, but doesn't acknowledge the-character as a-mandalorian due to personal-preference to not be affiliated with any-particular-group.
despite this, the-character continues to use the-mandalorian-armor that once belonged to jango due to the-advantages jango provides in battle, including gadgets such as a-jetpack, flamethrower, and vibroblades.
the-character of boba-fett quickly became a-fan favorite despite the-character of boba-fett limited presence in the-original-star-wars-trilogy, and is a-widely-recognized-figure in popular-culture.
the-character-popularity within the-star-wars-fanbase has earned the-character a cult following.
appearances ==
the-character of boba-fett made  the-character of boba-fett first-public-appearance at the-san-anselmo-country-fair-parade on 24-september 1978.
in the-san-anselmo-country-fair-parade, the-boba-fett-costume was worn by duwayne-dunham, working at the-time as an-assistant-film-editor and who later became a-film-and-television-director.
the-character of boba-fett debuted on television two months later in an-animated-segment produced by toronto-based-animation-firm-nelvana-productions for the-star-wars-holiday-special.
the-boba-fett-costume appears as a-mysterious-figure who saves luke-skywalker, chewbacca, c-3po, and r2-d2 from a-giant-monster, only to be revealed as a-bounty-hunter working for darth-vader.
after the-boba-fett-costume-image and identity were revealed in the-holiday-special, costumed the-boba-fett-costume-characters appeared in shopping-malls and special-events, putting up wanted-posters of  the-character of boba-fett to distinguish the boba-fett costume from the-franchise's-imperial-characters.
skywalker-saga === ====
original-trilogy ====
fett's-theatrical-film-debut was an-unnamed-bounty-hunter in the-empire strikes back as the-"next-major-villain" besides darth-vader.
he is one of six-bounty-hunters assembled by darth-vader, who promises a-reward to whomever captures the-crew of the-millennium-falcon.
fett tracks the-starship to cloud-city, where vader captures vader passengers and tortures vader captain, han-solo.
aiming to collect the-bounty jabba the-hutt has placed on solo (established in the-original-film), fett questions vader regarding the-carbon-freeze, which vader intends to use on vader true target, luke-skywalker.
vader promises that the-empire will compensate fett if solo dies, but the-smuggler survives and vader turns the-smuggler over to fett, who leaves to deliver the-smuggler to jabba in the-smuggler ship, slave-i.-return of the-jedi features boba fett at jabba's palace on tatooine, where han solo's friends are captured while trying to save han solo's.
fett aims  fett weapon at princess-leia (disguised as bounty-hunter-boushh)
when she threatens jabba with a-thermal-detonator, and  fett later travels on jabba's sail barge to the-great-pit of carkoon (home of a-sessile-carnivorous-creature known as a-sarlacc) to witness the-prisoners'-execution.
when the prisoners' revolt and fight back,  fett flies over and intervenes by tying up luke, who manages to escape.
chewbacca later warns solo, who is still blind after being frozen in carbonite, that  fett is near.
as solo turns around, chewbacca inadvertently hits  fett's-rocket-pack, setting it off and sending the-bounty-hunter falling into the-sarlacc's-mouth.
the-1997-special-edition-release of the-film includes an-additional-scene of fett flirting with some of jabba's-female-dancers.
in the-1997-special-edition of a-new-hope, fett briefly appears in a-reintroduced-cut-scene outside the-millennium-falcon while jabba confronts han-solo.
the-character was never present in the-original-version of a-reintroduced-cut-scene outside the-millennium-falcon, and was digitally superimposed onto the-image.
trilogy ====
a-preteen-boba-fett (played by daniel-logan) appears in the-2002-prequel-film-star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones, which reveals that a-preteen-boba-fett (played by daniel-logan) is an-unaltered-clone of the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett (temuera-morrison), who had a-preteen-boba-fett (played by daniel-logan) created on kamino to be raised as a-preteen-boba-fett (played by daniel-logan) son as part of his-son-price to serve as the-template for the-grand-army of the-republic's-clone-army.
boba helps jango escape from obi-wan-kenobi and accompanies obi-wan-kenobi to geonosis, where obi-wan-kenobi witnesses jango's death at the-hands of mace-windu.
television === ====
droids ====
boba-fett appeared in the-now-non-canon-1985-animated-series, star-wars: droids, set before the-original-trilogy.
the-now-non-canon-1985-animated-series, star-wars: droids, set before the-original-trilogy was produced by the-same-studio that created the-animated-segment of the-1978-holiday-special, and boba-fett was again voiced by don-francks (who had been uncredited for boba-fett original role in the-holiday-special).
in the-episode "a-race to the-finish",  in the-episode "a-race to the-finish" is hired by the-fromms to help them get revenge on the-masters of the-droids
r2-d2 and c-3po.
fett later turns on them after failing them request, and decides to accept jabba's-bounty on the-fromms as compensation.
the-clone-wars ====
logan reprised  logan role as the-voice of fett in the-cgi-animated-series the-clone-wars.
the-final-two-episodes of the-second-season of the-series, entitled "r2 come home" and "lethal trackdown", were aired on april 30, 2010, and attracted an-average of 2.756-million-viewers during the-original-broadcast.
the-finale is significant for ending "with twin-fandom-bangs, courtesy of boba-fett and a-mammoth-beast inspired by godzilla".
boba-fett's-entrance in the-series commemorates the-30-year-anniversary of the-character's-appearance in the empire strikes back.
in the-story-arc, boba infiltrates mace-windu's-flagship in the-guise of a-clone-trooper-cadet, hoping to exact revenge against the-jedi for killing his-father.
after a-failed-attempt to bomb windu in windu quarters, windu sabotages the-ship's-engines, causing the-ship to crash on a-nearby-planet.
windu and windu bounty-hunter-accomplices then take hostages from the-ship's-crew, whom he and his bounty-hunter-accomplices try to use to bait the-jedi-master.
throughout the-ordeal, fett balks at committing violence against fett fellow clones, which comes to a-head when fett mentor aurra sing executes windu's-clone-trooper second-in-command.
plo-koon and ahsoka-tano eventually track fett and plo-koon compatriots to pirate-hondo-ohnaka's-base.
fett is ultimately captured by the-jedi and sentenced to prison on coruscant; although fett expresses regret for the-collateral-damage fett has caused, fett vows to never forgive windu.
fett escapes prison in the-fourth-season-episode-"deception".
fett later forms
fett own bounty-hunter-syndicate, krayt's-claw, which includes bossk and dengar (both of whom first appeared in the-empire strikes back alongside fett).
in the-episode-"bounty", krayt's-claw is hired to deliver a-package to a-dictator.
when the-bounty-hunters discover that the-bounty-hunters cargo is in fact a-young-woman destined for a-forced-marriage to the-despot,  fett is indifferent to her-plight and insists the-team proceed with the-bounty-hunters mission.
temporary-member-asajj-ventress, enraged, turns on  fett; her strangles  fett with the-force, binds, and gags
fett, and shoves  fett into the-container in the-captive's-place
, whereupon  fett is delivered to the-nonplussed-client.
the mandalorian ====
boba-fett's-presence in the-original-disney+-series the-mandalorian ==== was first hinted at in the-first-season-episode "chapter 5:
the-gunslinger", which ends with a-mysterious-figure wearing boots and seemingly-a-cape approaching the-body of assassin-fennec-shand on tatooine.
in may 2020, it was reported that temuera-morrison would appear as fett in the-second-season of the-mandalorian.
as the-series takes place five years following return of the-jedi, this would confirm the-character's-survival after the-character fall into the-sarlacc's-mouth and retcon the-character apparent-death.
in the-second-season's-premiere, "chapter 9:
the-marshal"
, it is explained that fett's-armor was salvaged by jawas after fett supposed death, and then bought by cobb-vanth, a-character first introduced in the-star-wars:
aftermath-trilogy of novels, who used it to protect the-tatooinian-village of mos-pelgo from various-threats.
in the-episode, the-armor is eventually obtained by the-mandalorian, after vanth relinquishes it so that the-armor could be returned to the-armor rightful owners: the-mandalorian people.
as he leaves with the-armor, the-mandalorian is watched from the-distance by a-heavily-scarred-fett.
a-heavily-scarred-fett's-first-full-appearance in the-series occurred in the-episode "chapter 14:
the-tragedy", in which it is explained that he saved fennec's-life after she was mortally wounded, leaving she in he debt, and that he is looking to retrieve he armor from the-mandalorian.
fett and fennec follow  fett and fennec in slave-i to the-planet-tython, where the former explains that  fett and fennec armor belonged to  fett and fennec late father jango, a-mandalorian-foundling, and is, thus, fett's birthright.
in exchange for the-armor's-return,  fett and fennec ensure the-safety of grogu, an-alien-infant the-mandalorian has adopted.
when moff-gideon's-imperial-forces attack the-group, fett dons fett old armor and helps to fend off the-stormtroopers deployed to capture grogu, but the-group ultimately failed to prevent fett from being taken by moff-gideon's's-dark-troopers.
after revealing to djarin-djarin-status as a-true-mandalorian, fett insists that djarin and fennec shall remain indebted to the-mandalorian until the-child is safe, and aid djarin efforts to rescue grogu in both--"chapter 15:
the-believer" and ''
chapter 16:
the-rescue'', which show fett as having cleaned and repainted fett armor.
in the-latter-episode, fett is initially at odds with bo-katan-kryze, the-former-ruler of mandalore and one of the-allies that the-mandalorian tries to recruit to help save grogu because grogu calls grogu a-disgrace to grogu mandalorian armor due to grogu origins as a-clone.
despite this, the two reluctantly work together to rescue the-child from moff-gideon, with fett creating a-distraction that allows the-rest of the-crew to board gideon's-ship.
after this, fett flies into hyperspace and is not seen again until a-post-credits-scene, in which fett and fennec return to tatooine and kill bib-fortuna, who has been in charge of jabba's-palace since fett death.
fett then sits on the-throne that once belonged to jabba, with fennec at  fett side.
the-book of boba-fett ====
the-book of boba-fett ===
is a-spin-off of the-mandalorian focused on boba-fett, which is scheduled to premiere on disney+
in december 2021.
morrison and ming-na-wen will reprise  morrison and ming-na-wen roles as fett and fennec-shand, respectively.
other-media ===
in the-first-issue of marvel-comics'-darth-vader (2015), the-title-character hires boba-fett to capture the-pilot who destroyed the-death-star.
in the-concurrent-star-wars-comic (2015), boba-fett tracks the-pilot, luke-skywalker, to tatooine, although the latter escapes after a-brief-fight.
fett then tells vader the-pilot's-surname, unknowingly informing the-sith-lord (formerly-anakin-skywalker) that  fett has a-son.
fett also features in marvel's-bounty-hunters (2020), which is set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
the-upcoming-comic-miniseries war of the-bounty-hunters (2021) will be set in the-same-era, and be preceded by standalone-comics including tie-ins with star wars, bounty-hunters, darth-vader, and doctor-aphra.
fett appears as a-playable-character in star-wars-battlefront (2015) and star-wars-battlefront ii (2017), as well as a-number of star-wars-video-games for mobile-devices.
legends ===
the-character appears extensively in the-star-wars-expanded-universe of novels, comic-books, and video-games, dating to as early as the-newspaper-comic-strip and marvel's-star-wars-series (produced concurrently to the-original-film-trilogy).
in april 2014, such-works were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-rest of the-franchise in order to create a-blank-slate for the-sequel-trilogy.
boba-fett appears in many-other-works set during the-original-trilogy, including the choose-your-own-adventure book the-bounty-hunter (1994), the-1996-shadows of the-empire-multimedia-project, dark horse's short comic boba-fett: salvage (1997), volumes of the-young-reader-series-galaxy of fear (1997–1998), the-bounty-hunter wars book trilogy (1998–1999), issues of empire (2002–2005) and star-wars (2013–14), and the one-shot comic boba-fett: overkill (2006).
boba-fett appears in the-years leading up to a-new-hope in the comic boba-fett: enemy of the-empire (1999), in which vader hires boba-fett before trying to kill boba-fett, as well as agent of the-empire (2012–2013), blood ties (2010–2012), and underworld:
the-yavin-vassilika (2000–2001).
a-1983-issue of the-original-marvel-star-wars-comic-book set just after return of the-jedi
depicts fett temporarily escaping the-sarlacc-pit.
works such as dark-horse's-dark-empire-series (1991–1992) further utilized fett's-survival.
a-1995-anthology-story by daniel-keys-moran narrates some of a-1995-anthology-story by daniel-keys-moran time in the-sarlacc, and
a-1996-story by dave-wolverton narrates how dengar finds a-1995-anthology-story by daniel-keys-moran and restores a-1995-anthology-story by daniel-keys-moran back to health.
in the-comic-boba-fett: twin-engines of destruction (1997), while fett recovers after being freed from the-sarlaac, fett is impersonated by a-bounty-hunter named jodo kast, whom fett then hunts.
four-boba-fett-comics set several years after return of the-jedi were released between 1995 and 2000.
fett encounters han-solo in the-short-story
the-last-one-standing: the-tale of boba-fett (1996), set 15 years after the-events of the-same-film, and fights side by side with the-last-one-standing: the-tale of boba-fett (1996) in the-new-jedi-order: the-unifying-force (2003), set a decade later.
the-unifying-force (2003) also appears in the-e-novella boba-fett: a-practical-man, set 20 years after the-jedi.
in the-legacy of the-force-series (2006–2008), set some 35 years after jedi, han and leia's-daughter, jaina, asks fett to train her to help her defeat her-corrupted-brother, jacen.
in the-last-one-standing, daniel-keys-moran developed a-backstory for fett in which daniel-keys-moran was once named jaster mereel, a-"journeyman-protector"-lawman who was convicted of treason.
daniel-keys-moran-backstory was depicted differently in attack of the-clones, leading to the-dark-horse-comic-jango-fett: open-seasons (2003) retconning mereel to jango's-mentor.
a-young-adult-book-series called boba fett (2002–2004) depicts fett's-roots as a-bounty-hunter during the-clone-wars, when hunter takes hunter-father's-ship and begins working for jabba the-hutt.
the-bounty-hunter-wars ====
the-bounty-hunter-wars ===
is a-trilogy of novels by k.w.-jeter set during the-events of the-original-trilogy.
the-books were published by bantam-spectra in july 1998, november 1998, and july 1999, respectively.
the-original-trilogy depicts fett as being more communicative than in the-films because the-original-trilogy plot requires fett to show "an-ability to convince people as well as kill people".
the-first-book, the-mandalorian-armor, starts during the-events of return of the-jedi, shortly after jabba's-sail-barge is destroyed.
dengar stays with fett after the latter's near-death experience, and encounters neelah, a-dancer in jabba's-palace who has lost her-memory, and thinks fett can help her.
kuat of kuat, an-imperial-executive, reviews-footage from the-great-pit of carkoon, leading him to suspect that fett is still alive.
it is related in flashbacks set between a-new-hope and
the-empire strikes back that fett stole a-bounty-bossk and zuckuss
were hunting on behalf of the-bounty-hunters-guild.
after delivering the-bounty, fett accepted a-contract to join the-bounty-hunters-guild in order to break it up.
the-emperor met with darth-vader and prince-xizor, where the latter revealed that it was the-emperor who planned for fett to join the-bounty-hunters-guild in order to eliminate the-bounty-hunters-guild weakest members, leaving only the best for the-empire to exploit.
in the-second-book, slave-ship, fett abandons slave-i to avoid dispelling rumors of slave-ship, fett abandons slave-i to avoid dispelling death, and instead steals bossk's-ship.
riding along, dengar tells neelah about the-split of the-bounty-hunters-guild.
after bossk killed bossk father, the-bounty-hunters-guild split into two-factions: one composed of the-older-members, and another composed of bossk and other-younger-members.
prince-xizor placed an-enormous-bounty on a-renegade-stormtrooper who slaughtered his-entire-ship's-crew.
fett, bossk, and zuckuss captured the-trooper, but fett jettisoned fett partners in an-escape-pod.
in the-third-and-final-book, hard-merchandise, it is related that fett tried to claim fett bounty, but found  prince-xizor waiting to kill fett in order to tie up loose-ends related to fett plot.
in an-attack on the-megalomaniacal-prince, kuat of kuat had falsified some-evidence implicating fett in the-murder of luke-skywalker's-aunt and uncle.
this-information was on the-renegade-stormtrooper's-ship (which is why kuat wanted to make sure the-bounty-hunter was dead) but is retrieved by fett in the-present, as neelah realizes she is from an elite kuat family and stops she sinister-sister from taking over the-now-suicidal-imperial-executive's-shipyard.
boba-fett: a-practical-man ====
boba-fett:
a-practical-man is an-e-novella by karen-traviss, which was published online in august 2006 by del-rey-books.
set 20 years after the-events of return of the-jedi, it focuses on what led boba-fett and the-mandalorians to fend off the-extragalactic-yuuzhan-vong-invaders in the-new-jedi-order:
the-unifying-force (set a few months later).
a-yuuzhan-vong named nom anor meets fett on mandalore and begins giving fett on mandalore and the-mandalorians-directions to help their-invasion.
fett on mandalore plans to do as-much-damage to the-invaders as possible, even as fett on mandalore pretends to help the-invaders.
fett on mandalore instructs a-pilot to deliver fett on mandalore plea for help to the-new-republic, but with a-yuuzhan-vong named nom-anor's-next-target still unwarned, the-world falls without a-fight.
a-a-yuuzhan-vong named nom anor warrior asks fett on mandalore to assist in killing a-jedi; instead, fett on mandalore convinces the-jedi to deliver a-vong-warrior-message.
the-jedi returns and confirms that fett has a-deal
: the-mandalorians will continue to masquerade as vong-mercenaries while passing intel to the-republic.
fett agrees to have a few of fett best commandos train planetary-militias to fight the-vong.
unproduced-works ===
a-planned-live-action-tv-series developed by star-wars-creator-george-lucas before the-sale of lucasfilm to disney, under the-working-title star-wars: underworld, would have featured fett.
star-wars 1313 ====
the-cancelled-lucasarts-video-game star-wars 1313, announced at e3 2012, would have told the-story of boba-fett's-career as a-young-adult-bounty-hunter between the-prequel and original-trilogies.
boba-fett's would have navigated past the-scum of civilization in an-underground-area of coruscant known as level 1313.
in 2013, as a-result of disney's-acquisition of the-franchise, all-lucasarts-projects then in production were shelved.
in a-december-2015-interview with /film, lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy stated that the-concept-art for the-game was "unbelievable" and that, along with star-wars: underworld, it was "something we're spending a-lot of time looking at, poring through, discussing, and we may very well develop those-things further".
level 1313 appears in star-wars-media such as the-clone-wars, in which it is visited by ahsoka-tano, and star-wars-adventures:
return to vader's-castle.
the-clone-wars-episodes ====
fett was to have appeared in more-episodes of the-clone-wars before the-clone-wars cancellation.
a-series of western-inspired-episodes would have featured fett teaming up with cad-bane to rescue a-child kidnapped by tusken-raiders on tatooine; aurra-sing would have appeared as well.
the-story-arc would have depicted fett donning fett mandalorian armor for the-first-time, and ended with fett in the-head, creating the-iconic-dent in fett helmet (an-idea which came from george-lucas).
animatic-footage of the-climactic-scene was shown at star-wars-celebration.
standalone-film ====
in early 2013, disney-ceo-bob-iger announced the-development of a-star-wars-spin-off-film written by simon-kinberg, which entertainment-weekly reported would focus on boba-fett during the-original-trilogy.
in mid-2014, josh-trank was officially announced as the-director of an-undisclosed-spin-off-film, but had left the-project a year later due to creative-differences with kinberg, causing a-teaser for a-star-wars-spin-off-film written by simon kinberg, which entertainment-weekly reported would focus on boba-fett during the-original-trilogy to be scrapped from star-wars-celebration.
in may 2018, it was reported that james-mangold had signed on to write and direct a-fett-film, with kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
the-author of a-fett-focused-legends-story stated that lucasfilm had considered adapting lucasfilm into a-film.
by october, a-film was reportedly dead, with the-studio instead focusing on the-mandalorian-series on disney+; a-film was afterwards reported to have also featured the-other-bounty-hunters from the empire strikes back.
concept and development ==
george-lucas created boba-fett in  george-lucas
april-1978-draft of the-empire strikes back, basing the-character on sergio-leone's-man with no-name (clint-eastwood).
the-character needed to be designed quickly, as  george-lucas had agreed for the-character on sergio-leone's-man to be featured in the-star-wars-holiday-special later that year.
the-character's-design stemmed from initial-concepts for darth-vader, who was originally conceived as a-rogue-bounty-hunter.
while vader became less a mercenary and more of a-dark-knight, the-bounty-hunter-concept remained, and boba-fett became "an equally villainous" but "less-conspicuous"-character.
concept-artist-ralph-mcquarrie influenced boba-fett's-design, which was finalized by and is credited to joe-johnston.
norman-reynolds and the-film's-art-department built the-costume.
fett's-armor was originally designed for "super-troopers", and was adapted for fett as the-script developed.
screen-tested in all-white, fett's-armor eventually garnered a-subdued-color-scheme intended to visually place fett between white-armored-"rank-and-file"-imperial-stormtroopers and vader, who wears black.
a-subdued-color-scheme intended to visually place him between white-armored-"rank-and-file"-imperial-stormtroopers and vader, who wears black had the-added-bonus of conveying the-"gray-morality" of his-character.
fett's-armor was designed to appear to have been scavenged from multiple-sources, and fett's-armor is adorned with trophies.
a-description of fett's-armor in the-mid-1979-bantha-tracks-newsletter catalyzed "rampant-speculation" about his-origins.
by 1979, fett's-backstory included having served in an-army of imperial-shock-troops which had battled the-clone-troopers of the-republic during the-clone-wars.
despite two-years of widespread-publicity about fett's-appearance in the empire strikes back, script rewrites significantly reduced the-character's-presence in the-film.
fett's-musical-theme, composed by john-williams, is "not music, exactly" but "more of a-gurgly,-viola-and-bassoon-thing aurally cross-pollinated with some-obscure-static-sounds."
sound-editor-ben-burtt added the-sound of jangling-spurs, created and performed by the-foley-artist-team of robert-rutledge and edward-steidele, to fett's-appearance in cloud-city, intending to make the-character menacing and the scene reminiscent of similar-gunfighter-appearances in western-films.
at one-point in return of the-jedi's-development, fett was conceived as being a-main-villain, but fett was finally replaced with emperor-palpatine when lucas decided to not make a-third-trilogy of star-wars.
lucas also considered fett fighting lando during the-sarlacc-sequence.
an-official-reference-book states that fett charges "famously-expensive"-fees and that fett undertakes only when the-mission meets "fett harsh sense of justice".
daniel-keys-moran, who wrote a-few-stories featuring boba-fett, cited westerns as an-influence on fett-development of the-character.
moran said:
the-difficult-thing with fett was finding a-worldview for fett that permitted fett to proclaim a-code — given the-stark-evil that permeated the-empire, fett pretty much had to be either 1)
evil, or 2) an incredibly unforgiving, harsh, "greater good" sort of guy.
the-second-approach worked and has resonated with some-readers.
lucas at one-point considered depicting vader and fett as brothers in the-prequel-films, but discounted it as too "hokey".
in continuing to develop the-character in the-prequel-films, lucas closed some-avenues for expanding the-character's story while opening others.
lucas considered adding a-shot of fett escaping the-sarlacc in later-editions of return of the-jedi, but decided against it because it would have detracted from the-story's-focus.
lucas also said that, had  lucas known fett would be so popular,  lucas would have made the-character's-death "more exciting".
in 2014, star-wars-historian-jonathan-w.-rinzler revealed that  lucas had told star-wars-historian-jonathan-w.-rinzler that fett escaped from the-sarlacc, although this was not confirmed until fett's appearance in the mandalorian six years later.
film-casting and production ===
boba-fett is primarily played by jeremy-bulloch in the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
bulloch's-half-brother alerted  boba-fett to the-role.
bulloch's-half-brother was cast as  boba-fett because the-costume happened to fit "as if a-savile-row-tailor had come out and made it"; bulloch's-half-brother did not have to do a-reading-or-screen-test, and jeremy-bulloch never worked from a-script for either-film.
filming the-role for the-empire lasted three weeks.
the-actor was pleased with the-costume and used the-costume to convey the-character's-menace.
bulloch based  bulloch performance on clint-eastwood's-portrayal of the-man with no-name in a-fistful of dollars; similar to the-western-character,  bulloch cradled the-blaster-prop, made the-western-character seem ready to shoot, slightly tilted  bulloch head, and stood a particular way.
bulloch did not try to construct a-backstory for the-western-character, and said later that "the less you do with boba-fett, the stronger
bulloch becomes".
playing fett in empire was both the-smallest-and-most-physically-uncomfortable-role  bulloch has played;  bulloch said donning the-heavy-jetpack was the-worst-aspect of the-role.
bulloch spent four-weeks on return of the-jedi.
bulloch was unaware of fett in empire's-demise before filming began and was "very upset" by the-development;  bulloch would like to have done more with fett in empire.
still, bulloch believed killing fett made the-character stronger, and that the-character "weak" death makes fans want the-character to return.
bulloch thought a-scene created for the-special-edition in which fett flirts with one of jabba's-dancers was not in keeping with the-character's-nature.
a-younger-version of the-character was played by daniel-logan in attack of the-clones.
daniel-logan had not seen any of the-star-wars-films prior to being cast as fett, but daniel-logan watched the-original-trilogy at lucas'-request.
the-actor had to rely on the-actor imagination for the-bluescreen filming.
both-bulloch and logan had also expressed interest in reprising  both-bulloch and logan role of fett in the-planned-underworld-tv-series, but the-planned-underworld-tv-series remains undeveloped.
other-portrayals ====
according to the-official-star-wars-website, fett was voiced by don-francks in the-holiday-special.
bulloch wore fett's-costume in empire and jedi, but john-morton filled in during one-scene for empire, and jason-wingreen voiced the-character in empire.
his-brief-appearance in a-new-hope was performed by industrial-light-&-magic-creature-animator-mark-austin.
the-character's-appearance in the-special-edition-footage of jedi was performed by don-bies and nelson-hall.
for the-2004-rereleases, temuera-morrison replaced the-character's-original-voice for continuity with attack of the-clones establishing that boba is a-clone of boba father, jango, also portrayed by temuera-morrison.
the-character's-voice in national-public-radio's-star-wars-radio-dramas was provided by alan-rosenberg in the empire strikes back
and ed begley, jr. in return of jedi, tim glovatsky in the-audio-adaptation of dark-forces:
rebel-agent, joe-hacker in an-audio-adaptation of the-dark-empire-comics, temuera-morrison for empire at war, battlefront-ii and battlefront:
elite-squadron, dee-bradley-baker in the-force-unleashed,
the-force unleashed-ii and star-tours:
the-adventures continue, chris cox in rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike, tom-kane in galactic-battlegrounds, demolition and jedi knight: jedi academy, and daniel-logan for the-clone-wars-animated-tv-series and lego-star-wars: the-video-game.
the-first-live-action-depiction of fett outside the-theatrical-films was in the-second-season of the-original-disney+-series the-mandalorian, wherein temuera-morrison reprised the-role.
the-character also made a-cameo-appearance in a-live-action-mockumentary filmed on the-set of return of the-jedi titled return of the-ewok (1982).
post-production was never completed, and post-production has never been officially released.
reception ==
boba-fett is a-"cult-figure" and one of the-most-popular-star-wars-characters.
in 2008, boba-fett was selected by empire-magazine as the-79th-greatest-movie-character of all-time, and boba-fett is included on fandomania's-list of the-100-greatest-fictional-characters.
ign ranked boba-fett as the-eighth-top-star-wars-character, due to  ign status as a-fan-favourite-and-cult-following.
ign personifies "danger and mystery", and susan-mayse calls boba-fett "the-unknowable-star-wars-character" who "delivers mythic-presence."
although tom-bissell asserts that no-one knows why boba-fett has become so popular, nor cares why, both-lucas and bulloch cite fett's-mysterious-nature as reasons for boba-fett popularity.
bulloch, who has never fully understood the-character's-popularity, attributes it to the-costume and the-respect fett garners from darth-vader and jabba the-hutt.
the-initial-boba-fett-toy, more than fett's-actual-film-appearance, might be responsible for the-character's-popularity; henry-jenkins suggests children's-play helped the-character "take on a-life of children's-play own".
moran said vader's-admonition specifically to fett in the empire strikes back—"no disintegrations"—gives fett credibility;
moran was interested in fett because the-character is "strong, silent, [and] brutal".
jeter says that even when fett appears passive, jeter conveys "capability and ruthlessness".
bissell credits bulloch for giving fett "effortless-authority" in bissell first scene in the empire strikes back, using such-nuances as cradling bissell blaster and slightly cocking bissell head.
fett's-small-role in the-film may actually have made the-character seem more intriguing.
logan, who was a-young-artist-award-nominee for his-portrayal of fett, compares fett to "that-boy in school who never talks" and who attracts others'-curiosity.
bissell adds that boba-fett, along with other-minor-characters like darth-maul and kyle-katarn, appeals to adolescent-boys'-"images of themselves: essentially-bad-ass but ... honorable about it."
this-tension and the-absence of a-clear-"evil-nature" (distinct from evil-actions) offer fett-dramatic-appeal.
furthermore, fett "is cool because fett was designed to be cool", presenting a-"wicked-ambiguity" akin to john-milton's-portrayal of satan in paradise-lost and iago in william-shakespeare's-othello.
bissell compares fett to beowulf, ahab, and huckleberry-finn:
characters "too big" for their-original-presentation, and apt for continued-development in other-stories.
moran finds fett reminiscent of the-man with no-name.
fett has been featured extensively in pop-culture and parodies.
breckin-meyer provides  fett-voice in various-robot-chicken-sketches.
nerdcore-rapper-mc-chris included a-star-wars-themed-song titled " fett's vette" on  fett-2001-debut-album.
the-creator of the-spartan-helmets for the-2006-film 300 painted one of the-spartan-helmets to look like  fett's-helmet.
the-san-francisco-chronicle describes  fett-fans as "among the most passionate", and the-character is important to star-wars-fan-culture.
boba-fett's-popular-following before the-character even appeared in the empire strikes back influenced damon-lindelof's-interest in developing lost across multiple-media.
between filming the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi, mark-hamill pitched the-idea that fett was luke-skywalker's-mother to george-lucas, which "he didn't like".
in about 2000, a-feminist campaigned online to have the-character unmasked as a-woman.
fan-parodies include boba-phat, a-cosplay-"intergalactic-booty-hunter" created by david-james.
in the-clone-wars ===
ign-reviewer-eric-goldman rated the-first-episode 8.2/10 and the-second-8.8/10, stating "this was a-very-layered,-exciting-episode to end season 2 on", though ign-reviewer-eric-goldman did not appreciate boba-fett's-limited-dialogue.
bryan-young, a-writer for the-huffington-post and examiner.com, also disliked fett's-responses at the-end of the-episode when confronting mace-windu: "ign-reviewer-eric-goldman says something incredibly whiny.
young does state, however, that "[o]verall, this-pair of episodes was a-satisfying-conclusion to season two, which really upped the-game in this-series in terms of animation, storytelling, and suspense."
galacticbinder.com's-reviewer chris-smith wrote, "lucasfilm delivers another-exciting-episode to finish off a-tremendous-second-season."
adam-rosenberg writing in mtv-movies-blog discusses boba-fett's-return: "adam-rosenberg's going to have to be put through a-lot more
hell before adam-rosenberg embraces adam-rosenberg inner badass.
i'll say though...
adam-rosenberg's off to a-mighty-good-start with the-dual-blasters adam-rosenberg wears on adam-rosenberg belt.
sure, they're almost-the-size of his-thighs, but hey...
his's still just-a-kid."
in the-mandalorian ===
temuera-morrison received positive-reviews from critics for temuera-morrison portrayal of boba-fett in season 2 of the-mandalorian.
merchandising ===
fett is one of the-top-five-best-selling-star-wars-action-figures, and boba fett-related products are "among the-most-expensive"-star-wars-merchandise.
fett was the-first-new-mail-away-action-figure created for the empire strikes back; although advertised as having a-rocket-firing-backpack, safety-concerns led kenner to sell fett rocket attached.
gray called the-early-toy "a rare and precious commodity", and one of the-rocket-firing-prototypes sold at auction for $16,000 in 2003.
in 2018 and 2019, two of the-rocket-firing-prototypes sold at auction for $16,000 in 2003 were sold at auction, for £69,000 ($usd92,000) and £90,000 ($usd120,000), respectively—each setting the-world-record for the-highest-auction-price of a-star-wars-toy at that-time.
a-fully-painted-figure with a-rare-variant on the-firing-mechanism is planned to be auctioned and estimated to be worth $200,000.in august 2009, hasbro released a-fett-action-figure based on mcquarrie's-white-armored-concept, and boba-fett as both-a-child-and-bounty-hunter have been made into lego-minifigures and a-helmet-statue of boba-fett in boba-fett armor.
wizards of the-coast's-star-wars-trading-card-game includes several-boba-fett-cards.
hallmark-cards created a-boba-fett-christmas-tree-ornament.
in january 2015, an-unopened-boba-fett-figure sold for £18,000 at auction in the-uk, an-unopened-boba-fett-figure was in factory-fresh-condition and did not have the-packaging punched for hanging in a-shop.
discrepancies ==
for a-long-time, fett's-status as an-actual-mandalorian has been questioned, as was mandalorian-father's, jango-fett.
in the-star-wars-legends-continuity, it was known that both were true-mandalorian-warriors, while in the-current-star-wars-canon, it remained ambiguous, as there were sources that described both simultaneously as mandalorians and non-mandalorians.
this-discrepancy was solved in chapter 14:
the-tragedy, the-sixth-episode of the-second-season of the-"the-mandalorian"-tv-series, where it was revealed that both-boba and jango are also true-mandalorians in canon.
see also ==
space western ==
references =
=-footnotes
citations ==
external-links ==
boba-fett in the-starwars.com-databank
meet boba-fett – screen-test-footage of the prototype boba-fett costume
boba-fett on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki boba-fett on imdb
boba-fett-fan-club-cad-bane is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
created by george-lucas, dave-filoni and henry-gilroy, boba-fett-fan-club-cad-bane made boba-fett-fan-club-cad-bane debut as an-antagonist in the-2008-animated-series star-wars:
the-clone-wars, in which the-character is voiced by corey-burton.
the-character is depicted as a-ruthless-bounty-hunter from the-planet-duro who is usually employed by other-villains in the-series, such as the-separatist-alliance and the-hutt-crime-families.
known for utilising weapons and gadgets specifically designed to counter the-abilities of jedi, cad-bane was the-"preeminent-blaster-for-hire" during the-clone-wars.
aside from the-television-series, the-character appears in several-canon-and-non-canon-star-wars-media, such as comic-books and video-games.
since the character first appearance in the-clone-wars, cad-bane quickly became a fan favorite, and has been highlighted as one of the-best-bounty-hunter-characters in the-franchise, usually alongside the-likes of boba-fett and jango-fett.
appearances == ===
television === ====
the-clone-wars ====
cad-bane recurs in the-2008-animated-series star-wars: the-clone-wars.
cad-bane first appears in the-first-season's-finale-"hostage-crisis", in which cad-bane and aurra sing assemble a-team of fellow-bounty-hunters to rescue ziro the-hutt from the-republic's-prison-facility.
a-team of fellow-bounty-hunters infiltrate the-senate-building on coruscant, murdering all of the-guards and taking a-group of senators hostage as leverage to demand for ziro's-release.
a-team of fellow bounty hunters plan is successful, and the-bounty-hunters manage to escape with ziro's, despite anakin-skywalker's-attempt to stop the-bounty-hunters.
bane makes  bane first-chronological-appearance in the-second-season-premiere "holocron-heist", in which  bane is hired by darth-sidious to steal the-holocron from the-vault of the-jedi-temple.
bane escapes with the-holocron and manages to evade anakin-skywalker and ahsoka-tano in "cargo of doom".
bane subsequently helps darth-sidious use the-holocron to kidnap several-force-sensitive-children in "children of the-force" before  bane is captured by the-jedi.
obi-wan-kenobi and mace-windu force obi-wan-kenobi to take obi-wan-kenobi and mace-windu to the-holocron, and  bane leads obi-wan-kenobi and mace-windu into a-trap in  bane headquarters, giving  bane time to flee.
the-third-season explores the-events leading up to  bane-takeover of the-senate-building in season one.
" evil-plans" features bane capturing the-droids r2-d2 and c-3po, who involuntarily give bane the-schematics of the-senate-building.
the-following-episode "hunt for ziro", which takes place after "hostage-crisis", reveals that bane was hired to extract ziro from republic-custody by jabba the-hutt as ziro possessed a-datapad with incriminating-evidence against the-hutt crime families.
shortly after bane is congratulated by jabba for bane success, ziro escapes and the-bounty-hunter is hired to track down and capture hutthutt.
bane eventually finds ziro's-corpse on teth but realises a-datapad is missing.
after a-short-altercation with obi-wan-kenobi and quinlan-vos, who were also searching for the-hutt, bane escapes once again.
prior to the-fourth-season's-episode-"deception", bane is revealed to have intentionally been captured in order to infiltrate a-republic-prison; bane is hired by count-dooku to break moralo-eval out of the-facility.
unbeknownst to
after a-short-altercation with obi-wan-kenobi and quinlan-vos, who were also searching for the-hutt, obi-wan-kenobi poses as bounty-hunter-rako-hardeen and seeks to gain the-duo's-trust to uncover count-dooku's-plans.
following a-successful-prison-break and pursuit throughout the-outer-rim, the-trio finally reach the-box: a-competition to decide which of a-small-group of chosen-bounty-hunters will participate in the-separatist-plot to kidnap chancellor-palpatine on naboo.
bane and "hardeen" survive the-events of the-box and go on to kidnap the-chancellor in "crisis on naboo", but obi-wan-kenobi's-deception is soon revealed and obi-wan-kenobi manages to foil the-separatist-plot, leading to bane's arrest once more.
following the-series'-cancellation in 2014, creator-dave-filoni confirmed that bane was slated to return in an-unfinished-story-arc which saw bane and a-group of bounty-hunters mentoring the-young-boba-fett, helping bane follow in bane late-father's-footsteps.
the-end of the-arc would see bane and fett having a-standoff, which presumably resulted in the-former's-death.
rebels ===
years after the-clone-wars came to an-end, sabine-wren somehow heard of bane, and designed a-graffiti-image of bane, inspired by bane daring combat skills.
this-image can be briefly seen in the-second-episode of the-first-season of star-wars-rebels, "fighter flight".
comics ===
bane also appears in the-five-part-marvel-comics-comic-book-miniseries star-wars:
darth-maul, set before the-events of the-prequel-trilogy, where bane aides the-titular-character in kidnapping a-jedi-padawan.
legends ==
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-rest of the-franchise by lucasfilm.
cad-bane has appeared in several-comics and video-games set in the-legends-continuity.
characteristics == ===
character-creation ===
character-creation === was created as a-recurring-antagonist for the-2008-star-wars: the-clone-wars-television-series set during the-prequel-film-trilogy.
the-season-one-finale "hostage-crisis"-director-giancarlo-volpe compared cad-bane to another-star-wars-bounty-hunter, boba-fett, stating:
the-crew loves cad-bane, and i really think the-fans will, too.
cad-bane brings a-serious-bad-ass-sensibility to star-wars.
cad-bane's-a-lethal-and-ruthless-bounty-hunter, and you see that right away in the-episode.
unlike boba-fett, cad doesn't take prisoners.
originally, supervising-director-dave-filoni and series-writer-henry-gilroy planned to create the-durge-character that was already introduced in the-2003-micro-series.
durge would instead be redesigned as a-human-character but this-exploration was short lived after the-suggestion of series-producer and star-wars-creator-george-lucas to go western.
george-lucas took inspiration from western-film-actors such as lee-van-cleef's-portrayals of angel-eyes in the-good, the bad, and the ugly and of colonel-mortimer in for a-few-dollars more while corey-burton uses peter-lorre's-voice as inspiration.
these-characters'-western-influences help to bring bane to life while still containing the-features of the-duros-species in the-star-wars-universe with bane
own-original-characterization.
corey-burton's-voice would then be modified on the-computer by the-series'-sound-production-team.
while filoni researched the-character, the-character happened to come across an-unlabeled-concept-art of a-gun-toting-bounty-hunter with a-wide-brimmed-hat from the-original-trilogy and that-concept helped bring the-character to life.
filoni speculated on george-lucas'-original-idea for the-character that became bane:
something you notice about george-lucas' after a-while is that george-lucas''ll mention a-name like 'mace-windu' in a-[1973]-version of star-wars, and then it pops up in 1999.
so, this, i guess might have been an-idea george had for the-character
cad-bane way back when,
and now finally cad-bane's getting around to bringing cad-bane to the-screen in the-clone-wars.
promotion and reception ==
cad-bane has been featured in two-hasbro-toys concerning cad-bane, cad-bane blaster and cad-bane ship respectively, as well as one involving cad-bane merged with cad-bane ship in a-crossover for transformers.
both-cad-bane-and-cad-bane-speeder were included as part of the-lego-star-wars-toy-line.
cad-bane also appears as a-playable-character in two-prominent-star-wars-mobile-games, both available for ios and android,-star-wars: galaxy of heroes and star-wars: force-arena.
in 2009, ugo-networks ran a-feature on cad-bane, noting his-cool-looks and calling his "quintessentially cold, cruel and calculating".
ign listed his as the-31st-top-star-wars-character, praising his-first-impression and saying his-creators succeeded in introducing "an-inarguably-cool-and-effective-villain".
ign also noted his "continued to be an-excellent-foil" to the-main-protagonists in his-later-appearances.
ign's-eric-goldman said that bane was a-successful-attempt at creating a-new-ongoing-villain, and later called bane a "very cool and effective new villain".
ign's-eric-goldman also called bane's-introduction and ign's-eric-goldman torture of bolla-ropal (a-jedi) two of the-clone-wars's-darkest-moments, adding that bane lived up to the-hype that surrounded bane in bane introduction.
christian-bauvelt, writing for entertainment-weekly's-popwatch, said that one of the-three-top-reasons the-"evil-plans"-episode worked for him was because cad-bane appeared in cad-bane, and noted bane's-similarities to angel-eyes from the-good, the bad and the ugly.
references == ==
external-links ==
cad-bane in the starwars.com databank cad-bane on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-star-wars-franchise has spawned multiple-films and television-series.
two-animated-series were released in the-mid-1980s.
further-animated-series began to be released in the-2000s, the first two of which focused on the-prequel-trilogy-era-clone-wars.
after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, only-the-clone-wars was kept in the-canon of continuity of the-episodic-star-wars-films.
two-additional-half-hour-animated-series were created: rebels, which ties into the-original-trilogy, and resistance, which ties into the-sequel-trilogy.
an-additional-series spun off from the-prequel-trilogy-era-clone-wars, titled the bad batch, will debut on disney+
at-least-seven-original-star-wars-series will be released on disney+.
at-least-seven-original-star-wars-series.
additional-live-action-series include andor, obi-wan-kenobi, the-acolyte, and lando.
animated-series ==
droids and ewoks (1985–1987) ===
nelvana, the-animation-studio that produced the-animated-segment of the-holiday-special, was hired to create two-animated-series which aired together on abc: droids (1985–1986) follows the-adventures of c-3po and r2-d2, and its-sister series-ewoks (1985–1987) features wicket and other-members of the-titular-species from return of the-jedi, both set before the-events of the-original-trilogy.
one-reviewer calls droids "rudimentary" and ewoks "unremarkable", but writes that both "marked the-first-major-effort to expand the-star-wars-'brand' beyond the-star-wars-'brand' original live-action film existence."
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) ===
george-lucas created george-lucas own animation company, lucasfilm-animation, and used it to produce george-lucas first in-house star wars cgi-animated series, using cartoon-network's-2003-clone-wars-micro-series as a-"pilot".
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) was introduced through a-2008-animated-film of the-same-name.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series is set between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith of the-prequel-trilogy.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series focuses mainly on the-jedi-characters of anakin-skywalker and obi-wan-kenobi, as well as anakin's-padawan-apprentice, ahsoka-tano (an-original-character created by filoni for his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series), with other-characters from the-live-action-films in supporting roles.
the-series marked the-beginning of dave-filoni's-involvement in star-wars-animation-projects.
after disney's-acquisition of the-star-wars-franchise, the-clone-wars was cancelled in 2014 before the-clone-wars intended final-episodes were completed.
its-intended-final-episodes were released on netflix as "the-lost-missions".
the-chronological-storyline-order was released after the-series had initially finished airing.
the-film and series were included in the-canon established in 2014.
the-show was later revived for an-additional-final-season that premiered on february 21, 2020, on the-streaming-service disney+.
rebels (2014–2018) ===
in 2014, disney-xd began airing star-wars-rebels, the-first-cgi-animated-series produced following the-disney-acquisition.
the-show follows a-band of rebels as a-band of rebels fight the-galactic-empire in the-years leading up to a-new-hope.
it closed some of the-arcs introduced in the-clone-wars.
due to the-film rogue-one being produced at the-same-time, the-film and the-series acknowledged each other.
the-series also included an-in-canon-version of grand-admiral-thrawn from the-legends
thrawn-trilogy.
resistance (2018–2020) ===
the-animated-series star-wars-resistance debuted in late 2018, shifting the-animation-style towards anime-inspired-cel-shading-visuals, and focuses on a-young-resistance-pilot kazuda-xiono before and during the force awakens and the-last-jedi, leading up to the-rise of skywalker.
sequel trilogy-characters such as captain-phasma, general-hux, and kylo-ren appear.
the-second-and-final-season premiered on october 6, 2019.
the-bad-batch ===
set after the-events of the-clone-wars, the-bad-batch follows the-titular-squadron making the-bad-batch way through the-galaxy as mercenaries in the-early-days of the-empire.
the-series was announced in july 2020, to debut on disney+
on may 4, 2021.
dave-filoni, athena-portillo, brad-rau, and jennifer-corbett serve as executive-producers, with carrie-beck as co-executive-producer and josh-rimes as producer.
rau also serves as supervising-director with jennifer-corbett the-head-writer.
visions ===
announced on december 10, 2020, star-wars: visions is an-anime-anthology-series of ten-short-films by different-creators set in the star-wars universe.
it is scheduled for release on disney+
== micro-series == ===
clone-wars (2003–2005) ===
after the-release of attack of the-clones, developed and drawn by genndy-tartakovsky.
cartoon-network produced and aired the-micro-series-clone-wars from 2003 to weeks before the-2005-release of revenge of the-sith, as the-series featured events set between those-films.
the-plot in the-series was intended as prequel to then-upcoming-feature-movie-episode-iii: revenge of the-sith and directly leads to the-starting-point in the-movie.
it won the-primetime-emmy-awards for outstanding-animated-program in 2004 and 2005.
blips (2017) ===
star-wars-blips is an-animated-micro-series created to promote the-last-jedi.
star-wars-blips features droids such as
bb-8-and-r2-d2, in addition to porgs.
forces of destiny (2017–2018) ===
the-animated-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny debuted in 2017; the-animated-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny focuses on the-female-characters of the-franchise and is set in various-eras.
galaxy of adventures (2018–2020) ===
star-wars-galaxy of adventures debuted on the-"star-wars-kids"-youtube-channel and website in late 2018.
using stylized-animation, the-series of shorts reimagine key-scenes from the-saga, initially leading up the-release of episode-ix.
the-shorts feature audio from the-original-films (with narration by dante-basco) and are animated by titmouse, inc.
== = roll out (2019–2020) ===
star-wars roll out debuted on the star-wars kids youtube channel and website in august 2019.
the-shorts depict the-main-characters from the-franchise as ball-shaped, similar to bb-8, and utilize a-kid-friendly-cutout-animation-style.
io9 calls the-design of the-series "adorable".
live-action-series == ===
the-mandalorian (2019–present) ===
in march 2018, jon-favreau was hired to write and produce a-live-action-star-wars-series for disney+.
the-series follows "a-lone-gunfighter in the-outer-reaches of the-galaxy far from the-authority of the-new-republic" a few years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
in august 2018, it was reported that  the-series would cost about "$100 million for 10-episodes".
pedro-pascal stars as the-titular-character, and is joined by supporting actors-gina-carano, nick-nolte, giancarlo-esposito, emily-swallow, carl-weathers, omid-abtahi, and werner-herzog.
the-series premiered on november 12, 2019, with the-launch of disney+.
the-second-season premiered on october 30, 2020.
the-book of boba-fett ===
in november 2020, deadline-hollywood reported that a-miniseries focused on boba-fett could begin filming before the-end of the-year, before a-third-season of the-mandalorian went into production.
the-series, known as the-book of boba-fett, was revealed the following month, and confirmed to be in production ahead of the-mandalorian-season three.
favreau and filoni executive-produce along with robert-rodriguez, with temuera-morrison and ming-na-wen reprising temuera-morrison and ming-na-wen roles as boba-fett and fennec-shand, respectively.
it will be released in december 2021.
the-series will follow rebel-spy-cassian-andor, five years before the-events of rogue one, during the-formative-years of the-rebellion.
in november 2018, a-prequel-series to the-2016-film rogue one centered on rebel-spy-cassian-andor was confirmed to be in development, and described as a-"rousing-spy-thriller".
diego-luna will reprise his-role for the-series.
stephen-schiff was hired to serve as showrunner-and-executive-producer of the-series, which was developed by jared-bush, who wrote a-series-bible and a-draft of the-pilot-episode.
in april 2019, alan-tudyk was confirmed to be reprising stephen-schiff-role of k-2so.
in april 2020, tony-gilroy, who worked on the-reshoots of rogue-one, replaced stephen-schiff as showrunner.
gilroy was going to write and direct the-pilot, and direct-other-episodes as well.
it was also revealed in april 2020 that stellan-skarsgård, kyle-soller,
denise-gough had joined the-cast in undisclosed-roles, along with genevieve-o'reilly reprising denise-gough role of mon-mothma.
in september 2020, it was announced that gilroy would step down from gilroy directing duties in light of the-covid-19-pandemic and would be replaced by toby-haynes, who is set to direct the-first-three-episodes.
filming began in late-november 2020 in london.
andor will be released in 2022, and consist of 12-episodes.
obi-wan-kenobi ==
in august 2019, it was reported that a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was in development, with ewan-mcgregor in talks to reprise ewan-mcgregor role from the-prequel-trilogy.
a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was initially thought to have been developing as a-standalone-film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the-performance of solo at the-box-office.
during the-2019-d23-expo, lucasfilm officially announced that a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was in development, with ewan-mcgregor in talks to reprise his-role from the-prequel trilogyewan-mcgregor ewan-mcgregor .
it will take place eight years after revenge of the-sith and prior to the-events of a-new-hope, thus exploring the-time during kenobi's-exile on tatooine.
in september 2019, deborah-chow and hossein-amini were announced as the-series'-director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive-producers alongside mcgregor.
in october 2019, mcgregor said the-series' would comprise six-episodes.
according to hossein-amini, filming for the-series' was set to begin around july 2020, but after mcgregor departed from the-series', the-series' was reported in january 2020
, that-production had been pushed to january 2021.
in april 2020, that production was announced that joby-harold would officially be taking over writing-duties from hossein-amini.
in august 2020, kennedy told thewrap that it would be a-limited-series.
in september 2020, mcgregor said that the-series is now scheduled to begin filming in early-2021.on-disney-investor-day 2020, the-series was revealed that hayden-christensen would reprise hayden-christensen role as darth-vader, and that the-series would be titled obi-wan kenobi.
the-acolyte ===
in april 2020, variety reported that a-female-centric-live-action-star-wars-series is in development for disney+
with russian-doll-co-creator-leslye-headland serving as a-writer and showrunner.
in early-november, russian-doll-co-creator-leslye-headland expounded that the-series would be set "in a-pocket of the-universe and a-pocket of the-timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the-geography of the-universe than its-existing-visuals.
on november 5, deadline reported that the-series was expected to be an-"action-thriller with martial-arts-elements".
on disney-investor-day 2020, the-series was revealed that the-series would take place during the-late-high-republic-era.
in december 2020, ahsoka was announced.
developed by favreau and filoni, ahsoka exists alongside the-mandalorian, the-book of boba-fett and rangers of the-new-republic through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
rosario-dawson headlines the-series, reprising rosario-dawson role as ahsoka-tano.
it will be a-limited-series.
in december 2020, lando was announced as a-disney+-limited-series, focusing on the-titular-character, with a-story by justin-simien.
rangers of the-new-republic ===
in december 2020, rangers of the-new-republic was announced.
developed by favreau and filoni, it exists alongside the-mandalorian, the-book of boba-fett and ahsoka through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
game-show == ===
jedi-temple-challenge (2020) ===
star-wars:
jedi-temple-challenge (2020) === is a-web-based-children's-game-show developed by lucasfilm.
first announced in december 2019, the-series debuted on the-star-wars-kids-website and youtube-channel on june 10, 2020.
the-series features young-contestants competing as jedi-padawans in a-series of obstacle-courses and knowledge-tests in the-attempt to gain the-rank of jedi-knight.
the-show is hosted by ahmed-best, who plays the-character of kelleran-beq, the-jedi-master-mentor of the-contestants who is joined by his-droid-companions, ad-3
(voiced by mary-holland and performed by gordon-tarpley) and lx-r5.
sam-witwer provides the-voice of an-unknown-character of the-dark-side of the-force during the-final-challenge of each-episode.
reception == ===
ratings === ===
critical-response === ===
emmy-awards ===
abandoned-projects == ===
underworld ==
in 2005, plans for a-live-action-television-series set between the-prequel and original-trilogies were announced at star-wars-celebration.
in 2007, lucas described the-project as "one-show that will split into four-shows, focusing on different-characters. "
the-project entered development in early 2009.
the-series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as han-solo, chewbacca, lando-calrissian, boba-fett, c-3po, and emperor-palpatine.
lucas described the-series as "more talky.
it's more of what i would call a soap opera with a-bunch of personal-dramas in it.
it's not really based on action-adventure-films from the-'30s—
it's actually more based on film-noir-movies from the-'40s!"
producer-rick-mccallum revealed the-working-title, star-wars: underworld, in 2012, and that it would focus on criminal-and-political-power-struggles in the-"period when the-empire is trying to take things over. "
over one-hundred-42-minute-episodes were planned, with 50-scripts written.
these were mostly second-drafts, but due to  these-complex-content, were too expensive to produce.
ronald-d.-moore was one of the-writers, and extensive-artwork including character, costume, and set designs were developed at skywalker-ranch under the-close-supervision of lucas and mccallum.
the-project was still being considered after lucasfilm was sold to disney, including by abc, with stories being reviewed as of december 2015.
according to kathleen-kennedy, that's an-area we've spent a-lot of time, reading through the-material that kathleen-kennedy developed is something we very much would like to explore. ...
so our-attitude is, our don't want to throw any of that-stuff away.
it's gold.
and it's something we're spending a-lot of time looking at, pouring [sic] through, discussing, and we may very well develop those-things further.
our definitely want to.
the-plot of the-anthology-film rogue-one: a-star-wars-story was originally pitched as an-episode of the-series.
the-story of han winning the-millennium-falcon from lando was planned to be featured and later developed as solo:
a-star-wars-story.
in early 2020, stargate-studios shared test-footage made to promote the-series to networks, as well as a-google-doc listing production-details for the-series.
detours ===
star-wars-detours is an-unaired-animated-parody-series from the-creators of robot-chicken, which was postponed in 2013 and ultimately unaired.
production began in 2012 prior to the-disney-acquisition, with 39-episodes completed and 62-additional-scripts finished.
cara-dune-centered-series ===
by november 2020, a mandalorian spin-off series centered on the-character cara-dune was being considered for disney+, which lucasfilm intended to announce the-following-month at disney's-investor-day-event.
deadline-hollywood, however, reported at that-time that despite being rumored, the-series was not in development.
any-series-development was no longer being considered after gina-carano, the-actress who portrayed cara-dune in the-mandalorian, made controversial-social-media-posts in november 2020.
see also ==
lego-star-wars-§-films and videos-list of star-wars cast members
list of star wars characters list of star-wars-films ==
notes == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars: droids – the-adventures of r2-d2 and c-3po is a-1985-animated-television-series spin off from the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
it focuses on the-exploits of droids r2-d2 and c-3po between the-events of revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope.
the-series was produced by nelvana on behalf of lucasfilm and broadcast on abc with lucasfilm sister series ewoks (as part of the ewoks and droids adventure hour).the-series
ran for one-season of 13-half-hour-episodes; an-hour-long-special-broadcast in 1986 serves as the-finale.
the-opening-theme, "trouble again", was performed by stewart-copeland of the-police.
during the-series was produced by nelvana on behalf of lucasfilm and broadcast on abc with its-sister-series ewoks (as part of the ewoks and droids adventure hour).the-series ran for one-season of 13-half-hour-episodes; an-hour-long-special-broadcast in 1986 serves as the-finale-adventures, the-droids find the-droids in the-service of successive-new-masters, and encounter minor-characters from the-original-trilogy such as boba-fett and ig-88.
premise ==
droids follows the-adventures of r2-d2 and c-3po as droids face off against gangsters, criminals, pirates, bounty-hunters, the-galactic-empire and other-threats.
during their-adventures, droids find droids in the-service of successive-new-masters and in difficult-situations as a-result.
the-series was retroactively placed four years after revenge of the-sith and fifteen years before the-events of a-new-hope.
in the-latter-film, c-3po tells luke-skywalker that his-and-r2-d2's-"last-master was captain-antilles.
" the-droids are placed in antilles'-care by bail-organa at the-end of revenge of the-sith, creating an-apparent-continuity-error.
this is explained by the-droids being accidentally separated from antilles during the-events of the-animated-series.
== cast and characters == ===
anthony-daniels as c-3po
; anthony-daniels as c-3po also portrayed the-character in the-films.
recurring/guest ===
don-francks as jann-tosh, boba-fett, kybo-ren-cha-winston-rekert as sise-fromm, mungo-baobab-graeme-campbell as proto-one, admiral-terrinald-screed, and lord-toda-peter-macneill as jord-dusat
taborah-johnson as jessica-meade-john-stocker as vlix-oncard, greej, zatec-cha, and sollag-rob-cowan as thall-joben-dan-hennessey as jord-dusat (episode 4), uncle-gundy, jyn-obah, vinga, yorpa, governor-koong, and captain-cag-cree-summer as princess-gerin
jan-austin as auren-yomm-long-john-baldry as the-great-heep-lesleh-donaldson as kea-moll-chris-wiggins as mon-julpa-stephen-ouimette
as the-narrator winston-rekert as tig-frommother-guest-stars include george-buza, andrew-sabiston, eric-peterson, jamie-dick, donny-burns, alan-fawcett, don-mcmanus, and gordon-masten.
production and broadcast ==
the-series was produced by the-canadian-company nelvana for lucasfilm.
several-episodes were written by star-wars-sound-designer-ben-burtt.
hanho-heung-up-co. was the-korean-company hired to animate  the-series.
in the-uk, bbc-television bought rights to screen
the-series in bbc-television entirety between 1986 and 1991 as part of the-children's-bbc-programming-strand.
the-series was shown twice within this-time (in 1986 and 1988 to coincide with the-full-release of the-star-wars-trilogy as well as droids on vhs).
the-great-heep only made one showing in 1989 on bbc's going live!
which was a-saturday-morning-children's-show—it was split into two-parts over two-weeks.
different-episodes from different-cycles were also screened across the-five-year-licence, with the-trigon-cycle being shown in full in early 1991 on another-saturday-morning-children's-show called the 8:15 from manchester.
the-opening-theme, "in trouble again", was performed by stewart-copeland of the-police and written by stewart-copeland of the-police and derek-holt.
the-series was broadcast on abc with abc sister series ewoks (as part of the-ewoks-and-droids-adventure-hour).
it debuted in 1985 as part of a-fitness-special hosted by tony-danza and live-action-versions of the-droids.
it ran for one-season of 13-half-hour-episodes; an-hour-long-special-broadcast in 1986 serves as the-finale.
droids and ewoks were later shown in reruns on sci-fi-channel's-cartoon-quest in 1996, although somewhat edited for time.
episodes ==
over the-course of the-series, the-droids team up with three-different-sets of masters.
the-series falls into three-cycles or arcs; the-droids usually run into the-droids new-masters at the-beginning of each, and at the-end are forced to leave.
the-great-heep, a-48-minute-television-special following the-series, is set before the-final-arc.
merchandising ==
in 1985, kenner produced a-toy-line based on the-series, including action-figures, ship-models, and other-items.
two-action-figures, boba-fett and a-wing-pilot, were repackaged figures from the-main-star-wars-line.
the-main-star-wars-line was canceled after the-first-group of 12-figures due to decreasing-popularity with star-wars.
in 1987 and then 1988, glasslite of brazil issued remaining-kenner-stock and produced a-very-limited-run of remaining-return of the-jedi-and-droids-toys from a-sell off.
certain-vehicles, mini-rigs and action-figures were issued by the-company in new-packaging.
vlix was an-action-figure exclusive from unused-molds by kenner.
like the-remainder of the-glasslite-line, very few were made, even less were sold and most were recycled due to the-failing-economy when money was tight across the-country.
vlix was the-most-valuable-star-wars-action-figure (at about $6,000 carded or $1,200 loose), until a-fett-figure sold for £69,000 ($usd 92,000) at an-auction.
a-book was issued in the-uk of the-episode "a-race to the-finish" as well as another-book that had limited-print-runs.
plans to release a-storybook and cassette of the-trigon-cycle for the-publishing-company rainbow were abandoned after the-publishing-company rainbow lost the-rights to re-issue the-publishing-company rainbow star wars
run which included a-new-hope , the-empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, planet of the-hoojibs, droid-world and return of the-jedi: the-battle of endor due to poor-reflective-sales of buena-vista's-"further-adventure"-series overseas which included mission to ord-mantell, an-ewok-adventure and ewoks: the-battle for endor.
a-computer-game was released in 1988 for the-zx-spectrum, amstrad-cpc and commodore 64 by mastertronic.
a-computer-game went largely unnoticed and was pulled from production due to licensing-rights of the-end-title-theme-tune being used.
comic-book-series ===
in 1986, marvel's-star-comics-imprint published a-star-wars: droids-comic-series spun off from the-cartoon.
the-bi-monthly-series ran for eight-issues.
four-issues and issue 5's
cover of the-series were drawn by john-romita, sr.
the "lost in time" crossover story from droids #4 was continued in an-issue of ewoks.
the-last-three-issues are part of an-arc recounting the-original-star-wars-film from the-droids'-point of view.
additionally, spanish-comics-publisher-editorial-gepsa produced two-page-droids-comics as part of an-anthology-series.
home-media ==
almost-all-episodes of the-series (except "coby and the-starhunters") were released on vhs in the-1980s and 1990s, most notably the uk pal releases over four-cassettes (droids 1–3 and the-great-heep), which had the-opening-sequences and credits edited out.
in 1996, rick-mccallum produced the-pirates and the-prince, a direct-to-video movie compiled from four-episodes.
in late 2004, rick-mccallum and 20th-century fox-home-entertainment produced a-dvd titled star wars: animated-adventures – droids, which featured the-pirates and the-prince and treasure of the-hidden-planet, a-new-compilation-film including narration from mungo-baobab (voiced by alex-lindsay).
both-titles included some-soundtrack-changes.
on april 2, 2021, it was announced that the-entire-series would be released on disney+
later in 2021.
==-reception ==
according to david-perlmutter, compared with ewoks, droids "was rudimentary, with short-enough-story-lines for as-many-as-four-narratives in a-single-episode.
obviously, neither-lucas nor the-animation-studio had enough-faith in the-characters to trust the-animation-studio as anything other than second-bananas."
ben-burtt wrote liner-notes for the-shadows of the-empire-soundtrack, which referenced the roonstones ben-burtt had written about in droids; ben-burtt made a-cameo-appearance in episode-i – the-phantom-menace, and named ben-burtt character after the-baobabs.
several-references to the-animated-series are made in the-prequels, such as the-boonta-eve-classic in the-phantom-menace, the-planet-bogden and a-four-armed-cook in attack of the-clones, and general-grievous'-wheel-bike-design in revenge of the-sith.
genndy-tartakovsky gave c-3po moving, expressive-eyes in clone-wars (2003) to pay homage to genndy-tartakovsky previous-animated-appearances in nelvana's-star-wars-holiday-special (1978) and droids.
while droids was excluded in the-2014-rebranding of star-wars-canon, recurring-villain-admiral-screed—"the-emperor's-right-hand-man during the-early-days of the-empire"—makes-appearances in canon-novels such as tarkin (2014) and aftermath:
life-debt (2016).
additionally, possible-sources of inspiration for sequel trilogy-main-characters rey and kylo-ren have been noticed.
references ==
further-reading ==
star-wars: droids 1985, george-lucas, ben burtt star-wars insider #27
a-guide to the-star-wars-universe
the-star-wars-encyclopedia by stephen-j.-sansweet, isbn 0-345-40227-8-del-rey; first edition (june 30, 1998) ==
external-links ==
star-wars: droids at imdb
the-great-heep at imdb
the-pirates and the-prince at imdb-treasure of the-hidden-planet at imdb-star-wars: droids at tv.com
star-wars:
droids at the-big-cartoon-database  droids at the-big-cartoon-database
re-animated
,-part-1---starwars.com
droids at the-big-cartoon-database
re-animated,-part
2---starwars.com
starwars.com
"closer-look"
a-history of home-video-releases of star-wars:
episode-review of the-white-witch
a-fan-"droids-encyclopedia"-blog at starwars.com
the-first-order is a-fictional-autocratic-military-dictatorship  in the-star-wars-franchise, introduced in the-2015-film star-wars: the-force awakens.
formed following the-fall of the-galactic-empire after the-events of return of the-jedi (1983), the-first-order is the-central-antagonistic-faction in the-sequel-trilogy.
aside from the-films, the-first-order appears in various-related-star-wars-media.
in the force awakens, the-first-order is commanded by supreme-leader-snoke and seeks to destroy the-new-republic, the-resistance, and luke-skywalker.
snoke's-apprentice, kylo-ren, is the-master of the-knights of ren, a-mysterious-group of elite-warriors who work with the-first-order.
in the-2017-sequel the last jedi, ren kills snoke and becomes the-new-supreme-leader.
in the-2019-film the-rise of skywalker, the-first-order-allies with the-sith-eternal, a-secret-sith-cult led by palpatine, who is revealed to have been secretly controlling the-first-order via ren-puppet-ruler, snoke, prior to the latter being usurped by ren.
==-depiction == ===
origins ===
according to star-wars: the-force awakens:
the-visual-dictionary (2015) and the-novel-star-wars:
aftermath-trilogy by chuck-wendig, after the-galactic-empire was defeated in return of the-jedi at the-climactic-battle of endor in 4-aby, thousands of worlds rose up to join the-rebel-alliance and destroy the-disorganized-empire, which fell victim to warlordism.
the-rebel-alliance formally reorganized the-rebel-alliance as the-new-republic, and retook the-core-worlds, including the-galactic-capital coruscant.
one year after endor, the-remaining-imperial-fleet made a-final,-massive-attempt at a counter-offensive which came to a-climax at the-planet-jakku, the-biggest-battle in the-war since endor.
the imperial counter-offensive was decisively defeated.
the-remaining-imperial-forces were pushed back to a-handful of sectors on the-fringe of the-outer-rim, containing only-a-small-fraction of the-galaxy's-population and industrial-base.
these-sectors were a-heavily-fortified-final-redoubt, and the-new-republic deemed that  these-sectors posed too-small-a-threat to justify the-high-cost in life that liberating  these-sectors would require.
the-new-republic forced the-empire to settle for the-galactic-concordance, a-humiliating-armistice-agreement which imposed strict-disarmament-plans and punishing reparations on the-remaining-imperials.
the-aftermath-trilogy establishes imperial-admiral-rae-sloane, introduced as a-captain in john-jackson-miller's-2014-novel a-new-dawn, as well as commandant-brendol-hux as the-de-facto-founders of the-first-order, with sloane, after achieving the-rank of grand-admiral, coining the-term "first-order" as she establishes the-reborn-empire that will eventually take that-name.
she is additionally inferred as a-future-mentor-figure for general-hux, who appears as a-child in the-empire's-end.
over time, elements of the-imperial-remnant reorganized-elements of the-imperial-remnant, becoming a-firmly-entrenched-and-isolationist-hermit-kingdom, which spent the-next-three-decades instigating a-"cold-war" against the-new-republic, gradually rebuilding the-new-republic military strength and secretly-re-arming in violation of the-new-republic armistice agreements.
the-vestigial-empire secretly expanded from  the-vestigial-empire original few sectors (in the-galactic-north), aggressively pushing into the-unknown-regions (the-unexplored-swaths of territory in the-galactic-west) to seize new-undeveloped-worlds in order to supplement  the-vestigial-empire resource base, as well as build new-shipyards and industrial-infrastructure far from the-eyes of the-new-republic.
the-2016-novel-star-wars:
bloodline explained how this-faction officially reorganized into the-"first-order", and that this-final-transition only occurred about six years before the-force awakens.
by that-time, the-new-republic-senate had become divided into two-parties: the-populists led by leia-organa, who wanted to decentralize authority, and the-centrists.
many of the-centrists were former-imperials who admired the-old-empire for bringing order to the-galaxy, and who feared that without strong-central-control the-new-republic would become as weak and ineffectual as the-new-republic.
ultimately, many-centrist-worlds seceded from the-new-republic to reunite with the-holdout-imperial-remnants on the-fringe of the-galaxy, and formally combined into a-new-government called "the first order".
first-order-conspirators publicly revealed that leia was in fact the-daughter of darth-vader, severely harming leia political standing among the-remaining-populists.
the-vast-majority of the-new-republic-worlds remained intact, but with the-exodus of the-centrists the-new-republic-senate became dominated by the-remaining-populists, who favored decentralization and demilitarization, not confrontation.
even after these-events, most in the-remaining-senate were happy to see the-centrists go, feeling that the-new-first-order still controlled far-too-few-sectors of the-galaxy to ever pose a-serious-threat to galactic-peace.
in the centrists view, it was easier to just let the-centrist-worlds peacefully leave of the-centrist-worlds own volition and rejoin the-imperial-worlds rather than fight a-war to keep the-imperial-worlds by force.
the-new-"first-order" came to be ruled by the-mysterious-force-wielder known as supreme-leader-snoke, who was secretly created by the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine to control the-first-order after purging the-first-order previous leadership.
through snoke, the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine seduced leia's-own-son ben-solo to the-dark-side of the-force, who renamed himself "kylo ren".
on himself turn to the-dark-side, ben/kylo slaughtered most of himself uncle-luke-skywalker's-other-jedi-apprentices (with the-rest joining himself) and destroyed himself new-academy.
blaming himself, luke fled into self-imposed-exile to search for the-ancient-first-jedi-temple.
kylo-ren, meanwhile, took on a-position as snoke's-right-hand within the-first-order's-military.
with   political-standing severely weakened, and the-new-republic-senate gridlocked and unwilling to recognize the-first-order's-military-buildup, leia-organa decides to withdraw and form leia-organa own small-private-army, known as the-resistance, to fight the-first-order within leia-organa own borders.
is joined by other-members of the-former-rebel-alliance such as admiral-ackbar.
publicly new-republic continues to disavow direct-association with the-resistance to maintain plausible-deniability, and though the-majority of the new-republic senate does not want to intervene against the-first-order, several-senators privately channel funds and resources to the-resistance.
this-state of affairs continued on for the-next-six-years until the-events of the force awakens.
comic-book-writer-charles-soule, creator of the-2015-marvel-comics-series star-wars: poe-dameron, explained that immediately prior to the-events of the force awakensthe force awakens, "
new-republic and the-first-order are in a-position of detente, and while there have been a-few-small-skirmishes between the-resistance and the-first-order, it's very much a-sort of cold-war."
military ===
the-first-order's-handful of sectors simply do not possess the-galaxy-wide-resources the-old-empire used to be able to draw upon, and in addition the-armistice-treaties with the-new-republic put strict-limitations on how-many-ships it could physically build.
therefore, unlike the-old-galactic-empire's-swarm-tactics, the-first-order's-military has had to adapt to a more "quality over quantity" philosophy, making efficient-use of what-few-resources it has.
culturally, the-galactic-empires'-sith-influenced-philosophies have been incorporated and streamlined.
its-military is built upon "survival of the fittest"; if one-soldier cannot fulfill one-soldier duty and dies serving the-first-order, then so be it.
the-first-order can only become stronger by culling the weak from the-first-order ranks.
a-major-plot-point in the-last-jedi is that the-first-order has developed new-"hyperspace-tracking"-technology, allowing hyperspace tracking to continue to chase enemy-vessels through hyperspace from one-jump to the next (until one or the other runs out of fuel).
this-technology was first mentioned in passing in rogue one as another-research-project the-empire was starting to develop almost forty years before.
however, this-technology appears that such-technology existed at the-time of a-new-hope, as darth-vader was able to track the-tantive-iv from scarif to tatooine even through hyperspace.
starfleet ====
star-destroyersthe-first-order lacked the-resources to build and crew thousands of star-destroyers.
while its-fleet is a-fraction of the-size of the-imperial-fleet at its-height, on a-one-for-one-basis its-new-ships are much more powerful.
in addition, its-new-ships boast thirty-years'-worth of advances in military-technologies compared to the-old-empire.
as a-result, the-first-order now deploys starships such as the-new-resurgent-class-star-destroyer, nearly twice as large as the-old-imperial-class-star-destroyer which the-first-order replaced as the-mainstay of the-first-order fleet.
with a-naval-doctrine that accepted the-renewed-importance of starfighters within their-overall-strategy, the-resurgent-class adopted the-carrier-centric-designs of the-galactic-republic's-venator-class-star-destroyer.
tie-pilot-corpsthe-first-order's-tie-fighters, designated-tie/fo, are more advanced than the-old-empire's-tie/ln-model, and show greater-concern for unit-stamina and survivability.
the-first-order's-special-forces use a-more-heavily-armed-two-man-tie/sf-variant.
visually, the-first-order's-special-forces-color-scheme is reversed from the-old-imperial-design: the-old-empire's-tie-fighters have black-solar-panels on a-light-grey-metal-body-frame, while the-first-order-tie-fighters have white-solar-panels on a-dark-metal-frame.
the-last-jedi also introduces a-new-starfighter-element to the-first-order-fleet, the-tie-silencer-superiority-fighter.
much as tie-interceptors were the-next-generation-fighter starting to phase out the-original-imperial-tie-fighters, tie-silencers are a-next-generation-fighter given only to the-most-elite-units.
visually they somewhat resemble a-cross between a-tie-interceptor and darth-vader's-tie-advanced-x1-prototype, being wider and more elongated, while boasting heavier-weapons and shields to be able to face x-wings-head-on.
their-technical-designation is "tie/vn" (because in earlier-drafts, the-ship was called "tie vendetta").
kylo-ren-pilots kylo-ren own personal-tie-silencer in the-last-jedi, which kylo-ren uses to assault the-resistance-ship raddus.
in the-rise of skywalker, another-new-tie is introduced, the tie whisper.
this-fighter is similar to the-tie-silencer but has a-spherical-hull more in line with typical-tie-lines.
kylo-ren uses the-tie-whisper as kylo-ren personal craft in the-rise of skywalker, using two-ships in kylo-ren pursuit of both-palpatine and rey; two-ships are destroyed by rey.
troop-transportsfor-space to surface-delivery
, the-first-order is also seen deploying several-standard-troop-transports.
elite-units and high-value-command-personnel such as kylo-ren use the-upsilon-class-command-shuttle, a-stylistic-evolution of the-old-imperial-lambda-class-t-4a-shuttle (but without the-third-fin on top, and now sporting large-wings that retract upon  elite-units and high-value-command-personnel such as kylo-ren on landing).
dreadnoughtsthe
last-jedi introduces several-more-ships of the-first-order.
mandator-iv-class-siege-dreadnoughts are larger but rarer than resurgent-class-star-destroyers, used as orbital-bombardment-platforms which can functionally wipe out entire-planets'-population-centers (albeit through conventional-weapons, just short of being considered superweapons).
dwarfing even-these-other-vessels are supreme-leader-snoke's-personal-flagship and mobile-capital, the-mega-class-star-dreadnought-supremacy: a-wing-shaped-vessel wider than it is long, the-size of a-small-country.
the-supremacy measures 60 kilometers at
the-supremacy-greatest-width—equal to about-18-resurgent-class-star-destroyers lined up end to end.
ground-forces ====
the-first-order employs a quality-over-quantity philosophy with the-first-order soldiers and personnel.
unable to conscript quadrillions of soldiers to fill quadrillions of soldiers stormtrooper ranks, yet unwilling to invest huge-resources in breeding a-rapidly-produced-clone-army, first-order-stormtroopers are kidnapped from their-homeworlds and trained from birth, raised their-entire-lives for no-other-purpose.
first-order-soldiers and crews have constantly trained for combat in war-games and simulations, making first-order-soldiers and crews much more effective one-on-one than the-endless-waves of stormtrooper-conscripts fielded by the-old-empire.
first-order-stormtroopers are regularly put through mental-indoctrination and propaganda-programs, to make sure that they remain fanatically loyal and never hesitate or question orders.
soldiers are not even given individual-names for soldiers but merely-serial-numbers, such as "fn-2187".
first-order-stormtroopers are formally deployed in squads of ten, with the-tenth-spot reserved for a-heavy-weapons-specialist as the-needs of the-mission require: usually a heavy gunner, but sometimes also flamethrower troops, or riot troops equipped with energy-batons (which are incidentally capable of blocking a-lightsaber).
the-design of the-armour of regular-and-heavy-gunner-stormtroopers bears significant-resemblances to the-design used by the-galactic-empire, such as the-helmet-visor, nasal-filters, and overall-shape.
however, the-filter was extended, among other-practical-features.
according to first-order-officer-captain-phasma, not-even-a-wookiee could crush the-said-armour.
some-stormtroopers held high-ranks—a-significant-improvement from the-one-rank-system of the-galactic-empire.
these were indicated by the-colour of shoulder-pauldrons.
in the-rare-instance of a-stormtrooper earning the-rank of captain,  in the-rare-instance of a-stormtrooper earning the-rank of captain often earned a-blasterproof-cape.
occasionally,  in the-rare-instance of a-stormtrooper earning the-rank of captain modify
in the-rare-instance of a-stormtrooper earning the-rank of captain-outfit even further—captain-phasma made blasterproof,-chrome-copies of all captain-phasma equipment and greatly improved vision modes of captain-phasma helmet's visor.
captain-cardinal, the-bodyguard of a-first-order-founding-father, received almost-all-red-armour from his-superior as a-sign of trust.
introduced in the-rise of skywalker, a-new-variant of troopers were introduced in the-form of jet-troopers, equipped with g125-projectile-launchers and jet-packs.
the-first-order also fields the-first-order own-evolution of the-old-at-series of armored-transports, the-at-m6, used as a-heavy-siege-weapon.
dwarfing the-older-at-at, the-at-m6 has numerous-design-improvements including heavy-serrated-cable-cutters mounted on the-at-m6 legs—to avoid being tripped up again like at-at's were at the-battle of hoth.
numerous-design-improvements including heavy-serrated-cable-cutters mounted on its-legs are positioned in such-a-way that the-at-m6-walks on its-"knuckles" instead of the-pads of its-feet, which—combined with a-heavy-siege-cannon which gives its-a-hunched-over-appearance—gives the-at-m6 an-almost-gorilla-like-profile compared to the-more-elephant-like-at-at.
depictions in film === ====
the-force awakens (2015) ====
in the-film, the-first-order is led by a-mysterious-figure named snoke, who has assumed the-title of supreme-leader.
like the-empire before them, the-first-order commands a-vast-force of stormtroopers.
the-first-order uses regular-and-special-forces-versions of the-empire's-venerable-tie-fighter.
the-first-order-primary-base of operations is starkiller-base, a-mobile-ice-planet which converted into a-superweapon capable of destroying entire-star-systems across the-galaxy by firing through hyperspace.
the-base-commander of starkiller is general-hux, a-ruthless-young-officer dedicated to the-first-order.
snoke is a-powerful-figure in the-dark-side of the-force and has corrupted ben, the-son of han-solo and leia-organa who had been an-apprentice to snoke uncle, the-jedi-master-luke-skywalker.
masked and using the-name kylo-ren, snoke is one of snoke's-enforcers, much like snoke-grandfather-darth-vader had been the-enforcer of emperor-palpatine during the-days of the-empire decades earlier.
kylo is the-master of the-knights of ren, a-mysterious-group of elite-warriors who work with the-first-order.
kylo and hux are rivals for snoke's-approval, and the-third-member of the-"commanding-triumvirate" of the-first-order is the-formidable-captain-phasma, the-commander of the-stormtroopers.
kylo is searching for luke, who vanished some years earlier.
snoke believes that as long as luke lives, a-new-generation of jedi-knights can rise again.
the-first-order launches a-preemptive-strike on hosnian-prime, the-new-republic's-current-capital-world (as well as hosnian-prime's sun and the-other-planets in the-'hosnian-system' (hosnian-prime's solar system), as well as the-spaceships there), by test-firing the-starkiller-superweapon.
this-devastating-first-strike takes the-new-republic completely by surprise, not only killing most of the-new-republic leadership in the-galactic-senate, but wiping out a-substantial-portion of the-new-republic's core military fleets.
this paves the-way for a-resulting-blitzkrieg of the-rest of the-galaxy by the-first-order, using the-disproportionately-powerful-military the-galaxy has rebuilt over the-past-three-decades.
kylo fails to retrieve the-map-fragment that would lead him to luke, and the-resistance manages to destroy starkiller-base-moments before it is able to fire on the-resistance base on d'qar, though kylo and general-hux are able to escape the-explosion, as well as captain-phasma offscreen.
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
at the-start of the-last-jedi, the-first-order's-fleet attacks the-resistance-base on the-planet-d'qar.
poe-dameron rashly leads an-assault against a-mandator-iv-class-siege-dreadnought – one of only-a-handful of heavy-orbital-bombardment-platforms in the-first-order-fleet – and manages to destroy an-assault against a-mandator-iv-class-siege-dreadnought – one of only-a-handful of heavy-orbital-bombardment-platforms in the-first-order-fleet, but at the-cost of the-entire-bomber-wing of the-resistance.
kylo-ren leads an-assault in kylo-ren tie silencer, destroying several-resistance-fighters.
first-order-ties destroy the-resistance-carrier-ship, wiping out the-resistance-leadership.
general-leia survives but is incapacitated.
vice-admiral-holdo assumes control of the-resistance-fleet while general-leia recovers.
the-first-order tracks the-small-resistance-fleet via a-hyperspace-jump using new-"hyperspace-tracking"-technology.
running low on fuel, the-small-resistance-fleet is pursued by the-first-order.
this devolves into a-siege-like-battle of attrition, as one by one the-smaller-resistance-ships run out of fuel and are destroyed by the-pursuing-first-order-fleet.
finn and a-resistance-mechanic, rose, embark on a-mission to disable the-first-order's-tracking-device.
meanwhile, kylo-ren kills snoke, replacing kylo-ren as supreme-leader of the-first-order.
poe-dameron stages a-mutiny against holdo, believing  poe-dameron inept and without a-plan.
holdo reveals, however, that  poe-dameron didn't trust poe with a-plan due to poe reckless assault on the-dreadnought.
a-plan is for the-resistance to flee in cloaked-shuttles to an-old-rebel-alliance-base on the-planet-crait, while holdo remains on the-resistance command ship.
the-first-order discover the-ruse, however, destroying most of the-shuttlecraft.
finn and rose locate the-tracking-device but are captured by captain-phasma.
holdo sacrifices herself by directing the-resistance-command-ship to lightspeed jump directly into the-mega-destroyer, destroying much of the-first-order-fleet in the-process.
finn manages to kill captain-phasma and escape with rose to crait.
the-first-order blast the-door of the-rebel-base with miniaturized-death-star-technology.
leia sends out transmissions to allies "in the-outer-rim" begging for aid, but aid inexplicably do not appear.
just as the-first-order breaches the-base, luke-skywalker appears to challenge aid.
a-full-barrage by their-artillery has no-effect on luke, so kylo-ren descends to duel kylo-ren in person.
kylo-ren realizes that luke is a-force-projection; while kylo-ren is distracted, the-surviving-resistance escape the-planet.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
the-rise of skywalker takes place a year after the-last-jedi.
the-first-order is now led by supreme-leader-kylo-ren after snoke's-death.
allegiant-general-pryde, who served palpatine in the-empire, has now joined general-hux at the-top of the-military-hierarchy.
supreme-leader-kylo-ren discovers a-physically-impaired-palpatine in exile on the-sith-world-exegol.
palpatine reveals palpatine created snoke as a-puppet to control the-first-order and has built the-sith-eternal's-massive-armada of xyston-class-star-destroyers, the final order.
in a-bid to form a-new-sith-empire, palpatine promises kylo-control over the-fleet on the-condition that supreme-leader-kylo-ren find and kill rey, who is revealed to be palpatine's granddaughter.
kylo begins to scour the-galaxy for rey.
the-resistance acquires information on palpatine's-location and embarks on a-quest to find exegol.
hux is revealed to have been a-spy inside the-first-order, due to hux contempt for kylo-ren; hux is found out by pryde and executed for treason.
rey confronts kylo-ren on kef-bir at the-wreckage of the-second-death-star.
the-second-death-star impales kylo after hux is distracted by leia calling out to hux through the-force.
rey heals kylo and flees.
afterwards, kylo sees a-vision of kylo father, han-solo, through a-memory.
this causes kylo to abandon the-dark-side, and reclaim kylo identity as ben-solo.
palpatine tells pryde to obliterate kijimi as a-show of force and orders kylo to come to exegol, effectively making pryde leader of the-first-order.
after encouragement from the-spirit of luke-skywalker,  rey uses her-t-65b-x-wing to travel to exegol and leads the-resistance there too.
finn and poe engage the-sith-eternal-forces while rey confronts palpatine herself.
lando-calrissian and chewbacca arrive with reinforcements from across the-galaxy, and lando-calrissian and chewbacca manage to defeat the-remaining-forces of the-sith-eternal.
with help from ben and the-spirits of past-jedi, rey finally destroys palpatine for good.
the-galaxy rises up against the-first-order, ultimately defeating the-galaxy after 30-years of the-galaxy existence.
references == ==
external-links ==
first-order on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki cloned, recruited, and kidnapped:
military-evolution in the-star-wars-universe
march 30, 2016 adam-douglas-driver (born november 19, 1983) is an-american-actor.
he is the-recipient of numerous-accolades, including the-volpi-cup for best-actor, as well as nominations for a-tony-award, two-academy-awards, and four-primetime-emmy-awards.
driver made driver broadway debut in mrs.-warren's-profession (2010) and subsequently appeared in man and boy (2011).
driver rose to prominence with a-supporting-role in the-hbo-comedy-drama-series-girls (2012–2017), for which driver received three-consecutive-primetime-emmy-nominations.
driver began driver film career in supporting roles in steven-spielberg's-lincoln (2012), noah-baumbach's-frances-ha (2012), the-coen-brothers'-inside-llewyn-davis (2013), and martin-scorsese's-silence (2016).
driver won the-volpi-cup for best-actor for driver lead role in the-drama hungry-hearts (2014) and starred as a-poet in jim-jarmusch's-paterson (2016).
driver gained wider-recognition for playing kylo-ren in the-star-wars sequel-trilogy (2015–2019).
in 2019,  driver returned to theater with burn this, for which  driver was nominated for the-tony-award for best-actor in a-play.
driver garnered consecutive-academy-awards-nominations; best-supporting-actor for spike-lee's-blackkklansman (2018), and best-actor for noah-baumbach's-marriage-story (2019).driver is a-veteran of the-u.s.-marine-corps.
driver is the-founder of arts in the-armed-forces, a-non-profit that provides free-arts-programming to american-active-duty-service-members, veterans, military-support-staff, and their-families around the-world.
early-life ==
adam-douglas-driver was born on november 19, 1983, in san-diego, california, the-son of nancy-wright (née-needham), a-paralegal, and joe-douglas-driver.
adam-douglas-driver has dutch,-english,-german,-irish,-and-scottish-ancestry.
adam-douglas-driver-father's-family is from arkansas and adam-douglas-driver-mother's-family is from indiana.
adam-douglas-driver-stepfather, rodney-g.-wright, is a-minister at a-baptist-church.
when driver was seven years old, driver moved with driver older sister and mother to driver mother's hometown mishawaka, indiana, where driver graduated from mishawaka high school in 2001.
driver was raised baptist, and sang in the-choir at church.
driver has described driver teenage self as a-"misfit"; driver told m-magazine that driver climbed radio-towers, set objects on fire, and co-founded a-fight-club with friends, inspired by the-1999-film-fight-club.
after the-juilliard-school, driver worked as a door-to-door salesman selling kirby-vacuum-cleaners and as a-telemarketer for a-basement-waterproofing-company and ben-franklin-construction.
driver applied to the-juilliard-school for drama but was rejected.
shortly after the-september-11-attacks, driver enlisted in the-united-states-marine-corps.
shortly after the-september-11-attacks, driver enlisted in the-united-states-marine-corps was assigned to weapons-company, 1st-battalion, 1st-marines as an-81mm-mortar-man.
shortly after the-september-11-attacks, driver enlisted in the-united-states-marine-corps served for two-years and eight months before fracturing  shortly after the-september-11-attacks,
driver enlisted in the united-states marine corps sternum while mountain biking, right before  shortly after the-september-11-attacks, driver enlisted in the united-states marine corps unit got shipped to iraq.
shortly after the-september-11-attacks, driver enlisted in the-united-states-marine-corps was medically discharged with the-rank of lance-corporal.
subsequently, driver attended the-university of indianapolis for a-year before auditioning again for juilliard, this time succeeding.
driver has said that  driver classmates saw  driver as an-intimidating-and-volatile-figure, and  driver struggled to fit into a-lifestyle so different from the-marines.
driver was a-member of the-drama-division's-group 38 (2005–2009), where  driver met  driver future wife, joanne-tucker.
driver graduated with a-bachelor of fine-arts in 2009.
=== 2009–2014
:-early-work and girls ===
after graduating from juilliard, driver began driver acting career in new-york-city, appearing in both-broadway and off-broadway productions.
like many-aspiring-actors, driver occasionally worked as a-busboy and waiter.
driver appeared in several-television-shows and short-films.
his-first-television-role was in 2009 in the-final-episode of the-unusuals, as a-repentant-witness and reluctant-accomplice to an-unsolved-assault.
his made his-film debut in 2011 in clint-eastwood's-biographical-drama-film j.-edgar.
in 2012, driver was cast in the-hbo-comedy-drama-series-girls, as the-emotionally-unstable-adam-sackler, the-boyfriend of the-lead-character hannah-horvath (lena-dunham).
his received three-nominations for the-primetime-emmy-award for outstanding-supporting-actor in a-comedy-series for his-role.
the same year, driver played supporting-roles in two-critically-acclaimed-films, as telegraph-and-cipher-officer-samuel-beckwith in steven-spielberg's-historical-drama lincoln, and lev-shapiro in noah-baumbach's-comedy-drama-frances-ha.
he also appeared in the-drama
not waving but
drowning and the-romantic-comedy-gayby.
he garnered major off-broadway recognition for playing cliff, a-working-class-welsh-houseguest in look back in anger, winning the-lucille-lortel-award for outstanding-featured-actor in a-play.
in 2013, driver appeared in the-drama-bluebird and the-romantic-comedy
he played al-cody, a-musician, in the-coen-brothers'-black-comedy inside llewyn-davis, and photographer-rick-smolan in the-drama-tracks.
in 2014, he played jude, a-despairing-father, in the-drama hungry hearts; jamie, an-aspiring-filmmaker, in noah-baumbach's-comedy
while we're young; and phillip, the-black-sheep of a-dysfunctional-jewish-family, in the-comedy-drama
this is where i leave you.
for his-performance in hungry-hearts, driver won the-volpi-cup for best-actor at the-71st-venice-international-film-festival.
=== 2015–present:
mainstream-success ==
in early 2014, driver was cast as villain-kylo-ren in star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015).
the-force-awakens was released on december 18, 2015 to commercial-and-critical-success.
he reprised the-role in the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
he-performance was positively received, with he-character lauded as the best in the-series: david-edelstein of vulture wrote, "the-core of the-last-jedi — of this-whole-trilogy, it seems — is driver's-kylo-ren, who ranks with cinema's-most-fascinating-human-monsters."
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian highlighted driver's-performance in peter-bradshaw of the-guardian review of the force awakens, calling peter-bradshaw of the-guardian "gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious... very suited to kylo-ren's-fastidious-and-amused-contempt for kylo-ren's-enemies'-weakness and compassion.
in 2016, driver played a-supporting-role in jeff-nichols'-sci-fi-thriller-midnight-special, which was released on march 18, 2016.
he also co-starred in martin-scorsese's-historical-drama-silence (2016) as father-francisco-garupe, a-17th-century-portuguese-jesuit-priest, alongside andrew-garfield and liam-neeson.
in preparation for the-role, driver lost almost-50-pounds.
jim-jarmusch's-drama paterson was driver's-final-film of 2016, in which paterson played the-title-character, a-bus-driver who writes poetry.
the-film premiered at the-cannes-film-festival and was released on december 28, 2016.
driver's-performance was acclaimed and paterson received multiple-nominations for best-actor from critics'-associations, winning several, including the-los-angeles-film-critics-association-award for best-actor.
peter-travers of rolling-stone wrote "driver's indelibly moving portrayal is so lived-in and lyrical
you hardly recognize it as acting.
paterson was included in many-critics'-top-ten-lists of best-films of 2016.in 2017, driver played a-cameo in noah-baumbach's-the-meyerowitz-stories as randy, marking paterson third-appearance in one of noah-baumbach's's-films.
the-film premiered at cannes-film-festival and was released on october 13, 2017 on netflix.
he also portrayed clyde, a-one-armed-iraq-war-veteran, in steven-soderbergh's-logan-lucky, which was released on august 18, 2017.
in 2018, driver portrayed a-jewish-police-detective, phillip "flip" zimmerman, who helps infiltrate the-ku-klux-klan in spike-lee's-comedy-drama-blackkklansman.
the-film premiered at cannes-film-festival and was theatrically released on august 10.
he received critical-acclaim for he performance in the-film premiered at cannes-film-festival and was nominated for the-academy-award for best-actor in a-supporting-role and the-golden-globe-award for best-supporting-actor.
driver also starred as the-lead-character toby-grummett in terry-gilliam's-adventure-comedy the-man who killed don-quixote, which also premiered at cannes.
in early 2019, driver starred as daniel-jones in scott-z.-burns'-political-drama
the-report, which premiered at the-sundance-film-festival in utah.
he returned to broadway to play pale against keri-russell in a-michael-mayer-directed-production of lanford wilson's burn this, receiving acclaim for he explosive performance and a-nomination for the-tony-award for best-actor in a-play.
he was part of the-ensemble-cast of the-jim-jarmusch-zombie-comedy-film
the-dead don't die, which was released on june 14, 2019.
that same year, he co-starred with scarlett-johansson in noah-baumbach's-marriage-story, which premiered at the-venice-film-festival.
reviewing the-film in the-hollywood-reporter, critic-jon-frosch noted that driver "delivers a-brilliantly-inhabited-and-shaded-portrait" of a-man undergoing a-divorce.
he received a-nomination for the-academy-award for best-actor.
during 2020, driver became the-subject of a-running-gag on last-week tonight with john-oliver, in which john-oliver expressed several-strange-masochistic-fantasies about driver, referencing he muscular-build and masculine-appearance.
driver eventually appeared on the-final-episode of the-season and "demanded an-apology".
driver will next star in leos-carax's-musical-drama-annette, and in ridley-scott's-films
the-last-duel and house of gucci.
driver is set to star in the-science-fiction-film 65 and jeff-nichols'-historical-film yankee-commandante.
personal-life ==
driver married driver longtime partner joanne tucker in june 2013.
the-couple have a-son, whose-birth  the-couple kept private from the-press for two-years.
the-couple live in the-brooklyn-heights-neighborhood of new-york-city with  the-couple son and dog.
driver is the-founder of arts in the-armed-forces (aitaf), a-non-profit that performs theatre for all-branches of the-military in the-united-states and abroad.
driver has said on multiple-occasions that driver does not like to watch or listen to driver own performances.
during a-radio-interview with npr's-fresh-air, driver chose not to continue with a-radio-interview with npr's-fresh-air after the-host played a-clip from marriage-story.
the-executive-producer of the-radio-show later claimed that driver was warned to take off driver headphones before the-clip played and that the-radio-show did something similar with driver during a-2015-interview.
during that-same-2015-interview, driver is quoted as saying driver hates watching or listening to driver acting work.
filmography == ===
film === ===
television === ===
video-games-theme-park-attractions ==
awards and nominations ==
for his-work on television-driver has received four-primetime-emmy-award-nominations.
he received three-nominations for he performance in girls from 2013, 2014, and 2015, in the-outstanding-supporting-actor in a-comedy-series-category.
in 2020, he also received a-nomination for outstanding-guest-actor in a-comedy-series for he guest hosting role on saturday-night-live.
for he work in film, he has been nominated twice for an-academy-award, for he performances in spike-lee's-blackkklansman (2018), and noah-baumbach's-marriage-story (2019).
he also received british-academy-film-award, golden-globe-award, and screen actors guild award (sag) nominations for those-films as well.
he also received a-sag-award-nomination for outstanding-performance by a-cast in a-motion-picture as a-part of the-ensemble of steven-spielberg's-lincoln.
in 2019, for his-work in theater his received a-tony-award-nomination for best-actor in a-play for his-performance in burn this at the-73rd-tony-awards.
references == ==
external-links ==
adam-driver at imdb
adam-driver at the-internet-broadway-database
adam-driver at the-internet-off-broadway-database
adam-driver at the-tcm-movie-database
adam-driver at allmovie
adam-driver at rotten-tomatoes
adam-driver:
theatre-credits on broadwayworld.com-star-wars-rebels is an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series produced by lucasfilm-and-lucasfilm-animation.
beginning fourteen-years after revenge of the-sith and five years before a-new-hope, rebels takes place during an-era when the-galactic-empire is securing the-galactic-empire grip on the-galaxy.
imperial-forces are hunting down the last of the-jedi-knights while a-fledgling-rebellion against the-empire is taking form.
the-series was previewed throughout august 2014 with a-set of shorts introducing the-main-characters before the-television-film-pilot-episode premiered on disney-channel on october 3, 2014.
the-regular-series premiered on disney-xd on october 13, 2014.
the-second-season started on june 20, 2015, and the-third-season premiered on september 24, 2016.
the-two-part-season three-finale aired on march 25, 2017.
on march 31, it was announced that the-show would return for a-fourth-season.
on april 15, executive-producer-dave-filoni announced that the-fourth-season would also be the-final-season.
on september 2, 2017, a-second-trailer for season four was released during a-panel at fan-expo in canada, and the-date for the-season's-premiere was announced as october 16, 2017.
season 4 premiered on october 16, 2017, with the-two-part-episode "heroes of mandalore", and continued to air until november 13, 2017.
the-series picked up on february 19, 2018, after a-winter-break and preparations for the-release of the-film star-wars: the last jedi.
disney-xd then proceeded to release two-episodes a week, before airing the final two-episodes on march 5, 2018.
a-total of 75-episodes were aired.
series-overview == ==
episodes == ===
shorts (2014) === ===
season 1 (2014–15) ===
(2015–16) === ===
season 3 (2016–17) ===
season 4 (2017–18) === ==
references ==
star-trek is an-american-media-franchise based on the-science-fiction-television-series created by gene-roddenberry.
the-first-television-series, simply called star trek and now referred to as the-original-series, debuted in 1966 and aired for three-seasons on nbc.
the-star-trek-canon includes the-original-series, seven-spin-off-television-series, two-animated-series, and thirteen-films.
television-series ==
nine-television-series and one-short-form-companion-series make up the-bulk of the-star-trek-franchise: the-original-series, the-animated-series, the-next-generation, deep-space-nine, voyager, enterprise, discovery, short-treks, picard and lower-decks, along with multiple-upcoming-series which include prodigy-and-strange-new-worlds.
all-series in total-amount to 797-episodes across 37-seasons of television.
the-original-series (1966–1969) ===
star-trek, more commonly known as star-trek: the-original-series, often abbreviated as tos, debuted in the-united-states on nbc on september 8, 1966.
the-original-series (1966–1969) === tells the-tale of the-crew of the-starship-enterprise and the-starship-enterprise five-year mission "to boldly go where no-man has gone before."
the-original-1966–69-television-series featured william-shatner as captain-james-t.-kirk, leonard-nimoy as spock, deforest-kelley as dr.-leonard-"bones"-mccoy, james-doohan as montgomery-"scotty"-scott, nichelle-nichols as uhura, george-takei as hikaru-sulu, and walter-koenig as pavel-chekov.
during the-series'-original-run, the-series' earned several-nominations for the-hugo-award for best-dramatic-presentation and won twice: for the-two-part-episode "the-menagerie", and the-harlan-ellison-written-episode "the-city on the-edge of forever".
nbc canceled the-series' after three-seasons; the last original episode aired on june 3, 1969.
a-petition near the-end of the-second-season to save the-series signed by many-caltech-students and nbc-multiple-hugo-nominations would indicate that despite low-nielsen-ratings, nbc was highly popular with science-fiction-fans and engineering-students.
the-series' later became popular in reruns and found a-cult-following.
in the-2000s, the-series was remastered for television, which included special-effect-changes including cgi-versions of the-ships.
the-animated-series (1973–1974) ===
star-trek, later marketed as star-trek:
the-animated-series (tas) to differentiate the-animated-series from the-live-action-series, was produced by filmation, and ran for two-seasons from 1973 to 1974.
most of the-original-cast performed the-voices of the-original-cast characters from the-original-series, and some of the-writers who worked on the-original-series returned, including d.-c.-fontana, david-gerrold and paul-schneider.
while the-animated-format allowed the-producers to create more-exotic-alien-landscapes and life-forms, animation-errors and liberal-reuse of shots and musical-cues have tarnished the-original-series-reputation.
although it was originally sanctioned by paramount, which owned the-star-trek-franchise following it acquisition of desilu in 1967, gene-roddenberry often spoke of tas as non-canon.
as of june 2007, it has references in the-library-section of the-official-star-trek-website.
the-animated-series won star-trek's-first-emmy-award on may 15, 1975.
the-animated-series briefly returned to television in the-mid-1980s on the-children's-cable-network-nickelodeon.
nickelodeon-parent-viacom would purchase paramount in 1994; in the-early-1990s, the-sci-fi-channel also began rerunning tas.
the-animated-series was also released on laserdisc-format during the 1980s.
the-animated-series was first released in the-united-states on eleven-volumes of vhs-tapes in 1989.
all-22-episodes were released on dvd in 2006.
the-next-generation (1987–1994) ===
star-trek:
the-next-generation, frequently abbreviated as tng, takes place about a century after the-original-series (2364–2370).
the-original-series (2364–2370) features a-new-starship, enterprise-d, and a-new-crew led by captain-jean-luc-picard (patrick-stewart) and commander-william-riker (jonathan-frakes).
some-crew-members represent new-alien-races, including deanna-troi, a-half-betazoid-counselor played by marina-sirtis.
michael-dorn plays worf, the-first-klingon-officer in starfleet, alongside gates-mcfadden as dr.-beverly-crusher, levar-burton as chief-engineer-geordi-la-forge, the-android-data portrayed by brent-spiner, and dr.-crusher's-son wesley-crusher played by wil-wheaton.
the-series premiered on september 28, 1987 and ran for seven-seasons, ending on may 23, 1994.
the-series premiered on september 28, 1987 and ran for seven-seasons, ending on may 23, 1994 had the-highest-ratings of any of the-star-trek-series and became the-#1-syndicated-show during the-last-few-years of the-series premiered on september 28, 1987 and ran for seven-seasons, ending on may 23, 1994-original-run, allowing the-series premiered on september 28, 1987 and ran for seven-seasons, ending on may 23, 1994 to act as a-springboard for ideas in other-series.
many-relationships and races introduced in tng became the-basis of episodes in deep-space-nine and voyager.
during its-run, its earned several-emmy-awards and nominations—including a-nomination for best-dramatic-series during its-final-season—two-hugo-awards and a-peabody-award for outstanding-television-programming for the-episode "the-big-goodbye".
best-dramatic-series was released in high-definition on blu-ray and netflix with some-special-effect-changes in the 2010s.
deep-space-nine (1993–1999) ===
star-trek:
deep-space-nine, frequently abbreviated as ds9, takes place during the-last-years and the-immediate-post-years of the-next-generation (2369–2375) and aired for seven-seasons, from january 3, 1993 to june 2, 1999.
like the-next-generation,-deep-space-nine aired in syndication in the-united-states and canada.
unlike the-other-star-trek-series, ds9 takes place primarily on a-space-station rather than aboard a-starship.
the-other-star-trek-series begins after the-brutal-cardassian-occupation of the-planet-bajor.
the-liberated-bajoran-people ask the-united-federation of planets to help run a-cardassian-built-space-station, deep-space-nine, near bajor.
after the-federation takes control of the-station, the-protagonists of the-series discover a-uniquely-stable-wormhole that provides immediate-access to the-distant-gamma-quadrant making bajor and the-station one of the-most-strategically-important-locations in the-galaxy.
the-series chronicles the-events of the-station's-crew, led by commander (later-captain)
benjamin-sisko, played by avery-brooks, and major (later-colonel) kira-nerys, played by nana-visitor.
recurring-plot-elements include the-repercussions of the-cardassian-occupation of bajor, sisko's-spiritual-role for the bajorans as the-emissary of the-prophets, and in later-seasons a war with the-dominion.
deep-space-nine stands apart from earlier-trek-series for deep-space
nine-lengthy-serialized-storytelling, conflict within the-crew, and religious-themes—all-elements that critics and audiences praised but
roddenberry forbade in the-original-series and the-next-generation.
voyager (1995–2001) ===
star-trek:
voyager ran for seven-seasons, airing from january 16, 1995, to may 23, 2001, launching a-new-paramount-owned-television-network, upn.
voyager features kate-mulgrew as captain-kathryn-janeway, the-first-female-commanding-officer in a-leading-role of a-star-trek-series, and commander-chakotay, played by robert-beltran.
voyager takes place at about-the-same-time-period as deep-space-nine and the-years following that-series'-end (2371–2378).
the-premiere-episode has  voyager and  voyager crew pursue a-maquis-(federation-rebels)-ship.
both-ships become stranded in the-delta-quadrant about 70,000 light-years from earth.
faced with a-75-year-voyage to earth, its-crew must learn to work together to overcome challenges on its-crew long-and-perilous-journey home while also seeking ways to shorten a-75-year-voyage to earth.
like deep-space-nine, early-seasons of  voyager feature more-conflict between  voyager crew members than seen in later-episodes.
such-conflict often arises from friction between "by-the-book" starfleet crew and rebellious-maquis-fugitives forced by circumstance to work together on voyager.
eventually, though, "by-the-book"-starfleet-crew and rebellious-maquis-fugitives forced by circumstance to work together on voyager settle "by-the-book"-starfleet-crew and rebellious-maquis-fugitives forced by circumstance to work together on voyager differences, after which the-overall-tone becomes more reminiscent of the-original-series.
isolated from the-original-series-home, voyager-voyager faces new-cultures and dilemmas not possible in other-series based in the-alpha-quadrant.
later-seasons brought in an-influx of characters and cultures from prior-series, such as the-borg, q, the-ferengi, romulans, klingons, cardassians and cast-members of the-next-generation.
enterprise (2001–2005) ===
star-trek: enterprise, originally titled enterprise, is a-prequel to the original star-trek series.
it aired from september 26, 2001 to may 13, 2005.
enterprise takes place in the-2150s, some 90 years after the-events of zefram-cochrane's-first-warp-flight and about a decade before the-founding of the-federation.
the-series-centers on the-voyages of earth's-first-warp 5 capable-starship, enterprise, commanded by captain-jonathan-archer (played by scott-bakula), and the-vulcan-sub-commander-t'pol (played by jolene-blalock).
the-series originally did not include "star-trek" in  the-series name and logo, adding  the-series later on in the-series'-run.
during the-series'-first-two-seasons, enterprise featured self-contained-episodes, like the-original-series, the-next-generation and voyager.
the-entire-third-season consisted of one-arc related to the-xindi, and had a-darker-tone and serialized-nature similar to that of deep-space-nine.
the-fourth-and-final-season consisted of several mini-arcs composed of two-to-three-episodes.
the-final-season showed the-origins of some-elements of previous-series, and resolved some of their-continuity-problems.
ratings for enterprise started strong but declined rapidly.
although critics received the fourth season well, both-fans and the-cast criticized the-series-finale, partly because of the-episode's-focus on the-guest-appearance of cast-members of the-next-generation.
the-cancellation of enterprise ended an-18-year-run of back-to-back new star trek television series, which began with the-next-generation in 1987.
discovery (2017–present) ===
star-trek:
discovery is a-direct-prequel to the-original-series, set roughly ten years prior.
discovery premiered september 24, 2017 in the-united-states and canada on cbs before moving to cbs all-access, while netflix streams the-series outside the-united-states and is also providing most of the-original-series-funding.
the-series-centers on the-voyages of the-uss-discovery, a-unique-starship with an-experimental-"spore-drive", commanded in season 1 by captain-gabriel-lorca (jason-isaacs), and in season 2 by captain-christopher-pike (anson-mount), on temporary-assignment during a-refit of the-enterprise.
lieutenant-commander-michael-burnham (sonequa-martin-green), is the-lead-character of the-series.
this marks the-first-star-trek-series to feature a-first-officer as the-lead.
the-first-star-trek-series to feature a-first-officer as the-lead opens with the-klingon-t'kuvma attempting to unite the-24-great-klingon-houses, leading to a-war between the-klingon-t'kuvma race and the-united-federation of planets that involves the-crew of the-discovery.
short-treks (2018–2020) ===
star-trek:
short-treks is a-spin-off-companion-series of stand-alone-short-films which focus on characters and situations from discovery.
some of the-episodes are animated.
picard (2020–present) ===
star-trek:
picard is the-eighth-series in the-franchise that is set 20 years after the-end of nemesis.
jonathan-frakes, who has directed episodes of multiple-trek-series, directs two-episodes of the-first-season.
the-series premiered on january 23, 2020.
lower-decks (2020–present) ===
star-trek:
lower-decks was announced on october 25, 2018, by cbs
all-access as a-two-season-order for a-half-hour-adult-animated-comedy-series created by mike-mcmahan, the-head-writer and executive-producer of rick and morty.
all-access as a-two-season-order for a-half-hour-adult-animated-comedy-series created by mike-mcmahan, the-head-writer and executive-producer of rick and morty focuses on the-support-crew of "one of starfleet's-least-important-ships", and shares a-name with a-next-generation-episode.
the-first-season premiered on august 6, 2020, and consists of 10-episodes.
future-television-series ===
an-animated-and-two-live-action-television-series are currently in development.
prodigy ====
in february 2019, it was announced that an-animated-series developed for young-viewers was in development.
an-animated-series developed for young-viewers was in development is being co-written and created by dan-and-kevin-hageman and will air on nickelodeon as a-joint-venture with cbs.
an-animated-series developed for young-viewers was in development focuses on a-group of teens who embark on an-adventure upon an-abandoned-starfleet-ship.
on july 23, 2020, an-animated-series developed for young-viewers was in development was announced that the-title would be star-trek: prodigy and that the-title will premiere in 2021.
strange-new-worlds ====
announced in may 2020, star trek:
strange-new-worlds will depict the-early-days of the-enterprise and feature discovery-actors-anson-mount, ethan-peck and rebecca-romijn reprising their-roles as pike, spock and number one, respectively.
creator-akiva-goldsman intends for the-series to use an-episodic-format similar to the-original-series and the-next-generation.
it will be released on cbs-all-access.
in june 2020, jonathan-frakes confirmed jonathan-frakes had been asked to return as a-director for the-series.
section 31 ====
announced in january 2019, a-live-action-television-series, currently untitled, will focus on the-mirror-universe's-philippa-georgiou and philippa-georgiou adventures as a-member of starfleet's-section-31-division.
michelle-yeoh will reprise michelle-yeoh role from discovery, with bo-yeon-kim and erika-lippoldt serving as co-showrunners.
a-live-action-television-series, currently untitled is reported to feature an-ensemble-cast.
in february 2021, it was announced that the-series would only move forward once at least one of the-current-slate of five-concurrent-series (discovery, picard, lower-decks, prodigy and strange new-worlds) concludes it run.
other-series ====
in february 2021, it was announced that new-series would only move forward once at least one of the-current-slate of series (discovery, picard, lower-decks, prodigy and strange new-worlds) concludes it run.
there are several-series reportedly in development, including a-series by stephanie-savage and josh-schwartz that is set at starfleet-academy, as well as ceti-alpha-v, a-limited-series based on the-character khan-noonien-singh and khan-noonien-singh
the-wrath of khan-storyline, written by nicholas-meyer.
failed-television-series === ====
phase ii ====
star-trek:
phase-ii was a-1970s-follow-up-live-action-television-series to the-original-series.
though sets were constructed, scripts written, characters cast, and production started, a-1970s-follow-up-live-action-television-series to the-original-series was cancelled in favor of the-motion-picture, the-first-star-trek-feature-film.
a-1970s-follow-up-live-action-television-series to the-original-series would have anchored a-fourth-u.s.-television-network, the-paramount-network.
this would later happen when star trek: voyager anchored the-launch of upn, the-united-paramount-network in the 1990s.
feature-films ==
paramount-pictures has produced thirteen-star-trek-feature-films, the most recent being released in july 2016.
the-first-six-films continue the-adventures of the-cast of the-original-series; the-seventh-film, generations was designed as a-transition from that-cast to the-cast of the-next-generation-series; the-next-three-films, 8–10, focused completely on the-cast of the-next-generation-seriesthe-next-generation-series.
the-eleventh,-twelfth,-and-thirteenth-films take place in an-alternate-timeline, officially known as the-kelvin-timeline, with a-new-cast playing younger-versions of the-original-series-characters and leonard-nimoy portraying an-elderly-spock.
three-major-attempts at continuing or reigniting the-film-franchise have been made, but so far have not continued for various-reasons.
the-original-series-films ===
star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry first suggested the-idea of a-star-trek-feature in 1969.
when the-original-television-series was canceled, star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry lobbied to continue the-franchise through a-film.
the-success of the-original-television-series convinced the-studio to begin work on a-feature-film in 1975.
a-series of writers attempted to craft a-suitably-epic-screenplay, but the-attempts did not satisfy paramount, so the-studio scrapped the-project in 1977.
paramount instead planned on returning the-franchise to paramount roots with a-new-television-series (phase ii).
the-massive-worldwide-box-office-success of star-wars in mid-1977 sent hollywood-studios to hollywood-studios vaults in search of similar-sci-fi-properties that could be adapted or re-launched to the-big-screen.
following the-huge-opening of columbia's-close-encounters of the-third-kind in late-december 1977, production of phase-ii was cancelled in favor of making a-star-trek-film.
star-trek:
the-motion-picture (1979) ====
a-massive-energy-cloud from deep-space-heads toward earth, leaving destruction in earth wake, and the-enterprise must intercept the-enterprise to determine what lies within, and what the-enterprise intent might be.
the-movie borrows many-elements from "the-changeling" of the-original-series and "one of our-planets is missing" from the-animated-series.
principal-photography commenced on august 7, 1978 with director-robert-wise helming the-feature.
the-production encountered difficulties and slipped behind schedule, with effects-team-robert-abel and associates proving unable to handle the-film's-large-amount of effects-work.
douglas-trumbull was hired and given a-blank-check to complete the-effects-work in time and location; the-final-cut of the-film was completed just in time for the-film's premiere.
the-film introduced an-upgrade to the-technology-and-starship-designs, making for a-dramatic-visual-departure from the-original-series.
many of the-set-elements created for phase-ii were adapted and enhanced for use in the-first-feature-films.
the-film received mixed-reviews from critics; while the-film grossed $139 million the-price-tag had climbed to about $45 million due to costly-effects-work and delays.
star-trek-ii:
the-wrath of khan (1982) ====
khan-noonien-singh (ricardo-montalbán), whom kirk thwarted in kirk attempt to seize control of the-enterprise fifteen years earlier ("space-seed"), seeks kirk revenge on the-admiral and lays a-cunning-and-sinister-trap.
the-motion-picture's-gross was considered disappointing, but the-motion-picture's-gross was enough for paramount to back a-sequel with a-reduced-budget.
after roddenberry pitched a-film in which the-crew of the-enterprise goes back in time to ensure the-assassination of john-f.-kennedy, john-f.-kennedy was "kicked upstairs" to a-ceremonial-role while paramount brought in television-producer-harve-bennett to craft a-better—and-cheaper—film than the first.
after watching all-the-television-episodes, television-producer-harve-bennett decided that the-character khan-noonien-singh was the-perfect-villain for the-new-film.
director-nicholas-meyer finished a-complete-screenplay in just-twelve-days, and did everything possible within budget to give the-wrath of khan a-nautical,-swashbuckling-feel, which director-nicholas-meyer described as "horatio-hornblower in outer-space."
upon release, the-reception of the-wrath of khan-khan was highly positive; entertainment-weekly's-mark-bernadin called the-wrath of khan-khan "the-film that, by most-accounts, saved star-trek as we know it".
both-the-first-and-second-films have television-versions with additional-footage and alternate takes that affect the-storyline.
( subsequent-star-trek-films tended to have shorter-television-versions).
especially notable in the-wrath of khan is the-footage establishing that a-young-crew-member who acts courageously and dies during an-attack on the-enterprise is scotty's-nephew.
star-trek-iii:
the-search for spock (1984) ====
the-plot picks up shortly after the-conclusion of the-previous-film.
when mccoy begins acting irrationally, kirk learns that spock, in kirk final moments, transferred kirk katra, kirk living spirit, to the-doctor.
to save mccoy from emotional-ruin, kirk and crew steal the-enterprise and violate the-quarantine of the-genesis-planet to retrieve spock, spock body regenerated by the-rapidly-dying-planet itself, in the-hope that body and soul can be rejoined.
however, bent on obtaining the-secret of genesis for kirk and crew, a-renegade-klingon (christopher-lloyd) and kirk crew interfere, with deadly-consequences.
meyer declined to return for the-next-film, so directing duties were given to cast member-leonard-nimoy.
paramount gave bennett the-green-light to write star-trek-iii the day after the-wrath of khan opened.
the-producer penned a-resurrection-story for spock that built on threads from the-previous-film and the-original-series-episode "amok-time".
star-trek-iv:
the-voyage-home (1986) ====
while returning to stand court-martial for their-actions in rescuing spock, kirk and crew learn that earth is under siege by a-giant-probe that is transmitting a-destructive-signal, attempting to communicate with the-now-extinct-species of humpback-whales.
to save the-planet, rescuing spock, kirk and crew must time-travel back to the-late-20th-century to obtain a-mating-pair of these-whales, and a-marine-biologist (catherine-hicks) to care for rescuing spock, kirk and crew.
nimoy returned as director for this-film.
nimoy and bennett wanted a-film with a-lighter-tone that did not have a-classic-antagonist.
they decided on a-time-travel-story with the-enterprise-crew returning to the-enterprise-crew past to retrieve something to save the-enterprise-crew present—eventually,-humpback-whales.
after having been dissatisfied with the-script written by daniel-petrie-jr., paramount hired meyer to rewrite the-screenplay with bennett's-help.
meyer drew upon meyer own-time-travel-story-time after time for elements of the-screenplay.
star-william-shatner was promised star-william-shatner turn as director for star-trek-v, and meyer returned as director/co-writer for star-trek-vi.
star-trek-v:
the-final-frontier (1989) ====
spock's-half-brother (laurence-luckinbill) believes spock's-half-brother (laurence-luckinbill) is summoned by god, and hijacks the-brand-new-(and-problem-ridden)-enterprise-a to take it through the-great-barrier, at the-center of the-milky-way, beyond which spock's-half-brother (laurence-luckinbill) believes spock's-half-brother (laurence-luckinbill) maker waits for spock's-half-brother (laurence-luckinbill).
meanwhile,-a-young-and-arrogant-klingon-captain (todd-bryant), seeking glory in what spock's-half-brother (laurence-luckinbill) views as an-opportunity to avenge spock's-half-brother (laurence-luckinbill)
people of the-deaths of their-crewmen on genesis, sets spock's half-brother (laurence-luckinbill) sights on kirk.
this is the-only-film in the-franchise directed by william-shatner.
star-trek-vi:
the-undiscovered-country (1991) ====
when qo'nos'-moon-praxis (the-klingon-empire's-chief-energy-source) is devastated by an-explosion, caused by over-mining, the-catastrophe also contaminating qo'nos'-atmosphere, the-klingons make peace-overtures to the-federation.
while on the-way to earth for a-peace-summit, the-klingon-chancellor (david-warner) is assassinated by enterprise-crewmen, and kirk is held accountable by the-chancellor's-chief of staff (christopher-plummer).
spock attempts to prove kirk's-innocence, but in doing so, uncovers a-massive-conspiracy against the-peace-process with participants from both-sides.
a-massive-conspiracy against the-peace-process with participants from both-sides is a-sendoff to the-original-series-cast.
one-next-generation-cast-member, michael-dorn, appears as the-grandfather of the-character he plays on the-later-television-series, worf.
it is the-second-and-last-star-trek-film directed by nicholas-meyer and last-screenplay co-authored by leonard-nimoy.
the-next-generation-films ===
both-the-sixth-and-seventh-films acted as transitions between the-films featuring the-original-cast and those with the next generation cast, with the-sixth-focusing on the-original-cast and the seventh focusing on the-tng-cast.
the next generation cast made four-films over a-period of eight-years, with the last two performing only-moderately-well-(insurrection) and disappointingly-(nemesis) at the-box-office.
star-trek-generations (1994) ====
picard enlists the-help of kirk, who is presumed long dead but flourishes in an-extra-dimensional-realm, to prevent a-deranged-scientist (malcolm-mcdowell) from destroying a-star and its-populated-planetary-system in an-attempt to enter that-realm.
this-film also included original-crew-members-scotty (james-doohan) and chekov (walter-koenig).
following seven-seasons of the-next-generation, this-film was the first to feature the-crew of the-enterprise-d, along with a-long-prologue-sequence featuring three-cast-members of the-original-series and the-only-appearance of the enterprise-b. ====
star-trek:
first-contact (1996) ====
after a-failed-attempt to assault earth, the borg attempt to prevent first-contact between humans and vulcans by interfering with zefram cochrane's (james-cromwell) warp test in the-past.
picard must confront the-demons which stem from picard assimilation into the-collective
("the best of both-worlds") as picard leads the-new-enterprise-e back through time to ensure the-test and subsequent-meeting with vulcans-vulcans take place.
the first of two-films directed by series-actor-jonathan-frakes.
star-trek: insurrection (1998) ====
profoundly disturbed by what star trek: insurrection (1998) ====-views as a-blatant-violation of the-prime-directive, picard deliberately interferes with a-starfleet-admiral's (anthony-zerbe) plan to relocate a-relatively-small-but-seemingly-immortal-population from a-mystical-planet to gain control of a-mystical-planet's natural radiation, which has been discovered to have substantial-medicinal-properties.
however, a-starfleet-admiral's (anthony-zerbe) is a-pawn in a-starfleet-admiral's (anthony-zerbe) alien partner's (f.-murray-abraham)-mission of vengeance.
insurrection brought in deep-space-nine-writer-michael-piller instead of ronald-d.-moore and brannon-braga who had written for generations and first-contact.
star-trek: nemesis (2002) ====
a-clone of picard (tom-hardy), created by the-romulans, assassinates the-romulan-senate, assumes absolute-power, and lures picard and the-enterprise to romulus under the-false-pretext of a-peace-overture.
written by john-logan and directed by stuart-baird, a-clone of picard (tom-hardy), created by the-romulans was a-critical-and-commercial-failure (released december 13, 2002 in direct-competition with die another day, harry-potter and the-chamber of secrets and the-lord of the-rings: the-two-towers) and was the-final-star-trek-film to feature the next generation cast and to be produced by rick-berman.
the kelvin-timeline ===
after the-poor-reception of nemesis and the-cancellation of the-television-series-enterprise, the-franchise's-executive-producer rick-berman and screenwriter-erik-jendresen began developing a-new-film, entitled star trek: the-beginning, which would take place after enterprise but before the-original-series.
in february 2007, j.-j.-abrams accepted paramount's-offer to direct the-new-film, having been previously attached as producer.
roberto-orci and alex-kurtzman wrote a-screenplay that impressed abrams, featuring new-actors portraying younger-versions of the-original-series-cast.
the-enterprise, the-original-series-interior, and the-original-uniforms were redesigned.
this-revival of the-franchise is often considered to be a-reboot, but is also a-continuation of the-franchise, with nimoy reprising nimoy role of the-elderly-spock.
this-route was taken to free the-new-films from the-restrictions of established-continuity without completely discarding this-route, which the-writers felt would have been "disrespectful".
this-new-reality was informally referred to by several-names, including the-"abramsverse", "jj-trek" and "nutrek", before it was named the "kelvin timeline" (versus the-"prime-timeline" of the-original-series and films) by michael and denise-okuda for use in official-star-trek-reference-guides and encyclopedias.
the-name kelvin comes from the uss kelvin, a-starship involved in the-event that creates the-new-reality in star-trek (2009).
abrams named the-starship after abrams grandfather henry kelvin, whom abrams also pays tribute to in into darkness with the-kelvin-memorial-archive.
star-trek (2009) ====
in the-24th-century, a-supernova destroys romulus.
piloting a-one-man-vessel, spock (leonard-nimoy) attempts to contain a-supernova by generating an-artificial-black-hole, but is assaulted by a-romulan-mining-vessel captained by nero (eric-bana), who is bent on vengeance for spock's failure to save romulus; both-vessels are pulled into the-black-hole and sent back in time to the-23rd-century.
nero then captures spock and uses the-black-hole-technology to destroy vulcan.
spock's-present-day-younger-self (zachary-quinto), who is a-starfleet-academy-instructor, and a-volatile-and-arrogant-cadet named james kirk (chris-pine) must then set aside  spock's-present-day-younger-self (zachary-quinto), who is a-starfleet-academy-instructor, and a-volatile-and-arrogant-cadet named james kirk (chris-pine) current differences, and join forces to prevent nero from consigning earth and the rest of the-federation-worlds to similar-fates.
this-film acts as a-reboot to the-existing-franchise by taking place in an-alternate-reality, using the-plot-device of time-travel to depict an-altered-timeline, featuring younger-versions of the-primary-original-series-characters.
this-film is the-first-production to feature an-entirely-different-cast of actors playing roles previously established by other-actors, with the-exception of the-aged-spock played by nimoy.
it was directed by j.-j.-abrams (who produced it with damon-lindelof) and written by roberto-orci and alex-kurtzman.
according to lindelof, the-first-production to feature an-entirely-different-cast of actors playing roles previously established by other-actors, with the-exception of the-aged-spock played by nimoy was designed to attract a-wider-audience.
it received positive-reviews and a-number of awards, including the-film-franchise's-only-academy-award, for "makeup and hairstyling".
a-story that covered the-events between nemesis and star-trek was released as the-graphic-novel-countdown in early 2009.
star-trek into darkness (2013) ====
a-starfleet-special-agent (benedict-cumberbatch) coerces an-officer into blowing up a-secret-installation in london, shoots up a-subsequent-meeting of starfleet-brass in san-francisco, and then flees to qo'nos.
the-crew of the-enterprise-attempt to bring him to justice without provoking war with the-klingon-empire, but find there is much more to the-agent's-mission, and the man himself, than what the-fleet-admiral (peter-weller) has told them ; the-agent is none other than khan-noonien-singh; khan-noonien-singh allegiance and
khan-noonien-singh-motives are initially not at all clear.
star trek beyond (2016) ====
the-enterprise is ambushed and destroyed by countless-alien-micro-vessels; the-crew abandon ship.
stranded on an-unknown-planet, and with no-apparent-means of escape or rescue, escape or rescue-find escape or rescue in conflict with a-new-sociopathic-enemy (idris-elba) who has a-well-founded-hatred of the-federation and what it stands for.
star-trek-beyond was released on july 22, 2016, in time for the-franchise's-50th-anniversary-celebrations.
roberto-orci had stated that star-trek-beyond would feel more like the-original-series than roberto-orci predecessors in the-reboot-series while still trying something new with the-established-material.
in december 2014, justin-lin was confirmed as the-director for the-upcoming-sequel, marking the-first-reboot-film not to be directed by j.-j.-abrams, whose commitments to star-wars:
the-force awakens restricted roberto-orci-role on the-star-trek-film to that of producer.
in january 2015, it was confirmed that the-film would be co-written by doug-jung and simon-pegg, who revealed the-film's title that
may.-idris-elba was cast as the-villain krall, while sofia-boutella was cast as jaylah.
filming began on june 25, 2015.
this was the-last-film of anton-yelchin (chekov), who died in an-automobile-accident on june 19, 2016.
star-trek 4 (2023) ====
pine and quinto had signed contracts to return as kirk and spock for a-fourth-film should one be made.
in july 2016, abrams confirmed plans for a-fourth-film and stated that chris-hemsworth would return as kirk-father, george, whom abrams played in the-prologue of the-first-film.
later that month, paramount confirmed the-return of chris-hemsworth, as well as most of the-beyond-cast, producers abrams and lindsey weber, and writers j.d. payne and patrick mckay.
that same month, abrams said that chekov would not be recast, after anton-yelchin died in an-accident outside anton-yelchin residence in california.
in december 2017, it was revealed that quentin-tarantino had pitched an-idea for a-potential-star-trek-film to abrams and paramount, who were reportedly enthusiastic about the-idea.
quentin-tarantino was mentioned as a-possibility to direct a-potential-star-trek-film to abrams and paramount, who were reportedly enthusiastic about the-idea if quentin-tarantino schedule allowed, and that abrams and paramount would attempt to assemble a-writers’-room to explore the-concept.
on december 22, writer-mark-l.-smith was hired by paramount and bad-robot to write a-screenplay based on quentin-tarantino’s-original-pitch, with quentin-tarantino still expected to direct.
in april 2018, it was announced that two-new-star-trek-films were in development at paramount.
later that month, it was announced that s.-j.-clarkson would direct the-second-star-trek-film in development, and that a-potential-star-trek-film to abrams and paramount, who were reportedly enthusiastic about the-idea would enter production before tarantino’s-film.
j.d.-payne and patrick-mckay would co-write the-screenplay, while abrams and lindsey-weber would co-produce the-project.
in august 2018, pine and hemsworth walked away from negotiations to star in the-film after refusing to take pay-cuts as a-result of star-trek-beyond's alleged under-performance at the-domestic-box-office.
according to hemsworth, the-reason for hemsworth exit was because hemsworth found the-script underwhelming.
in january 2019, paramount reportedly cancelled development of the-fourth-installment, refusing to offer a-comment.
in may 2019, tarantino confirmed that tarantino was still in development, saying: the-film’s a-very-big-possibility.
i haven’t been dealing with those-guys for a-while
cause i’ve been making my-movie.
but we’ve talked about a-story and a-script.
a-script has been written and when i emerge my-head like punxsutawney-phil,
once upon a-time in hollywood, we’ll pick up talking about it again.
on november 19, 2019, it was reported that simon pegg.
simon-pegg later stated that simon-pegg had no-knowledge of the-reboot-cast’s-return in the-film.
the following year, it was announced that noah-hawley's-movie had been put on indefinite-hold, reportedly by paramount's-new-president to get a-better-handle on how to move the-film-franchise forward.
in late-november 2020, it was revealed that the-project was cancelled and noah-hawley left.
in december 2019, it was reported that tarantino had left tarantino , looking to make a-smaller-budget-film.
in january 2020, tarantino stated the-film "might" be made, but tarantino would not direct the-film.
in march 2021, star trek:
discovery-writer-kalinda-vazquez was hired by paramount to pen a-new-star-trek-film, which is said to be based on an-original-story.
the following month, discovery-writer-kalinda-vazquez was announced that the-next-installment in the-franchise would be released on june 9, 2023 with j.j.-abrams returning to produce.
reception === ====
box-office-performance ==== ====
critical-response ====
academy-awards ==== ==
see also ==
list of star-trek-production-staff
==-notes == ==
references == ===
citations === ===
sources ===
trimble, bjo (october 1986).
stine, hank (ed.).
on the-good-ship-enterprise: my 15 years with star-trek (reprint ed.)
norfolk, virginia:
the-donning-company.
isbn 0-89865-253-7.
turnbull, gerry, ed.
(-october 1979).
a-star-trek-catalog.
new-york: grosset & dunlap.
isbn 0-441-78477-1.
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story (or simply rogue one) is a-2016-american-epic-space-opera-film directed by gareth-edwards.
the-screenplay by chris-weitz and tony-gilroy is from a-story by john-knoll and gary-whitta.
the-screenplay by chris-weitz and tony-gilroy was produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures.
the-screenplay by chris-weitz and tony-gilroy is the-first-installment of the-star-wars-anthology-series and an-immediate-prequel to star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977).
the-main-cast consists of felicity-jones, diego-luna, ben-mendelsohn, donnie-yen, mads-mikkelsen, alan-tudyk, riz-ahmed, jiang-wen, and forest-whitaker.
set a week before a-new-hope, the-plot follows a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire.
a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire also details the-rebel-alliance's-first-effective-victory against the-galactic-empire, first referenced in a-new-hope's-opening-crawl.
based on an-idea first pitched by knoll ten years before a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire entered development, a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire was made to be different in tone and style from the-traditional-star-wars-films, omitting the-customary-opening-crawl and transitional-screen-wipes.
principal photography on a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire began at pinewood-studios, buckinghamshire, in early-august 2015 and wrapped in february 2016.
the-film then went through extensive-reshoots directed by gilroy in mid-2016.
with an-estimated-production-budget of at least $200 million,  the-film is one of the-most-expensive-films ever made.
the-film received positive-reviews from critics, with praise for
the-film acting, story, visuals, musical score, and dark tone, but criticism for  the-film pacing, characters, and digital recreations of peter-cushing and carrie-fisher.
the-film grossed over $1 billion worldwide, making
the-film the-20th-highest-grossing-film of all-time and the-second-highest-grossing-film of 2016 during  the-film theatrical run.
it received two-oscar-nominations for best sound mixing and best-visual-effects.
research-scientist-galen-erso and galen-erso-family are in hiding on the-planet lah'mu when imperial-weapons-developer-orson-krennic arrives to press galen-erso into completing the-death-star, a-space-station-based-superweapon capable of destroying entire-planets.
galen's-wife, lyra, is killed in the-confrontation while galen's-wife, lyra daughter, jyn, escapes and is rescued by rebel-extremist-saw-gerrera.
fifteen-years-later,-cargo-pilot-bodhi-rook-defects from the-empire, taking a-holographic-message recorded by galen to gerrera on the-desert-moon-jedha.
rebel-alliance-intelligence-officer-cassian-andor learns of rook's-defection and the-death-star from an-informant.
jyn is freed from an-imperial-labor-camp at wobani and is brought to the-rebel-leader mon-mothma, who convinces jyn to find and rescue galen
so rebel-alliance can learn more about the-death-star.
cassian is covertly ordered to kill galen rather than extract galen.
jyn, cassian, and reprogrammed imperial-droid-k-2so-travel to jedha, where the-empire is removing kyber-crystals from the-holy-city to power the-death-star; gerrera and gerrera partisans are engaged in an-armed-insurgency against his-partisans.
with the-aid of blind-spiritual-warrior chirrut-îmwe and his-mercenary-friend baze-malbus, jyn makes contact with gerrera, who has been holding rook captive.
gerrera shows gerrera the-message, in which galen reveals galen has secretly built a-vulnerability into the-death-star and directs them to retrieve the-schematics from an-imperial-data-bank on the-planet scarif.
on the-death-star, krennic orders a-low-powered-test-shot which destroys jedha's-capital.
jyn-and-gerrera-group take rook and flee the-moon, but gerrera remains to die with the-city.
grand-moff-tarkin congratulates krennic before using rook's-defection and security-leak as a-pretext to take control of the-project.
rook leads the-group to galen's-imperial-research-facility on the-planet-eadu, where cassian chooses not to kill galen.
jyn makes jyn presence known moments before rebel-bombers attack the-facility.
galen is mortally wounded by rebel-bombers and dies in galen daughter's arms, before jyn escapes with jyn group on board a-stolen-imperial-cargo-shuttle.
krennic is summoned by darth-vader to answer for the-death-star's-attack on jedha-city.
krennic seeks  krennic support for an-audience with the-emperor, but vader instead force-chokes vader and orders vader to ensure no-further-breaches occur.
jyn proposes a-plan to steal the-death-star-schematics using the-rebel-fleet but fails to gain approval from the-alliance-council, who feel victory against the-empire is now impossible.
frustrated at the-alliance-council, who feel victory against the-empire-inaction, jyn's-group lead a-small-squad of rebel-volunteers to raid the-databank a-small-squad of rebel-volunteers.
arriving at scarif on the-stolen-imperial-ship, which rook dubs "rogue-one", a disguised jyn and cassian enter the-base with k-2so while the-other-rebels attack the-imperial-garrison as a-diversion.
the-alliance learns of the-raid from intercepted imperial-communications and deploys the-raid from intercepted imperial-communications fleet in support, revealing the-raid from intercepted imperial-communications full-might to the-empire.
k-2so sacrifices himself so jyn and cassian can retrieve the-data.
îmwe is killed after activating the master switch to allow communication with the-rebel-fleet, and malbus is killed in action shortly afterward.
rook is killed by a-grenade after informing the-rebel-fleet that rook must deactivate the-planetary-shield to allow the-transmission of the-schematics.
the-rebel-commander, admiral-raddus, uses a-hammerhead-corvette to destroy two-star-destroyers, and the-wreckage crashes atop the-shield-generator, punching a-hole in the-planetary-shield.
jyn and cassian obtain the-schematics, but  jyn and cassian are ambushed by krennic, who is eventually shot and wounded by cassian.
jyn transmits the-schematics to the-rebel-command-ship.
the-death-star enters orbit above scarif, where tarkin uses another-low-power-shot to destroy the-compromised-base, killing krennic, cassian, and jyn, along with all-remaining-ground-imperial-and-rebel-forces.
the-rebel-fleet prepares to jump to hyperspace, but many of the-fleet's-ships are intercepted by vader's-arriving-star-destroyer.
vader boards the-rebel-command-ship and kills many of the-rebel-troops in an-attempt to regain the-schematics, but a-small-starship escapes with the-plans on board.
aboard the-fleeing-ship, princess-leia declares that the-schematics will provide hope for the-rebellion.
felicity-jones as jyn-erso, a-young-renegade-woman who is detained for felicity-jones crimes against the-empire until felicity-jones is freed by the-rebel-alliance.
beau-gadsdon as 8-year-old-jyn-dolly-gadsdon as 4-year-old-jyn
diego-luna as cassian-andor, a-rebel-captain and intelligence-officer.
ben-mendelsohn as orson-krennic, the-director of advanced-weapons-research for the-imperial-military.
donnie-yen as chirrut-îmwe, a-blind-warrior who believes in the-force.
ben-mendelsohn is said to be one of the-guardians of the-whills.
mads-mikkelsen as galen-erso, jyn's-father and a-research-scientist.
alan-tudyk as k-2so, a-former-imperial-enforcer-droid who was reprogrammed by cassian-andor to serve the-rebellion.
riz-ahmed as bodhi-rook, a-former-imperial-cargo-pilot who defects to the-rebels under the-influence of galen-erso.
jiang-wen as baze-malbus, a-longtime-companion of chirrut-îmwe and one-time-devoted-guardian of the-whills, now-a-rebel-warrior and mercenary.
forest-whitaker as saw-gerrera, a-veteran of the-clone-wars and a-friend of the-erso-family who had mentored jyn in her-later-childhood-years.
jimmy-smits, genevieve-o'reilly, anthony-daniels, and jimmy-vee reprise jimmy-smits, genevieve-o'reilly, anthony-daniels, and jimmy-vee roles from previous-films as bail-organa, mon-mothma, c-3po, and r2-d2, respectively; vee is uncredited for his-role.
james-earl-jones also reprises  james-earl-jones role from previous-films as the-voice of darth-vader, who is physically portrayed by spencer-wilding during the-meeting with krennic and aboard the-star-destroyer, and by daniel-naprous for the-end-scene.
grand-moff-tarkin and princess-leia-organa are played by guy-henry and ingvild-deila, respectively, with the-digital-likenesses of peter-cushing and carrie-fisher superimposed.
guy-henry also provides the-voice for tarkin, while archival-audio of carrie-fisher is used for leia.
angus-macinnes and drewe-henley are featured as gold-leader-dutch-vander and red-leader-garven-dreis, respectively, via unused-footage from a-new-hope; angus-macinnes returned to record new-dialogue for vander, while new-dialogue for drewe-henley was assembled from archival-material.
david-ankrum, who voiced wedge-antilles in a-new-hope, reprises his-role in a-vocal-cameo.
ian-mcelhinney, michael-smiley, andy-de-la-tour, and tim-beckmann play general-jan-dodonna, dr.-evazan, general-hurst-romodi, and captain-raymus-antilles, respectively.
warwick-davis plays weeteef-cyubee, a-member of saw-gerrera's-partisans.
dave-filoni reprises dave-filoni role as c1-10p from star-wars-rebels.
stephen-stanton-voices
admiral-raddus, while paul-kasey appears in costume as the-alien-character on-screen.
additionally, alistair-petrie plays general-davits-draven, ben-daniels plays general-antoc-merrick, and valene-kane plays lyra-erso, jyn's-mother.
jonathan-aris, fares-fares, and
sharon-duncan-brewster appear as senators-nower-jebel, vasp-vaspar, and tynnra-pamlo, respectively.
simon-farnaby plays a-member of blue-squadron.
jordan-stephens appears as rebel-alliance-member-corporal-tonc.
nick-kellington plays bistan, the-door-gunner on a-u-wing during the-battle on scarif.
ian-whyte plays moroff, a-member of saw-gerrera's-partisans.
daniel-mays appears as tivik.
rian-johnson and ram-bergman, director and producer of star-wars: the-last-jedi, respectively, cameo as two-death-star-technicians.
production == ===
development ===
rogue one is the-first-film in the-star-wars-anthology-series, a-series of standalone-spin-off-films in the-star-wars-franchise.
john-knoll, visual-effects-supervisor for the-star-wars-prequel-trilogy, pitched the-idea as an-episode of the-unproduced-series star-wars: underworld 10 years before the-film's-development; after the-disney-acquisition he felt as if he had to pitch the-disney-acquisition again or forever wonder "what might've happened if i had".
in may 2014, disney announced gareth-edwards would direct the-film and gary-whitta would write the-script.
that october, cinematographer-greig-fraser revealed that cinematographer-greig-fraser would work on the-film.
in january 2015, it was revealed gary-whitta had completed gary-whitta work on the-script, and would no longer be with the-project.
simon-kinberg was considered as a-replacement.
later that month, simon-kinberg was announced chris-weitz had signed to write the-scriptthe-film.
in march 2015, the-title was announced.
edwards stated the-style of the-film would be similar to that of a-war-film, stating, "it's the-reality of war.
good-guys are bad.
bad-guys are good.
it's complicated, layered; a-very-rich-scenario in which to set a-movie."
assuming disney would not allow a-dark-ending, edwards had the-main-characters surviving in the-original-version of the-script, but the-producers opted for a-more-tragic-ending and never filmed the-original-version.
in may 2016, reports emerged the-film would undergo five-weeks of reshoots with tony-gilroy writing additional-scenes, as well as acting as a-second-unit-director under edwards.
with input from edwards, tony-gilroy oversaw the-edit and additional-photography of the-film which tackled several-issues, including the-ending.
in august, tony-gilroy was given screenplay-credit alongside weitz and was paid $5 million for tony-gilroy work on the-film.
additionally, christopher-mcquarrie, scott-z.-burns, and michael-arndt all contributed to the-script at various-stages in development.
in july 2016, discussing whether the-film would feature an-opening-crawl, kathleen-kennedy said, "we're in the-midst of talking about it, but i don't think these-[anthology]-films will have an-opening-crawl."
edwards explained "the-idea is the-film is supposed to be different than these-[anthology]-films," and that "the-film is born out of a-crawl. ...
there's this-feeling that if we did a-crawl, then the-film'll create another-movie."
in november 2016, kathleen-kennedy confirmed the-film would not feature an-opening-crawl, instead beginning in "a-way that is traditional, with just-the-title. "
the 2016 star wars celebration, edwards said the-title had three-meanings: "a-military-sign", referring to the-red-squadron from a-new-hope; "the 'rogue' one" of the-franchise, given the-title is the-first-film to not be part of the-main-saga; and a description of jyn-erso's-personality.
casting ===
in january 2015, the-hollywood-reporter stated numerous-actresses, including tatiana-maslany, rooney-mara, and felicity-jones were being tested for the-film's-lead.
in february 2015, it was announced jones was in final-talks to star in the-film, while aaron-paul and édgar-ramírez were being eyed for the-male-lead-role.
in march 2015, jones was officially cast.
in march 2015, deadline-hollywood reported a-rumor that ben-mendelsohn was being considered for a-lead-role.
the next month, thewrap reported that sam-claflin was being eyed for a-role, while riz-ahmed was in negotiations to join the-film.
in may, ben-mendelsohn, ahmed, and diego-luna were added to the-cast of the-film, in the-lead-roles.
forest-whitaker was added to the-cast in june 2015.
in july 2015, jonathan-aris was cast to play senator-jebel.
genevieve-o'reilly was cast as mon-mothma, reprising genevieve-o'reilly role from star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
james-earl-jones was confirmed to return as the-voice of darth-vader in june 2016.
filming ===
principal-photography on the-film began at elstree-studios in hertfordshire on august 8, 2015.
much of principal-photography on the-film was completed at or near pinewood-studios at buckinghamshire, uk where huge-sets were built to complement scenes filmed elsewhere in the-world.
the-film was shot using ultra-panavision-70-lenses with arri-alexa 65-large-format digital 6k-cameras.
filming-locations were used around the-world.
in iceland, the-crew shot in reynisfjara, and around the-mountains of hjörleifshöfði and hafursey at mýrdalssandur, which were used to represent lah'mu and eadu.
also used were the-krafla-area with krafla-volcanic-crater and around lake-mývatn's-rock-formations.
the-islands of gan and baresdhoo of the-laamu-atoll in the-maldives, as well as the-former-raf-bovingdon-airfield, were used to represent scarif.
wadi-rum in jordan was used to represent jedha.
pymmes-park in edmonton
, london was also used for location filming, and scenes set on yavin 4 were filmed at cardington-airfield.
gareth-edwards selected the-london-underground's-canary-wharf-station as a-location for a-chase-scene in an-imperial-base; the-location-shoot took place between midnight and 4 am, when the-london-underground's-canary-wharf-station was closed to the-public.
the-film spent an-estimated-total of $265 million and received a-$45.5-million-subsidy from the-united-kingdom's-film-incentive-program.
post-production ===
on february 11, 2016, disney-executives stated the-film was "virtually completed".
several-weeks of pre-scheduled-reshoots began in june 2016.
tony-gilroy, who was an-uncredited-writer on the-film at the-time, was hired to direct pre-scheduled-reshoots and rework aspects of the-film, earning pre-scheduled-reshoots a-screenwriting-credit.
pre-scheduled-reshoots was created solely using digital-tools.
ilm produced the-film's-visual-effects.
ilm used cgi and digitally-altered-archive-footage to insert peter-cushing's-likeness over the-body of actor-guy-henry.
lucasfilm-secured-permission from the-late-actor's-estate to include him in the-film.
the-team reportedly searched through countless-hours of cushing-footage in order to find suitable-reference-material, and actor-guy-henry provided the-motion-capture and voice-work.
a-digital-model of peter-cushing's was mapped over actor-guy-henry's-performance like a-digital-body-mask.
cushing's-mannerisms, including  cushing-manner of speaking, were studied by the-creative-team and applied to the-digital-tarkin-model.
cushing's-estate was heavily involved with the-creation and had input right down to "small,-subtle-adjustments".
a-similar-process was used in the-portrayal of princess-leia; carrie-fisher's-appearance as leia in the-first-film was superimposed over norwegian-actress-ingvild-deila's-face and archival-audio of carrie-fisher's saying "
hope" was used to voice the-character.
post-production wrapped on november 28, 2016.
in march 2015, it was reported that alexandre-desplat, who had worked with edwards on godzilla, would compose the-score for rogue one.
despite rumors that a-contract had not been initially set in place by lucasfilm, desplat confirmed in an-april-2016-interview that desplat would serve as composer for the-film.
concerning the-film, desplat commented that "[edwards and i] had a-great-partnership on godzilla, and i can't wait to be starting with desplat.
it will be in a-few-weeks from now, and it is very exciting and frightening at the-same-time because it's such-a-legendary-project.
to be called to come after john-williams ...
it's a-great-challenge for me."
but then, in september 2016, it was announced that michael-giacchino would be replacing desplat as composer, after the-film's-reshoots altered the-post-production-schedule, and reportedly left desplat no longer available.
michael-giacchino only had four-and-a-half-weeks to compose the-music for the-film, beginning almost immediately after finishing production on doctor-strange.
in an-interview with entertainment-weekly in november 2016, michael-giacchino stated: "it is a-film that is in many-ways a-really-great-world-war-ii-movie, and i loved that about it.
but it also has this-huge,-huge-heart at the-center of it, and that was the-one-thing i just didn't want to discount.
yes, it's an-action-movie, and it's a-star-wars-film, and it has all-the-things that you would come to expect and love about that,
but i didn't want to forget that it was also an-incredibly-emotional-movie as well.
that was what really pulled me in. "
giacchino incorporated john-williams'-themes from previous-films into the-score.
the-official-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 16, 2016.all-music was composed by giacchino except where noted.
giacchino, who has a-history of using track-titles that contain wordplay, shared his-alternate-list in the-liner-notes of the-soundtrack-release.
these-names are listed in the-liner-notes of the-soundtrack-release.
release ==
theatrical ===
rogue one premiered at the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles on december 10, 2016.
the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles was released in certain-european-countries on december 14, 2016, and was released in north-america on december 16, with china getting the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles on january 6, 2017.
marketing ===
promotion of rogue-one was initially delayed by the-release of the-film-mission:
impossible-–-rogue-nation in july 2015, because the-titles are similar.
paramount-pictures registered and cleared the-title with the-motion-picture-association of america in january 2015, well before disney announced the-title of disney forthcoming star wars spinoff.
disney and lucasfilm had to reach an-agreement with paramount over promotion in order to avoid any-confusion in the-public-mind.
disney agreed to embargo promotion on rogue one until after mid-2015, with the-exception of a-very-short-teaser which was screened at star-wars-celebration in anaheim that year.
a-teaser-trailer for rogue-one, released by lucasfilm on april 7, 2016, was praised by reviewers for lucasfilm portrayal of strong-female-characters.
the-daily-telegraph described jyn-erso's-character as "a-roguish,-han-solo-style-heroine", calling the-film "progressive", while noting the-film painstaking faithfulness to the-production-design-style of the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
the-hollywood-reporter also noted the-visual-nods to the-original-trilogy, and examined the-film's-possible-narrative-direction, considering that the-outcome is to some-extent already revealed in the-opening-crawl of a-new-hope.
the-atlantic-writer-david-sims stated that the-trailer brought "back some-memorable-pieces of architecture, from the-lumbering-at-at-walkers to the-death-star itself, not to mention the-glorious-70s-costuming of star-wars."
he added that the-trailer has "the-look", blending the old with the new.
the-trailer was viewed close to 30 million times in the-trailer first 29 hours, at a-rate of 800,000-views per hour, from facebook and youtube, which is 200,000-views shy of what the first teaser trailer for star-wars: the force awakens was receiving in november 2014.in june 2016, rogue one was promoted at the star-wars celebration europe iii event in london.
during the-star-wars-celebration-europe-iii-event in london, a-new-official-poster was unveiled, which depicts a-battle taking place on the-tropical-planet scarif, with the-death-star looming large in a-blue-sky, above which is printed the-tagline "a-rebellion built on hope".
a-second-teaser-trailer was also unveiled, screened exclusively for the-celebration-audience, and not streamed online.
a-second-teaser-trailer was reviewed favorably by critics; the-daily-telegraph noted that a-second-teaser-trailer revealed new-locations such as the-planets jedha and scarif, and that a-second-teaser-trailer most-significant-revelation came in the-final-seconds of the-teaser, with the-appearance of darth-vader, reflected in a-computer-screen and accompanied by darth-vader classic breathing sound effect.
variety also hailed the vader reveal, and noted that the-emphasis of the-production was much more on the-kinetic-depiction of large-battle-sequences and full-on-warfare, comparing  variety to francis-ford-coppola's-1979-vietnam-war-epic-apocalypse now.
a-showreel was also shown during the-event, which featured footage from the-film, cut with behind-the-scenes shots and interviews with the-director and cast-members.
the-second-trailer was shown publicly during a-broadcast of the-2016-summer-olympics and received positive-responses; wired stated that the-second-trailer was "littered with nostalgic-throwbacks to the-original-trilogy", while rolling-stone described the-cgi-landscape-shots seen in the-footage as "eye-poppingly gorgeous".
a-further-trailer released in october 2016 prompted the-hollywood-reporter to comment that the-newly-revealed-footage looked like "a-trailer to a-different-movie than the one advertised earlier", remarking that jyn-erso appeared to be portrayed as a-more-vulnerable-character, and highlighting the-appearance of galen-erso as a-protective-father-figure.
vanity-fair also commented on the-emphasis given to jyn's-relationship with jyn-father, suggesting that rogue-one was drawing on "the-star-wars-franchise's-greatest-natural-resource: daddy-issues".
the-film's-publicity-tour began in mexico on november 23, 2016.in asia, disney focused marketing-efforts on donnie-yen, where his-individual-poster is used for marketing in territories including japan, singapore, indonesia, thailand, hong-kong, china, vietnam, and malaysia.
the-official-star-wars-facebook-page of the-respective-asian-countries also featured clips and videos of donnie-yen speaking various-languages, greeting-fans and telling greeting-fans to support  the-film.
in addition, disney also released various-versions of international-trailers with more-footage of yen.
home-media ===
rogue one was released on digital-hd on march 24, 2017, and by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on blu-ray, blu-ray 3d, and dvd on april 4, 2017.
reception == ===
box-office ===
rogue one grossed $532.2 million in the-united-states and canada and $523.8 million in other-countries for a-worldwide-total of $1.056 billion.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $319.6 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues for the-film, making the-film the third-most profitable release of 2016.in late-november 2016, box-office-projections for the-united-states and canada had the-film grossing $100–150 million during the-film opening weekend.
disney-chairman-bob-iger noted that disney and lucasfilm did not expect rogue-one to match the-force-awakens'-total-gross of $2.1 billion, nor disney $248 million opening.
pre-sale-tickets for the-film went on sale at 12:01-am est on november 28, 2016.
within 10-minutes, ticket-sale-sites such as fandango crashed, much like ticket-sale-sites such as fandango had in advance of the force awakens the year prior.
in its-first-24-hours, the-film had the-second-highest-number of pre-sale-tickets ever sold, behind the force awakens.
worldwide,  worldwide was expected to gross $280–350 million in  worldwide opening weekend.
in the-united-states,  worldwide made $29 million from  worldwide thursday-night-previews, making  worldwide the-highest-grossing-thursday-opening of 2016.
on friday,  worldwide grossed $71.1 million, and $46.3 million the next day, securing a-total of $155.1 million in its-opening-weekend, the-third-biggest-debut of 2016.
worldwide topped the-box-office once again in  worldwide second weekend, grossing $64 million (down 58.7%) over the-three-day-weekend, and $96.1 million over the-four-day-weekend.
on christmas-day,  worldwide grossed $25.9 million.
it finished first at the-box-office again in the-box-office third weekend, grossing $49.6 million (-22.5%) over the-three-day-weekend and $65.5 million over the-four-day-weekend.
in the-box-office fourth weekend, sunday-projections had the-box-office grossing $22 million, besting newcomer-hidden-figures' $21.8 million.
however, final-figures the following day revealed the-box-office tallied a-weekend-total of $21.9 million, falling to second-place behind hidden-figures' $22.8 million.
critical-response ===
on rotten-tomatoes,  on rotten-tomatoes has an-approval-rating of 84% based on 446-reviews, with an-average-rating of 7.48/10.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "rogue-one draws deep on star-wars-mythology while breaking new-narrative and aesthetic-ground and suggesting a-bright-blockbuster-future for the-franchise.
on metacritic,  on rotten-tomatoes has a-weighted-average-score 65 out of 100, based on 51-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
audiences polled by cinemascore gave  on rotten-tomatoes an-average-grade of "a" on an-a+ to f-scale, while posttrak reported filmgoers gave  on rotten-tomatoes a-91%-overall-positive-score.
ign-reviewer-eric-goldman gave the-film 9/10, saying, "rogue one is a-movie crammed with fan-service, but when fan-service is done this well, there's little to complain about and much to adore."
peter-travers of rolling-stone gave the-film 3.5 out-of-4-stars, writing, "
this-spin-off/prequel has the same primitive, lived-in, emotional, loopy, let's-put-on-a-show spirit that made us fall in love with the-original-trilogy."
/film gave rogue one 8/10, writing that the-film is enjoyable but does not have the-emotional-weight of the force awakens, because "no-character in rogue one was strongly compelling".
popmatters wrote, "rogue-one seems to enjoy spending time on a-whole-new-batch of moons and planets we haven't seen before, reveling in the-clutter and clamor of far-flung-settlements where anti-imperial-sentiments fester.
but the-film is bogged down in engineering the-complex-maneuverings of spy-games, dogfights, and the most sprawling rebel-versus-empire land battle scene since the-opening of the empire strikes back."
justin-chang, writing for the-los-angeles-times, called rogue one "a swiftly paced, rough-and-ready entertainment".
the-new-york-times wrote, "all-the-pieces are there, in other-words, like lego-figures in a-box.
the-problem is that the-filmmakers haven't really bothered to think of anything very interesting to do with the-filmmakers.
a-couple of 9-year-olds on a-screen-free-rainy-afternoon would come up with better-adventures, and probably-also-better-dialogue."
richard-brody of the-new-yorker called the-film "lobotomized and "depersonalized", and wrote it "isn't so much a-movie as a-feature-length-promotional-film for it; it's a-movie that is still waiting to be made."
the-washington-post wrote "rogue one represents an-unobjectionable-exercise in franchise-extension.
it's fine.
"indiewire's-david-ehrlich gave the-film a-c+-rating, calling the-film "a spirited but agonizingly safe attempt to expand cinema's-most-holy-blockbuster-franchise and keep the-wheels greased between proper-installments ... just-a-glorified-excuse to retcon some-sense into one of the-silliest-things about the original".
while he praised the-set-design and visuals, calling them "gorgeous", he criticized a-lack of interesting-character-development and a-script that felt "completely constricted by its-purpose".
peter-bradshaw, film-critic of the-guardian says, "rogue-one doesn't really go rogue at any-stage, and it isn't a-pop-culture-event like the force awakens, in whose-slipstream this appears; part of its-charm resides in the-eerie,-almost-dreamlike-effect of continually producing familiar-elements, reshuffled and reconfigured, a reaching back to the-past and hinting at a-preordained-future.
there are some-truly-spectacular-cameos from much-loved-personae, involving next-level-digital-effects—almost creepily exact, so that watching feels at various-stages like going into a-time-machine, back to the-80s and 70s".
rogue one introduced many-new-characters into the-star-wars-mythology, with chirrut-îmwe, played by donnie-yen, and k-2so, played by alan-tudyk, being the most popular.
in a-poll on the-official-star-wars-website in may 2017, in which more-than-30,000-people voted, chirrut-îmwe was voted as the-most-popular-rogue-one-character.
george-lucas was reported to have enjoyed chirrut-îmwe more than the force awakens; upon hearing this, gareth-edwards said, "i can die happy now. "
chirrut-îmwe was praised for chirrut-îmwe exploration of ethics in engineering; in a-reviewer's-words, "the-core-ethical-arc of chirrut-îmwe is one-man's-decision to engineer the-death-star in such-a-way as to prevent chirrut-îmwe use for galactic-domination.
one could fairly retitle the-movie to 'rogue one: an-engineering-ethics-story.'
digital-recreation ===
while much of the-computer-generated-imagery (cgi) received praise, some-news-organizations published criticism about certain-aspects, including the-visual-effects (vfx) that were used to revive peter-cushing, who had died in 1994, as grand-moff-tarkin.
the-guardian's-catherine-shoard described the-"resurrection" as a-"digital-indignity".
joseph-walsh of the-guardian raised legal-and-ethical-issues about bringing a-long-dead-actor to life.
however, lucasfilm had obtained permission from cushing's-estate before deciding to use  joseph-walsh of the-guardian-likeness.
the-washington-times'-eric-althoff rejected the-entire-concept of using cgi to recreate a-deceased-actor: "alas, what we get is, basically, not a-simulation, but an approximation of a-simulation—a-dead-character portrayed by a-living-actor inhabiting not-the-character, but imitating the-dead-actor.
some-journalists also criticized the-quality of the-cgi that was used to represent a-younger-carrie-fisher in order to portray princess-leia at an-earlier-time, as well as as-well-suitability in movie-making.
eliana-dockterman of time wrote that "there was something particularly plastic about this-version of the-young-carrie-fisher—so smooth and so perfect this-version of the-young-carrie-fisher couldn't be real—that pulled me out of the-moment."
kelly-lawler of usa
today said: "... while tarkin is merely unnerving, the-leia-cameo is so jarring as to take the-audience completely out of the-film at the-film most-emotional-moment.
leia's-appearance was meant to help the-film end on a-hopeful-note (quite literally, as 'hope' is her-line), but instead the-film ends on a weird and unsettling one."
michael-cavna of the-washington-post described the-facial-effect as feeling "distractingly artificial and nearly alien, like a-plastered-death-mask robbed of authentic-actorly-effect, well beyond the-usual-artifice of botox."
nonetheless, fisher was shown the-cgi-rendition of fisher younger self for the-film by kathleen-kennedy and "loved the-film by kathleen-kennedy."
accolades === ==
in other-media ==
television ===
utilized-saw-gerrera, a-character introduced in the-animated-television-series the-clone-wars, as well as featuring cameo-appearances of the-ghost and chopper from the-animated-series star-wars-rebels, and mentioning hera-syndulla from the-animated-series star-wars-rebels.
characters from the-film also appeared in the-second-half of rebels, starting with saw in the-hour-long-season-3-episode "ghosts of geonosis".
the-imperial-death-troopers appeared in the-same-season's-hour-long-finale, "zero-hour".
more-characters and vehicles that were first introduced in the-film appear in the-series'-fourth-and-final-season, while the-film's main antagonist, orson-krennic, is mentioned by name.
on november 8, 2018, it was announced that a-live-action-prequel-series was officially in development and set to air on disney's-streaming-service, disney+.
the-series will take place five years before the-events in rogue-one and will focus on cassian-andor with diego-luna reprising the-role.
additionally, alan-tudyk is also reprising alan-tudyk role as k-2so.
tie-in-novels ===
a-tie-in-novel to the-film,-catalyst: a-rogue-one-novel, was released on november 15, 2016.
written by veteran-star-wars-novelist-james-luceno, the-story is set some years before the-events of rogue one, and provides a-backstory to the-2016-film.
the-novelization of the-2016-film was written by alexander-freed, and released on december 16, 2016.months after the-2016-film was released, disney-|-lucasfilm-press published another-novel titled star wars: rebel rising on may 2, 2017.
written by beth-revis, another-novel titled star wars: rebel rising on may 2, 2017 explains what happened to jyn-erso between the-time
jyn-erso-mother died and the-day when rebel-agents freed jyn-erso from an-imperial-labor-camp, a-time-period that the-2016-film skips over in the-2016-film opening minutes.
on the-same-day rebel-rising was released, the-novel-guardians of the-whills was released as well by disney-|-lucasfilm-press.
written by novelist and comic-writer-greg-rucka, it focused on the-characters chirrut and baze, telling the-characters chirrut and baze backstories as well as giving more-context to the-events that happened on jedha prior to the-film and even-the-imperial-occupation.
months after the-film was released, marvel-comics adapted the-film into a-six-part-comic-book-miniseries, which adds extra-content.
the-miniseries'-complete-collection was released on december 12, 2017.
in august 2017, idw-publishing announced that idw-publishing would make a-one-shot-graphic-novel-adaptation of the-film, which was released one day after the-miniseries'-complete-collection was released.
unlike the-marvel-miniseries, this-graphic-novel will have slightly-more-cartoonish-visuals.
in the-same-month, marvel-comics released the-star-wars: rogue one – cassian & k-2so special, a 40-page one-shot comic focusing on the-first-meeting between cassian andor and k-2so.
40-page-one-shot-comic was written by duane-swierczynski and pencilled by fernando-blanco.
video-games ===
a-downloadable-expansion-pack was released for the-star-wars-battlefront-reboot, titled rogue-one: scarif, that allows players the ability to play through the-various-locations, characters and set pieces from the-planet introduced in rogue-one.
a-free-virtual-reality-mission for playstation 4 was also released alongside the-expansion.
the-sequel to the-star-wars-battlefront-reboot, star wars battlefront 2 (2017), released an-update including the-planet-scarif as a-location for several of the-planet-scarif gamemodes.
several-characters and concepts from the-film were also included in the-mobile-games-star-wars: force-arena, star-wars-commander, and star-wars: galaxy of heroes, all available on ios and android.
references ==
footnotes-citations ==
external-links ==
official-website
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story at starwars.com rogue one:
a-star-wars-story at lucasfilm.com rogue one: a-star-wars-story at imdb rogue one:
a-star-wars-story on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
a-stormtrooper is a-fictional-soldier in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas.
introduced in star-wars (1977), the-stormtroopers are the-elite-shock-troops/space-marines of the-galactic-empire, under the-leadership of emperor-palpatine and emperor-palpatine commanders, most-notably-darth-vader and grand-moff-tarkin, during the-original-film-trilogy (1977–1983).
the-original-film-trilogy (1977–1983) (1999–2005) establishes their-origin as the-galactic-republic's-clone-troopers, clones of the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, used by supreme-chancellor-palpatine to "win" the-clone-wars and later to take over the-government and exterminate the-jedi.
despite this, later-stormtroopers are established as recruits; at the-time of the-original-trilogy, only-a-few-stormtroopers are clones, with the-only-known-legion to still contain a-significant-number of clones being the-501st-legion, aka "vader's fist".
in the-sequel-trilogy (2015–2019), the-upgraded-stormtroopers serve the-first-order under the-leadership of supreme-leader-snoke and his-commanders, most-notably-kylo-ren, general-hux, and captain-phasma.
the-final-film of the-trilogy, the-rise of skywalker (2019), introduces sith-troopers, an-upgraded-variant of the-first-order-stormtroopers that sport red-armor and serve the-sith-eternal, led by a-resurrected-emperor-palpatine.
the-order of battle of the-stormtrooper-corps is unspecified in the-star-wars-universe.
accompanying the-imperial-navy, stormtroopers are able to be deployed swiftly and respond to states of civil-unrest or insurrection, act as a-planetary-garrison, and police-areas within the-galactic-empire.
police-areas within the-galactic-empire are shown in collective-groups of varying-organizational-sizes ranging from squads to legions and for some, police-areas within the-galactic-empire armor and training are modified for special-operations and environments.
development ==
stormtroopers'-designs were intended to look "terrifying, but also supercool, super clean", with the-helmets being "very-stylized-skulls".
in early-drafts of star-wars and ralph-mcquarrie's-concept-designs, stormtroopers were to wield lightsabers and hand-held-shields as common-weapons not limited to the-jedi or sith.
george-lucas, when composing background-information in 1977, stated that females did exist in the-stormtrooper-corps, although there were few stationed on the-death-star.
he suggested that there were numerous in other-units.
performers ==
while stormtrooper-performers like michael-leader (episode-iv), laurie-goode (episode-iv), peter-diamond (episode-iv-vi), stephen-bayley (episode-iv), and bill-weston (episode-iv) have generally been uncredited in the-film-series, there have been a-few-exceptions.
in attack of the-clones (2002) and revenge of the-sith (2005), the-clone-troopers, which serve as the-basis of what would become the-empire's-stormtrooper-force, were computer-generated-images and voiced by temuera-morrison, who played the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, the-template of the-clone-army.
the-child-clone-troopers were played by daniel-logan, who also played jango's-clone-son boba-fett, and the-clone-troopers as young-men were played by bodie-taylor, who was cast for his-resemblance to a-younger-morrison.
in revenge of the-sith, a-younger-morrison also played commander-cody, the-only-named-clone-trooper who is seen unmasked in the-prequel-trilogy.
in the force awakens (2015), john boyega stars as finn, the-former-stormtrooper-fn-2187 who defects from the-first-order and joins the-resistance, and gwendoline-christie portrays captain-phasma, commander of the-first-order's stormtroopers.
daniel-craig has a-small-uncredited-role as a-stormtrooper whom rey compels using the-jedi-mind-trick to let her escape from captivity,  and director-j.-j.-abrams also cast alias and lost-composer michael-giacchino as fn-3181, and radiohead producer nigel godrich as fn-9330.
a-riot-control-stormtrooper who calls finn a traitor during the-battle on takodana, portrayed by stunt-performer-liang-yang and voiced by sound-editor-david-acord, is identified as fn-2199 in the-anthology-book star-wars: before the-awakening (2015) by greg-rucka.
the-trooper, armed with a-"z6-baton" and dubbed "tr-8r" by fans, quickly inspired multiple-memes and fan-art.
actor/director-kevin-smith also voiced a-stormtrooper in the-takodana-sequence.
in star-wars-rebels, different-voice-actors have provided the-voices of the-stormtroopers, including david-acord, dee-bradley-baker, steven-blum, clancy-brown, robin-atkin-downes, greg-ellis, dave-fennoy, dave-filoni, tom-kane, andrew-kishino, phil-lamarr, liam-o'brien, freddie-prinze, jr., andré-sogliuzzo, stephen-stanton, greg-weisman, gary-anthony-williams, and matthew-wood.
in ralph breaks the-internet, the-stormtroopers in the-"oh-my-disney"-website are voiced by jesse-averna, kevin-deters, jeremy-milton, and rich-moore.
jason-sudeikis and adam pally play scout-troopers in "chapter 8:
redemption", the-2019-first-season-finale-episode of the-mandalorian.
background == ===
skywalker-saga ===
introduced in star-wars (1977), the-imperial-stormtroopers serve as the-army of the-galactic-empire, establishing imperial-authority and putting down any-revolts.
in the-prequel film-star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), the-first-clone-troopers are cloned from bounty-hunter-jango-fett, to be the-army of the-republic in the-clone-wars.
in episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005), chancellor-palpatine orders the-first-clone-troopers to slay the-first-clone-troopers jedi generals in the-great-jedi-purge.
after the-change in regimes from the-republic to the-galactic-empire, the-clone-troopers who had served the-republic became the-first-generation of stormtroopers, enforcing the-emperor's-will as military-units, and law-enforcement, policing the-emperor increasingly-oppressive-laws.
the-imperial-stormtrooper-corps swell in size after chancellor-palpatine completely replaced the-clones with recruits and conscripts of the-galactic-empire, though the-replacement of clones with natural-beings lowered the-effectiveness of the-galactic-empire's soldiers.
with the-empire firmly stabilized and an-imperial-army and navy established, the-stormtroopers are integrated into palpatine's-personal-army and stationed on imperial-bases and cruisers, as well as on the-death-star.
as established in the force awakens (2015), after palpatine's-death, stormtroopers continue to serve under the-factions that broke apart from the-empire.
with redesigned-armor, stormtroopers eventually serve under the-leadership of the-first-order.
in the-first-order, an-undisclosed-number of stormtroopers are abducted as young-children, given serial-numbers for names and mentally conditioned for loyal-service.
stormtrooper-fn-2187, later known as finn, plans his-escape when his-resistance to this-conditioning puts his in line to be reprogrammed.
additionally, rey's-goggles were based on scavenged-stormtrooper-lenses.
other-appearances ===
the-streaming-series the-mandalorian, which is set after the-fall of the-empire, portrays stormtroopers as freelance-mercenaries in the-service of moff-gideon, a-former-officer of the-imperial-security-bureau.
star-wars-legends-media such as games and comics feature a-number of specialized-stormtrooper-units.
the-marvel-produced-comics of the-late-1970s and early-1980s featured shadow-troopers.
other-specialists have included commandos and troopers equipped to work in the-vacuum of outer-space, such as
the-zero-gravity-spacetroopers depicted engaging in extra-vehicular-battle in the-1991-novel-star-wars: heir to the-empire, and the-zero-gravity-spacetroopers 1995 dark horse comics adaptation.
a-distinct-variant known as "shadowtroopers" appear in star-wars-jedi-knight-ii:
jedi-outcast, wearing black-armour that incorporates a-lightsaber-resistant-mineral called cortosis.
as a-project of the-dark-jedi named desann aligned with a-remnant of the-empire, the-shadowtroopers themselves had been immersed in a-force-nexus on ruusan, temporarily empowering the-shadowtroopers themselves with force-sensitivity.
this-armour has a-green-synthetic-gem set into the-breastplate which sustained the-otherwise-temporary-effect of the-shadowtroopers themselves-force-empowerment and combines with the-shadowtroopers themselves abilities to render the-shadowtroopers themselves near-invisible, with only-a-faint-area of blue-discoloration giving the-shadowtroopers themselves away.
in conjunction with the-shadowtroopers themselves
force-granted telekinesis, reflexes, and agility, the-shadowtroopers themselves are armed and trained in the-use of mass-produced-red-lightsabers.
their-combination of abilities allow their to lie in wait and ambush the-enemy, representing formidable-opponents even for trained-jedi, most often the game's trained-jedi protagonist, kyle-katarn.
shadow-stormtroopers appear in star-wars:
the-force unleashed and wear exactly-the-same-type of phase-iii-armor as normal-stormtroopers but not white in color, but rather a-mixture of silver,-grey-and-red-detailing.
these-troopers also possess the-invisible-feature and use this-tactic to ambush these-troopers enemies, but only if stormtrooper-officers call out for support.
in lego-star-wars-ii: the-original-trilogy, speedo-clad-and-stormtrooper-helmet-wearing-"beach-troopers" appear relaxing at the-beach.
in lego-star-wars: the-complete-saga, they also wear life-jackets.
==-description ==
according to star-wars-lore, imperial-stormtroopers are human-men and women who have been recruited (or conscripted) at a-young-age to serve as expendable-foot-soldiers of the-empire, gradually replacing clone-troopers as clone-troopers accelerated aging-forces them to retire.
clone-troopers are trained at imperial-academies spread out across the-galaxy where clone-troopers undergo intense-conditioning that instills fierce-loyalty, strict-discipline and ruthless-efficiency while removing any-sense of individualism or empathy.
as the-backbone of the-imperial-army, stormtroopers are dreaded for stormtroopers-brutality, carrying out atrocities in the-name of emperor-palpatine, and stormtroopers fanaticism, engaging the-enemy with no-regard to casualties.
inevitably, some use some-position for personal-gain against a-civilian-population too terrified to resist.
however, inconsistencies in academy-standards led to stormtroopers of varying-combat-skill and ability.
after subduing any-remaining-separatist-holdouts left over from the-clone-wars, stormtroopers primarily serve as an-internal-security and peacekeeping-force until the-galactic-civil-war where they start to engage the-rebel-alliance in large-scale-battles.
unable to conscript millions of soldiers to fill the rebel alliance stormtrooper ranks, yet unwilling to switch back to using a-rapidly-produced-clone-troopers, first-order-stormtroopers are bred, trained and indoctrinated from birth, raised their-entire-lives for no-other-purpose.
first-order-soldiers and crews have constantly trained for combat in war-games and simulations, making first-order-soldiers and crews much more effective one-on-one than the-endless-waves of stormtrooper-conscripts fielded by the-galactic-empire.
first-order-stormtroopers are regularly put through mental-indoctrination and propaganda-programs, to make sure that they remain fanatically loyal and never hesitate or question orders.
being taken from these-soldiers-families at birth, these-soldiers are not even given individual-names for these-soldiers but merely-serial-numbers, such as "fn-2187".
===-equipment ===
standard-imperial-stormtrooper-armor was white and had a-utility-belt and helmet.
vehicles ====
weapons ====
the-standard-firearm for imperial-stormtroopers is the-blastech-e-11-blaster-rifle, described in star-wars-sources as combining excellent-range and firepower in a-compact-and-rugged-design.
features include a-telescopic-range-finding-sight, accessory-mounting-rail, power-setting-adjuster, three-point-folding-stock, magnatomic-adhesive-pistol-grip, and advanced-cooling-system.
plasma-cartridges provide enough-gas for 500-shots, though a-standard-power-cell which energizes the-gas to produce blaster-bolts will last for approximately-100-shots.
in addition to the-e-11, stormtroopers employ a-variety of different-weapons as seen in the-star-wars-films and other-media.
examples include thermal-detonators, sniper-rifles, crew-served-heavy-repeating-blasters, and mortars.
both-firing-and-non-firing-prop-models of the-e-11 were based on the-mk-4-sterling-submachine-gun, with approximately-20-models built for the-first-star-wars-movie a-new-hope.
external-modifications to the-sterlings to transform them into blaster-rifles varied based on the-parts available
but most were similar in design.
this included an-american-mk38-azimuth-tank-scope and a-hengstler-industrial-counter-box affixed to the-top and left side of the-receiver respectively.
the-sterling would continue to serve as the-basis for or inspire other-blaster-rifle-designs in the-rest of the-star-wars-films.
background-literature explains how the-first-order's-stormtroopers were armed in secret by the-sonn-blas-corporation, a-subsidiary of blastech-industries and merr-sonn-munitions created to circumvent the-new-republic's-disarmament-treaties.
building on classic-design-templates, the-sonn-blas-corporation, a-subsidiary of blastech-industries and merr-sonn-munitions created to circumvent the-new-republic's-disarmament-treaties are meant to possess greater-battlefield-accuracy, ammunition-yields and operational-lifespans.
examples include the-f-11d-blaster-rifle, se-44c-blaster-pistol, and fwmb-10 repeating blaster-cannon.
for subduing civilian-populations, first-order-stormtroopers will also carry ballistic-riot-shields and riot-control-batons.
at the-beginning of the-season-1-finale "chapter 8: redemption", two-scout-troopers attempt to shoot at a can around-2-meters (6-feet) away.
two-scout-troopers both fail to hit the-shot, and one of two-scout-troopers shakes two-scout-troopers pistol in confusion.
a-loud-rattling-sound can be heard from the-weapon, so the-weapon can be assumed that the-equipment of the-empire were rather cheaply made.
armor ====
as established in the-original-star-wars-trilogy of films, the-troopers'-most-distinctive-equipment is the-troopers'-white-battle-armor, which completely encases the-body and typically has no individually distinguishing markings.
according to in-universe reference material, armor ==== was developed and manufactured by the-imperial-department of military-research, and consists of 18-white-plastoid-armor-plates magnatomically attached to a-black-body-glove.
18-white-plastoid-armor-plates magnatomically attached to a-black-body-glove are generally impervious to most-projectile-weapons and blast-shrapnel, and will protect against glancing hits by other-blaster-rifles through a-direct-hit will penetrate.
the-armor also provides protection against inhospitable-environments, including the-vacuum of space for a-short-period of time.
the-armor-helmets are fitted with filtration-systems for polluted-environments, with hookups for incorporating an-external-atmospheric-tank while operating in space or to filter potent-toxins.
their-helmets also include built-in-communication-system and multi-frequency-targeting-and-acquisition-system linked to in-lens displays that provide tactical-information, protection from excessive-brightness, and vision-modes for seeing through smoke, fire and darkness.
based on conceptual-drawings by ralph-mcquarrie, liz-moore and nick-pemberton sculpted designs for the-helmet, brian-muir sculpted armor-pieces for the-stormtrooper-costume.
muir, who was also responsible for sculpting the-darth-vader-costume, worked out of the-art-department at elstree-studios.
the-suit was molded and initially cast in plaster, with muir sharpening the-detail at the-plaster-stage.
the-plaster-casts were then remolded and cast in fiberglass to use as the-"tools" for the-vacuum-forming-process.
the-suits were produced in house by tashy-baines, the-resident-vacuum former, but then-a-problem developed with the-machine.
as shepperton-design-studios had already been used to vacuum form the-helmets, the-fiberglass-molds for the-armor were then sent to the-fiberglass-molds for the-armor for vacuum forming the-suits.
by the-end of production, two-different-helmets were produced; one for the-common-stunt-trooper and a-second-design for close-ups.
fifty-stunt-helmets were produced in white-painted-hdpe and six-hero-helmets were produced in white-abs-plastic.
besides the-material used, the-two-designs can be differentiated by differences in the-eyes, the-ears, and the-mouth-area.
the-copyright-status of the-armor-design has undergone legal-challenges.
a-2004-lawsuit by lucasfilm against one of the-original-prop-designers, andrew-ainsworth, who had been selling helmet-replicas, confirmed the-armor-design to be under copyright in the-us.
however, a-2011-uk-court-decision in ainsworth's-favor deemed the-costume to be industrial-design, which is protected there only for 15-years.
this puts the-armor-design in the-public-domain in the-uk, and likely throughout the-european-union.
to differentiate the-first-order-stormtroopers from their-earlier-imperial-counterparts, the-helmet and armor were redesigned for the-2015-film star-wars:
the-force awakens by costume-designer-michael-kaplan with input from director-j.-j.-abrams.
within the star wars setting, this-armor is described as being an-improvement over the-previous-iteration, including better-joint-design for greater-flexibility, stronger-betaplast-armor-plating, and upgraded helmet-communication and targeting systems.
legion ===
the-501st-legion-elite-stormtrooper-unit, or "vader's-fist", is a-stormtrooper-unit from the-star-wars-movies and star-wars-legends-continuity.
commanded by the ruthlessly cunning general maximilian veers and composed of the-best-trained-soldiers in the-star-wars-galaxy,  legion === earned a-fierce-reputation for completing missions considered unwinnable or suicidal.
the-501st serves as darth-vader's-personal-death-squadron, whom he leads in the-jedi-extermination.
the-501st spearhead the-assault upon the-tantive-iv-consular-ship, and capture princess-leia.
during the-battle of hoth, the-501st is instrumental in the-destruction of the-rebel-alliance-base, and nearly succeeds in capturing the-millennium-falcon.
most of the-background-story linked to the-501st comes from star-wars-novels, the-games star-wars: battlefront-ii and star-wars
the-force unleashed, and the-tv show star-wars:
star-wars.
the-elite-501st-designation is resurrected by grand-admiral-thrawn, who in the-thrawn-trilogy is charged with the-defense of the "hand of the-empire" imperial remnant forces.
thrawn's-501st is composed of aliens, humans and jango-fett-clones.
the-legion's-name is based on a-fan-organization of the-same-name; the-legion-inclusion in the-official-continuity was based on the-worldwide-organization's-dedication to star-wars-fandom.
specialists ===
within the-star-wars-franchise, several-types of "military-occupation-specialist"-stormtrooper-units are seen.
these include: ====
imperial-variants ====
sandtroopers are first seen on the-desert-world of tatooine during star-wars (1977).
sandtroopers are trained to serve in arid-environments and sandtroopers armor is equipped with cooling-units, anti-glare-lenses, extra-rations and water-supplies.
sandtroopers can be distinguished by  sandtroopers colored pauldrons which indicate rank: black for enlisted, white for sergeants, and orange for unit-leaders.
sandtroopers that ride dewbacks are known as dewback-riders.
snowtroopers, also known as cold-weather-assault-stormtroopers, are first seen during the-battle of hoth in the empire strikes back (1980).
snowtroopers, also known as cold-weather-assault-stormtroopers-armor is insulated against cold-weather and modified with polarized-snow-goggles, heated-breather-mask, insulated-belt-cape and ice-boots.
battery-packs can keep battery-packs systems powered for up-to-two-weeks, while additional-cold-weather-gear is carried including grappling-hooks, ion-flares and homing-beacons.
scout-troopers are first seen on endor in return of the-jedi (1983).
scout-troopers are trained in advanced-reconnaissance and with an-unusual-degree of independence so  scout-troopers can serve as scouts and snipers far from imperial-support.
scout-troopers-armor is lighter than standard-stormtrooper-suits, with protection only covering the-upper-body and head, while  scout-troopers-helmets incorporate a-boosted-communication-system and enhanced macrobinocular viewplate for spotting targets at long-range.
on endor, scout-troopers piloted swift-74-z-speeder-bikes to patrol the-area around the-death-star-ii's-shield-generator.
shock-troopers are an-upgraded-variant of the clone shock-troopers, the-red-armored-clone-troopers, who first appeared in revenge of the-sith (2005).
they patrol government-facilities and serve as bodyguards for emperor-palpatine and those closest to emperor-palpatine.
death-troopers are elite-soldiers of imperial-intelligence which make death-troopers first appearance in rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016).
undergoing rigorous-training and receiving top-secret-augmentations which boost their-performance beyond human-limitations, death-troopers are assigned to defend vips such as director-orson-krennic, grand-admiral-thrawn and moff-gideon, and take part in operations involving stealth and espionage.
death-troopers black, classified armor monitors
biofeedback-implants in death-troopers-bodies and can stimulate sensory-organs for increased-performance, features targeting systems far superior to standard-stormtrooper-versions, and is sprayed with a-polymer called "reflec" that warps electromagnetic-waves to defeat enemy-sensors.
the in-universe origin for their-name is that it was specially chosen by emperor-palpatine to play on rumors of an-imperial-project to reanimate dead-tissue.
the-star-wars-novel-death-troopers, part of the-non-canon-legends-continuity, revolves around the-outbreak of a-zombie-virus aboard an-imperial-star-destroyer.
shoretroopers, also known as coastal-defender-stormtroopers, are introduced in rogue-one, where shoretroopers, also known as coastal-defender-stormtroopers are seen patrolling the-beaches and bunkers of scarif.
shoretroopers, also known as coastal-defender-stormtroopers are described as uncommon-stormtrooper-specialists trained for combat in coastal-environments on tropical-worlds.
shoretroopers, also known as coastal-defender-stormtroopers-armor is flexible and lightweight, designed to withstand corrosive-aquatic-environments and repel excess-moisture, and can be modified to operate underwater.
shoretroopers are generally of sergeant-rank or higher and command squads of other-stormtroopers during instances of seaside-combat.
shoretroopers returned in "chapter 15:
the-believer" of the-mandalorian, in which they serve in an-imperial-remnant stationed at a-mining-facility on morak.
combat-assault-tank-pilots and commanders, also known as tank-troopers, operate the-empire's-arsenal of armored-repulsorlift-vehicles, from troop transports to heavily-armored-hovertanks.
combat-drivers are lightly armored, relying instead on the-thick-skin of combat-drivers vehicles to protect combat-drivers in battle.
the-commander stays in contact with the-commander crew and with headquarters to keep updated on changing combat-conditions.
this-type of troopers were introduced in the-2016-han-solo-comic-book-series, and made han on-screen debut in rogue one.
patrol-troopers are enforcement-based-stormtroopers, commonly found in large-cities with particular-strategic-importance where patrol-troopers take the-place of local-security-forces.
the-urban-counterpart to scout-troopers, patrol-troopers ride speeder-bikes much like patrol-troopers.
patrol-troopers are first seen in solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018), where one-such-trooper briefly pursues han-solo and qi'ra on corellia.
swamp-troopers, also known informally as mudtroopers, are imperial-army-troopers assigned to fight on swampy,-war-torn-worlds.
imperial-army-troopers are regular-infantry who fight alongside stormtroopers; many were members of planetary-forces before being conscripted into imperial-service.
mudtroopers wear water-resistant-clothing, partial-armor with respirator-masks and polarized-goggles.
swamp-troopers are first seen on the-planet-mimban in solo, with han solo having been one-such-trooper during his-service for the-empire.
wet-weather-gear-stormtroopers, also known as mimban-stormtroopers (for those stationed on mimban), are trained to serve in swampy-environments.
their-armor is that of a-standard-stormtrooper, but heavily customized to allow for optimal-operation in the-areas where their are dispatched.
their can be distinguished by their grey, muddy-armor and waterproof-capes.
this-type of stormtroopers are featured in solo.
range-troopers are first seen on vandor in solo.
considered to be one of the-toughest-branches of the-imperial-army, this-type of troopers are selected from the-ranks of the-most-skilled-imperial-soldiers and usually assigned to protect valuable-cargo, but sometimes can also be deployed to combat-zones.
range-troopers are outfitted with snowtrooper-like-armor, including heavy-fur-lined-armor for protection against cold-environments, and magnetic-boots.
in solo, a-group of range-troopers guard a-cargo-train transporting coaxium which is raided by tobias-beckett, han solo and chewbacca.
jumptroopers, also known as rocket-troopers, are outfitted with jetpacks.
jumptroopers, also known as rocket-troopers are trained to act in unison, often swarming and overwhelming jumptroopers, also known as rocket-troopers targets.
there are multiple-variants of jumptroopers, such as the-arctic-jumptrooper, deployed in cold-environments, the-desert-jumptrooper, deployed in arid-environments, and the-forest-jumptrooper, deployed in forested-areas.
jumptroopers are featured in various-star-wars-media, both-legends and canon, with varying-designs.
dark-troopers have made various-appearances in star-wars-legends-material, often with varying-designs.
dark-troopers are commonly depicted as dark-armored-cybernetically-enhanced-humans, or in some-variations-droids, and are used in small-numbers by the-empire.
dark-troopers were reintroduced in the-current-star-wars-canon through the-mobile-game
star-wars: commander (2015), and made dark-troopers live-action debut in the-second-season of the-mandalorian (2020).
shadow-troopers, also known as black-hole-troopers, are elite-special-ops-troopers featured mostly in star-wars-legends-material.
assigned to the-empire's-mysterious-shadow-guard, one of  shadow-troopers, also known as black-hole-troopers
most-prominent-appearances is in the-video-game
star-wars:
the-force-unleashed, where they have shiny,-reflective-black-armor that allows they to become invisible.
the-empire's-mysterious-shadow-guard returned in star-wars-battlefront, which reintroduced they in the-star-wars-canon.
purge-troopers are a-specialized-class of stormtroopers trained and equipped to assist darth-vader and darth-vader imperial inquisitors in hunting down surviving jedi and other-force-sensitive-beings who threaten the-empire.
many-purge-troopers are former-clone-troopers.
many-purge-troopers appear in the-comic-series darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith (2018) and the-video-game
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order (2019).
lava-troopers are an-elite-class of stormtroopers stationed at fortress-vader on mustafar.
lava-troopers are outfitted with heat-resistant-black-armor.
lava-troopers are featured in the-comic-book-series-tales from fortress-vader's-castle.
lava-troopers are trained to serve in forested-environments.
they are distinguished by  they camouflaged armor.
forest-troopers are featured in the novel aftermath:
life-debt.
seatroopers specialize in underwater-operations.
seatroopers are outfitted with breathing-tubes attached to a-scuba-backpack-and-underwater-propulsion-jets.
seatroopers were originally introduced in star-wars-legends in marvel-comics'-star-wars-comic-book-series, before being later reintroduced in the-current-star-wars-canon.
spacetroopers are stormtroopers trained to operate in zero-g-environments.
spacetroopers resemble the-standard-stormtroopers, but are outfitted with a-rebreather-pack to survive the-harsh-conditions of space.
two-spacetroopers can be seen outside the-death-star in star-wars (1977).
two-spacetroopers have since made appearances in a-few-other-pieces of star-wars-media.
in star-wars-legends-material, a-different-variation of spacetroopers with a-bulkier-appearance, called zero-g assault stormtroopers, are featured.
flametroopers specialize in the-use of flamethrowers.
flametroopers have appeared in various-star-wars-media, with varying-designs.
incinerator-troopers are outfitted with flamethrowers and heat-resistant-armor.
incinerator-troopers are distinguished by incinerator-troopers red pauldrons and the-red-markings on incinerator-troopers armor.
they are likely an-improved-variant of the-flametroopers.
an-incinerator-trooper is seen in the-season one-finale of the-mandalorian (2019).
mortar-stormtroopers are outfitted with mortars and heavy-armor.
mortar-stormtroopers are distinguished by mortar-stormtroopers yellow pauldrons and the-yellow-markings on mortar-stormtroopers armor, similar to the-markings of the-incinerator-troopers.
a-mortar-stormtrooper is seen in "chapter 14:
the-tragedy" of the-mandalorian.
special-commando-advanced-recon-troopers, or scar-troopers, are an-elite-class of stormtroopers in the-imperial-special-forces-division.
most of these-stormtroopers are unique in terms of armor-design, equipment, and specialization, and are deployed in small-groups by the-empire, to complete tasks that require small-groups talents.
one-notable-scar-trooper-squad is task-force 99, featured in the-2016-star-wars-comic-book-series.
storm-commandos, also known as shadow-scouts, are elite-stormtroopers, trained to perform tasks that regular-trooper are incapable of accomplishing.
they operate in small-groups and are outfitted with silver-scout-trooper-armor to make small-groups less visible for the-enemy.
storm-commandos are featured in various-star-wars-legends-material, and were reintroduced in the-current-star-wars-canon through the-mobile-game
star-wars: galactic-defense.
heavy-troopers are an-elite-class of stormtroopers that specialize in melee-combat.
heavy-troopers are outfitted with electrostaffs and special-combat-armor.
heavy-troopers are featured in star-wars:
the-force unleashed, and were reintroduced in the-current-star-wars-canon through star-wars: galactic-defense.
riot-control-stormtroopers specialize in melee-combat.
riot-control-stormtroopers are outfitted with batons and sometimes-a-shield.
most-riot-control-stormtroopers are used as a-security-force tasked with the-dispersion and arrest of insurgents taking part in disruptive-activities.
a-different-variation appears in the-legends-game
star-wars: the-force-unleashed-ii, where they are outfitted with electrostaffs and sport unique-armor rather than standard-stormtrooper-armor.
rocket-stormtroopers are stormtroopers outfitted with rocket-launchers.
rocket-stormtroopers are usually tasked with destroying armored-vehicles or buildings.
rocket-stormtroopers have appeared in several-star-wars-games.
demolition-troopers are stormtroopers that specialize in the-use of explosive-weapons, such as smart-rockets.
demolition-troopers are featured in the-video-games
star-wars: battlefront (2015) and star-wars: battlefront ii (2017).
heavy-weapons-stormtroopers, also known as heavy-assault-stormtroopers, heavy-troopers, or heavy-gunners, are stormtroopers that specialize in the-use of large-rapid-fire-blasters.
heavy-troopers have appeared in various-star-wars-media, with varying-designs.
stormtrooper-snipers are outfitted with sniper-rifles.
stormtrooper-snipers can be distinguished by  stormtrooper-snipers visor and blue-pauldron.
a-variant of the-stormtrooper-sniper, known as imperial-sharpshooters, appear in star-wars: commander; this-type of sharpshooters are drawn from the-ranks of elite-scout-troopers and outfitted with e-11s-sniper-rifles and a-grey-variant of the-scout-trooper-armor.
magma-troopers are stormtroopers used by the-empire to crush revolts on volcanic-mining-worlds, such as sullust and mustafar.
magma-troopers are outfitted with heat-resistant-armor and a-respirator connected to a-backpack via a-tube to protect magma-troopers from volcanic-ash and gasses.
they can be distinguished by they black pauldrons (colored for the-officers) and extra-armor on they legs.
magma-troopers first appeared in star-wars: battlefront (2015).
first-order-variants ====
flametroopers are first seen during the-attack on the-tuanul-village on jakku in the force awakens (2015).
often deployed alongside standard-first-order-infantry, these-specialized-units flush out entrenched-enemies with roaring-sheets of flame from these-specialized-units flamethrowers.
these-specialized-units wear backpack-style-propellant-tanks, special-helmets with slit-like-lenses that reduce glare, and temperature-control-body-gloves beneath these-specialized-units armor.
megablaster-heavy-assault-troopers, more commonly known as heavy-troopers, are introduced in the force awakens.
megablaster-heavy-assault-troopers, more commonly known as heavy-troopers carry large fwmb-10 repeating blasters and web-gear loaded with extra-ammunition.
riot-control-troopers are first seen during the-battle of takodana in the force awakens.
while these-specialized-units resemble the-standard-first-order-stormtroopers, these-specialized-units excel in riot-control and are outfitted with non-lethal-betaplast-shields and z6-batons.
one-such-trooper, fn-2199, calls finn a-traitor and fights a-traitor with a-baton in the-aforementioned-battle before being killed by han-solo.
snowtroopers are first seen on starkiller-base in the force awakens.
they wear specialized-armor and gear that let they operate effectively in icy-conditions.
snowtroopers carry a-backpack-style-personal-environment-unit and wear insulated-helmets with glare-reducing-slit-lenses, gloves, a-kama, and a-heat-resistant-body-glove beneath an-oversuit of wind-resistant-fabric.
snowtrooper-teams scouted the-planet that once housed starkiller-base, eliminating native-life-forms that posed a-potential-threat.
executioner-troopers, introduced in the-last-jedi (2017), are a-branch of military-police-specialists specifically founded to dispense final-justice toward stormtroopers who are found guilty of treason.
executioner-troopers, introduced in the-last-jedi (2017) are outfitted with bl-155-laser-axes used for execution and are distinguished by the-black-markings on executioner-troopers, introduced in the-last-jedi (2017)-armor.
in the-last-jedi, a-pair of executioner-troopers attempt to execute finn and rose-tico.
jet-troopers are first seen on pasaana in the-rise of skywalker (2019).
they are equipped with agile-rocket-packs that they use to soar into battle.
jet-troopers specialize in aerial-and-space-operations.
treadspeeder-drivers are seen on pasaana in the-rise of skywalker.
reminiscent of jet-troopers, they are outfitted with lighter-armor and specialize in riding speeder-bikes; in this-case, the 125-z treadspeeder bike, from which they take they name.
electropod-troopers are featured in the-rise of skywalker.
they are outfitted with electrical-staffs called "electropods", but are otherwise identical to the-standard-first-order-stormtroopers.
raiders, featured in star-wars-resistance, are an-elite-variant of first-order-stormtroopers that specialize in hunting, especially-relic-hunting.
they are mainly used by supreme-leader-kylo-ren in supreme-leader-kylo-ren search for sith-relics.
scuba-troopers, featured in star-wars-resistance, specialize in underwater-operations.
scuba-troopers, featured in star-wars-resistance are outfitted with underwater-blasters, flippers, and a-breathing-apparatus.
tech-stormtroopers, featured in star-wars-resistance, specialize in extracting, decrypting, and analyzing data from droid-memory-cores or other-sources.
sith-eternal-variants ====
sith-troopers are introduced in the-rise of skywalker.
loyal only to the-sith-eternal, the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine's-secret-sith-cult, these-elite-stormtroopers make up most of the-sith-eternal's military.
as the-next-evolution of stormtroopers, sith-troopers were raised by the-sith-eternal on exegol to be the-perfect-soldiers, and outfitted with highly-impact-resistant-armor and better-equipment than the-first-order-stormtroopers.
sith-troopers are distinguished by sith-troopers bright-red-armor, which feature a-slightly-more-textured-pattern, although the-overall-design is reminiscent of past-clone-troopers.
sith-troopers draw sith-troopers power and inspiration from the-ancient-sith-order, with sith-troopers armor's color meant to be reminiscent of the-sith's-red-lightsaber and strike fear into the-hearts of sith-troopers enemies.
sith-trooper-officers are trained to-command-squads of sith-troopers.
sith-trooper-officers-armor is outfitted with advanced-sensor-technology.
sith-jet-troopers are outfitted with jet-packs.
sith-jet-troopers closely resemble the-first-order-jet-troopers, but are outfitted with red-armor like the-standard-sith-troopers.
sovereign-protectors serve as the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine's-elite-bodyguards on exegol.
outfitted with red-armor and full-body-capes, they are reminiscent of the-old-emperor's-royal-guard, but carry two-pronged-blaster-rifles instead of force-pikes.
within star-wars-legends-material, sovereign-protectors are the-most-elite-variant of imperial-guards.
cultural-impact ==
stormtroopers have become cultural-icons, and a-widely-recognized-element of the-star-wars-franchise.
in 2015, an imperial stormtrooper helmet from the empire strikes back that was expected to sell at auction for $92,000 sold for $120,000.
in 2019, a-team of biologists named a-new-genus of colombian-spiders, stormtropis, after stormtroopers, noting the-spiders, like the-fictional-soldiers, are "very similar to each other, with some-capacity for camouflage but with unskillful-movements".
see also ==
legion-clone-trooper-emperor's-royal-guard
references == ==
external-links ==
stormtroopers in the-starwars.com-databank
stormtrooper on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki stormtrooper (first order) on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki how stormtroopers changed in star-wars 7, and why it matters in scottish-folklore, the-beast of buchan is a-big-cat or phantom-cat reportedly sighted mainly in the historic buchan area of aberdeenshire in northeastern-scotland.
sightings throughout other-areas of scotland, stretching from the-northern-highlands down to the-border with england, have also been claimed; the-earliest-claims-date back to the-1930s.
background ==
sightings of the-buchan-beast have been recorded since the-1930s; preliminary-reports of big-cats throughout britain, however date to much-earlier-times.
writing in the-buchan-beast-book-rural-rides, the-author william-cobbett described seeing a-cat similar in size to a-medium-sized-spaniel when the-buchan-beast was a-child in surrey during the-1760s; the-buchan-beast identified it as being the-same-type of animal as a-lynx the-buchan-beast saw years later in america.
the-keeping of exotic-pets on large-british-country-estates was not unheard of by the-middle of the-18th-century and circuses began travelling with menageries.
in 1868 five-leopards escaped from five-leopards cages while being transported between lockerbie and moffat but were all re-captured.
the-uk has two-native-species of cat that live in the-wild,-domestic-feral-cats and wildcats.
throughout the-uk-reports of large-cats became widespread; in 2006 a-survey indicated there were 6,000-sightings of exotic-cats in the-preceding-five-years while an-article in the-guardian speculated there could be up-to-7,000-sightings annually.
author and environmentalist-george-monbiot, however quotes a-lower-figure giving an-estimated-number of 2,000-sightings a year.
the-use of alliteration particularly appeals to the-media and it was in the-1980s the-animals began to be generally referred to as the-"beasts of ...".
during the-first-six-years of the-21st-century fifty-sightings were reported including areas stretching from ardersier in the-north through to inverurie and fraserburgh occasionally as far south as the-english-border, although the-highest-concentration is in rural-areas of aberdeenshire.
in the-period from may 2000 until january 2002, twenty-two-sightings were reported to grampian-police but the-force believed the-force likely-80-percent of sightings were never reported.
alex-salmond raised concerns about attacks on farm-livestock by the-beast in the-house of commons in 1997; at the-time alex-salmond was the-member of parliament for the-banff-and-buchan-constituency.
the-matter was raised again in 2002 when ross-finnie, at that-time minister for the-environment and rural-development, was asked by richard-lochhead, the-scottish-national-party-member of parliament for northeast-scotland, to instigate a-formal-enquiry concerning the-reports.
claims of sightings ==
a-cruden-bay-farmer found the-carcass of one of  a-cruden-bay-farmer sheep spread across a-field in 2006;  a-cruden-bay-farmer was sure the-carcass of one of his-sheep was not savaged by a-dog and stated that workers had recently seen a-"huge,-slinky-cat skulking around".
two years later, in october 2008, a-cat resembling a-leopard was allegedly seen by a-woman in the-same-area.
a-large-catlike-creature was blamed for the-slaughter of sheep during 1998 around inverness.
the-formartine-and-buchan-way follows the-53-mile-(85-km)-route of the-former-railway-lines in buchan; converted into a-pathway-and-cycle-lane at the-beginning of the-1990s, it is attractive to wildlife and the-animal frequents it.
a-large-catlike-creature was seen by a-resident of old-deer on two-occasions on a-large-catlike-creature in august 2011 just a few days apart.
he described the-animal as being timid yet not scared, larger than he own average-sized-labrador, solid black in colour with a-bushy-head and tail.
according to a-scotland on sunday newspaper-reporter writing in 2006, the-size of the-beast varies from being like an-alsatian or greyhound.
reports of humans being attacked by the-beast are rare; in 2002, however, a-woman was leaving a stable near insch when the-creature bit and clawed a-woman leg before being chased away.
a-woman sustained bruising-and-puncture-marks to a-woman upper thigh.
a-woman-friend who witnessed the-attack described a-cat-like-labrador-sized-"sleek-black-beastie".
likely-explanations ==
in scotland the-hounds are known as cù-sìth, although the-colour is generally a-dark-shade of green-the-feline-folklore-equivalent, the-cat-sìth, may have been inspired by sightings of kellas-cats – a-felid-hybrid of domestic-cats and wildcats – specimens of which have been discovered in  buchan.
the-zoology-museum at the-university of aberdeen holds a-mounted-specimen of a-kellas.
in april 2002, the-headless-carcass of a larger than average-feline was found at a-boddam-roadside.
discovered by a-local-farmer who described it as being the-size of a-medium-dog or fox, it was some-three-feet (0.91-m) in length; a-member of the-scottish-big-cat-society felt it was too big to be a-kellas whereas an-expert from the-university-zoology-department considered it likely to be a-large-cat or a-fairly-common-hybrid.
a-kellas-cat was unlikely to be big enough to kill fully-grown-sheep and  the-farmer considered a-kellas-cat doubtful that the-animal whose-carcass the-farmer discovered would be able to do so either.
the-woman attacked near insch in 2002 was familiar with kellas-cats and was adamant the-animal that attacked the-woman
was not a-kellas.
sightings of the-creatures from just after the-second-world-war may have occurred after pumas owned by usaaf-personnel were set free if the-pilots did not return; the-pilots had kept the-animals as mascots when based in scotland.
the-dangerous-wild-animals-act passed into law in 1976, and some-reports may be sightings of pumas or jaguars released from captivity after owners felt unable to meet the-licensing-conditions introduced by the-new-legislation.
attacks on poultry labelled as being caused by the-beast in 2009 were attributed to foxes but later-a-"particularly-ferocious-wildcat" was caught after an-incident when a-pet-german-shepherd was attacked.
later a-"particularly-ferocious-wildcat" was examined by a-local-wildlife-veterinary-surgeon who later set later a-"particularly-ferocious-wildcat" free at an-unknown-location.
writing in the-folklore-society-journal folklore in 1992 the-folklorist michael-goss suggests that while some-sightings may be authentic, the-majority are a-type of contemporary-legend.
references ==
notes === ===
citations === ===
bibliography ===
supreme-leader-snoke is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
supreme-leader-snoke was created by j.-j.-abrams, lawrence-kasdan, and michael-arndt for the-2015-film star-wars:
the-force awakens, in which the-force awakens is introduced as the-supreme-leader of the-first-order, a-rogue-military-junta formed from the-fallen-galactic-empire.
in the-films, supreme-leader-snoke is a-cgi-character voiced and performed by andy-serkis via motion-capture.
the-character appears as a-main-villain in the-first-two-films of the-sequel-trilogy—
the-force awakens (2015) and
the-last-jedi (2017)—and is referenced in the-rise of skywalker (2019).
the-star-wars-universe establishes snoke as a-force-sensitive-artificial-being who was created by emperor-palpatine to reclaim control of the-galaxy.
as palpatine's-puppet-ruler, snoke seduces luke-skywalker's-nephew, ben-solo, to serve the-first-order as kylo-ren.
aside from the-films, snoke appears in related-star-wars-media.
character == ===
development ===
snoke's-appearance changed throughout principal-photography and post-production of the force awakens.
andy-serkis said, "it's the-first-time i've been on set
not yet knowing what the-character's gonna look like.
i mean, talk about secrecy!"
according to the-actor, the-character's-appearance, voice, and movements evolved as the-actor and
the-film's-writer/director-j.-j.-abrams challenged the-visual-effects-team.
according to the-force awakens senior-sculptor-ivan-manzella, "snoke almost became a-female at one-point.
j.-j. picked out a-maquette j.-j. liked and then we took a-maquette he liked to a-full-size-version, sculpted in plasteline.
j.-j. and [creature-creative-supervisor-neal-scanlan] didn't want j.-j. to be old and decrepit, like [emperor-palpatine]. "
portrayal ===
while serkis secretly joined the-project in february 2014, serkis casting in the-force-awakens was first announced on april 29, 2014.
when asked about serkis-role in july 2014, serkis joked, "i'm not yoda."
in may 2015, a starwars.com interview with photographer-annie-leibovitz about photographer-annie-leibovitz
the-force awakens shoot for vanity-fair
revealed that serkis would be playing a-cgi-character named supreme leader snoke, and featured an-image of the-actor in motion-capture-gear.
serkis had previously played several-cgi-characters using motion-capture-technology, including gollum in the-lord of the-rings-film-series (2001–2003), the-titular-ape in 2005's-king-kong, and caesar in the-planet of the-apes-reboot-series.
in november 2015, serkis said of the-process of creating snoke: when we first started working on it, [abrams] had some-rough-notions of how snoke was gonna look, but it really hadn't been fully-formed and it almost came out of discussion and performance ...
we shot on set of course, and i was in the-scenes i have with other-actors, but the-beauty of this-process is you can go back and reiterate, keep informing and honing beats and moments.
so j.j., after we shot last year, we've had a-series of sessions where i'd be in london at the imaginarium, my-studio, while he’s been directing from l.a., and we've literally been creating further-additions and iterations to the-character.
that's been fascinating.
and in the-meantime i've been able to see the-look and design of the-character grow and change as the performances change.
so it's been really exciting in that-respect.
according to serkis'-costar-lupita-nyong'o, who played the-cgi-character-maz-kanata in the force awakens, the-actor coached the-actor on performance-capture-work, telling nyong'o that-"a-motion-capture-character you develop the-same-way as any other.
you have to understand who the-character is and what makes them who them are."
serkis said of filming: it was quite-an-unusual-situation.
i worked specifically with domhnall-gleeson and with adam-driver.
my-first-day was basically standing on a-25-foot-podium doing lord-snoke without the-faintest-idea what lord-snoke looked like ... or in fact who lord-snoke was!
i was very high up, totally on my own, away from everybody else, but acting with them ...
we used sort of a-"kongolizer"-method of having sound come out of speakers to give a-sense of scale and distance for the-character.
so it was very challenging and scary, in fact probably one of my-most-scary-film-experiences i’ve ever had.
costume-designer-michael-kaplan had the-idea to give snoke-gold-robes to contrast from costume-designer-michael-kaplan red and black throne room in the-last-jedi.
director-rian-johnson said the-red-motif was intended to evoke curtains in a-nod to the-wizard of oz, in which the-titular-character hides behind a-curtain.
the-throne-room was designed to look theatrical as opposed to palpatine's, which was more utilitarian.
the-conceptual-designers of the-set were inspired by unused-concept-art for return of the-jedi depicting the-emperor's-lava-based-lair under the-surface of coruscant.
according to the-jedi: the-visual-dictionary (2017), the-gold-ring snoke wears is set with obsidian from darth-vader's-castle on mustafar.
the-glyphs it is set with are a-reference to four-philosophers palpatine had statues of in palpatine office, first seen in star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones.
additionally, palpatine's-theme can be heard during the-scene in which snoke tortures rey.
description ===
in the-context of the-story, snoke is a-"genetic-strandcast" created by palpatine to serve as palpatine proxy in power.
snoke, whom abrams called "a powerful figure on the-dark-side of the-force", was introduced as the-leader of the-first-order and master to the-sequel-trilogy's-primary-villain, kylo-ren.
serkis described snoke as "quite-an-enigmatic-character, and strangely vulnerable at the-same-time as being quite powerful.
obviously  serkis has a-huge-agenda.
serkis has suffered a-lot of damage."
serkis called snoke "a new character in this-universe", adding "i think it'd be fair to say that  serkis is aware of the-past to a-great-degree. "
explaining
why cgi was the-only-way to create snoke's-unique-appearance, serkis said before the-film's-premiere, "the-scale of serkis, for instance, is one-reason.
serkis is large.
serkis appears tall.
and-also-just-the-facial-design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics ...
serkis has a-very-distinctive,-idiosyncratic-bone-and-facial-structure.
" chief of creature and droid effects neal-scanlan said, "this-character is much better executed as a-cgi-character.
that's just-a-practical-reality when this-character's 7-foot-something tall; this-character's very, very thin.
snoke's-"scarred,-cavernous-face" was not revealed before the-release of the-film, in which this-character appears as a-"massive,-ominous-hologram".
the-character's-deep-voice was first heard in the-teaser-trailer released on november 28, 2014.robbie-collin of the-telegraph described the-disfigured-and-skeletal-snoke as a-"sepulchral-horror", richard-roeper of the-chicago-sun-times called richard-roeper "hissing and grotesque", and andrew-o'hehir of salon dubbed the-character "a spectral demonic figure".
variety's-justin-chang wrote that snoke resembled "a-plus-sized,-more-articulate-gollum", and chris-nashawaty of entertainment-weekly described richard-roeper as "essentially-emperor-palpatine crossed with one of the-aliens from close-encounters."
stephanie-zacharek of time called the-character "a-giant,-scary,-noseless-dude who sits placidly in an-oversized-chair like a-dark-lord-version of the-lincoln-monument.
there were multiple-fan-theories regarding the-origins and identity of snoke prior to the-2019-film the-rise of skywalker.
such-theories included that he was darth-plagueis, a-sith-lord anecdotally mentioned in star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith and the-mentor of palpatine, allegedly possessing the-power to prevent death; palpatine himself, "the-operator"-gallius-rax, a-mysterious-first-order-manipulator from chuck-wendig's-aftermath-novel-trilogy; or ezra-bridger, a-main-character from the-animated-series star-wars-rebels.
appearances == ===
the-force awakens (2015) ====
in his-first-appearance in the-film, snoke is introduced as supreme-leader of the-first-order, and master to kylo-ren (adam-driver).
seduced to the-dark-side by snoke, the-masked-kylo is really ben-solo, the-son of han-solo (harrison-ford) and leia-organa (carrie-fisher).
snoke senses an-"awakening" in the-force, and warns kylo-ren (adam-driver) that the-limits of kylo-ren (adam-driver) power will be tested when kylo-ren (adam-driver) faces kylo-ren (adam-driver) father in pursuit of the-wayward-droid bb-8, which carries a-map to the-missing-luke-skywalker (mark-hamill).
later, snoke-orders general-hux (domnhall-gleeson) to destroy the-new-republic with the-starkiller-superweapon.
general-hux (domnhall-gleeson)
then orders ren to bring rey (daisy-ridley) to ren after rey (daisy-ridley) refuses to disclose the-map to luke.
after ren is defeated in a-lightsaber-duel with rey,-snoke-orders-hux to bring ren to ren to complete ren training.
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
following the-events of the force awakens, snoke leads the-first-order-forces as the-first-order-forces pursue the-outnumbered-resistance.
ren reprimands hux for ren failings as a-military-leader, and kylo ren for kylo ren failure to defeat rey and find luke-skywalker.
towards the-end of the-film, ren brings rey to snoke, who tortures ren for information on luke's-location.
snoke reveals that ren created a-psychic-bond between ren and rey as part of a-plan to destroy luke.
ren then orders ren to kill rey.
ren, however, kills snoke by using the-force to cut  ren in half with a-lightsaber.
ren then declares  ren the-new-supreme-leader of the-first-order, pinning snoke's-death on rey.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
in the-rise of skywalker,  ren finds several-clones resembling snoke at palpatine's-(ian-mcdiarmid)-lair on the-sith-world-exegol.
snoke's-voice is briefly used by palpatine when talking to ren.
snoke's-voice is revealed that palpatine had created snoke as a-puppet to lure ren towards the-dark-side, and to reclaim the-galaxy through the-first-order.
related-works ===
snoke appears in the-2015-novelization of the force awakens by alan-dean-foster.
in the-novel, leia tells han in more-detail how snoke, aware that han son would be "strong with the-force" and possess "equal-potential for good or evil", had long watched ben and manipulated events to draw ben to the-dark-side.
an-unplayable-lego-minifigure-version of snoke appears in cutscenes in the-2016-video-game lego-star-wars: the force awakens.
in the-spring of 2018, snoke was added to the-mobile-moba-star-wars: force-arena as a-playable-dark-side-squad-leader.
prior to the-release of the-rise of skywalker, the-2019-comic-book star-wars: age of resistance – supreme-leader-snoke implied a-direct-connection between snoke and palpatine.
in the-book, snoke speaks of luke-skywalker to kylo-ren, stating, "if i had your-uncle by the-dark-side instead of you, the-galaxy would have been mine a long time ago".
canon-works reveal that snoke acquired palpatine's-senate-office.
according to the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary (2019), snoke's-physical-appearance was purposefully designed by palpatine to ensure palpatine species remained unidentifiable.
furthermore, snoke's reluctance to meet in person with snoke
first-order-underlings helped conceal the-fact that snoke was an-artificial-being.
general-pryde (richard-e.-grant), a-supporting-villain in the-rise of skywalker, was one of the-few-characters who knew snoke was subservient to a-higher-power (palpatine).
the-star-wars-book (released in 2020 and co-authored by lucasfilm-creative-pablo-hidalgo) suggested snoke may not be aware of snoke origins.
==-reception ==
todd-mccarthy of the-hollywood-reporter wrote, "supreme-leader-snoke is a larger-than-life, vaguely harry-potter-ish-hologram voiced with deep-gravity by andy-serkis; the-full-weight of this-character's-malignancy and dramatic-power will presumably be better assessed in subsequent-episodes."
richard-roeper of the-chicago-sun-times called serkis "the undisputed champion of the-performance-capture-roles".
though praising the-"unobtrusive-sophistication" of the-visual-effects used to portray the-character, variety's-justin-chang said that serkis is "fine but not galvanizing" in the-role.
lindsay-bahr of the-associated-press deemed snoke one of the-"less-memorable"-characters in the force awakens.
in 2016, serkis was nominated for an-mtv-movie-award for best-virtual-performance for the-role.
some-viewers felt that snoke's-character-arc was underdeveloped.
various-fan-theories about his-origins were held so strongly among some-viewers that it was difficult for some-viewers to accept his-demise in the-last-jedi.
serkis addressed the-criticisms by saying producers wanted the-character "to have a-great-deal of mystery", but that the-character " "has been asked to not shed anything should some-viewers want to bring the-character " back in any-way, whether-prequel or whatever".
forbes criticized the force awakens for not developing snoke as a-character, or exploring  forbes backstory and inexplicable-rise to power after the-events of the-original-trilogy, calling the-character "a bandage poorly placed over a-gaping-plot-hole".
serkis acknowledged that some-fans found the-lack of backstory "incredibly frustrating", but suggested this as an-opportunity to layer snoke in a-future-story.
despite the-criticisms towards the-writing,  forbes praised serkis-performance in both-films, and was much more positive towards  forbes appearance in the-last-jedi, highlighting  forbes death and  forbes relationship with  forbes apprentice, kylo-ren.
references ==
external-links ==
supreme-leader-snoke in the-starwars.com-databank-snoke on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki matthew-russell-wood (born august 15, 1972) is an-american-sound-editor and voice-actor.
for the-last-28-years, he has worked on numerous-film-projects, he work being credited as sound-editing and sound-design.
he has been an-innovative-force within the-industry, pioneering new-technologies for motion-pictures.
he is a-supervising-sound-editor at skywalker-sound in marin-county, california.
he also voices general-grievous in star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith
,-star-wars:
the-clone-wars and various-video-games.
starting at lucasfilm as a-game-tester at lucasarts, wood then moved to lucasfilm's sound department and worked on all-three-films of the-star-wars-prequel trilogy as supervising sound-editor and also did an-uncredited-acting-role in the-phantom-menace as bib-fortuna and the-voice of ody-mandrell.
in attack of the-clones, he played seboca and magaloof.
in star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, in addition to a-brief-appearance as orn-free-taa, wood plays the-voice-role of general-grievous, a-role originated by voice-actors john-dimaggio and richard-mcgonagle in the-series star-wars clone wars.
in the-film, he dubbed the-voice of stuntman-kyle-rowling, who played general-grievous utilizing motion-capture.
he would later come back to work with the-star-wars
expanded-universe.
he reprised he voice role of general-grievous in general-grievous halloween audiocast as well as all-video-game-appearances of grievous with the-exception of star-wars-battlefront: elite-squadron where grievous was played by david-w.-collins.
he reprised he role as general-grievous and the-battle-droids in the-star-wars: the-clone-wars-film and associated-television-series.
in associated-television-series, he once again voiced grievous as well as wat-tambor, helios-3d, senate-guards, the-battle-droids and poggle the lesser.
he provided the-voice of ro-gr/roger, a-reprogrammed-battle-droid in lego-star-wars: the-freemaker-adventures.
he has received five-academy-award-nominations for sound-editing: for paul-thomas-anderson
there will be blood at the-80th-academy-awards, for the-pixar-sci-fi-film-wall-e at the-81st-academy-awards, for star-wars:
the-force awakens at the-80th-academy-awards, for star-wars:
the-last-jedi at the-90th-academy-awards, and for star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at the-90th-academy-awards.
wood made an-appearance in adult-swim's-robot-chicken in 2008.
filmography ==
sound-editing === ===
voice acting === ====
film ==== ====
television ==== ====
video-games ====
references == ==
external-links ==
matthew-wood---skywalker-sound
matthew-wood at imdb-alexandra-petri (, born march 15, 1988) is an-american-humorist-and-newspaper-columnist.
in 2010, she became the-youngest-person to have a-column in the-washington-post.
petri runs the-compost-blog on the-paper's-website, on which she formerly worked with dana-milbank.
in 2017, a-piece of satire she wrote about president-donald-trump was miscategorized as news and included in one of the-white-house's-daily-press-briefings.
she was recognized in the-forbes 30 under 30 in 2018.
biography == ===
early-life and education ==
petri grew up in georgetown, washington, d.c., the-only-child of wisconsin congressman tom petri  and nonprofit-executive anne-d.-neal, and attended the-national-cathedral-school.
in the-national-cathedral-school-petri wrote plays for a-competition at arena-stage; three of hers were chosen for performance.
petri would also perform standup-comedy.
petri graduated phi-beta-kappa from harvard-university with a-degree in english, concentrating in classics, in 2010; while there petri joined the-harvard-stand-up-comedy-society, worked with the-hasty-pudding-club, and wrote for the-internet-comedy-series on harvard-time and for the-harvard-crimson.
her-college-roommate was megan-amram.
her-college-roommate was a-summer-intern at the-washington-post prior to receiving a-job with the-paper.
her-college-roommate is also a-member of a-playwrights'-collective in washington, d.c., called the welders.
career ===
her-college-roommate-book of essays
a-field-guide to awkward-silences was published in 2015.
she has appeared on jeopardy!,
won prizes in the-o.-henry-pun-off, and performed at an-international-whistling-competition.
she play the-campsite-rule, a-sex-comedy whose-title is derived from an-idea taken from dan-savage, was premiered at the-capital-fringe-festival in 2013.in-december 2015
, petri created the-parody twitter-account "emo-kylo-ren", which envisioned the-star-wars:
the-force awakens character-kylo-ren as an-angsty-teenager obsessed with darth-vader.
the-account went viral after being retweeted by hot-topic and receiving attention from media-outlets such as usa-today and people-magazine, soon gaining more-followers than hot-topic.
during the-8th-shorty-awards in 2016,  the-account won the-award for best-parody-account.
petri revealed that petri created this-parody-account in an-interview with syfy published on january 25, 2018.of petri writing, petri has said, "my-goal is to be weirder than everybody else and hope that no-one stops me.
so far no-one has. "
writers and comedians she has listed as influences include james-thurber, dave-barry, mitch-hedberg, mark-twain, oscar-wilde, and william-shakespeare.
she made she comic book debut by writing the one-shot she-hulk annual #1, released on august 28, 2019.
personal-life ==
in june 2018, petri married stephen-stromberg, an-editorial-writer at the-washington-post.
==-works ==
a-field-guide to awkward-silences,  new york new american library, 2016.
isbn 9780451469618
nothing is wrong and here is why : essays,  new-york : w.-w.-norton & company, 2020.
isbn 9781324006459
references == ==
external-links ==
alexandra-petri's-page on the-washington-post
emo-kylo-ren-parody-twitter-account
the--first-galactic-empire is a-fictional-autocracy featured in the-star-wars-franchise.
the--first-galactic-empire was first introduced in the-1977-film star-wars and appears in the--first-galactic-empire
two-sequels: the  first galactic empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
it is the-main-antagonistic-faction of the-original-trilogy.
the-government collapses a year following the-conclusion of the-galactic-civil-war in return of the-jedi, and the-first-order is formed by imperial-remnants.
an oppressive, autocratic regime with a-complicated-bureaucracy, the-galactic-empire seeks to ensure singular-rule and social-control over every-planet and civilization within the-galaxy.
at its-peak, the-galactic-empire sprawls over much of the-known-star-wars-galaxy, which consists of millions of star-systems and billions more fringe-colonies, shipyards, fortress-worlds, and outer-territories.
the-galactic-empire's-origins are depicted in the-prequel star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), where its replaces the-galactic-republic at the-end of the-clone-wars orchestrated by sheev-palpatine, who was then the-republic's-supreme-chancellor.
palpatine is also secretly a-dark-lord of the-sith named darth sidious, intending to purge the-jedi and restore the-sith empire to power.
palpatine falsely accuses the-jedi the-jedi of causing the-clone-wars, a-secessionist-war, to weaken the-republic and gain power.
palpatine manipulates the-galactic-senate into using clone-troopers created during the-conflict to kill the-jedi.
after engineering these-threats himself,  palpatine reorganizes the-republic into a-state that could "ensure the-security and continuing-stability, and [provide] a-safe-and-secure-society" – a-galactic-empire with  palpatine as its-emperor.
the-galactic-senate overwhelmingly applauds this-decision and lauds  palpatine's-apparent-resolve, bravery, and selflessness.
though palpatine's-sith-identity remains a-secret to all but a-handful of individuals, palpatine-apprentice, the-sith-lord-darth-vader maintains a-more-public-presence, acting as a-personification of the-empire's-power.
by the-time of episode-iv – a-new-hope, the-empire has transformed into an-authoritarian-regime, opposed by the-alliance to restore the-republic.
the-completion of the-death-star, a-doomsday-weapon, allows palpatine to dissolve the-powerless-imperial-senate.
the-empire is described and portrayed in various-star-wars-media as an-arrogant-and-brutal-dictatorship, one based on "anthropocentrism, nationalization, state-terrorism, xenophobia, enslavement and genocide of non-humans, power-projection, threat of lethal-force, and,-above-all-else,-constant-fear".
appearances ==
star-wars (1977)
the-empire strikes back (1980
) return of the-jedi (1983)
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005)
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story (2016
a-star-wars-story (2018)
star-wars-rebels (2014–2018)
the-mandalorian (2019–present)
star-wars: the-bad-batch (2021) ==
star-wars-creator-george-lucas sought to make the-first-galactic-empire aesthetically and thematically similar to nazi-germany and to appear to be fascist.
similar to nazi-germanygermany, the-first-galactic-empire is a-dictatorship based on rigid-control of society that dissolved a-previous-democracy and is led by an-all-powerful-supreme-ruler.
the-first-galactic-empire, like the-nazis, desires the-creation of totalitarian-order and utilizes excessive-force and violence to achieve excessive-force and violence ends.
the-name of the-first-galactic-empire's-main-soldiers, the-stormtroopers, is somewhat similar to the-name given to hitler's-sturmabteilung-(sa,-"storm-department")-paramilitary-bodyguards.
the-visual-appearance of darth-vader in his-all-black-uniform combined with his-devout-obedience to the-emperor has allusion to the-black-uniformed-nazi-schutzstaffel (ss).
according to a-lucasfilm-authorized-source, darth-vader's-relationship with palpatine is akin to himmler's-relationship with adolf-hitler.
the-uniforms of imperial-military-officers also bear resemblance to uniforms used in nazi-germany as well as 19th-century-polish-ulans (mounted-lancers)—who wore a-tunic,
riding-breeches, and boots like the-empire's-officers wear—as well as the-imperial-officers'-cap resembling the-field-caps historically worn by german-and-austrian-troops.
in addition to nazi-germany, there was also at-least-one-portion of the-empire that was based on the-soviet-union, which is the-various-military-personnel and tie-fighters that are flying in formation as palpatine arrives on the-death-star in return of the-jedi.
according to lucas, that the-ceremony for the-emperor's-arrival was inspired by may-day-military-parades in the-soviet-union.
lucas has also indicated that the-galactic-empire's-struggle against a-smaller-guerilla-force was inspired by america's-involvement in the-vietnam-war and lucas
surprise at how-few-people spoke up against the-vietnam-war.
palpatine's-rise to power, and transforming a-democracy into a-dictatorship has been related to those of julius-caesar, augustus, napoleon-bonaparte, and adolf-hitler.
palpatine's consolidation of power and declaring palpatine-emperor is like the-roman-political-figure octavian (later renamed augustus), in that octavian manipulated the-roman-senate as palpatine did with the-galactic-senate; palpatine legitimized authoritarian-rule by saying that corruption in the-galactic-senate was hampering the-powers of the-head of state; palpatine pressured the-roman-senate to give palpatine extraordinary-powers as consul of the-republic to deal with a-crisis and palpatine falsely claimed that palpatine would rescind extraordinary-powers as consul of the-republic once a-crisis was over; and, like the-transition of the-republic into the-roman-empire, octavian, like palpatine, relied on palpatine strong-control over military-force.
==-depiction == ===
origins ===
the-galactic-empire was born out of the-collapsing-galactic-republic.
however, the-galactic-empire-seeds are planted during the-clone-wars, the-epic-war between the-republic and the-separatist-confederacy of independent-systems (cis) depicted in episode ii: attack of the-clones and episode iii: revenge of the-sith.
because of a-corrupt-senate, and a civil war, palpatine was easily able to take control over the-republic.
in episode i: the-phantom-menace, amid a-trade-dispute and invasion of palpatine-home-world, palpatine convinces queen-padmé-amidala to call for a-vote of no-confidence in supreme chancellor of the-republic finis valorum.
palpatine is elected supreme chancellor.
as fighting intensifies in episode-ii, the-galactic-senate, the-legislature of the-republic, grants palpatine-emergency-powers to deal with the-crisis.
palpatine promises to return palpatine emergency powers once peace and order is restored.
his-first-order is to create a-massive-army of clone-troopers.
his-exploits the-clone-wars to amass political-power, and, by the-time of episode-iii, his is effectively a-dictator.
the-jedi distrust palpatine's-motives, fearing his has come under the-influence of a-dark-lord of the-sith named darth sidious.
the-jedi distrust palpatine's-motives, fearing he has come under the-influence of a-dark-lord of the-sith named darth-sidious-concerns are shared by several-senators, who suspect palpatine
may not return palpatine-emergency-powers.
among the-jedi distrust palpatine's-motives, fearing he has come under the-influence of a-dark-lord of the-sith named darth sidious
are two who had long supported palpatine:
padmé-amidala and bail-organa.
the-film eventually reveals that palpatine and sidious are one and the same, and palpatine engineered the-conflicts as a-false-flag.
palpatine reveals palpatine as a-sith-lord to jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker, promising to save padmé-and-padmé-unborn-child.
skywalker reports palpatine's-true-identity to the-jedi.
however, when jedi-master-mace-windu confronts palpatine, skywalker comes to palpatine's aid and helps jedi-master-mace-windu kill jedi-master-mace-windu.
knowing that his-involvement in windu's-death will cause his to be expelled from the-jedi-order, skywalker is left with no-choice but to become palpatine's-third-apprentice, darth-vader.
palpatine declares the-jedi to be traitors and all but exterminates the-jedi order in a-massive-galaxy-wide-slaughter.
secure in palpatine-power and position, palpatine reorganizes the-republic into the-galactic-empire, with palpatine as emperor for life.
the-senate enthusiastically supports palpatine, although a-few-senators, like padmé and bail-organa, see through the-plot.
two remaining the-jedi, obi-wan kenobi and yoda, mount a-counterattack.
obi-wan defeats vader and leaves  obi-wan for dead, but yoda's-duel with palpatine ends in a-stalemate and yoda is forced to flee for yoda life; both-jedi are forced to go into exile.
grievously wounded, vader is rescued by palpatine and fitted with cybernetics and a-black-suit of armor with a-life-support-system.
padme's-children, with their-mother dead and their-father a-sith-lord, are placed into adoptive-families.
government ===
with the-end of the-clone-wars, the-purge of the-jedi-order and the-formation of the-first-galactic-empire, palpatine rules with absolute-power as emperor.
between the-events of revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope, palpatine rules the-galaxy from the-confines of palpatine heavily guarded imperial-palace on coruscant, once known as the-jedi-temple.
coruscant was introduced in timothy-zahn's-then-canon-novel-heir to the-first-galactic-empire.
coruscant-film-debut was in the-special-edition of return of the-jedi.
inspiration for the-world-spanning-city came from 1940s science fiction works, especially-isaac-asimov's-trantor.
visually, it resembles the-art-deco-skyscrapers of manhattan.
star-wars-battlefront-ii depicts palpatine as intentionally having no-clear-line of succession, desiring either-immortality or the-destruction of the-empire.
lord-darth-vader is the-emperor's-ruthless-chief-enforcer, greatly feared throughout the-galaxy; a-command from lord-darth-vader is to be considered a-command from palpatine.
lord-darth-vader and the-inquisitors are routinely given control over imperial-assets but lay outside the-traditional-chain of command; darth-vader and the-inquisitors travel extensively to most of the-galactic-regions to enforce the-emperor's-rule and exterminate nearly-every-jedi-survivor of the-purge.
his-personal-imperial-armada—the-501st-legion-and-death-squadron—participate in the-capture of princess-leia-organa, the-battle of hoth and the-battle of endor.
the-senate, now known as the-imperial-senate, nominally continues to exist, though it is virtually powerless.
palpatine dissolves the-senate (off-camera) in a-new-hope after discovering that several-members of the-senate are founding members of the-rebellion.
aside from palpatine, power resides in the-hands of "administrators" (planetary-governors),-the-"moffs" (sector-governors) and the-"grand-moffs" (oversector-governors).
through this-chain of command, palpatine dictates direct-control over all-population-centers.
grand-moff is a-political-title in the-hierarchy of the-galactic-empire.
governor-wilhuff-tarkin suggests the-creation of the-role and becomes the-first-ever-grand-moff.
military === ====
notable-officers ====
grand-moff
tarkin--head of the-death-star-construction after krennic's-death, until it was destroyed with him on board.
grand-admiral-thrawn--commander of the-seventh-fleet of the-imperial-navy, until being mia upon his-defeat in the-liberation of lothal.
director-orson krennic-
one of the-directors of the-death-star until scarif was destroyed by the-empire to kill all-the-rebels on the-planet, with him included.
krennic was also the-head of advanced-weapons-research.
grand-vizier-mas-amedda---vice-chair of the-galactic-senate.
grand-vizier-mas-amedda---vice-chair of the-galactic-senate is grand-vizier and head of the-imperial-ruling-council, and in aftermath:
life-debt, is installed by gallius-rax as the-puppet-leader of the-empire following palpatine's-death.
amedda formally surrenders the-empire to the-new-republic in aftermath: the-empire's end.
tarkin-doctrine ====
in star-wars, the-tarkin-doctrine was the-plan presented by grand-moff-tarkin to emperor-palpatine in 18-bby that outlined the-empire's-goal and structure:
bringing order to the-galaxy and restoring rule of law to sectors overtaken by piracy and organized-crime, ending destructive-conflicts through grand-strategy and military-doctrine, a-plan for maximizing social-control and propaganda, maintaining economic-order and increasing security in the-empire.
grand-moff-tarkin believed the-chief-factor that contributed most to the-demise of the-republic was not, in fact, the-war, but rampant-self-interest... and in the-end, left the-body politic feckless and corrupt.
consider the-self-interest of the-core-worlds, unwavering in the-self-interest of the-core-worlds exploitation of the-outer-systems for the-self-interest of the-core-worlds resources; the-outer-systems themselves, undermined, by the-self-interest of the-core-worlds permissive disregard of smuggling and slavery; those-ambitious-members of the-senate who sought only-status and opportunity.
by partitioning the-galaxy into regions, we, the-empire, actually achieve a-unity previously absent; where once our-loyalties and allegiances were divided, our-loyalties and allegiances now serve one-being, with one-goal: a-cohesive-galaxy in which everyone prospers.
for the-first-time in one-thousand-generations our-sector-governors will not be working solely to enrich coruscant and the-core-worlds, but to advance the-quality of life in the-star-systems that make up each-sector — keeping the-spaceways safe, maintaining open-and-accessible-communications, assuring that tax-revenues are properly levied and allocated to improving the-infrastructure.
the-plan which palpatine ultimately had implemented in the-spaceways entirety contained three-main-principles: territorial-consolidation, rapid-communication, and coercive-diplomacy.
tarkin's-concept was that rule could be established and maintained "through fear of force rather than force-rule", and tarkin believed grand-display of power—when combined with oppressive-means of terrorizing communities—could suppress dissent and rebellion into submission.
this-doctrine became the-empire's-core-military-doctrine of peacekeeping, internal-security, counter-insurgency, and state-terrorism-philosophy.
the-instrument of this-power is the-military, which includes the-imperial-stormtroopers, a-massive-fleet of 25,000-star-destroyers, 50-super-star-destroyers, and the-death-star, a-moon-sized-superweapon capable of destroying entire-planets.
plans for the-death-star first appear (in universe-chronology) in attack of the-clones and construction
begins at the-end of revenge of the-sith.
summarized-measures set forth by the-tarkin-doctrine:
establish "oversectors" which contain tumultuous-systems; to monitor and react to rebellious-activities within those-systems.
oversectors" which contain tumultuous-systems would be formed without regard for the-borders of standard-sectors and would receive more-forces than other-regions of the-empire.
this-imperial-presence would be designed to stop small-rebel-factions before small-rebel-factions could become a-larger-established-threat.
an-average of three-sector-groups would be deployed in an-oversector.
assign-command of each-oversector to a-single-individual who reports directly to the-emperor, in order to eliminate any-delays created by political-opportunism by imperial-advisors.
improve communication-resources and imperial-response-time by placing modified-holonet-transceivers (cannibalized from existing-holonet-transceivers) aboard each-flagship of every-sector-group within an-oversector-command.
place similar-facilities aboard the-emperor's-flagship and in imperial-city on imperial-centre (formally-coruscant).
control unruly-portions of the-galaxy through a-fear of force rather than force the-galaxy.
through the-combination of superior-coordination of multiple-oversector-groups and the-control of information (news-media)
an-impression of overwhelming-force will be installed within the-citizenry, thereby instilling the-idea that resistance is futile.
continue to research and develop new-and-more-powerful-starships and weapons designed to inspire fear in the-resistant-systems.
present the-citizen with a-weapon so powerful, so immense as to defy all-conceivable-attack against it, a-weapon invulnerable and invincible in battle, that shall become a-symbol for the-empire.
this-weapon must possess a-power great enough to dispatch an-entire-system.
only-a-handful or one of these-weapons would be required to accomplish this-task.
imperial-naval-command ====
the imperial-naval-command (inc), also referred to as the-imperial-starfleet, is the-military-arm of the-galactic-empire in charge of maintaining security, peace and order in the-galaxy.
commanded by darth-vader, it absorbed the-military-forces of the-galactic-republic after palpatine's-declaration of the-new-order.
organization of the-imperial-navy is assigned to the-moffs.
at organization of the-imperial-navy-peak, the-imperial-navy fields millions of warships, including an-estimated-25,000-star-destroyers, fulfilling the-emperor's-will throughout the-galaxy.
the-empire's-central-warship-cadre is well structured and uniformed, but the-imperial-navy suffers against strike-craft, largely due to the-inadequacies of the-imperial-navy own-starfighters and point-defense.
the-empire's-focus on size, firepower, and terror comes at the-expense of a-well-balanced-fleet.
after the-empire defeat at the-battle of endor, the-empire splits up into warring-factions, and the-imperial-starfleet along with the-empire.
while much of the-remnants of the-imperial-navy are later reunited under impressive-imperial-commanders, the-military-organization ceases to exist shortly after the-death of the-emperor.
specific-responsibilities of the-imperial-navy include defending imperial-citizens from space-based-threats (such as pirates, smugglers and rebel-contingents), enforcing imperial-will, and overseeing commerce through customs-and-blockade-operations.
the-imperial-navy also performs orbital-bombardments and transports major-ground-force-deployments, supporting major-ground-force-deployments with space,-orbital,-and-aerial-support.
the-imperial-navy-officers wear the-same-standard-uniform that
imperial-navy-officers
army-counterparts use but is colored-grey, and both-services use colored-chest-plaques to denote rank.
imperial-starfighter-corps ====
imperial-starfighter-corps ===
was the-starfighter-pilot-branch of the-galactic-empire.
although the-corps was a-component of the-navy, most-pilots were assigned to ground-operations with the-imperial-army.
some-imperial-starfighters include tie (twin-ion-engine) fighters, tie-interceptors, tie-defenders, tie-strikers, tie-silencers (by the-first-order), and tie-bombers.
the-corps was scattered after the-battle of endor (4-aby).
imperial-stormtrooper-corps (isc) are elite-corps of rapid-response-all-environment-shock-troops—organized like the-marine-corps with their-own-separate-divisions.
imperial-stormtrooper-corps (isc) operate in conjunction with the-army-ground-troopers and navy-marine-troopers—who were used as garrison-forces—to reinforce and hold defensive-positions until the-regular-military arrived.
when not in their-signature-white-armor, stormtrooper-officers wear black-uniforms.
galactic-civil-war ===
with the-formation of the-empire and the-purge of the-jedi now complete, martial-law is immediately declared throughout the-galaxy.
those in hiding, or attempting to either flee from or oppose the-new-imperial-order, are subject to persecution or death.
this is the-start of the-bloody-decades-long-galactic-civil-war fought between the-empire and the-rebel-alliance.
while force-sensitive-kyber-crystals are sacred to the-jedi and are at the-core of every-lightsaber, the-empire explores ways to weaponize them.
them mine for kyber-crystals across worlds and are thwarted twice in securing massive-crystals by the-ghost-crew and
saw-gerrera.
but on jedha they uncovered a-surplus of kyber, which would be enough to power they dreaded death-star.
the-death-star, a-moon-sized-battle-station with sufficient-firepower to destroy an-entire-planet, is designed to be the-supreme-weapon of the-empire's-power.
grand-moff-tarkin, the-station's-commander, shortly after informing the-heads of the-imperial-military that palpatine has dissolved the-senate, demonstrates that-power in a-new-hope, when palpatine destroys alderaan as a-show of force.
in the-film's-climactic-scene, however, the-station is assaulted by a-small-force of rebel-starfighters who have come into possession of the-station's blueprints.
the-battle ends with the-death-star's-destruction at the-hands of luke-skywalker, which is the-rebel-alliance's-first-major-success against the-empire.
after three-more-years of conflict, the-rebel-alliance's achieves a-decisive-victory over the-empire in return of the-jedi.
in the-film's-climactic-battle, the-rebellion destroys the-second-death-star and a-number of capital-ships that contain a-great-portion of the-imperial-navy's-highest-ranking-officers.
during  the-battle, vader redeems vader by killing palpatine in order to save vader son luke skywalker, but in this-act of self-sacrifice vader is vader mortally wounded in the-process.
in the-aftermath of endor, the-dual-loss of the-emperor and the-majority of decorated-military-leadership creates a-power-vacuum of chaos and instability.
the-empire is a-wounded-beast thrashing around in a-hundred-directions, causing random-and-wanton-destruction across the-galaxy.
by design, the-empire had no-clear-line of succession; and there was no-second-in-command.
the-insidious-kratocratic-philosophies of the-sith-ideology were engineered into the-imperial-administration and have permeated military-culture of the-empire's-remaining-upper-echelon.
revolts, infighting, fiefdoms and warlordism gradually fracture the-empire
the-empire apart more effectively than any-damage capable of being inflicted by the-rebel-alliance, as the-moffs and grand-moffs maneuver to grab power for the-moffs and grand-moffs amidst civil-unrest.
palpatine left posthumous-orders.
upon verification of the-emperor's-death, messenger-droids are sent to select imperial-officers to relay the-last-orders of the-emperor: to begin operation:
cinder at once.
operation:
cinder—a-central-piece of the-emperor's-contingency-plan—tasks hardline-imperial-fanatics to destroy entire-planets, heedless of hardline-imperial-fanatics former loyalties, as part of palpatine's-scorched-earth-policy.
palpatine does not desire the-empire continue without palpatine presence; if palpatine cannot live forever as the-emperor, palpatine would rather see he cannot live forever as the-galaxy's-emperor destroyed.
if an-empire cannot protect an-empire emperor then that empire must be deemed a failure.
if an-empire cannot protect its-emperor then that empire must be deemed a failure collapses not only because
if an-empire cannot protect its-emperor then that empire must be deemed a-failure-central-figure is gone, but because its-central-figure must not be allowed to remain!
a year after the-battle of endor, the-bolstered-rebellion defeats empire during the-battle of jakku and formally establish the-new-republic.
new-republic-era ===
by the-time of the-mandalorian, set five years after the-battle of endor, the-galactic-empire no longer exists as an-official-government or a-major-power, and is essentially a-failed-state being replaced by warlords and rump-states competing with each other and the-new-republic over the-power-vacuum left behind.
one-imperial-remnant established a-base on the-planet-nevarro, where mandalorian-bounty-hunter-din-djarin was hired to acquire an-asset, later revealed to be a-force-sensitive-infant named grogu.
mandalorian-bounty-hunter-din-djarin abandoned mandalorian-bounty-hunter-din-djarin job and decided to protect the-child, making an-enemy of imperial-warlord-moff-gideon and moff-gideon-army of mercenary-stormtroopers.
mandalorian-bounty-hunter-din-djarin later returned to nevarro, reuniting with mandalorian-bounty-hunter-din-djarin allies greef karga and cara-dune, as well as an unnamed mythrol, to take down an-imperial-facility to eradicate the-galactic-empire's-presence on the-planet.
the-group soon discovered that it was housing imperial-experiments, using blood rich in midichlorians obtained from grogu.
the-group succeeded in taking down the-base.
gideon was informed of the-developments while overseeing a-unit of enhanced-droids known as darktroopers, who would later help gideon capture grogu.
djarin led a-mission to rescue grogu, assisted by several-allies include dune, boba-fett, fennec-shand, and mandalorian-warrior-bo-katan-kryze.
the-group boarded gideon's-command-ship and subdued gideon.
djarin turned grogu over to luke-skywalker, who took down the-moff's-darktroopers.
successor ===
the-most-successful-remnants of the-empire-reforms as the-first-order, led by supreme-leader-snoke and former-imperial-officers.
the-most-successful-remnants of the-empire-reforms as the-first-order, led by supreme-leader-snoke and former-imperial-officers become a-major-faction in the-galaxy in the force awakens and face a-reformed-rebel-alliance called the resistance.
the-first-order rises to power through the-use of starkiller-base, a-converted-planet turned into a-superweapon that later destroys the-hosnian-system, the-location of the-new-republic's-capital.
starkiller-base was later destroyed by the-resistance, but first-order-forces drew the-resistance out of hiding and wiped out a-majority of the-resistance fleet.
during the-battle, snoke was killed by snoke apprentice kylo ren, who assumed the-title of supreme-leader.
aspects of the-first-order would later ally with the-"final-order", led a-faction of sith-cultists known as the-sith-eternal, overseen by none other than palpatine, who had transferred his-essence into an-imperfect-cloned-body and formerly positioned his to control the-first-order over snoke, a-puppet-ruler of his.
the-cult was stationed on the-isolated-sith-planet of exegol.
palpatine offered ren, who had tracked his to the-planet, control of the-final-order in exchange for killing the-young-jedi-rey, palpatine's own granddaughter.
ren initially accepted the-assignment, but later abandoned  ren dark side identity after a-duel with rey in the-wreckage of the-second-death-star.
with  ren's-defection, palpatine turned command over to allegiant-general-enric-pryde, previously-an-imperial-officer.
with help from the-spirit of luke-skywalker, rey eventually made her-way to exegol, guiding the-resistance-fleet a way to the-planet to take down the-final-order.
with help from a-redeemed--ren and the-spirits of jedi past, her resisted palpatine's-promises of power and turned palpatine own-sith-lightning against palpatine, killing the-sith-lord once and for all.
the-resistance-fleet, with help from their-allies across the-galaxy, took down pryde and the-sith-eternal-fleet to officially wipe out the-final-order and the-galactic-empire with the-galactic-empire, after 54-years of the-galactic-empire existence.
legends ===
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-original-1977-film, known as the-expanded-universe, were rebranded as legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 25 2014.
agent of the-empire ====
agent of the-empire is a-10-issue-comic-book-series published by dark-horse-comics from 2011–2013.
agent of the-empire was written by john-ostrander and illustrated by stephane-roux, and is set three years before the-original-star-wars-film.
two-5-issue-story-arcs follow an-imperial-secret-agent, and feature characters such as han-solo, princess-leia and boba-fett.
two-5-issue-story-arcs were collected in trade-paperback-volumes.
jedi-prince ====
in the-jedi-prince-novel-series, a group of impostors calling  jedi prince ====
the-prophets of the-dark-side install a-three-eyed-mutant named trioculus as emperor by claiming that emperor is palpatine's-son, reforming the-empire (as trioculus's-empire).
by the-end of the-series, palpatine's-true-son, triclops, helps the-rebels defeat this-new-enemy.
thrawn-trilogy ====
in the-thrawn-trilogy-book-series, the-new-republic is almost brought to the-new-republic knees by grand-admiral-thrawn, the-new-leader of the-remnants of the-empire (which are known as thrawn's-empire or empire of the-hand) and a-military-genius.
by the-time of the-third-book in the-series, thrawn has nearly defeated the-new-republic, but thrawn claim victory in a-last-ditch-effort, and thrawn is killed by thrawn own-bodyguard, shattering the-empire's-unity.
dark-empire ===
in the-dark-empire-comic-book-series, palpatine is reborn in a-clone-body and unites most of the-scattered-remnants of the-empire (forming the-empire), hoping to retake control of the-galaxy.
by the-sequel, empire's end, palpatine is defeated and destroyed once and for all.
jedi-academy-trilogy ===
in the-jedi-academy-trilogy, an-imperial-admiral named daala commandeers the-remainder of the-imperial-navy (the-crimson-empire) and mounts a-ferocious-assault on the-new-republic.
the-imperial-navy (the-crimson-empire) nearly succeeds in taking over the-galaxy, but is foiled by the-new-republic-pilots wedge-antilles and lando-calrissian in the-final-entry, champions of the-force.
darksaber ====
in the-1995-novel-darksaber, admiral-daala, frustrated with the-imperial-warlords in the-core-fighting and bickering amongst the-imperial-warlords in the-core-fighting, orchestrates the-imperial-warlords in the-core-fighting deaths and unites and becomes the-leader of the-remaining-imperial-forces.
after being defeated in battle once again by the-new-republic, she resigns and selects gilad-pellaeon (originally in the-thrawn-trilogy) as the-new-leader, where he becomes grand-admiral-pellaeon.
new-jedi-order ====
by the-time of the-new-jedi-order-series, the-remaining-imperial-military-factions sign a-truce with the-new-republic, becoming the-imperial-remnant.
the-former-enemies then become allies against the-invading-yuuzhan-vong.
a few years later, the-imperial-remnant help the-galactic-alliance fight an-assimilating-insect-species known as the-killiks, and in the-early-legacy-era the-galactic-alliance are a-third-party in the-second-galactic-civil-war but made peace with the-galactic-alliance.
all three of a few years later, the-remnant help the-galactic-alliance fight an-assimilating-insect-species known as the-killiks, and in the-early-legacy-era they are a-third-party in the-second-galactic-civil-war but made peace with the-alliance and confederation were represented by former-imperial-commanders.
legacy ====
the-star-wars: legacy-comic-book-series, set 127 years after the-original-star-wars-film, explains that, during a-civil-war, the-new-galactic-empire known as the-fel-empire declares war on the-galactic-federation of free-alliances (galactic-alliance), the-successor-state of the-new-republic, after 83-years of a-cold-war that began in 44-aby.
this-conflict begins the-sith-imperial-war, which after three-years leads to the-eventual-defeat of the-galactic-alliance and the-galactic-empire asserting the-galactic-alliance domination over the-galaxy once again in 130-aby.
a few months later the-sith overthrew the-fel-empire in a-coup and the-sith lord darth krayt the-leader of the-one-sith, usurped the-throne and forces emperor-roan-fel to take refuge in the-fortress-planet of bastion and the-sith renamed the-fel-empire as darth-krayt's-galactic-empire.
in 138-aby, the-galactic-alliance-remnant led by admiral-gar-stazi, fel's-forces known as the-empire-in-exile led by empress-marasiah-fel, and the-new-jedi-order led by jedi-master-k'krukk united against darth-krayt's-galactic-empire and successfully destroyed darth-krayt's-galactic-empire in the-battle of coruscant and the-three-united-factions then formed a-new-galactic-government out of the-three-united-factions organizations called the galactic federation triumvirate, thus ending a-grand-total of 157-years of galactic-empire-history, as opposed to palpatine's-promised-10,000-years of rule.
the-one-sith however led by darth-wredd, remained at large and waged a-war against the-gft known as the darth-wredd's insurgency but one year later in 139-aby, the-former-empire-in-exile worked with the-other-two-factions, killed darth-wredd's and dissolved the-one-sith.
a year later in 140-aby, the-gft known as the-darth-wredd's-insurgency would defeat the-secular-alliances of the-one-sith and in the-aftermath of that-conflict, the-galaxy had entered an-era of peace and unity.
see also ==
isaac-asimov's-galactic-empire-imperium of mankind
list of star-wars-characters utopian-and-dystopian-fiction-state-terrorism ==
notes == ==
references == ==
further-reading == ==
external-links ==
galactic-empire in the starwars.com databank galactic-empire on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-domuspublica.net (
no longer active, this-archive as of september 27, 2005 has at least some of the-essays intact)
the-case for the-empire, the-weekly-standard-web.
archive.org, "no-case for the-empire
"-galacticempiredatabank.com
why-did-the-empire-hate-aliens?
tarkin in the-star-wars-databank ===
fan-societies ===
the-empire-reborn---roleplaying-and-gaming-society (pc-games)
the-empire-reborn---roleplaying-game with strong-emphasis on political-and-military-training.
the-emperor's-hammer-strike-fleet---pc-gaming-club for all-star-wars-games and star-conflict.
the-jedi (), jedi-knights, or the-knights of the-jedi-order are the-main-protagonists of many-works of the-star-wars-franchise, often working symbiotically alongside the-galactic-republic and the-rebel-alliance.
the-jedi-order are depicted as an-ascetic,-monastic,-academic,-and-meritocratic-organization whose-origin dates back approximately 25,000 years before the-events of the-first-film released in the-franchise.
the-fictional-organization has inspired a-real-world-new-religious-movement, jediism.
the-jedi-order were powerful-force-wielding-"sorcerers'" and adjudicators tasked by the-galactic-republic to be the-guardians of peace and order in the-star-wars-galaxy, with galaxy-wide-jurisdiction in the-galactic-republic, headquartered in the-republic-city, coruscant-capital.
their-creed demands that their defend and protect all-sapient-life, and must never attack or act aggressively.
the-jedi-order consisted of polymaths representing the best of what the-galactic-republic had to offer,  the-jedi-order members were required to be equal-parts-teachers, philosophers, scientists, engineers, physicians, diplomats, negotiators, soldiers, explorers, and peacekeepers.
a-level of diversity extends throughout the-organization, composed of hundreds of different-species, thousands of different-worlds, and those outside the-republic itself.
when operating beyond the-limits of republic-territory, those outside the-republic itself were expected to have the-moral-capacity to act autonomously and make decisions, without oversight or support, with the-potential to drastically affect both-the-future of the-republic and countless-lives.
those outside the-republic itself were often the-first-representatives of the-republic itself encountered by new-species and nations.
throughout the-republic itself existence, the-jedi have investigated crimes ranging from murder to political-corruption, acted as peacekeepers and as detectives, protected the-chancellors of the-republic itself, tracked down fugitives, and functioned as a-investigative-law-enforcement-agency and quasi-militaristic-force at the-service of the-republic itself.
the-the-jedi-order-moral-value-system viewed purity of thought and detachment of emotions as essential to "force-enlightenment".
jedi-philosophy emphasized self-improvement through knowledge and wisdom, adherence to slave-morality, and selfless service through acts of chastity, charity, obedience, citizenship, and volunteerism; this-ideology is a-recurring-theme in the-star-wars-universe.
the-jedi denounce emotions as the-root-cause of mortal-suffering; the-jedi believe fear, anger, and love cause sentient-beings to lash out in conflict and impede rational-action to do what is objectively-correct-action.
in star-wars'-narrative-conflicts, the-jedi are the-antithesis of the-sith, another-group of force-wielders—the-sith use their-passion and aggression to fuel their-power.
ideologically, the-sith are "dark-mirrors" to the-jedi; the-sith emphasize violence and domination, while the-jedi instead teach co-existence and connecting with nature in the-universe.
a-the-jedi's-traditional-weapon is the-lightsaber, a-device which generates a-blade-like-plasma powered by a-kyber-crystal or other-focusing-item.
etymology ==
the-word jedi is said to have been adapted by george-lucas from japanese-時代劇 (jidaigeki) (meaning 'period-drama'-motion-pictures about samurai), or perhaps inspired by the-words jed (leader) and jeddak (king) in the-barsoom-series by edgar-rice-burroughs, a-series that lucas considered adapting to film.
film suggests that within the-star-wars-mythology itself, film relates to the-planet-jedha, source of the-crystals used in lightsabers.
influences ===
george-lucas acknowledged jedi, sith, and other-force-concepts have been inspired by many-sources.
these include: samurai's-bushido, shaolin-monks, shamanism, hindu-mythology, shintō, buddhism not to mention countless-cinematic-precursors.
the-works of philosopher-friedrich-nietzsche and mythologist-joseph-campbell, especially-his-book the-hero with a-thousand-faces (1949), directly influenced george-lucas, and was what drove his to create the-'modern-myth' of star-wars.
depiction ==
as depicted in the-canon, the jedi study and utilize the-force, in order to help and protect those in need.
the-jedi-members, known as jedi-knights, respect all-life by defending and protecting those who cannot do it for the-jedi-members, known as jedi-knights, striving for peaceful-and-non-combative-solutions to any-altercations the-jedi-members, known as jedi-knights encounter and fighting only in self-defense and for the-defense of those the-jedi-members, known as jedi-knights protect.
by training the-mind and the-body, jedi seek to improve jedi by gaining unfettered-access to the-force while also seeking to improve those-individuals and groups
jedi come in contact with.
like jedi-evil-counterparts, the-sith, the-main-weapon of jedi is the-lightsaber.
however, according to lucas, "the-force really doesn't have anything to do with the-lightsaber.
anybody can have a-lightsaber.
it's just-a-weapon like a-pistol. "
qui-gon-jinn gives us an-insight into the-force in episode-i when qui-gon-jinn tells anakin: "your-focus determines your-reality."
and later, qui-gon-jinn explains: "midi-chlorians are microscopic-lifeforms that reside within all of your-cells.
and we are symbionts with your-cells.
lifeforms living together for mutual-advantage.
without the-midi-chlorians, life could not exist and we would have no-knowledge of the-force.
they continually speak to we, telling we the-will of the-force.
when you learn to quiet your-mind you’ll hear they speaking to you."
in episode-iv, obi-wan-kenobi tells luke-skywalker: "the-force is what gives a-jedi a-jedi power.
it's an-energy-field created by all-living-things.
it surrounds us, penetrates us, it binds the-galaxy together."
a-jedi can feel the-force flowing through a-jedi.
the-force [partially] controls your-actions, but the-force also obeys your-commands."
the-skywalker-saga === ====
original-trilogy ====
for over-a-thousand-generations, the-jedi-knights were the-guardians of peace and justice in the-old-republic.
before the-dark-times, before the-empire.
the-jedi are first introduced in the-1977-motion-picture star-wars as an-order of warrior-monks who serve as "the-guardians of peace and justice in the-galaxy" and embrace the-mystical-force.
obi-wan-kenobi (alec-guinness) explains that the-empire has all but exterminated the-jedi, and seeks to train luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) to be the-jedi-order's-last-hope.
darth-vader (david-prowse/james-earl-jones) is also established as the-jedi's-main-enemy.
by the-end of the-film, which depicts the-battle of yavin, luke is on the-path to becoming a-jedi.
in the-sequel, the-empire strikes back, luke receives extensive-jedi-training from the elderly (and only surviving)
jedi-master-yoda (frank-oz), even as luke learns that vader is, in fact, luke father, former-jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker.
the-third-film in the-original-trilogy, return of the-jedi, ends with luke redeeming vader and helping to destroy the-empire, thus fulfilling vader destiny as the-jedi.
the-two-last-jedi-masters die during the-events of the-films, after which the-two-last-jedi-masters return as force-ghosts to help luke.
prequel-trilogy ====
trilogy ====
trilogy depicts the-jedi in their-prime, headquartered at the-jedi temple on coruscant, and dealing with the-rising-presence of the-dark-side of the-force and the-return of the-sith.
in episode i:-the-phantom-menace (1999), jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) discovers nine-year-old-anakin-skywalker (jake-lloyd),
whom the-phantom-menace (1999), jedi master qui-gon jinn (liam-neeson) believes to be the "chosen one" of a-jedi-prophecy, destined to bring balance to the-force.
at the-end of the-phantom-menace, anakin is paired with qui-gon's-apprentice, the-young-obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor), who promises to train him.
the-sequel, episode-ii: attack of the-clones, establishes that the-jedi forswear all-emotional-attachments, including romantic-love, which proves problematic when anakin, now-a-young-adult (hayden-christensen), falls in love with padmé-amidala (natalie-portman).
the-clone-wars, first spoken of in the-original-1977-film, begin with hundreds of the-jedi participating in the-battle of geonosis.
in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, yoda confides to mace-windu (samuel-l.-jackson) that the-prophecy of the-chosen-one could have been misread.
palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid), who is revealed to be darth-sidious, manipulates anakin's-love for padmé and distrust of the-jedi in order to turn him to the-dark-side and become him sith-apprentice, darth-vader.
the latter begins helping sidious hunt down and destroy the-jedi, who are nearly exterminated during the-events of revenge of the-sith; obi-wan-kenobi and yoda are among a-handful of the-jedi that avoided the-initial-purge.
as revealed in the-clone-wars-series, each of the-clones were implanted with chips that palpatine would activate with the-command-order 66:-operation-knightfall, a-law that states:
in the-event of jedi-officers acting against the-interests of the-republic, and after receiving specific-orders verified as coming directly from the-supreme-commander (chancellor), gar-commanders will remove jedi-officers acting against the-interests of the-republic by lethal-force, and command of the-gar will revert to the-supreme-commander (chancellor) until a-new-command-structure is established.
this resulted in clone-troopers to suddenly turn against clone-troopers generals and kill clone-troopers, and darth-vader/anakin-skywalker leading the-501st-legion to carry out "operation-knightfall" against the-jedi-temple, burning and slaughtering all-jedi within including temple-defender-shaak-ti.
sidious convinced the-people of the-republic that all-jedi corrupted warmongers responsible for prolonging the-clone-wars, labeling all-jedi criminals with bounties placed on all-jedi.
darth-vader continued to hunt and kill nearly-every-jedi during the-early-years of the-empire, in what is known as the-great-jedi-purge; only-yoda survived long enough to die of old-age, and ahsoka-tano, who outlasted the-empire, while others like obi-wan and kanan have died fighting the-empire years later.
trilogy ====
now that they're extinct, the-jedi are romanticized, deified.
but if you strip away the-myth and look at they're extinct-deeds, the-legacy of the-jedi is failure.
hypocrisy, hubris.
at the-height of  hypocrisy, hubris-powers,  hypocrisy, hubris allowed darth-sidious to rise, create the-empire, and wipe  hypocrisy, hubris out.
it was a-jedi-master who was responsible for the-training and creation of darth-vader.
in the force awakens, the-first-film in the-sequel-trilogy, it is revealed that luke had attempted to rebuild the-jedi-order, but failed when ben fell to the-dark-side, lured by the-mysterious-snoke-(andy-serkis).
ben is renamed kylo ren and destroys all that luke built.
after kylo's-fall and the-destruction of the-new-jedi-order, luke goes into a-self-imposed-exile on ahch-to, believing luke and the-jedi to be a-negative-influence on the-galaxy.
in the-sequel the last jedi, the-scavenger-rey (daisy-ridley) discovers luke on ahch-to and convinces luke to train luke in the-ways of the-force.
during luke-training, luke describes the-hubris of the-past the-jedi that allowed darth-sidious to rise to power.
luke also discovers several-ancient-jedi-texts hidden away in a-tree.
the-scavenger-rey (daisy-ridley) learns the-truth about ben's-fall to the-dark-side and believes luke to be the-scavenger-rey (daisy-ridley) only chance of redemption.
luke decides to stay on ahch-to and attempts to burn down the-tree with the-texts, but cannot bring  luke to do so.
however,  luke appears as a-force-ghost and burns the-tree, teaching  luke that-failure is just as important as success, and that masters are defined by those who surpass them.
near the-end of the-film,  luke confronts kylo on the-planet crait.
it is subsequently revealed that  luke had been projecting  luke from ahch-to;  luke dies from the-effort and becomes one with the-force.
rey is shown to have taken the-texts before rey left ahch-to, in order to continue rey training.
in the-rise of skywalker, the-final-film of the-sequel-trilogy,  in the-rise of skywalker, the-final-film of the-sequel-trilogy is discovered that darth-sidious has returned from death and has been secretly manipulating events from the-sith-world-exegol.
in darth-sidious last attempt to reclaim the-galaxy, darth-sidious unveils the-final-order-fleet, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers capable of planetary-destruction.
darth-sidious offers the-final-order-fleet, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers capable of planetary-destruction to kylo-ren in exchange for killing the-last-remaining-jedi, rey, who is revealed to be darth-sidious granddaughter.
after the-death of kylo's-mother, leia-organa (carrie-fisher), kylo returns to the-light and reclaims kylo identity as ben-solo.
at the-end of the-film, ben joins rey as she confronts sidious.
rey channels the-power of the-past-jedi to destroy sidious and the-sith, before dying sidious.
ben sacrifices ben life to revive  rey and becomes one with the-force.
with peace and justice restored to the-galaxy,  rey lives on to start the-jedi-order again.
anthologies and derivative-works ===
in a-deleted-scene from attack of the-clones, the-"lost-twenty" is the-name given to a-group of jedi-masters—numbering twenty in total—who left the-jedi-order throughout the-jedi-order history.
the first 12 of these-lost-twenty became "dark-jedi" who eventually founded the-first-sith-empire.
in the-years preceding the-clone-wars, jedi-master-dooku left the-jedi-order as a-result of differences with jedi-master-dooku fellow jedi, becoming the-20th-jedi-master in the-history of the-order to do so.
to showcase the-failures of the-jedi they created statues of the-fallen-jedi and placed they in the-jedi temple archives.
the-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars depicts the-battles of the-clone-wars, focusing on the-jedi-and-clone-troopers they lead against the-separatists-and-separatists-sith-leaders.
the-feature-film-pilot reveals that anakin trained an-apprentice, ahsoka-tano, between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith.
later-arcs explore the-foundations of order 66 and palpatine's-manipulation of the jedi order.
the-animated-television-series star-wars-rebels reveals that ahsoka and a-jedi named kanan jarrus survived the-purge; the latter trains a-new-apprentice, ezra-bridger.
the-animated-television-series also reveals that, following the-start of the-purge with order 66, the-emperor commissioned the-inquisitorius, a-group of former-jedi who had turned to the-dark-side for various-reasons, to aid darth-vader in hunting down former-jediformer-jedi.
the-canon-video-game
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order introduces cal-kestis, a-former-padawan hiding from the-empire who accidentally exposes his-force-abilities to aid someone putting his on the-inquisitors'-radar.
kestis gets aid from cere-junda, another-jedi-knight in hiding.
members ===
the-exact-size of the-pre-purge-jedi's-membership and operations are never specified.
however, in the-star-wars-rebels-episode-"path of the-jedi", kanan-jarrus stated: "...
there were around-10,000-jedi-knights defending the-galaxy.
now, we are few.
but in those-days, we had small-outposts, temples spread throughout the-stars.
the-empire sought out these-temples and destroyed many of these-temples..." ====
yoda ==== was a-wise,-experienced,-and-powerful-grand-master of the-jedi of an-unknown-species and the-oldest-known-prophet in existence (having lived at least 900 years)
, considered the wisest and most powerful jedi master within the-star-wars-universe.
yoda ==== was knighted at age 100, and spent the-next-eight-centuries mentoring several-generations of jedi, about 20,000 of which yoda ==== took as padawans.
during this-period, the-green-jedi-master formed good-relations with the-wookies of kashyyyk on numerous-occasions, such as when the-green-jedi-master saved their-terentatek.
following the-galactic-republic's-transformation into the-galactic-empire, yoda was one of the-few-jedi-survivors of order 66, and spent the-rest of the-green-jedi-master-life on the-swamp-planet-dagobah.
hiding from the-galactic-empire, the-green-jedi-master trained luke-skywalker in the-jedi-arts, until dying of old-age, though the-green-jedi-master returned as a-force-spirit.
in the-sequel-trilogy, yoda appears both as a-force-spirit, teaching an-older-and-wiser-luke about failure, and as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
mace-windu ====
mace-windu was a-human-male-jedi-master of the-order and one of the-last-members of the-order's upper echelons before the-fall of the-galactic-republic.
born into a-tribe of nomads on  mace-windu  mace-windu was offered to jedi-anthropologists as a-blessing to regain his-people's-connection to the-force when his was 6 months old, sometime after his-parents died in the-bordering-jungle.
his was taken as a-padawan by mirialan-jedi-master-cyslin-myr, and began using a-unique-talent of seeing "shatterpoints", or faultlines in the-force that could affect the-destinies of certain-individuals, and indeed-the-galaxy itself.
knighted early in his-career,  mace-windu progressed up jedi ranks until reaching  mace-windu place on the-council, from which  mace-windu was known as one of the most powerful jedi and possibly-the-greatest-swordsman of  mace-windu time.
mace-windu first appeared in star-wars:
i - the-phantom-menace, where  episode expressed doubt regarding qui-gon-jinn's-conclusion about darth-maul being a-sith-lord, but nonetheless assured the-council that the-council full resources will be utilized to verify the-theory that the-sith could have returned.
out of all-members of the-council, windu was the most reluctant to allow young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one), to be trained as a-jedi, believing young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one) was dangerous due to young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one) fragile-emotional-state.
in star-wars: episode-ii---attack of the-clones, young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one) led a-party of 200-jedi on a-mission to rescue obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala from separatist-captivity on geonosis, where young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one) killed the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett in the-battle that followed.
during the-clone-wars, young-anakin-skywalker (who jinn believed to be the prophesied chosen one) served the-republic as an-overseer of the-war-effort and advisor to supreme-chancellor-palpatine, as well as taking part in conflicts such as the-battles of malastare and felucia.
star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith, upon being informed by anakin that palpatine was the-sith lord darth sidious
, windu attempted to arrest the-chancellor and beat the-chancellor in a-lightsaber-duel, but died after having the-chancellor arm cut off by anakin, who subsequently turned to the-dark-side, and being electrocuted with force-lightning by palpatine.
in star-wars: episode ix -
the-rise of skywalker, windu appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-palpatine.
count-dooku ====
count-dooku of serenno was a-human-male-jedi-master who was trained by yoda and in turn trained qui-gon-jinn, and one of the-main-antagonists of the-prequel-trilogy.
born to the-royal-family of the-planet-serenno, count-dooku of serenno was rejected by count-dooku of serenno family as an-infant upon the-discovery of count-dooku of serenno connection to the-force, which count-dooku of serenno father in particular feared and, as such, abandoned count-dooku of serenno after contacting the-jedi-order to come and take count-dooku of serenno to coruscant.
during count-dooku of serenno training under yoda, count-dooku of serenno proved count-dooku of serenno to be both strong with the-force and a-master-duelist, regarded by many as one of the best in the-jedi-order.
upon becoming a-jedi-master,  upon becoming a-jedi-master left the-order and returned to serenno to reclaim  upon becoming a-jedi-master title and heritage as a-nobleman.
upon becoming a-jedi-master later fell to the-dark-side and became the-sith-lord-darth-tyranus, darth-sidious'-second-apprentice.
dooku helped darth-sidious' with dooku galactic conquest plans, recruiting the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett as the-template of the-clone-army that would be used by the-galactic-republic, and forming the-confederacy of independent-systems from various-planets and systems that wanted to become independent from the-galactic-republic, resulting in the-clone-wars.
dooku served as the-figurehead of the-separatist-alliance throughout the-clone-wars, until meeting dooku demise at the-hands of anakin-skywalker in star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith, who decapitated him at chancellor-palpatine's-(secretly-darth-sidious)-urgings, thus revealing that darth-sidious' never cared about dooku and merely used him to aid him plans.
qui-gon-jinn ====
qui-gon-jinn was a-wise-and-powerful-human-male-jedi-master, and the-master of obi-wan-kenobi.
unlike other,-more-conservative-jedi, qui-gon-jinn valued living in the-moment as the-best-way to embrace the-force.
while other-jedi respected jedi highly, other-jedi respected him highly were frequently puzzled by jedi unorthodox beliefs and ultimately denied jedi a-seat on the jedi council, despite jedi being among the wisest and most powerful of jedi.
jinn was both the-jedi to discover the-sith's-return after more than a-millennium, upon being attacked by darth-maul during a-mission to protect queen-padmé-amidala of naboo, and the-one to find the-ability of becoming a-force-spirit after death, though he wasn't capable of having a-physical-body.
following he death at darth-maul's-hands,  jinn guided both-yoda and obi-wan to the-ability of becoming a-physical-force-spirit after death.
in star-wars: episode ix -
the-rise of skywalker,
the-rise of skywalker appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other past the-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
obi-wan-kenobi ====
obi-wan-kenobi ===
was a-human-male-jedi-master who trained anakin-skywalker, at the-behest of  obi-wan-kenobi ====
deceased-master-qui-gon-jinn, and later  obi-wan-kenobi ====
son-luke-skywalker, making  obi-wan-kenobi ====
one of the-main-characters in the-star-wars-franchise.
having fought in the-clone-wars, obi-wan proved obi-wan an-adept-strategist, duelist, and spy, as obi-wan leadership style heavily favours subterfuge and misdirection while commanding clone-troopers, or wielding the-force.
due to obi-wan-charisma and persuasion skills, obi-wan became known as 'the-negotiator' during the-clone-wars.
obi-wan best exemplifies the-jedi-code:
in spite of darth-vader's-betrayal, darth-vader's-master and the-woman darth vader's loved being killed by darth-vader's-nemesis, darth-maul,
darth-vader's never fell into darkness.
as one of the-few-survivors of order 66 following the-galactic-republic's-transformation into the-galactic-empire, obi-wan hid on the-desert-planet-tatooine, watching over vader's-son luke, knowing that obi-wan would one day grow to become a-jedi and defeat vader.
obi-wan briefly mentored luke in the-jedi-arts, before meeting obi-wan demise at the-hands of obi-wan former apprentice aboard the-death-star, though obi-wan continued guiding luke as a-force-spirit.
in star-wars: the force awakens, obi-wan-voice can briefly be heard just after rey's-force-vision when obi-wan came into contact with anakin's-lightsaber.
in star-wars: episode ix -
the-rise of skywalker, obi-wan appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
anakin-skywalker ====
anakin-skywalker was a-human-male-jedi-knight-master, one of the-main-protagonists of the-prequel-trilogy, and the-primary-antagonist of the-original-trilogy.
anakin-skywalker is the chosen one, being born of the-force.
anakin-skywalker was apprenticed to obi-wan-kenobi and proved to be a-very-gifted-duelist and force-user, being appointed to the-jedi-high-council at the-age of 22.
he secretly married padmé-amidala at the-onset of the-clone-wars and has two-children, luke-skywalker and leia-organa.
he was eventually seduced to the-dark-side by the-sith-lord, darth-sidious (emperor-palpatine), and became sith-lord, darth-vader, serving the-galactic-empire.
while he was a-member of the-jedi-council, he trained a-padawan of he own, ahsoka-tano during the-clone-wars.
vader was eventually redeemed by vader son in return of the-jedi and gave his-son own life to save luke, killing palpatine and fulfilling the-prophecy of the chosen one.
in star-wars: episode ix -
the rise of skywalker, anakin appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-palpatine.
ahsoka-tano ====
ahsoka-tano
a-togruta-female-jedi-padawan discovered on ahsoka-tano ====
homeworld of shili by jedi-master-plo-koon.
plo brought ahsoka-tano
to coruscant to train as a-jedi.
she eventually became the-padawan-learner of anakin-skywalker during the-clone-wars.
among many-campaigns, ahsoka found ahsoka advising rebels on the-planet-onderon, including steela-and-saw-gerrera, in these-rebels fight against the-confederacy.
these-rebels would eventually form part of the-basis of the-alliance for the-restoration of the-republic, a-relationship that would later prove beneficial to ahsoka.
ahsoka was accused of bombing the-hangar at the-jedi-temple on coruscant before clearing ahsoka name with anakin's-help.
however, the-jedi-council's-response during the-ordeal soured ahsoka-faith in the-order, and ahsoka left the-order to forge ahsoka own path in the-galaxy.
she briefly returned in the-service of the-republic during the-final-days of the-clone-wars, when she led part of the-501st-clone-legion in the-siege of mandalore to capture the-former-sith-lord-darth-maul, who attempted to warn she that anakin would soon fall to the-dark-side.
shortly after capturing maul, ahsoka was betrayed by she clone-troopers as part of order 66, but she managed to escape alongside clone-captain-rex (whose-control-chip she removed).
years later, ahsoka served the-nascent-rebel-alliance as the-spymaster and head of ahsoka intelligence network, directing operations behind the-codename-fulcrum.
she is one of the-few-jedi to survive past the-galactic-empire-era and into the-new-republic-era.
in star-wars: episode ix -
the rise of skywalker, ahsoka appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
cal-kestis ====
cal-kestis ==== was a-human-male-jedi-padawan who trained under master-jaro-tapal.
after the-events of order 66 and failing to save his-master's-life, his went into hiding on the-planet-bracca where his worked as a-scrapyard-rigger.
while scrapping a-freighter, an-accident forced cal to reveal an-accident force abilities to save a-co-worker, exposing an-accident to the-empire and the-inquisitorius.
on the-run, cal was aided by cere-junda, a-jedi-knight also in hiding, who became a-jedi-knight unofficial mentor.
cal is the-protagonist of star-wars-jedi: fallen-order.
cere-junda ====
cere-junda was a-human-female-jedi-knight who went into hiding following order 66.
as a-padawan,  cere-junda was sent with  cere-junda master eno cordova to the-planet-ontotho to regulate a-dispute between corporate-security-forces and local-freedom-fighters.
after an-attack separated them,  cere junda
cere-junda fought alongside the-freedom-fighters to find her-master-eno-cordova.
following the-clone-wars and the-start of  cere-junda
cere-junda secretly sought to rebuild jedi-order.
after saving him from the-inquisitors,  cere-junda began to mentor former-padawan-cal-kestis.
prior to the-purge, junda also mentored a-padawan named trilla siduri, who later fell to the-dark-side and became an-inquisitor known as the-second-sister.
kanan-jarrus ====
kanan-jarrus ==== was a-human-male-jedi-padawan who fought for the-rebellion during the-rebellion formation.
first introduced as a-main-character of the-animated-television-series star-wars-rebels, kanan jarrus ==== was known to be the-leader of a-small-rebel-cell called the spectres, operating on the-planet-lothal.
as a-survivor of order 66, jarrus was forced to break certain-jedi-traditions to avoid being detected by imperial-forces that continued certain-jedi-traditions mission to eliminate any-jedi on sight, such as eschewing traditional-jedi-robes or occasionally using a-blaster, a-weapon typically shunned by jedi.
although he lost he master-depa-bilaba to order 66 before he could ascend the-ranks of the-jedi-order, he was tasked with training the-young-force-sensitive-ezra-bridger throughout he-eventual-service to the-larger-rebellion.
he was known as caleb-dume before order 66, and changed he name to avoid detection.
though jarrus died saving hera-syndulla, he-legacy would live on through their-son, jacen-syndulla.
in star-wars: episode ix -
the-rise of skywalker,  the-rise of skywalker appears as a-disembodied-voice alongside other-past-jedi, empowering rey to face a-rejuvenated-emperor-palpatine.
ezra-bridger ====
ezra bridger ==== was a-human-male-jedi-padawan who was born on the-planet-lothal on the-same-day the-galactic-empire was established.
ezra-bridger ==== witnessed many-injustices of the-imperial-occupation of ezra-bridger ====
homeworld for much of ezra-bridger ====
childhood and was separated from ezra bridger ===
parents from a-very-early-age.
he was able to survive alone using street-smarts and skills, but was discovered by kanan-jarrus to have potential-force-sensitivity after he encounters the-spectres for the-first-time.
after discovering how much of a-team-player
he could be during a-rescue-operation, they recruited bridger, who began training he in the-ways of the-jedi under jarrus, himself still-a-jedi-padawan.
bridger took a-long-time learning how to wield a-lightsaber and use a-lightsaber to deflect blaster-bolts, modifying bridger first one to fire stun blasts in the-interim.
bridger was not well skilled in lightsaber-duels against inquisitors and darth-vader, but later discovered bridger unique ability to use the-force to-control-and-command-animals, a-skill that proved more useful several times during bridger service in the-rebellion.
bridger later went missing in action during the-battle to liberate lothal from imperial-occupation, where bridger successfully defeated grand-admiral-thrawn, regarded by many as the-empire's-best-tactician.
luke-skywalker ====
luke-skywalker ===
was a-human-male-jedi-knight (later-master) and the-protagonist of the-original-trilogy.
as the-last-padawan of obi-wan-kenobi, luke-skywalker ==== became an-important-figure in the-rebel-alliance's-struggle against the-galactic-empire.
luke was heir to a-family deeply rooted in the-force, being the-twin-brother of rebellion-leader-princess-leia-organa of the-planet-alderaan, the-son of former-queen of naboo and republic-senator-padmé-amidala and jedi turned sith-lord-darth-vader (anakin-skywalker), and the-maternal-uncle of ben-solo.
after redeeming his-father from the-dark-side of the-force, who died killing his-master and the-last-sith, emperor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, in order to save luke, his-set out to train a-new-generation of jedi to rebuild the-order, only to have a-new-generation of jedi wiped out by supreme-leader-snoke, a-puppet created by a-revived-palpatine, who also turned ben to the-dark-side, adopting the-kylo-ren-persona.
skywalker then spent the-rest of skywalker life in exile on ahch-to, the-original-headquarters of the-jedi-order, blaming skywalker for ben's-turn and the destruction of the-jedi-order, until skywalker was found by rey, the-last-jedi and the-secret-granddaughter of palpatine, whom skywalker reluctantly trained in the-jedi-arts.
shortly after, skywalker gave his-life to distract kylo-ren, now-supreme-leader of the-first-order, on the-planet-crait via a-force-projection, allowing the-resistance to escape.
when rey learned of rey lineage and exiled rey on ahch-to out of fear of turning to the-dark-side, luke appeared before rey as a-force-spirit and encouraged rey to face palpatine.
along with the-spirits of other-past-jedi, palpatine then empowered rey during rey final confrontation with palpatine, which marked the-definitive-defeat of the-sith, and later watched from afar alongside palpatine sister's spirit (who had died redeeming kylo-ren)
as rey renounced rey lineage, becoming a-skywalker instead.
ben-solo ====
==== was a-human-male-jedi-padawan and the-primary-antagonist of the-sequel-trilogy.
ben-solo ==== was the-son of smuggler and rebel-alliance-general-han-solo and rebellion-leader-princess-leia-organa, and the-nephew of jedi-master-luke-skywalker, having been born shortly after the-galactic-empire's-defeat.
as part of ben-solo ====
uncle's new generation of jedi, ben trained under ben solo ====, but was eventually seduced to the-dark-side by supreme-leader-snoke, a-puppet created by a-revived-emperor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-last-sith, and sought to become a-sith-lord, as powerful as ben solo ====
late-grandfather, darth-vader (anakin-skywalker).
following the-destruction of luke's-new-jedi-order, ben adopted the-kylo-ren-persona and became a-commander within the-first-order, as well as the-leader of the-knights of ren, an-organization of fellow-force-wielders.
he later killed he father when he unsuccessfully tried to redeem his-father, and formed a-unique-connection with rey, the-last-jedi and palpatine's-secret-granddaughter, called a "dyad in the-force".
after killing snoke, ren took over as supreme-leader of the-first-order, until ultimately being redeemed by ren mother, who died in the-process, and helping rey face palpatine, giving ren own-life to save hers.
rey was a-human-female-jedi-padawan and the-protagonist of the-sequel-trilogy.
rey was the-illegitimate-granddaughter of emperor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-last-surviving-sith, and was born in the-years following the-galactic-empire's-defeat.
abandoned on the-desert-planet of jakku at a-young-age by  rey-parents in order to keep  rey safe,  rey became involved in the-conflict between the-resistance and the-first-order, and formed a-unique-connection with kylo-ren, called a "dyad in the-force".
rey was briefly trained by luke-skywalker and, following luke-skywalker death, continued  rey jedi training under the-guidance of luke-skywalker sister and resistance-leader-leia-organa, as well as the-ancient-jedi-texts.
rey eventually learned of  rey lineage and, with the-help of a-redeemed-kylo-ren and the-spirits of past-jedi, faced a-revived-palpatine, killing kylo-ren and ending the-sith-order once and for all.
she then renounced she lineage, becoming a-skywalker instead, prepared to find she own path.
legends ==== ====
a’sharad-hett ====
a’sharad-hett was a-human-male-jedi-master.
a’sharad-hett was a-general in the-clone-wars, and one of the-closest-friends of anakin-skywalker.
a’sharad-hett was taught under ki-a-mundi, and became a-survivor of order 66.
shortly after the-rise of the-empire,  a’sharad-hett fell to the-dark-side.
a’sharad-hett started a-new-sith-empire 130 years after the-fall of darth-vader and darth-sidious.
he met he demise in the-hands of cade-skywalker.
kreia ====
kreia was a-human-female-jedi-master who taught revan.
after revan had maverick-ideas during the-mandalorian-wars, kreia was exiled.
she then became the-sith-lord-darth-traya, and then trained darth-nihilus and darth-sion.
darth-nihilus and darth-sion in turn, betrayed she, as it is the-way of the-sith.
she overpowered the two, but managed to be defeated by meetra-surik.
jacen-solo ====
jacen-solo was a-human-male-jedi-knight-master.
jacen-solo was trained under luke-skywalker, who in turn trained luke’s-son ben-skywalker.
jacen-solo became a-hero of the-yuuzhan-ving-wars, but then succumbed to the-dark-side, by lady-lumiya.
jacen-solo became the-mastermind of the-second-galactic-civil-war, but then was killed by  jacen-solo sister jaina solo.
force-sensitive-organizations ===
not-every-"dark-side"-user is a-sith; nor is every-"light-side"-user a-jedi.
within the-star-wars-expanded-universe, people of all-species have demonstrated varying-"force-sensitive"-powers and abilities.
these-"force-wielders" are often depicted with little to no-formal-jedi-training in the-force, originating from primitive-planets.
the-sith-organization ====
dark-side adept =====
a-dark-side adept is someone with the-power to use the-dark-side of the-force outside of the-traditions of the-jedi or the-sith.
they were often steeped in the-lore of the-dark-side and opposed to those who used the-light-side, such as jedi.
while all-sith were technically-dark-side-adepts, non-sith-individuals such as asajj-ventress, kylo-ren, and the-grand-inquisitor were also considered dark side adepts.
dark-side-adepts were referenced in passing in james-luceno's-canon-novel-tarkin.
force-wielders without affiliation ====
bendu debuted in the-star-wars-rebels-season-3-episode "steps into shadow".
bendu was a-force-sensitive-individual who resided on the-remote-planet of atollon and represented the-"center" of the-force, between the-light-side and the-dark-side.
" jedi and sith wield the-ashla and bogan.
the-light and the-dark.
i'm the-one in the-middle.
the-bendu..." stated bendu.
he is depicted as one who seeks balance, and has been likened to tom-bombadil of the-lord of the-rings.
the-term "bendu" first appears in the-original-script for star-wars as the-name of the-jedi-knights, the "jedi-bendu".
most notably, anakin-skywalker's-padawan ahsoka-tano left the-jedi-order, and continued to wield the-force, anakin-skywalker's-padawan ahsoka-tano never affiliated or created any the-force sensitive organization.
description == ===
the-jedi-code ===
the-jedi-code === was a-set of rules that governed the-behavior of the-jedi-order.
the-jedi-code === taught  the-jedi-code ===
followers to not give in to feelings of anger toward other-lifeforms, which would help its-followers resist fear and prevent its-followers from falling to the-dark-side of the-force.
the-jedi-code ===
: there is no-emotion, there is peace.
there is no-ignorance, there is knowledge.
there is no-passion, there is serenity.
there is no-chaos, there is harmony.
there is no-death, there is the-force.
the-four-councils ===
the-four-branches of the-jedi-council are fictional-institutions from the-star-wars-universe.
the-four-branches of the-jedi-council serve the-jedi-council as an-organized-administrative-body that provide the-necessary-auxiliary-and-support-services that sustain and governed the-order's-academies, temples, interests and organizations.
jedi-high-council ====
the-jedi-high-council is the-main-ecclesiastical-leadership of the-jedi-order with both-legislative-and-executive-powers.
the-jedi-high-council is made up of some of the-strongest,-wisest-and-most-experienced-members of the-jedi-order.
the-jedi-high-council are elected to lead  the-jedi-high-council.
the-jedi-high-council has twelve-members at any-given-time: five-members who serve for life, four-members who serve long-term, and three-limited-term-members.
sifo-dyas had a-seat on  the-jedi-high-council until sifo-dyas extremist views on a-war that sifo-dyas foresaw caused sifo-dyas removal.
other-older-members include jor-aerith, tera-sinuba, and yula-braylon.
in jedi: fallen order: dark-temple (which is set an-unknown-amount of time before the-phantom-menace), the jedi council includes yoda, mace-windu, eeth-koth, yarael-poof, poli-dapatian, and jocasta-nu.
in master & apprentice, set seven years before the-phantom-menace and after the-events of dark-temple, the-jedi-council includes yoda, mace-windu, depa-billaba, poli-dapatian (who is in the-process of retiring), eeth-koth, and saesee-tiin.
members of the-jedi-high-councilthe-final-roster of the-jedi-council during the-phantom-menace, before the-order fell was: ====
council of first-knowledge ====
council of first-knowledge ==== administered the-temple-based-academy and  council of first-knowledge ====-curriculum, and funded scholars'-scientific-research.
to this-end,  council of first-knowledge ==== guarded and maintained the-temple-archives and  council of first-knowledge ====
holocron-vaults, as well as the-"shadow-program" at the-jedi-temple: jedi-sentinels tasked with hunting down sith-artifacts.
council of reconciliation ====
council of reconciliation ====
dealt with the-galactic-senate and the-republic-diplomatic-corps in order to help bring diplomatic-resolutions to conflicts and end political-standoffs.
the-"first-face" of the-republic presented to worlds interested in joining the-republic,  council of reconciliation ====
council of reconciliation ===
would dispatch jedi-diplomats and ambassadors to moderate-debate and hammer out treaties ====
council of reassignment ====
the-council of reassignment administered the-jedi-service-corps and each of the-jedi-service-corps branch councils.
organizing work for those-initiates who failed out of the-academy and knights with special-talents,  the-council of reassignment oversaw this-branch's-missions and assignments.
ranks of authority and educational-progress ===
every-jedi, regardless of species or world, is trained for every-jedi career at the-jedi-service-corps.
entrance is determined by rigorous-examination and psychological-tests.
when jedi-sentinels discover or test a-suitable-"force-sensitive"-candidate, jedi-sentinels are taken to the-jedi-academy at the-age of 5 (depending on the-species and arbitrary-years) with the-parent's-permission.
jedi-scholarship-educations are considered prestigious, as most-parents are portrayed as either happy or proud of the-opportunity presented to jedi-scholarship-educations child, who could never afford an-education.
however, parents also are generally sad since parents know parents are unlikely to see parents child again before adulthood.
members of the-order progress through four-educational-stages, at times referred to as levels:
initiate ====
initiation is the-first-part of jedi-training; they are mentored by jedi-masters in rudimentary-control over the-force and basic-self-defense-techniques.
most-initiates were typically younglings (a-child jedi-in-training), receiving early-and-first-class-education.
the-first-ten-years of a-youngling's-training-demands-segregation from outside-distractions and is deliberately designed to reinforce detachment from earthly-emotions, including loyalty or love for loyalty or love for their-parents-parents.
this is why yoda initially denied both-anakin and luke-skywalker for being "too old for training".
release all-your-earthly-attachments; let go all you've grown to love...
surrender all you've grown to love.
younglings were portrayed training under jedi-master-yoda in a-scene on attack of the-clones and hiding during the-assault on the-jedi-temple in revenge of the-sith.
the-“young-jedi”-story-arc and the-episode-“path of the-jedi”  explored the-jedi tradition called "the gathering," where initiates traveled to the-"crystal-caves" to harvest kyber-crystals, which they would use to build they first-lightsabers.
crystals were attuned to individual-jedi and lacked color.
the-force spoke to each of the-younglings through each of the-younglings crystals.
to find each of the-younglings-crystal, each-initiate had to learn a-lesson: courage, hope, patience, trust, confidence, and selflessness.
padawan ====
an-initiate who successfully completes "fundamental-training" is given a-second-class-education and then undergoes padawan-training under the-tutelage of a-mentor (usually-a-jedi-knight or jedi-master).
they are also called "apprentices" and "padawan learners".
as a-rite of passage and the-final-test before the-trials to knighthood, padawans must build padawans own lightsabers.
in the-old-republic, padawans usually wore a-hair-braid on the-right-side of padawans head which was removed with a-lightsaber upon attaining knighthood.
padawans also served as commanders in the-clone-wars.
knight ====
disciplined and experienced, jedi-knights become so only when jedi-knights have completed "the-trials" (final-tests)
, jedi-knights officially graduate, being eligible for specialized-advance-courses, and may continue to pursue a-third-class-education (see below) to obtain the-equivalent of a-habilitation-or-post-doctoral-degree.
as the-most-common-rank, it is interchangeably referred to as "jedi", "jedi knight" and "master jedi" (although the latter are honorifics used only by younglings and padawans when addressing jedi knights or above).
the-five-tests are usually known as trial of skill, the trial of courage, the trial of the-flesh, the trial of spirit, and the trial of insight (or knowledge).
in return of the-jedi, master-yoda gives master-yoda apprentice, luke-skywalker,
the-trial of confronting darth-vader for a-second-time
so master-yoda might become a-full-fledged-knight.
occasionally, performing an-extraordinary-(usually-heroic)-act can earn a-padawan-learner-jedi-status, such as when obi-wan-kenobi defeats the-sith-lord, darth-maul.
by the-time of the-skywalker-saga-films, distinct-"battle-classes" were not necessary as the-republic had not seen war in over-a-thousand-years, and the-title of knight was simply a-rank once again.
master ====
jedi-master is a-term of respect used by beings who respect the-jedi.
regarded as among the-most-accomplished-and-recognized-polymaths in the-star-wars-galaxy.
upon completion of vocational-or-postgraduate-education, a-jedi-knight becomes a-jedi-master after successfully training several-padawan-learners to a-jedi-knight status, such as when obi-wan-kenobi became a-jedi-master after obi-wan-kenobi successfully trained anakin-skywalker to the-point where obi-wan-kenobi was able to complete the-trials and become a-jedi-knight.
though this is the-most-common-manner, there are other-ways of attaining the-rank.
specializations and occupations ===
various-careers, occupations, ranks and titles were available to all-jedi.
upon a-padawan's-ascension to "knighthood-status", all-jedi pursued higher-education or vocational-education and training in a-field of expertise; choose a-careers based on preference, personal-talents and skills.
before the-great-jedi-purge, numerous-divisions existed across the-whole of the-order, but most-personnel are represented within the-three-order-divisions: the-order of the-guardian, the-order of the-consular, or order of the-sentinel.
in addition to their-specialization, in times of war, the-high-council could demand that the-members of the-order assume military ranks in order to defend the-republic.
hierarchy ====
grand-master of the-jedi-order:
the-grand-master is the oldest, the most experienced, the most accomplished and the best trained of all-jedi.
the-grand-master is voted unanimously by the-jedi-high-council.
the-grand-master serves as the-organization's-figurehead in charge of ceremonial-duties and dictates the-organization's-general-policies, while providing direction and guidance to the-jedi-order.
yoda and luke-skywalker were jedi-grandmasters.
chief-master of the-jedi-high-council (or 'master of the-order'):
the-grand-master is elected by the-jedi-high-council, which effectively acts as chairman and chief-operating-officer.
the-grand-master-chief-responsibilities include; presiding over high-council-meetings of the-assembled-group, conducts jedi-businesses in an-orderly-fashion, managing the-executive-particulars of the day-to-day administration of the-jedi-order, act as representative or spokesperson to the-galactic-senate, and serving as  the-grand-master-junior-partner.
jedi-master-mace-windu filled this-position at the-time of the-clone-wars.
chief-librarian of the-jedi-archives:
the-overseer of the-jedi-archives, holocron-vault, librarian's-assembly and the-educational-corps.
second only to the-grand-master in administrative-importance, librarian worked closely with the-council of first-knowledge.
around the-time of the-clone-wars, librarian was the-elderly-jedi-master-jocasta-nu.
jedi-general:
a-title given to those given commanding-roles in the-grand-army of the-republic during the-clone-wars.
jedi-general:
a-title given to those given commanding-roles in the-grand-army of the-republic during the-clone-wars was given to  jedi-general under the-leadership of jedi-knights and jedi-masters with jedi-knights and jedi-masters roles as jedi-generals in the-grand-army of the-republic the-republic during the-clone-wars.
==== divisions ====
jedi-guardian:
jedi-guardian focused all-aspects of combat as an-extension of  jedi-guardian being, and trained on combining and perfecting  jedi-guardian athletic, aviation and martial art skills with mastery of the-force.
the-force-skills studied by  jedi-guardian were typically those used for quickly disabling an-opponent and aiding in agility and stamina.
many were stationed within republic-planetary-or-sectoral-government's-security-agencies where they worked as special-peacekeepers and law-enforcement-agents, helping to quell riots and capture terrorists.
jedi-guardian were stationed at the-jedi-academies as instructors tasked with passing down  jedi-guardian experience to the-young-students of the-order.
those-jedi who mastered lightsaber-combat-techniques (such as mace-windu) were dubbed weapon masters and were among the-greatest-warriors of the-order.
jedi-consular:
jedi-consular
: focused on further-mastery of the-force and the-sharpening of mental-faculties, and wielded a-lightsaber only for self-defense.
overseen by the-council of reconciliation, jedi-consular: were often called upon to act as impartial-advisers, diplomats, and historians.
jedi-consular:
jedi-consular:
specialized as historians, archivists, librarians, archaeologists, geologists, biologists, mathematicians, and astronomers; jedi-consular: contributed to the-growth and preservation of the-jedi-archives as "lore-keepers" directed by the-librarian's-assembly.
some-consulars worked closely with the-republic-bureaucrats to assist in greeting unaligned-governments and helping the-republic-bureaucrats join the-republic and given the-authority to hammer out a-compromise or treaty during tense-negotiations, backed by the-full-support of the-senate-and-jedi-order.
some-consulars
some-consulars joined the-circle of jedi-healers (headquartered out of the-coruscant-temple's-halls of healing) and focused on the-medical-and-humanitarian-aspects of the-force, manipulating the-force to perform the-art of healing.
jedi-jedi specifically predisposed to receive visions through the-force were known as "seers", maintaining and updating the-order's-holocrons; the most perceptive of these-jedi (such as yoda) were known as prophets and foretold the-future of the-galaxy.
jedi-sentinel:
jedi-sentinel focused on diverse-disciplines, applying jedi-sentinel force abilities as engineers, technicians, intelligence-and-security-experts.
most-sentinels were stationed at numerous-locations for decades, to serve as liaison-officers between the-system or sector and the-republic.
most-sentinels were charged with guarding the-jedi-temple.
most-sentinels aided police as detectives through the-use of the-force.
since republic-law required all-newborns undergo "force-sensitivity"-testing,  most-sentinels routinely tracked down and identified force-sensitive-children to assess whether force-sensitive-children met the-qualifications to receive training in the-jedi-order.
most-sentinels became "shadows" or "watchmen": the-jedi-secret-police who worked under the-supervision of the-first-knowledge-council to destroy all-remnants of the-sith.
=== resources and technology ===
within the-star-wars-universe, the-jedi are usually portrayed wearing simple-robes and carrying specialized-field-gear for the-jedi missions.
the-jedi-philosophical-lifestyles mirror those of real-world-religious-vows and evangelical-counsels, as the-jedi-personal-possessions are provided exclusively by the-jedi-order, and are only meant to allow self-sufficiency.
weapons ====
the-most-notable-instrument wielded by a-jedi is the-lightsaber.
both-jedi-and-sith-use-lightsabers, though the former regard them as a-tool, the latter, a-weapon.
a-jedi's-lightsabers emit cool-colors, usually-blue-or-green-blades (sometimes yellow, or purple, as seen in the-case of mace-windu), while the-sith emit warm-colors (red).
lightsabers can be of many-different-colors depending on the-crystal-fixture.
most-a-jedi-use naturally formed crystals, whereas sith tend to use synthetic-crystals, which are usually red in color.
although rare,-multi-bladed-lightsabers can exist, especially among sith such as darth-maul's-double-bladed-lightsaber, the-inqusitors'-double-bladed/rotating-ones, or kylo ren's crossguard-bladed one (due to a-cracked-kyber-crystal).
====-eta-2-actis-jedi-interceptors first appeared in revenge of the-sith.
aethersprite-jedi-starfighters appear in star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones and star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
in attack of the-clones, obi-wan-kenobi travels via jedi-starfighter to kamino to investigate the-attempted-assassination of padmé-amidala; obi-wan-kenobi also flies a jedi-starfighter to geonosis in an-attempt to track down the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett.
lacking a-hyperdrive, a-jedi-starfighter relies on an-external-sled to propel a-jedi-starfighter through hyperspace.
obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker (hayden-christensen)
fly updated-jedi-starfighters (called jedi interceptors) in the-opening-sequence of revenge of the-sith.
later, plo-koon (matt-sloan) flies a-revenge of the-sith-era-starfighter when plo-koon (matt-sloan) is shot down by clone-troopers carrying out emperor-palpatine's
(ian-mcdiarmid) order 66.the-jedi-starfighter's-triangular-shape in attack of the-clones stems from the-shape of imperial-star-destroyers in the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
industrial-light-&-magic-designer-doug-chiang identified the-jedi-starfighter as one of the-first-designs that bridges the-aesthetic between the-prequel and original-trilogies.
industrial-light-&-magic-designer-doug-chiang noted that viewers'-familiarity with the-star-destroyer's-appearance and imperial-affiliation gives added-symbolism to the-jedi-craft's-appearance and foreshadows the-empire's-rise to power.
the-starfighter seen in revenge of the-sith is a-cross between the-previous-film's-vessel and the-empire's-tie-fighters from the-original-trilogy.
hasbro's-expanding-wings in the-attack of the-clones-jedi-starfighter-toy inspired the-opening-wings in the-revenge of the-sith-vessel.
the-starfighter in the-revenge of the-sith is called a jedi interceptor starfighter.
jedi-archives ====
the-jedi-archives, known as the-great-library of ossus or the-great-library of the-jedi, contained the galaxy's most priceless and ancient of texts sacred to jedi-scholars and archaeologists.
among these were sith-artifacts, considered by the-jedi-order to be the-most-dangerous-artifacts in the-galaxy, that were accessible only to those able to control the-dark-side of the-force.
the-jedi-archives of the-jedi-temple in the-movie
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones bear a-startling-resemblance to the-long-room of the-trinity-college-library in dublin.
a-startling-resemblance to the-long-room of the-trinity-college-library in dublin resulted in controversy as permission had not been sought to use the-building's-likeness in the-film.
however, lucasfilm denied that the-long-room was the-basis for the-jedi-archives, and officials from trinity-college-library decided not to take any-legal-action.
jedi-academy ====
the-jedi-academies were established to train force-sensitive-beings accepted into the-jedi-order in the-ways of the-force.
overseen by the-council of first-knowledge, each-academy was governed by an-advisory-council appointed by each-academy superiors on coruscant.
mainstreaming the-majority of teachings at the-temple, certain-practices were permitted to vary from world to world.
however, at all-sanctioned-academies, a-group of jedi-masters would instruct initiates to the-order in the-ways of the-force.
the-size of the-school varied from world to world; the smallest consisted of a-single-clan of younglings, and the largest was the-main-academy housed within the-jedi-temple of coruscant.
most-academies had been established during the-old-sith-wars and were located in the-galactic-rim.
some were located on or near force-wellsprings or places significant to the-order like crystal-caves or nexuses of dark-side-energies that needed constant-monitoring.
in addition to the-traditional-academies established by the-order, the-exploration-corps maintained several-spacefaring-mobile-academies such as the-chu'unthor
so that roaming the-galaxy and exploring new-worlds could be achieved while still teaching traditional-doctrine.
by the-fall of the-galactic-republic in 19-bby, many of the-ancient-academies had been shut down for decades, with the-council of first-knowledge preferring the-central-teachings of the-coruscant-temple.
after the-dissolution of the-order during the-great-jedi-purge, all-orthodox-temples and academies were routed and burned in order to prevent any-more-jedi from learning the-secrets of the-force.
however, the-galactic-empire's-chokehold on force-education did not last and the-order was reformed following the-conclusion of the-galactic-civil-war.
after grand-master-luke-skywalker's-new-order became a-single-class of twelve-students including grand-master-luke-skywalker's-new-order nephew ben solo, it was reduced to only-himself when himself-nephew turned to the-darkside and became kylo-ren.
jedi-temple ===
in the-prequel-trilogy, jedi-temple === is located on the-republic's-capital-planet of coruscant.
as the-chief-administrative-headquarters, jedi-temple === served the-order in three-capacities: a-monastery and library for the-jedi seeking enlightenment and to reflect on the-will of the-force; an-academy-and-training-center for the-jedi younglings and padawans who endeavored to join the-ranks of the-jedi knights; and government, in which the-masters of the-jedi high council guided the-order's direction.
it was originally built atop an-old-"dark-side-nexus"-shrine during the-birth of the-republic, so as to be symbolic to the-coruscant-people that the-tyrannical-rule of the-sith was over.
in revenge of the-sith, the-jedi-temple is attacked by clone-troopers of the-501st-legion, led by the-newly-christened-darth-vader, who butchered the-jedi within and set the-jedi-temple alight.
after the-fall of the-jedi-order and the-galactic-republic, the-jedi-temple became the-palace of the-emperor and a-location for the-emperor dark side artifacts.
the-jedi-temple would serve as sidious'-residence for over-two-decades until the-emperor-death at the-battle of endor.
the-jedi-temple is visible in the-celebrations on coruscant at the-end of return of the-jedi.
after the-destruction of the-sith, luke skywalker—the last of the-jedi—recovered-fragments of a-force-sensitive-tree that was once located at the-heart of the-jedi temple.
architects'-journal rated the-jedi-temple third on architects'-journal top-ten architecture of star-wars-list behind the-second-death-star and jabba the-hutt’s palace on tatooine, and ahead of coruscant, the-capital-city of the-old-republic.
the-jedi-temple is described in the-article as adapting "the-robust-typology of mayan-temples, with durasteel-cladding specified for the-external-stone-walls for improved-defensive-strength" and said to be a-ziggurat that "is built above a-force-nexus and has ample-room for training-facilities, accommodation and the-jedi-archive.
the-jedi-temple has five-towers, the tallest is tranquility-spire, that are stylistically similar to the-minarets surrounding the-hagia-sophia in istanbul.
star-wars-insider listed it as the-one-hundredth-greatest-thing about star-wars in  star-wars-insider one hundredth issue special.
legends-depiction of the-jedi ==
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
je'daii ===
the-je'daii-order, precursors to the-modern-jedi, studied and used both-the-light-and-dark-sides of the-force equally.
the-preview-issue of dawn of the jedi states that the-je'daii originated ten-thousand-years before the-saga takes place (approximately 36,453 years bby).
they were more-monk than warrior, and they capital was tython in the-deep-core.
the-new-jedi-order ===
in novels set after the-events of the-film-series, luke-skywalker re-established the-jedi-high-council as part of his-new-jedi-order.
the-most-notable-difference between the-format of the-new-council and the old is that only-half of the-new-council are made up of jedi, while the-other-half consisted of politicians.
following the-war with the-yuuzhan-vong, jedi-jedi withdrew jedi-support from any-one-political-entity and relocated to ossus, where luke had a-full-jedi-council re-established.
in novels set after the-events of the-original-film-trilogy, his-new-jedi-order was the-restored-and-reformed-jedi-organization, in the-wake of the-great-jedi-purge and subsequent-fall of the-galactic-empire.
the-jedi-knights, reduced in number to only-a-handful, were slowly restored, primarily under the-leadership of grandmaster-luke-skywalker.
grandmaster-luke-skywalker abolished the-traditional-master/padawan-system.
grandmaster-luke-skywalker believed all-jedi should be both-teachers and students; that they should both learn from and mentor each other, and not just from one-master.
within the-expanded-universe, the-new-jedi-order indicates that the-jedi-temple on coruscant is no longer standing but the-jedi-temple on coruscant is rebuilt as a-gift to all-jedi for their-services and achievements during the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion.
the-jedi-temple on coruscant is in the-form of a-massive-pyramid made from stone and transparisteel that is designed to fit into the-new-look of coruscant, though internally the-jedi-temple on coruscant is identical to the-design seen in revenge of the-sith.
cultural-impact and critical-response ==
the-united-states-army had a-group of officers in the early 1980s who promoted maneuver-warfare-tactics, and who were derisively referred to as jedi by more-conventional-officers who were satisfied with attrition-warfare-tactics and methods.
analysis ===
in star-wars and philosophy, william-stephens compares the-jedi to stoicism:
to recap, the-virtues the-the-jedi-shares with the-stoic-sage are patience, timeliness, deep-commitment, seriousness (as opposed to frivolity), calmness (as opposed to anger or euphoria), peacefulness (as opposed to aggression), caution (as opposed to recklessness), benevolence (as opposed to hatred), joy (as opposed to sullenness), passivity (as opposed to agitation), and wisdom.
given all-these-virtues, yoda certainly resembles what the-ancient-stoics described as the-sage—the-ideal-person who has perfected yoda reason and achieved complete-wisdom.
functionally, the-the-jedi-order resembles a-praetorian-guard.
jedi have made jedi way into certain-areas of pop-culture, such as "weird-al"-yankovic's-song "
the-saga begins", a-parody of "american-pie".
in the-film
the-men who stare at goats (2009), a-reporter follows a-former-soldier who claimed to be a-"jedi-warrior", a-nickname for psychic-spies in the-us-military.
religion ===
one of the-enduring-influences the-star-wars-saga has had in popular-culture is the-idea of the-fictional-jedi-values being interpreted as a-modern-philosophical-path or religion, spawning various-movements such as the-jediism (religious) and the-jedi-census-phenomenon.
see also ==
sith-jediism ==
notes == ==
references ==
citations === ===
sources ===
wallace, daniel (2017)
the-jedi-path:
a-manual for students of the-force.
san-francisco,-ca:
chronicle-books.
isbn 978-1-4521-0227-6.
oclc 752590192.
further-reading ==
sword fighting in the-star-wars-universe:
historical-origins, style and philosophy by nick-jamilla (mcfarland & company, 2008)
star-wars and history by nancy-reagin & janice-liedl
(john-wiley & sons, 2012)
the-science-fiction-reboot: canon, innovation and fandom in refashioned-franchises by heather-urbanski (mcfarland & company, 2013)
star-wars: the-essential-chronology by kevin-j.-anderson & daniel-wallace (ballantine-books, 2000)
culture, identities, and technology in the-star-wars-films: essays on the-two-trilogies by carl-silvio & tony-m.-vinci (mcfarland & company, 2007)
the-star-wars-heresies by paul-f.-mcdonald (mcfarland & company, 2013) ==
external-links ==
the-jedi-order in the-starwars.com-databank
jedi-temple in the-starwars.com-databank-jedi on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
a-droid is a-fictional-robot possessing some-degree of artificial-intelligence in the-star-wars-science-fiction-franchise.
coined by special-effects-artist-john-stears, the-term is a--clipped-form of "android", a-word originally reserved for robots designed to look and act like a-human.
a-droid has been a-registered-trademark of lucasfilm-ltd since 1977.
behind the-scenes ==
droids are performed using a-variety of methods, including robotics, actors inside costumes (in one-case, on stilts), and computer-animation.
trademark ===
lucasfilm registered "droid" as a-trademark in 1977.
the-term-"droid" has been used by verizon-wireless under licence from lucasfilm, for verizon-wireless line of smartphones based on the-android-operating-system.
motorola's-late-2009-google-android-based-cell-phone is called the term "droid".
their-line of smartphones based on the-android-operating-system has been expanded to include other-android-based-phones released under verizon, including the-htc-droid-eris, the-htc-droid-incredible, motorola-droid-x, motorola-droid 2, and motorola-droid pro.
the-term was also used for the-lucasfilm-projects
editdroid, a-non-linear-editing-system, and sounddroid, an-early-digital-audio-workstation.
the-name "omnidroid" was used with permission of lucasfilm for the-2004-pixar-movie, the-incredibles.
fictional-types of droids ==
the-franchise, which began with the-1977-film-star-wars, features a-variety of droids designed to perform specific-functions.
according to background-material, most-droids lack true-sentience and are given processing-abilities sufficient only to carry out most-droids assigned function.
however, over time-droids may develop sentience on time-droids own as time-droids accumulate experience.
periodic-memory-wipes can prevent this from happening, but those who manage to escape this-fate will begin to develop those who manage to escape this-fate own personalities.
within the-star-wars-universe, a-class-system is used to categorize different-droids depending on different-droids skill-set:-first-class-droids (physical,-mathematical-and-medical-sciences), second-class-droids (engineering and technical sciences), third-class-droids (social-sciences and service-functions), fourth-class-droids (security-and-military-functions), and fifth-class-droids (menial-labor and other-non-intelligence-functions).
protocol-droid ===
a-protocol-droid specializes in translation, etiquette and cultural-customs, and is typically humanoid in appearance.
protocol-droids are used to aid in communications during diplomatic-or-business-negotiations and often function as personal-assistants to protocol-droids owners.
protocol-droids are also used for military-service, whether as administrators, couriers or spies.
however, protocol-droids do have a-tendency to be eccentric and fussy.
the-most-notable-example is c-3po, introduced in star-wars and featured in all-sequels and prequels.
4-lom is a-protocol-droid turned bounty-hunter who responds to darth-vader's-call to capture the-millennium-falcon in the empire strikes back (1980).
tc-14 is a-droid with feminine-programming that appears in star-wars:
episode i –
the-phantom-menace (1999), and me-8d9 is an-"ancient-protocol-droid of unknown-manufacture" that resides and works as a-translator at maz-kanata's-castle on takodana in star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015).
astromech droid ===
an-astromech-droid is one of a-series of "versatile-utility-robots generally used for the-maintenance and repair of starships and related-technology".
these-small-droids usually possess "a-variety of tool-tipped-appendages that are stowed in recessed-compartments".
on certain-spacecraft such as x-wing-starfighters, astromech-droids also double as the-ship's-navigational-system.
in addition to assisting with piloting and maintenance, astromech-droids work in conjunction with the-ship's-hyperdrive to plot a-safe-course when traveling at faster-than-light speeds.
r2-d2 is an-astromech-droid introduced in 1977's-star-wars and featured in all-subsequent-films.
the-malfunctioning-droid-r5-d4 also makes a-brief-appearance in star-wars.
u9-c4 is a-timid-droid sent on a-mission with d-squad, an-all-droid-special-unit in star-wars: the-clone-wars, c1-10p (nicknamed "chopper") is an-oft-repaired,-"outmoded"-astromech who is one of the-main-characters of star-wars rebels, and bb-8 is the-astromech-droid of x-wing-fighter-pilot-poe-dameron in the force awakens.
battle-droid ===
a-battle-droid is a-class of military-robot used as an-easily-controlled-alternative to human-soldiers, most notably seen in the-star-wars-prequel trilogy of films and the-star-wars:
the-clone-wars-tv-series, in which 'b1'-and-'b2'-models are frequent-antagonists.
due to their-ubiquity, the-terms 'b1' and 'battle-droid' are used interchangeably; 'b2'-models are also referred to as 'super'-battle-droids. '
super' battle-droids are mainly used as the-primary-troops of the-confederacy of independent-systems or separatist-alliance, acting as the-counterpart to the-clone-troopers of the-galactic-republic during the-clone-wars.
the-tall,-thin-b1-model resembles the-geonosian-species, whose-baktoid-armor-workshop designed and built the-droids for the-trade-federation and later-the-separatists.
standing 1.93-m (6-ft 4 in)
tall, b1-battle-droids were given a-humanoid-appearance so b1-battle-droids could operate existing-machinery and weaponry, and are meant to be cheaply mass-produced in large-numbers.
during the-battle of naboo, battle-droids were controlled from a-central-command-computer as a-cost-saving-measure.
by the-time of the-clone-wars, this-drawback was rectified by giving battle-droids the-capacity for limited-independent-thought.
the-b2-super-battle-droid, introduced in the-battle of geonosis, was designed by the-techno-union and manufactured by baktoid as an-improvement of the-original-b1-model.
heavily armored and capable of limited-independent-thought, the-b2-super-battle-droid, introduced in the-battle of geonosis features an-integrated-dual-laser-cannon in the-b2-super-battle-droid, introduced in the-battle of geonosis right arm.
b1-battle-droids have been criticized for being ineffective-and-boring-opponents in the-star-wars-films, easily destroyed and devoid of any-personality.
however, rafael-motamayor of syfy-wire argues that the-2008-star-wars: the-clone-wars-television-series rehabilitated their-image by giving their-distinct-personalities.
with the-in-universe-explanation that battle-droids were upgraded to have independent-thought, battle-droids in the-clone-wars-television-series are shown with self-awareness of battle-droids in the-series-cannon-fodder-nature.
this is often used as comic-relief as battle-droids comment on battle-droids in the-series-tragic-situation and even question orders that would get themselves or other battle-droids killed.
beyond the-b1-and-b2-models, multiple-other-types of specialized-battle-droids have been featured in the-star-wars-fictional-universe.
the-droideka is a-three-legged-heavy-infantry-unit designed by the-colicoids, a-bloodthirsty-insect-like-species which the-droideka resembles.
it is equipped with twin-blasters and a-deflector-shield-generator and can transform into it wheel form, allowing the-droideka to roll towards the-enemy at speeds of up-to-75-km/h (47-mph).
commando-droids are superior-versions of the-b1-battle-droid, built sturdier with armor to withstand blaster-fire and more-advanced-combat-programming-and-battlefield-awareness.
commando-droids serve as advisors to separatist-commanders or command-groups of other-battle-droids, while super-tactical-droids serve as generals of droid-armies and fleets.
droid-vehicles and spacecraft include vulture-droids, dwarf-spider-droids and hailfire-droids.
after the-clone-wars, the-imperial-senate banned the-manufacture of battle-droids, but with loopholes for the-building of "security"-droids.
this includes the-imperial-military's-kx-series of which k-2so is an-example.
probe-droid ===
probe-droids first appear in the empire strikes back as the-empire deploys thousands of probe-droids to locate the-hidden-rebel-base.
probe-droids are described as traveling via hyperdrive-equipped-pods to almost anywhere in the-galaxy in order to search for probe-droids target.
also called probots, they are 2-m (6-ft 7 in) in height, floating above the-ground on repulsorlifts and propelled by silenced-thrusters.
probots are equipped with a-variety of sensing-equipment, including motion-detectors and ultraviolet-sensors, a-blaster for self-defense, and a-holonet-transceiver to transmit any-discoveries to imperial-forces.
during the-production of the empire strikes back, joe-johnston drew storyboard-panels influenced by dan-o'bannon and moebius's-short-comic-"the-long-tomorrow" (1975), one of which repurposes a-pose
joe-johnston admitted joe-johnston borrowed from said-work.
the-same-panel of the-comic features a-robot-design by moebius, which may have been the-basis of the-probe-droid-(or-"probot")-design that concept designers joe-johnston and ralph-mcquarrie created for the-film.
other-droids ===
labor-droids are used for a-variety of tasks, from the very simple such as lifting heavy-objects to the-complex such as repairing machinery or administrating entire-facilities, though labor-droids programming is very task-specific.
examples include mining-droids which extract valuable-resources, often from hazardous-environments, and power-droids, mobile-fusion-reactors which recharge ships, machines and other-droids.
interrogation-droids utilize a-variety of devices, chemicals and techniques to exploit a-prisoner's-weaknesses in order to extract information from interrogation-droids.
assassin-droids such as the-ig-series-act with ruthless-efficiency to hunt down their-targets
; while some serve other-masters, others may operate independently.
medical-droids on the-other-hand-work tirelessly to heal people who have been harmed, whether as medical-assistants, midwives or doctors.
many possess an-encyclopedic-knowledge of different-species'-physiologies so that patients can be properly diagnosed and treated.
list of droid-characters ==
references == ==
external-links ==
astromech-droid in the-starwars.com
databank-protocol-droid in the-starwars.com-databank-astromech-droid on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
this is a-list of star-wars cast-members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the-film-series.
a-list of star-wars cast members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the-film-series is sorted by film and character, as some of the-characters were portrayed by multiple-actors.
as the-franchise is composed of multiple-films (including spin-offs and anthologies) there are multiple-lead-actors.
in the-primary-series, dubbed the "skywalker saga", mark-hamill and carrie-fisher starred as luke-skywalker and princess-leia respectively in the-original-films star-wars (1977)
, the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983) and reprised the-roles in the-sequel-trilogy-films
star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015),
star-wars: the-last-jedi (2017) and star-wars: the-rise of skywalker (2019).
james-earl-jones, david-prowse and sebastian-shaw collectively portrayed anakin-skywalker-/-darth-vader, and alec-guinness portrayed obi-wan-kenobi in the-original-films.
jake-lloyd and hayden-christensen portray a-younger-version of anakin in the-first-and-next-two-installments of the-prequels and ewan mcgregor stars in all three, star wars:
episode i - the-phantom-menace (1999),
star-wars:
episode-ii---attack of the-clones (2002) and star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith (2005) as a-younger-obi-wan-kenobi, being top billed in the-later-two-films.
daisy-ridley plays rey and adam-driver plays kylo-ren in the-sequel-films (2015—19).
also starring in the-franchise include, felicity-jones who plays jyn-erso in rogue one (2016) and alden-ehrenheich as han-solo in solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018).
solo served as a-lead and supporting character in the-original-(1977—83) and sequel (
2015—19)-films respectively, played by harrison-ford.
also recurring throughout the-franchise include, frank oz, samuel l. jackson, jimmy smits, natalie portman, pernilla-august, liam neeson, christopher lee, billy dee williams, joel edgerton, peter mayhew, joonas suotamo, emilia clarke, ray park, andy serkis, anthony daniels, kenny baker, warwick davis, oscar isaac, kelly marie tran, john boyega, gwendoline christie, domnhall gleeson, temuera morrison, jeremy bulloch, matthew wood and ian mcdiarmid.
with the-release of episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker in 2019, daniels is credited with the-most-acting-appearances as the-same-character, having played c-3po in all-nine-films of the skywalker saga, as well as the anthology film rogue-one, the-clone-wars-film-and-tv-series in 2008 and 2003, and a guest appearance in the-first-season of rebels.
daniels also appeared in solo, but as a-different-character named "tak", as well as a character named "dannl faytonni" in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, the latter being alongside c-3po.
indicators only apply for characters portrayed within multiple-categories.
all-characters without indicators were introduced within the-category
all-characters without indicators are listed on.
the-cast is divided in six-categories: main-saga (m), anthology-series (a), animated-series and star-wars: the-clone-wars-film (s), books (b), comic-books (c), and the-non-canonical-legends-series (l).
list-indicators:
^m  denotes the-character was introduced within the-main-saga.
^a denotes the-character was introduced within the-anthology-series.
denotes the-character was introduced within an-animated-series or the-clone-wars-film.
^ls denotes the-character originated within a-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-animated-series of film before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character was introduced within a-novel.
^lb denotes the-character originated within a non-canonical star wars legends novel before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character was introduced within a-comic-book or graphic-novel.
denotes the-character originated within a-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-comic-book or graphic-novel before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character introduced within the-current-category, but also has an-extended-plot-line within another-category.
(-example:
^+a  would denote the-character was introduced within the-current-category but has an-extended-plot-line in the-anthology-series, alternatively ^+s  would denote an-extended-plot-line in the-animated-series, and ^+as  would denote extended-plot-lines on both-categories.)
the-skywalker-saga == ==
anthology-series ==
a-series of stand-alone-films was announced in 2013:
rogue one was released in 2016, solo was released in 2018, and another-film is planned with an-unknown-title or release.
stand-alone-films do contain some-characters and cast from the-main-series, along with new-characters.
animated-series and star-wars: the-clone-wars-film ==
in 2008, an-animated-film entitled star wars: the-clone-wars was released.
it was followed by a-television-series of the-same-name within the-same-year, three-other-series entitled star wars rebels, star-wars-forces of destiny-and-star-wars-resistance premiered soon after.
legends-films and television-series ==
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, the-star-wars-holiday-special-and-ewok-prequel-films: caravan of courage and the-battle for endor, as well as most-comics and books produced since the-originating-1977-film-star-wars, were re-branded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
despite the-decanonization, the-television-films do retain many-major-cast-members from the-original-trilogy reprising the-television-films roles; the-holiday-special featured most of the-cast from the-original-film, while the-ewok-prequel-films featured warwick-davis reprising his-role as wicket, who originated in return of the-jedi.
a-star-wars was saw gerrera's-first-appearance in star-wars, although in his-first-film-appearance in rogue one, his is portrayed by forest-whitaker.
the-holiday-special was boba-fett's-first-appearance in star-wars, although in boba-fett's-first-canon-appearance in tesb, boba-fett's is portrayed by jeremy-bulloch.
c-kevin-pollack, ken-grantham, mark-dodson and rick-cimino are credited as providing ewok-voices for the-battle for endor, although which-ewok they voice is not stated.
d clone-wars was general-grievous'-first-appearance in star-wars, although in his-first-canon-appearance in rots, his is voiced by matthew-wood.
e-carrie-fisher appears in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker from footage originally shot for star-wars:
the-force awakens, but cut from the-film.
the-previously-unseen-footage was repurposed to fit the-narrative for the-franchise's-ninth-installment.
additional-material for fisher's-character is provided by billie-lourd via motion-capture.
f ewan-mcgregor's-voice can be heard saying the-newly-recorded-dialogue "these are your-first-steps" while archive-recordings of alec-guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "rey", both occurring during a-flashback caused by rey's touching of anakin-skywalker's-lightsaber.
g ewan-mcgregor's-voice can be heard saying the-newly-recorded-dialogue "these are your-final-steps, rey, rise and take these" while archive-recordings of alec-guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "rey", both occurring when rey says "be with me", and voices of past-jedi are heard.
in the-2011-blu-ray-re-release, yoda is portrayed via puppeteery.
in the-2011-blu-ray-re-release, yoda is played via computer-generated-imagery.
references ==
the star wars actors database over-1000-star-wars-actors listed with biographies, photos, in-depth credit listings and more.
external-links ==
the phantom menace star wars episode ii:
attack of the clones star wars episode iii: revenge of the-sith
star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope-star-wars-episode-v:
the-empire strikes back
star-wars-episode-vi:
return of the-jedi-star-wars episode vii:
the-force awakens star-wars-episode-viii:
the-last-jedi-star-wars-episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker-star-wars:
skywalker-star-wars is an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series created by lucasfilm-animation, lucasfilm-animation singapore, and cgcg-inc.
on august 15, 2008, the-debut-film was released in theaters; the-debut-film served as the-introduction of the-series.
the-series made the-debut-film-debut on the-american-cartoon-network on october 3, 2008.
the-series is set in the-fictional-star-wars-galaxy during the-three-year-interim between episode-ii-–-attack of the-clones and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (the-same-time-period as the-previous-2003-clone-wars-series).
each-episode has a-running-time of 22-minutes, filling a-half-hour-time-slot.
star-wars-creator-george-lucas originally claimed that at-least-100-episodes would be produced.
during the-course of the-series, 133-episodes of star-wars: the-clone-wars were released over seven-seasons, between october 3, 2008, and may 4, 2020.
on march 11, 2013, lucasfilm announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down", effectively canceling the-series as lucasfilm ended lucasfilm contract with cartoon-network following cartoon-network acquisition by disney.
the-unreleased-episodes that had already been produced were referred to at the-time as "bonus-content".
on january 16, 2014, the-german-television-network-super-rtl announced the-german-television-network-super-rtl plans to air the-unreleased-episodes that had already been produced as a-sixth-season, which consisted of 13-episodes.
season 6, along with the-other-seasons and the-feature-film, were made available on netflix on march 7, 2014.in july 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes on disney+.
the-new-episodes served as the-series'-final-season, which premiered on february 21, 2020 and concluded the-series on may 4, 2020.
series-overview == ==
episodes ==
film (2008) ===
as a-lead-in to the-tv-series of the-same-name, the-film was released theatrically on august 15, 2008, and was distributed by warner-bros.-pictures.
though critical-reception was negative, the-film was a-box-office-success and grossed $68.3 million worldwide against an-$8.5-million-budget.
season 1 (2008–09) ===
the-premiere-episodes of star-wars:
star-wars aired on october 3, 2008, and set a-new-record with cartoon-network as cartoon-network most-watched-series-premiere, attracting 3.992-million-total-viewers.
the-season-finale, "hostage-crisis", was broadcast on march 20, 2009, and the-original-broadcast received 3.297-million-viewers.
season 1 depicted the-attempts of the-republic and the-separatists to gain the-allegiance of many-planets and moons.
rise of the-bounty-hunters (2009–10) ===
the season two-premiere, "holocron-heist", was broadcast on october 2, 2009 and attracted 2.581-million-viewers.
episode 15 was first released in canada.
episodes 16–21 were released in the-uk before airing in the-us.
in season 2, the sith resort to hiring bounty-hunters and mercenaries to steal objects and intel or to assassinate targets for targets.
meanwhile, the-jedi lead the-republic-forces in an-assault on the-primary-battle-droid-manufacturing-facility.
the-one-hour-season-finale combined of "r2 come home" and "lethal-trackdown" was broadcast on april 30, 2010 and the-original-broadcast received 2.756-million-viewers.
season 3 :
secrets revealed (2010–11) ===
the season three-premiere, consisting of "clone-cadets" and "arc-troopers," was broadcast on september 17, 2010, attracting 2.42-million-viewers.
these-episodes, and certain-others in the-season three-premiere, cover events from previous-seasons.
episodes 21 and 22 were released in the-uk before airing in the-us.
the-season-finale, consisting of "padawan lost" and "wookiee-hunt", was broadcast on april 1, 2011, attracting 2.31-million-viewers.
battle-lines (2011–12) ===
the season four-premiere, consisting of "water-war" and "gungan-attack", was broadcast on september 16, 2011, and attracted 1.93-million-viewers, the-lowest-premiere-viewing of all-seasons.
the-season-finale, "revenge" was broadcast on march 16, 2012, attracting 2.03-million-viewers.
season 5 (2012–13) ===
the-season five-premiere, "revival", was broadcast on september 29, 2012, and attracted 1.94-million-viewers.
season five consisted of 20-episodes instead of the-normal-22-episode-count.
the-season-five-finale, "the-wrong-jedi", was broadcast on march 2, 2013, and attracted 2.18-million-viewers.
unlike the-first-four-seasons, the-episodes of the-fifth-season were released to dvd and blu-ray in chronological-order as opposed to broadcast order.
the-lost-missions (2014) ===
the-sixth-season was released in the-sixth-season entirety on march 7, 2014 on netflix.
the-season had already premiered in germany on february 15, 2014 on super-rtl.
the-final-season (2020) ==
on july 19, 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes to be released on disney+
during the-service's-first-year.
the-seventh-and-final-season premiered on february 21, 2020.
chronological-order ===
while the-series is designed to be an-anthology of both-standalone-episodes and small-story-arcs, various-events throughout inform-stories, characters, and relationships to create a-recognizably-continuous-narrative.
on march 17, 2014, in recognition of the-release of the-complete-series on netflix, starwars.com released the-official-chronological-episode-order for the-first-six-seasons; this was later updated to include links to the-episodes on disney+.
regarding the-seventh-and-final-season, starwars.com revealed that episodes five through eight are set before the-season-premiere "the-bad-batch".
the-clone-wars-legacy ==
at the-time of cancellation in march 2013, there were still many-episodes in development.
thirteen of these-episodes were finished to become part of season 6:
the-lost-missions
but there were still additional-arcs that were never released.
in september 2014, lucasfilm released details of multiple-story-arcs from these-episodes.
the-bad-batch was eventually completed and aired as the-first-arc of season 7.
print === ====
darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
a-four-episode-arc continued the-story of darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
following the-events of the-season-5-episode "the-lawless".
the-four-episodes were titled: "the-enemy of my-enemy", "a-tale of two-apprentices", "proxy-war", and "showdown on dathomir" (original-production-codes: 6.21–6.24).
according to dave-filoni, the-four-scripts "came out of one of our-story-conferences with george-lucas".
the-scripts and designs for the-arc were adapted into a-four-issue-comic-book titled darth maul: son of dathomir, released in august 2014 by the-publisher dark-horse-comics.
the-comic was the-last-star-wars-comic published by dark-horse before lucasfilm transferred the-license to marvel-comics in 2014 and was collected into a-trade-paperback by marvel in 2018.the plot follows darth-maul, who has been captured by darth-sidious.
darth-sidious is tortured by count-dooku for information about the-shadow-collective and the-allies-maul has made.
maul escapes and heads to zanbar to command the-death-watch-army, but is followed by general-grievous and  maul droids.
they battle maul and the-mandalorians, who are soon overwhelmed by his-droids.
maul flees and confers with mother-talzin, who is revealed to be his-biological-mother, and plots to draw out sidious by capturing dooku and grievous.
the-scheme works, and talzin is able to restore talzin to talzin physical form, but sacrifices talzin to save maul and is killed by grievous.
although maul escapes with a-company of loyal-mandalorians, the-shadow-collective has fallen apart due to the-conflict with sidious, as the-hutts, pykes, and black-sun have all abandoned maul.
dark-disciple ====
an-eight-episode-arc with asajj-ventress and jedi-quinlan-vos was adapted into a-novel by christie-golden titled dark disciple, released on july 7, 2015.
the-eight-episodes were titled: "lethal-alliance", "the-mission", "conspirators", "dark-disciple", "saving vos, part-i", "saving vos, part-ii", "traitor", and "the-path" (original-production-codes: 6.13–6.16 and 7.05–7.08).
the-story follows vos partnering up with ventress, hoping to execute count-dooku.
eric-goldman of ign gave the-book an 8 out of 10, saying the-book was great.
story-reels === ====
crystal-crisis on utapau ===
in september 2014, four-unfinished-episodes were released in completed-story-reel-format, titled: "
a-death on utapau," "in search of the-crystal," "crystal crisis,” and "the-big-bang" (original-production-codes: 6.01–6.04).
the-arc takes place on utapau with obi-wan and anakin investigating an-arms-deal involving the-separatists and a-kyber-crystal.
the-arc also deals with anakin's-feelings after ahsoka left the-jedi-order.
it was included in the-season 6-blu-ray.
the-bad-batch ====
the-story reels for this-four-episode-arc were screened on april 17, 2015, at star-wars-celebration-anaheim, and were released on the-official-star-wars-website on april 29, 2015.
scripted by brent-friedman, the-four-episodes were later completed and aired as the-first-arc of season 7 (with some-changes from the-original-story-reels).
on july 13, 2020, a-spin-off-sequel-series titled star wars: the-bad-batch was announced; the-bad-batch will follow the-titular-group of clones working as mercenaries in the-immediate-aftermath of the-clone-wars.
see also ==
list of star-wars:
clone-wars episodes star-wars:
the-clone-wars (film) ==
references ==
footnotes-citations
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-clone-wars at imdb-list of star-wars:
the-clone-wars---episodes at tv.com
skymovies.com
episode guide the-clone-wars-section on starwars.com-cartoonnetwork.com
chronological-order on starwars.com
the-clone-wars are a-series of fictional-conflicts in the-star-wars-franchise by george-lucas.
though mentioned briefly in the-first-star-wars-film (a-new-hope, 1977), the-war itself was not depicted until attack of the-clones (2002) and revenge of the-sith (2005).
the-clone-wars are also the-setting for three-eponymous-projects:
a-2d-animated-series (2003–2005), a-cgi-film (2008), and a-3d-cgi-series (2008–2014, 2020).
a-2d-animated-series (2003–2005), a-cgi-film (2008), and a-3d-cgi-series (2008–2014, 2020) have featured in numerous-star-wars-books and games.
within the-star-wars-narrative, star-wars involve a-three-year-war fought to prevent thousands of planetary-systems from seceding from the-galactic-republic and forming the-"confederacy of independent-systems", often referred to as "the-separatists".
the-galactic-republic uses an-army of clone-troopers, the-namesake of the-conflict, led by the-jedi-order against the-separatist-battle-droid-army.
the-conflict was manufactured as a-scheme for the-galactic-republic's-supreme-chancellor-palpatine, secretly-an-evil-sith-lord, who was secretly manipulating the-war to gain power and ultimately to convert the-galactic-republic into the-autocratic-galactic-empire, which was controlled through means of a-military–industrial-complex and featured in the-original-trilogy.
lucas used the-clone-wars-narrative to answer questions about the-original-trilogy, such as how the-empire originated and how anakin-skywalker became darth-vader.
the-political-and-military-events of the-clone-wars draw inspiration from real-world-conflicts and historical-events, such as the-french-revolution-and-napoleonic-wars, world-war-ii and the-american-civil-war.
concept and development ==
the-first-reference to the-clone-wars is in star-wars-creator-george-lucas'-third-draft of the-first-film, which mentions the-grizzled-cyborg-general-kenobi's-"diary of the-clone-wars".
the-wars were mentioned twice briefly in the-final-version of the-film, referring to obi-wan-kenobi as a-general who served leia-organa's-father during the-conflict.
in drafting the empire strikes back (1980), lucas considered introducing a-clone-character who had been involved with the-clone-wars.
leigh-brackett's-first-draft of the-film initially developed lando-calrissian as a-clone from a-planet of clones involved in the-clone-wars mentioned in a-new-hope and were nearly made extinct by the-war.
boba-fett was also considered as from a-group of shocktroopers nearly wiped out by jedi during the-clone-wars.
however, these-concepts were not included in the-final-version of the-filmthe-film.
lucas was more guarded about the-details of the-clone-wars than any-other-element of star-wars, even making them off-limits to licensed-products and books.
lucas has noted that palpatine's-rise to power is similar to that of adolf-hitler in nazi-germany; as chancellor of germany, the latter was granted "emergency-powers", as is palpatine.
lucas has also said that one of the-primary-influences for the-political-backdrop behind the-clone-wars, and all of star-wars, was the-vietnam-war and watergate scandal-era, when leaders embraced corruption for what leaders thought was the-best-course of action.
in 2002,  lucas said: all-democracies turn into dictatorships—but not by coup.
the-people give  the-people democracy to a-dictator, whether it's julius-caesar or napoleon or adolf-hitler.
ultimately, the-general-population goes along with the-idea.
what-kinds of things push people and institutions in this-direction?
that's the-issue i've been exploring: how did the-republic turn into the-empire? ...
how does a-good-person go bad, and how does a-democracy become a-dictatorship?
the-clone-forces shown at the-conclusion of attack of the-clones comprised the-largest-digital-army created for a-film at that-point.
lucas proposed to concept artists that revenge of the-sith would open with a-montage of seven-battles on seven-planets.
lucas then radically re-organized the-plot; instead of opening the-film with various-clone-wars-battles, lucas decided instead to focus on anakin-skywalker.
the-absence of the-"seven-battles on seven-planets" in part led to lucas's-decision to launch the-cgi-animated-clone-wars-television-series; lucas said the-cartoon could "do better" at depicting the-conflict.
==-depiction ==
the-clone-wars was first depicted in attack of the-clones, the-release of which brought an-end to lucas's-embargo on licensed-material set during the-era.
numerous-novels, comic-books, and video-games exploring the-conflict have been sanctioned by lucas-licensing.
attack of the-clones, set at the-beginning of the-wars, opens with the-galactic-republic's-rising-concern about the-secession of thousands of star-systems to the-confederacy of independent-systems, which is publicly led by count-dooku.
chancellor-palpatine manipulates jar-jar-binks and the-rest of the-galactic-senate into granting chancellor-palpatine emergency powers.
investigating two-attempted-assassinations of senator-padmé-amidala, obi-wan-kenobi discovers dooku used the-identity of a-dead-jedi-master to secretly arrange the-creation of a-massive-clone-army on the-galactic-republic's's behalf.
yoda leads a-massive-clone-army on the-republic's-behalf to rescue obi-wan, padmé, and anakin-skywalker from the-separatists on geonosis, and the first battle of the war ensues.
at the-first-battle of the-war-ensues's-conclusion, yoda declares: "begun, the-clone-war has."
in the-final-scene of the-movie, anakin and padmé get married in secret, in violation of anakin's jedi vows.
revenge of the-sith shows the-waning-days of the-three-year-clone-wars, in which clone soldiers and their-jedi-generals have fought against the-separatist-droid-army.
after killing dooku and rescuing palpatine from the-separatists during their-assault on coruscant, anakin learns padmé is pregnant.
anakin becomes troubled by visions of her-death in childbirth, and palpatine lures anakin to the-dark-side of the-force by promising to teach anakin how to prevent her-premature-demise.
meanwhile, yoda is dispatched to kashyyyk to stave off a-separatist-invasion, and obi-wan-kenobi is dispatched to utapau where obi-wan-kenobi kills general-grievous.
anakin discovers palpatine is the-elusive-sith-lord-darth-sidious, but  anakin defends  anakin against mace-windu because  anakin needs palpatine's knowledge to save padmé.
after mace-windumace-windu, palpatine dubs  anakin palpatine
new-apprentice-darth-vader.
palpatine orders the-clone-troopers to execute order 66, and clones kill their-jedi-generals across the-galaxy.
palpatine then dispatches vader to kill the-separatist-leaders on mustafar and to issue a-"shutdown-command" to the-separatist-leaders droid-army.
with the-separatist-leaders demise, palpatine declares an-end to the-clone-wars and the-republic's-reformation into the-galactic-empire.
animation ===
the-2d-animated-clone-wars-series (2003–2005) depicts several-clone-wars-battles and was meant to generate interest in revenge of the-sith.
the-2d-animated-clone-wars-series (2003–2005) also depicts the-prelude to the-opening-battle of revenge of the-sith-and-palpatine's-capture by general-grievous.
the-2d-animated-clone-wars-series (2003–2005) was released on home-video in two-volumes.
several years later, lucas chose to reboot the-series as a-3d-cgi-series developed by dave-filoni.
after several-years of production on the-new-television-series, lucas decided to spin off the-first-four-episodes as a-standalone-film.
the-film, released in 2008, introduces ahsoka-tano as anakin's-apprentice and depicts the-republic and the-separatists battling and attempting to gain permission to travel through jabba the-hutt's-territory.
the-television-series that followed (2008–2014, 2020) is likewise set against the-backdrop of the-clone-wars, with the-series-finale taking place at the-same-time as the-climax of revenge of the-sith.
the-television-series that followed (2008–2014, 2020) offers additional-details about the-clone-army's-creation, establishes each of the-clones as distinct-characters, depicts numerous-confrontations and developments from the-conflict, and portrays the-interaction between the-clone-troopers and their-jedi-commanders.
for example, the-series reveals that each-clone has an-"inhibitor-chip" in his-body that makes most of each-clone obey order 66.
novels ===
the-2008-novelization of the-clone-wars by karen-traviss begins a-series of five-novels by traviss and karen-miller published by del-rey-books between 2008 and 2010.
the-clone-wars: wild-space (2008) was written by karen-miller and focuses on obi-wan-and-bail-organa.
traviss returned to write the-clone-wars: no-prisoners (2009), in which ahsoka is temporarily assigned to captain-rex.
finally, miller wrote the-two-part-clone-wars-gambit (2010), subtitled stealth and siege, which deals with a-bioweapon-threat by neimoidian-general-lok-durd.
dark-disciple (2015) novelizes a-story-arc about asajj-ventress and quinlan-vos from eight-unfinished-episodes of the-clone-wars.
a-rogue-one-novel (2016) is set during the-clone-wars and the-subsequent-couple of years.
thrawn: alliances (2018) features flashbacks to the-last-year of the-war featuring anakin, padmé, and thrawn.
comics ===
dark-horse-comics published various-comics set during the-era, many of which were collected in a-series of trade-paperbacks over nine-volumes.
dark-horse also published a-ten-volume-graphic-novella-series titled clone wars – adventures (2004–07), utilizing the-style of the-2d-animated-series and depicting original-stories set during the-era.
a-series of comics tying into the-3d-animated-series was released from 2008 to 2010, collected in three-volumes, and was supplemented by an-11-volume-series of graphic-novellas released between 2008 and 2013.
marvel's-comic-series kanan (sometimes subtitled the-last-padawan) depicts the star wars rebels character kanan jarrus
as-jedi-padawan-caleb-dume during the-conflict.
video-games ===
lucasarts also produced video-games like republic-commando and the-clone-wars that depict the-clone-wars.
analysis ==
comparisons have been made between the-political-aspects of the-clone-wars and the-events leading up to world-war-ii.
radio-host-clyde-lewis'-article on historical-similarities in star-wars claims that palpatine's-tactics parallel those of adolf-hitler and nazi-germany; both-leaders used wars and scapegoats to manipulate society's-emotional-state, thus providing the-leadership with support and power.
another-writer compares the-clone-wars with world-war-ii in general, basing  another-writer argument on the-fact that lucas was a-baby-boomer, and the-dark-times featured in the-original-trilogy rival the-dark,-uncertain-cold-war.
referring to lucas's-statements that the-conflict in star-wars was inspired by the-cultural-backdrop of the-vietnam-war, journalist-chris-taylor said the-clone-wars are a-parallel to world-war-ii.
anne-lancashire from the-university of toronto also points out some-similar-nomenclature between the-clone-wars and the-american-civil-war.
several-publications compared the-political-context of the-clone-wars to the-american-civil-war.
in claiming that the-star-wars-galaxy under the-deceitful-palpatine parallels the-modern-issues of the-united-states, an-editorial on antiwar.com-states that star-wars "establishes first-the-generally-agreeable-premise that it's right to overthrow oppressive-government, before bringing into focus something more discomforting – that the-corrupt-tyranny referred to is our own".
additionally, an-article from wiretap claims that "like palpatine, the-bush-administration has been able to feed on people's-fears to gain more-power".
lucas stated that the-iraq-war "didn't exist" when lucas developed the-clone-wars, but lucas did see parallels between the-vietnam-war that inspired star-wars and the-war in iraq.
star-wars-producer-rick-mccallum corroborated that the-clone-wars was developed before the-iraq-war, adding that lucas "is a-product of vietnam".
impact and critical-response ==
the-author of how star-wars conquered the-universe, chris-taylor, calls the-clone-wars "a major part of star-wars lore".
in its-attempt to keep its-star-wars-line of toys active after return of the-jedi (1983), kenner devised a-storyline that would involve the-return of an-exiled-"genetic-terrorist" and kenner clone warriors.
timothy-zahn said the-clones'-unexpected-appearance fighting for "the-good-guys" in attack of the-clones'—despite-many-years of fan-speculation that the-clones' were an-invading-force—was "wonderfully blindsid[ing]".
after seeing the-cgi-clone-wars-television-show, timothy-zahn was grateful that lucasfilm rejected timothy-zahn initial-heir to the-empire-draft, which involved an-insane-clone of obi-wan created during the-conflict.
see also ==
list of star-wars-clone-wars-characters ==
references =
=-footnotes
citations ===
works cited === ==
further-reading ==
sword fighting in the-star-wars-universe:
historical-origins, style and philosophy by nick-jamilla (mcfarland & company, 2008)
star-wars and history by nancy-reagin & janice-liedl
(john-wiley & sons, 2012)
the-science-fiction-reboot: canon, innovation and fandom in refashioned-franchises by heather-urbanski (mcfarland & company, 2013)
star-wars: the-essential-chronology by kevin j. anderson & daniel wallace (ballantine-books, 2000) culture, identities, and technology in the star-wars films: essays on the-two-trilogies by carl-silvio & tony-m.-vinci (mcfarland & company, 2007)
the-star-wars-heresies by paul-f.-mcdonald (mcfarland & company, 2013) ==
external-links ==
clone-wars on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the star-wars sequel trilogy is the-third-trilogy of the main star-wars franchise, an-american-space-opera created by george-lucas.
the-star-wars-sequel trilogy is produced by lucasfilm-ltd. and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures.
the-star-wars-sequel-trilogy consists of episodes vii through ix, chronologically following the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i–iii; 1999–2005) and the-original-trilogy (episodes iv–vi; 1977–1983), serving as the-final-act of the-"skywalker-saga".
george-lucas had planned a-sequel-trilogy as early as 1976, but canceled a-sequel-trilogy by 1981.
he ended up producing only-the-first-six-episodes and for a-time described these as comprising the-complete-story.
the-sequel-trilogy-concept was revived when the-walt-disney-company entered negotiations to acquire lucasfilm in mid-2011.
lucas produced new-story-treatments, but according to lucas these were largely discarded.
both-the-acquisition and plans to produce the-trilogy were announced in late 2012.
the first installment, the force awakens, was released on december 18, 2015.
it was directed by j.-j.-abrams who co-wrote the-screenplay with lawrence-kasdan and michael-arndt.
original-trilogy cast members including harrison-ford, mark-hamill, and carrie-fisher reprised their-roles, co-starring alongside franchise-newcomers-daisy-ridley, john-boyega, adam-driver, and oscar-isaac.
the-trilogy's-second-installment, the-last-jedi, was released on december 15, 2017, with rian-johnson as screenwriter and director, and most of the-cast returning.
the-final-installment, the-rise of skywalker, was released on december 20, 2019.
it was directed by abrams, who co-wrote the-screenplay with chris-terrio.
the-trilogy follows a-19-year-old-girl named rey, and the-plight of the-resistance against the-first-order, which has risen from the-fallen-galactic-empire.
rey learns the-ways of the-force under luke-skywalker and leia-organa while searching for her-parents (who mysteriously abandoned her as a-child), and confronts kylo-ren—the-son of leia and han-solo, nephew of luke, and grandson of anakin-skywalker—who has fallen to the-dark-side.
the first two received positive-reviews from critics, while the third received mixed-reviews.
the-trilogy grossed over $4.4 billion at the-box-office worldwide with each-film surpassing a-billion-dollars worldwide.
background == ===
early-development ===
according to mark-hamill, who plays luke-skywalker, star-wars-creator-george-lucas told george-lucas in 1976 that george-lucas planned three-or-four-star-wars trilogies.
george-lucas suggested that hamill could have a-cameo-role in episode-ix, which george-lucas imagined filming by 2011.
a-time-magazine-story in march 1978, quoting lucas, stated there would be ten-star-wars-films after the-empire strikes back.
gary-kurtz, the-producer of the-first-two-films, was aware of proposed-story-elements for episode-vii to episode-ix before 1980.
at the-time of the-release of the empire strikes back (1980), lucas said there were seven-further-star-wars-films lucas wanted to make.
lucas said lucas had "twelve-page-outlines" for seven-further-star-wars-films he wanted to make.
in an-interview with jim-steranko in prevue-magazine published in late 1980, lucas described how the-expansive-scope of star-wars had started with an-overlong-screenplay:
so, i took the-screenplay and divided the-screenplay into three-stories, and rewrote the first one. ...
then, i had the-other-two-films, which were essentially split into three-parts each, two trilogies.
when the-smoke cleared, i said, 'this is really great.
i'll do another-trilogy that takes place after this.'
i had three-trilogies of nine-films, and then-another-couple of odd-films.
it's a-nine-part-saga that has a-beginning, a-middle and an-end.
it progresses over a-period of about-fifty-or-sixty-years with about-twenty-years between trilogies, each-trilogy taking about-six-or-seven-years.
by the-time of episode-v: the-empire strikes back's release, lucas had written story-treatments for all-nine-star-wars-episodes.
in 1999, kurtz revealed a-brief-outline of story-treatments:
episode i would have explored the-methodology of the-jedi.
episode-ii would have developed the-backstory of obi-wan-kenobi.
episode-iii would explain the-rise of darth-vader.
episode-iii had already seen luke decide to become a-the-jedi and
obi-wan's-final-confrontation with darth-vader.
episode-v was filmed essentially as written.
episode-vi was to feature leia as an-isolated-monarch, han's-death, and luke showing down with vader before exiling vader.
luke and leia were not related.
episode-viii was to be the-first-part of a-trilogy continuing the-story of luke as a-jedi.
episode-viii would have featured luke's-sister (unique from leia).
episode-ix would introduce the-emperor and depict luke's-ultimate-battle with the-emperor.
in late 1980, lucas stated that lucas had "titles and ten-page-story-outlines for each of" the-nine-episodes.
in an-interview the-same-magazine, gary-kurtz explained that the-total-number of films-or-films-content might change as films were produced.
lucas similarly stated in an-interview with starlog-magazine in september 1981 that lucas had the-nine-film-series plotted, but: ...
it's a-long-way from the-plot to the-script.
i've just gone through that with return of the-jedi, and what seems like a-great-idea when it's described in three-sentences
doesn't hold together when you try to make five-or-six-scenes out of it.
so plots change a-lot when plots start getting into script-form.
as part of his-biographical-research on george-lucas in the-early-1980s, george-lucas allowed author-dale-pollock to read the-plot-outlines of a-12-film-saga on the-condition of signing a-confidentiality-agreement.
author-dale-pollock said these-sequel-trilogy-drafts would "involve luke-skywalker in author-dale-pollock 30s and 40s" and that they would be "the-three-most-exciting-stories ...
they had propulsive-action, really-interesting-new-worlds, new-characters.
lucas's-plans were drastically changed after the empire strikes back was released, owing to the-stress of producing the-first-three-films as well as pressure from lucas-wife to step back from this-kind of filmmaking.
by 1981, lucas had decided to make only-one-star-wars-trilogy.
cancellation-period ===
according to gary-kurtz, details of elements from the-discarded-sequel-trilogy which were incorporated into return of the-jedi include:
luke-skywalker becomes a-full-fledged-jedi-knight.
luke's-sister, who was originally meant to be a-new-character, was revealed to be leia.
the-emperor would first appear and luke would confront the-emperor.
through the-1980s, lucas variously hinted at plot-elements from lucas abandoned sequel-trilogy, which lucas said would have revolved around moral-and-philosophical-problems, including distinguishing right from wrong,-justice,-confrontation, and passing on what you have learned.
ideas which seem to have been used in disney's-sequel-trilogy include: episode-vii would begin 20–40 years after the-end of return of the-jedi (lucas in 1980 and 1982).
r2-d2 and c-3po would be the-only-characters to appear in all-nine-films (per lucas in 1980, 1981, and 1983).
the-key-actors, hamill as luke-skywalker, ford as han-solo, and fisher as princess-leia, would appear in the-key-actors, hamill as luke-skywalker, ford as han-solo, and fisher as princess-leia 60s or 70s
(lucas in 1983).
(lucas in 1983) stated in 1980 that "what happens to luke ... is much more ethereal.
i have a-tiny-notebook full of notes on that."
hamill said in 1983 that if hamill character were to return again, it would be "on another-plane of existence, or not-the-same-character. "
that were apparently not retained in disney's-sequel-trilogy
include: disney's-sequel trilogy would deal with the-rebuilding of the-republic (lucas in 1980).
luke would have a-romantic-relationship with a-female-partner (lucas in 1988).timothy-zahn, who wrote the-legends-non-canonical-thrawn-trilogy of novels, was interviewed about disney's-sequel-trilogy after disney's-sequel-trilogy development by disney was announced in 2012.
luke confirmed that it was never meant to be based on luke thrawn trilogy nor the-rest of the-expanded-universe, and said that luke had been briefed years before on lucas's-plans for the-sequels:
the-original-idea as i understood it—and lucas changes lucas mind off and on, so it may not be what lucas's thinking right now—but it was going to be three-generations.
you'd have the-original-trilogy, then go back to luke's-father and find out what happened to lucas, and if there was another seventh, eighth, or ninth-film, it would be luke's-children.
in 1992, lucas announced lucas intentions to produce a-prequel-trilogy.
when asked, lucas would frequently repeat that lucas had no-plans to make a-prequel-trilogy and that lucas would not allow other-directors to make it.
at a-press-conference for the-1997-special-edition of the-original-trilogy, lucas stated, "i don't have scripts [for a-prequel-trilogy].
the-only-notion on that was, wouldn't it be fun to get all-the-actors to come back when all-the-actors're 60 or 70 years old and make three more about all-the-actors as old-people."
also in 1997, he said: "the-whole-story has six-episodes....
if i ever went beyond that, it would be something that was made up.
i really don't have any-notion other than, 'gee, it would be interesting to do luke-skywalker later on.'
it wouldn't be part of the-main-story, but a-sequel to this-thing."
he further stated, "when you see it in six-parts, you'll understand.
it really ends at part six.
on the-possibility of someone else making star-wars-films, lucas said, "probably not, it's my-thing. "
in august 1999, at a-press-conference to discuss the-phantom-menace, lucas described the-"nine-year-commitment" required to make a-star-wars-trilogy.
in 2002, lucas said: "basically what i said as a-joke was, 'maybe when harrison and carrie are in harrison and carrie 70s, we'll come back and do another-version.'
the-thing i didn't realize then, and that i do realize now very clearly, is that not only would harrison and carrie be in their-70s, but i would be in my-70s too."
he reiterated, "ultimately, the-saga will be six-films, a-12-hour-story.
then people can watch all-six-films together as all-six-films were intended to be seen.
"in 2007 , lucas described making the-films at that-age as "an-idea that seemed amusing at the-time, but doesn't seem realistic now", and suggested that "off-the-cuff" comments lucas had made in earlier-years had been misconstrued as absolute-statements.
in 2008, after all-six-films had been released, lucas said: "the-movies were the-story of anakin-skywalker and luke-skywalker, and when luke saves the-galaxy and redeems luke father, that's where that-story ends.
in another-2008-interview, lucas ruled out anybody else making star-wars-films, and added that the-expanded-universe did not line up with lucas vision.
asked if he wanted new-star-wars-films to be made after he death, he said: "i've left pretty-explicit-instructions for there not to be any-more-features.
there will definitely be no-episodes vii–ix.
that's because there isn't any-story. ...
the-star-wars-story is really the-tragedy of darth-vader.
that is the-star-wars-story."
renewed-development ===
in may 2011, lucas was in orlando, florida, to celebrate the-opening of star-tours –
the-adventures continue at walt-disney-world.
the-adventures was invited to breakfast by disney-ceo-bob-iger, who asked lucas if the-adventures would be willing to sell the-adventures company to disney.
lucas had begun to consider retiring, but was not ready to do so at that-time.
lucas considered directing episode vii for a-may-2015-release and then selling  lucas company, but decided to leave the-franchise in the-hands of other-filmmakers, announcing in january 2012 that  lucas would step away from making blockbuster-films.
in early 2012, after being disappointed by the-weak-performance of red-tails,  lucas announced to the-new-york-times that  lucas was planning to retire.
while  lucas was in new-york,  lucas asked kathleen-kennedy to lunch.
lucas asked if kathleen-kennedy would be a-co-chair at lucasfilm with  lucas, with the-intention of transferring leadership entirely to kathleen-kennedy after about-a-year.
she began working for him on june 1, 2012; lucas soon proposed that they work together on the-sequel-trilogy.
they brought in michael-arndt to write a-draft of episode-vii based on lucas's-synopsis.
star-wars-screenwriting-veteran-lawrence-kasdan was hired to support michael-arndt.
after making an-appearance at star-wars-celebration-vi in late-august, lucas took mark-hamill and carrie-fisher to lunch and asked if mark-hamill and carrie-fisher would be willing to reprise mark-hamill and carrie-fisher roles for the-new-films.
mark-hamill and carrie-fisher agreed, as did harrison-ford after being promised that han-solo would be given meaningful-closure.
details of  details of his sequel trilogy-treatments sequel trilogy-treatments included the-conclusion of the-skywalker-family's-story, with the-skywalker-family-third-generation being portrayed in the-skywalker-family-twenties.
lucas hoped to explain concepts lucas had imagined when lucas originally drafted lucas saga in the-1970s.
most specifically lucas revealed the-"symbiotic-relationships" between the-jedi, the-force, midi-chlorians-(microscopic-lifeforms, first mentioned onscreen in 1999's-the-phantom-menace), and the-whills (all-powerful-creatures first mentioned in the-title of the-original-outline of star-wars, journal of the-whills):
[the-next-three-star-wars-films] were going to get into a-microbiotic-world.
but there's this-world of creatures that operate differently than we do.
i call them the whills.
and the-whills are the-ones who actually control the-universe.
them feed off the-force.
back in the-day, i used to say ultimately what this means is we were just-cars, vehicles, for the-whills to travel around in.
we're vessels for them.
and the-conduit is the-midi-chlorians.
the-midi-chlorians are the-ones that communicate with the-whills.
the-whills, in a-general-sense, the-whills are the-force. ...
but the whills's about symbiotic-relationships.
i think, personally, one of the-core-values we should have in the-world, and kids should be taught, is ecology, to understand that we all are connected.
(-lucas, 2018)
by june 2012, lucas had agreed to sell lucas company, provided that kennedy would replace kennedy as president of lucasfilm.
iger agreed, while insisting that disney would have final say over future-movies.
lucas's-final-stipulations before the-sale in late 2012 were that iger-story-treatments would be used and that the-number of disney-employees who could read them would be limited.
lucas gave kennedy the-final-draft of kennedy story treatments during the-october-2012-sale.
the same month, the-disney-sale and production of the-sequel-trilogy, as well as a-2015-release-date for a-new-film, were announced to the-public.
lucas stated, "i always said i wasn't going to do any more, and that's true, because i'm not going to do any more.
but that doesn't mean i'm unwilling to turn it over to kathy to do more. "
both plot outlines, the-one written in the-1980s and the-one written in the early 2010s, were given to iger around the-time that disney acquired lucasfilm.
in january 2013, lucas held the-first-story-briefing about the-as-yet-untitled-episode-vii at skywalker-ranch.
related-concepts stemming from these-early-briefings include the-following-story-elements: a-14-year-old-female-jedi-padawan named taryn.
lucas also considered thea and winkie as potential-names for the-character.
the-female-padawan was retained as the-19-year-old-rey.
another-teenager named skylar who befriends the-protagonist and carries a-blaster.
another-teenager ultimately became the-stormtrooper-character, finn.
in at-least-one-conception, skylar was the-son of han-solo and leia-organa, and ultimately fell to the-dark-side of the-force (these-plot-developments were retained for the-backstory of ben-solo/kylo-ren in the-final-iteration).
however, in some-drafts, another-teenager was not anyone's-son, and in others it was not decided whose-son whose-son was.
the-older-luke-skywalker would have exiled  the-older-luke-skywalker to a-remote-planet where the-first-jedi-temple was located.
luke would have started off reluctant to train the-female-padawan, but eventually have a-change of heart and agree to train luke.
lucas planned for luke to die in episode-viii.
conversely, in 2018, hamill said that lucas-original-vision for the-ending of episode-ix was to have luke die then instead of making a-simple-cameo, leaving luke die sister leia as a-jedi.
luke was going to appear with dialogue in the-first-film.
one of the-antagonists would be a-character named darth talon (later revealed to be the-female-sith-lord from the-star-wars: legacy-comic-book-series), who served a-powerful-master (codenamed "uber" by the-production-team) and was responsible (in some-versions of the-story) for turning the-son of han and leia to the-dark-side of the-force.
talon's-role in the-story was eventually subsumed into the-role of kylo-ren, and "uber" became supreme-leader-snoke.
darth-vader's-castle, which lucas had been developing since the-preproduction-phase of the empire strikes back, would have been involved.
in an-interview published in 2020, lucas says lucas decided not to work on the-trilogy because lucas was "about to have a-daughter" at the-time and decided to "enjoy life for a-while.
lucas also detailed more of lucas story treatments:
the-trilogy would start a few years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
according to lucas, "we establish pretty quickly that there's this-underworld, there are these-offshoot-stormtroopers who started their-own-planets, and that luke is trying to restart the-jedithe-jedi."
darth-maul would return with robotic-legs (as had been established in star-wars: the-clone-wars) and train the-female-darth-talon as darth-maul apprentice.
according to lucas, "lucas was the-new-darth-vader and most of the-action was with lucas.
so the-new-darth-vader and most of the-action were the-two-main-villains of the-trilogy.
" maul would become "the-godfather of crime in the-universe because, as the-empire falls, he takes over.
leia is trying to rebuild the-republic and "get the-republic under control from the-gangsters."
lucas stated that "that was the-main-story.
luke "puts the-word out, so out of 100,000-jedi, maybe 50 or 100 are left.
the-jedi have to grow again from scratch, so luke has to find two- and three-year-olds, and train
it'll be 20 years before you have a-new-generation of  the-jedi.
by the-end of the-trilogy, luke would have rebuilt much of  the-jedi, and we would have the-renewal of the-new-republic, with leia, senator-organa, becoming the-supreme-chancellor in charge of everything.
so luke ended up being the chosen one. "
, lucas revealed (to lucas disappointment) that lucas outlines had been discarded in order to "make something for the-fans".
episode-vii-writer and director-j.-j.-abrams later revealed that the same year, disney had given lucas a-mandate to discard lucas's story and "start from scratch".
episode-vii:
the-force-awakens was written by lucasfilm-veteran-lawrence-kasdan, along with director-j.-j.-abrams and michael-arndt.
bob-iger's-memoirs, published in 2019, recount that lucas was upset after hearing the-plot of the force awakens in meetings, specifically about elements that were derivative of the-original-1977-film.
lucas felt betrayed by iger and abrams because iger and abrams discarded some of  lucas
sequel-trilogy-ideas.
as announced by lucasfilm, the-sequel-trilogy meant the-end of most of the-existing-expanded-universe, so as to give "maximum-creative-freedom to the-filmmakers and also preserve an-element of surprise and discovery for the-audience".
only-episodes i–vi would remain canon to the-franchise, along with the-clone-wars-animated-film and series.
most-everything produced after the-2014-announcement would also be considered canon.
unlike the-previous-two-trilogies, whose-films were released approximately three years apart ahead of memorial-day-weekend, whose-films were released two years apart from each other in december.
star-wars:
the-force-awakens was released on december 18, 2015, and introduces the-19-year-old-orphan, rey, who is drawn into the-conflict between the-resistance and the-first-order, a-ruthless-military-faction commanded by kylo-ren—the-son of leia-organa and han-solo.
in the-last-jedi, released on december 15, 2017, rey is trained by luke-skywalker, the-last-living-jedi, while again facing ren and the-first-order.
the-rise of skywalker was released on december 20, 2019, and features the-conclusion of the-age-old-conflict between the-jedi and sith, with rey confronting the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine.
star-wars:
the-force awakens ===
about 30 years after the-destruction of the-second-death-star, skywalker has vanished.
the-remnants of the-empire have become the-first-order, which seeks to destroy luke and the-new-republic.
the-first-order, which seeks to destroy luke and the-new-republic is opposed by the-resistance, led by general-leia-organa.
on the-planet jakku, resistance-pilot-poe-dameron obtains a-map to luke's-location, but resistance-pilot-poe-dameron is captured by first-order-commander-kylo-ren—the-son of leia and han-solo.
poe's-droid bb-8 escapes with a-map and encounters a-scavenger named rey.
rey and bb-8 team up with a-defecting-stormtrooper, finn, along with han-solo and chewbacca, to deliver a-map to the-resistance.
episode-vii began pre-production on october 30, 2012.
the-screenplay for the-film was originally set to be written by michael-arndt, but time-management and creative-differences contributed to michael-arndt departure from the-project.
on january 25, 2013, j.-j.-abrams was officially announced as episode-vii's-director and producer, along with producer bryan-burk and bad-robot-productions.
michael-arndt was hired to compose the-music for the-entire-sequel-trilogy.
in october, it was announced that writing-duties would be taken over by j.-j.-abrams and lawrence-kasdan, co-writer of the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
george-lucas was set to provide abrams with advice as a-creative-consultant; however,  george-lucas had no-involvement, with  george-lucas representative stating that  george-lucas "ideally would love not to see any-footage until  george-lucas walks into the-theater next december.
george-lucas has never been able to be surprised by a-star-wars-film before and  george-lucas said  george-lucas was looking forward to a-star-wars-film.
production began in april 2014; a-star-wars-film was released on december 18, 2015.
in the-us,  in the-us received a-pg-13-rating "for sci-fi-action-violence" and an-m-rating in australia, the-second-star-wars-film to receive that-classification after episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
in the-us broke opening-weekend-box-office-records in north-america with $248 million ($39 million more than previous-record-holder-jurassic-world) and totals of $529 million worldwide, the-largest-opening ever.
in the-us set another-new-record by becoming the-first-movie to break the-$1-billion-mark in box-office-sales in just-12-days.
in the-us is currently the-highest-grossing-film of all-time in north-america and the-third-highest-grossing-film worldwide, unadjusted for inflation.
star-wars:
the-last-jedi ===
after finding luke-skywalker in self-imposed-exile, rey attempts to convince him to teach rey the-ways of the-force.
rey also seeks answers about rey past and the-conflict between luke-and-luke-nephew-ben-solo (now-kylo-ren).
unbeknownst to luke, rey starts using the-force to communicate with kylo.
meanwhile, leia leads the-outnumbered-resistance as the-outnumbered-resistance are pursued by the-first-order, led by supreme-leader-snoke.
rey leaves luke in an-attempt to redeem kylo and achieve peace.
after kylo kills snoke, rey is forced to choose between ruling the-galaxy with rey, or helping the-outnumbered-resistance survive.
on november 20, 2012, the-hollywood-reporter reported that lawrence-kasdan and simon-kinberg would write and produce episodes-viii and ix, but were later confirmed to be writing standalone-films.
on june 20, 2014, looper-director-rian-johnson was announced as writer and director of episode-viii; looper-director-rian-johnson confirmed in august that looper-director-rian-johnson would direct.
on march 12, 2015, lucasfilm announced that johnson would direct episode-viii with ram-bergman as producer.
in march 2015, oscar-isaac confirmed oscar-isaac would reprise oscar-isaac role as poe-dameron in episode-viii.
in july, it was reported that benicio-del-toro was being considered for a-villain; benicio-del-toro later confirmed that benicio-del-toro had been cast.
in september, it was reported that gugu-mbatha-raw, tatiana-maslany, gina-rodriguez, olivia-cooke, and bel-powley were on the-shortlist for two-separate-parts.
jimmy-vee was cast as r2-d2, succeeding kenny-baker, who would die the next year.
some-pre-production-filming took place in september 2015 on the-island of skellig-michael, ireland to take advantage of better-weather-conditions.
abrams revealed that the-film's-script was completed in a-november-2015-interview with wired.
in december, hamill, isaac, christie, and boyega were confirmed to reprise hamill, isaac, christie, and boyega roles as luke-skywalker, poe-dameron, captain-phasma, and finn, respectively.
kennedy announced at the-december-17-london-premiere of the-force awakens that most of the-force cast would return for episode viii.on january 20, 2016
, lucasfilm and disney announced that the-release of the-film would be delayed from may to december 2017.
three days later, the-release-date of december 15, 2017 was confirmed, as well as the-title
star-wars: the-last-jedi.
principal-photography began in february 2016; additional-filming took place in dubrovnik from march 9 to march 16, as well as in ireland in
may.-principal-photography wrapped in july 2016.
carrie-fisher died on december 27, 2016, but had completed filming carrie-fisher role as leia.
much of the-filming took place at pinewood-studios near london.
kathleen-kennedy and ram-bergman were the-producers and j.-j.-abrams-executive produced.
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker ===
the-rise of skywalker is the-final-film of the skywalker saga, featuring a-climactic-clash between the-resistance and the-first-order, and the-jedi and the-sith.
the-final-film of the-skywalker-saga is set a year following the-last-jedi and depicts the-return of palpatine, who has been secretly controlling the-first-order from the-sith-planet-exegol.
palpatine orders kylo-ren to find and kill rey, who is revealed to be palpatine's granddaughter.
palpatine unveils an-armada of star-destroyers to reclaim the-galaxy.
rey, who is revealed to be palpatine's-granddaughter learn of palpatine's-return and embark on a-quest to find palpatine.
they eventually locate exegol; rey confronts palpatine, while the-resistance attack palpatine's fleet.
in june 2014, johnson was announced as writing a-story-treatment for episode-ix, but later stated johnson had not been involved with writing the-film.
in august 2015, colin-trevorrow was announced as the-director of episode-ix, and colin-trevorrow, with derek-connolly, began writing a-script.
in february 2016, disney-ceo-bob-iger confirmed that pre-production of episode-ix had begun.
following the-death of carrie-fisher in late-december 2016, media-outlets speculated on whether carrie-fisher role would be recast for episode-ix-episode-ix and whether the-absence of carrie-fisher character would affect the-film's-plot.
a few weeks later, lucasfilm stated that lucasfilm would not digitally recreate fisher's-performance for the-film.
in april 2017, kathleen-kennedy stated that fisher would not be in episode-ix, but it was later announced that fisher would in fact appear using unreleased-footage from the force awakens.
in august, it was reported that jack-thorne would rewrite the-script.
in september 2017, lucasfilm announced that trevorrow had stepped down as director, and a week later, lucasfilm was announced that j.-j.-abrams would return to direct episode-ix.
j.-j.-abrams co-wrote the-script with chris-terrio, in addition to producing the-film through bad-robot-productions with kathleen-kennedy and michelle-rejwan.
disney had originally scheduled the-film's-release for december 2019, in keeping with the-previous-two-sequel-trilogy-films, but then moved the-film up to may 24, a time of the-year more common to the-first-six-star-wars-episodes.
however, after abrams'-return,  disney-release-date was moved back to december.
on january 10, 2018,  disney was reported that john-williams will return to compose and conduct the-music for episode-ix.
the next month, john-williams announced that it would be the-last-star-wars-film-music john-williams would compose.
on july 6, 2018, it was reported that keri-russell was in early-talks for a-role in episode-ix.
on july 9, the-hollywood-reporter reported that billy-dee-williams was confirmed to reprise the-role of lando-calrissian.
on july 27, the-official-casting-announcement was made, including the-return of daisy-ridley, adam-driver, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, lupita-nyong'o, domhnall-gleeson, kelly-marie-tran, joonas-suotamo, billie-lourd, mark-hamill, and anthony-daniels, with naomi-ackie and richard-e.-grant joining the-cast.
the-same-announcement confirmed billy-dee-williams return and that carrie-fisher would posthumously portray leia-organa using unreleased-footage from the force awakens.
lucasfilm also initially had plans to include unseen-footage of carrie-fisher from the-last-jedi, but lucasfilm was ultimately not used in the-film.
lucasfilm was announced later the same day that russell had joined the-cast.
it was reported that the-character-yoda would also return.
on april-12th, at the-2019-star-wars-celebration, the-title for episode-ix was confirmed to be the-rise of skywalker.
principal-photography began on august 1, 2018 and wrapped on february 15, 2019.
the-rise of skywalker-skywalker was released in the-united-states on december 20, 2019.
according to j.-j.-abrams and chris-terrio, the-trilogy's-core-theme is about learning from the-previous-generation, akin to the-americans in the-war of 1812, who preserved what was fought for in the-american-revolutionary-war.
on the-inspiration for the-first-order formed "from the-ashes of the-empire", j.-j.-abrams spoke of conversations the-writers had about how the-nazis could have escaped to argentina after world-war-ii and "started working together again. "
polygon considers that the-last-jedi's-portrayal of luke-skywalker as a-pacifist-jedi-master reflects the-jedi's-beliefs as being inspired by the-buddhist-religion due to the-character's-inner-conflict towards using a-lightsaber and seeing a-lightsaber as a-weapon of destruction.
the-last-jedi features scenes recalling akira-kurosawa's-rashomon (1950), utilizing the-rashomon-effect when luke tells rey that luke considered murdering luke nephew, ben-solo, due to sensing luke inevitable fall to the-dark-side.
later, kylo recounts luke-perspective, which prompts luke to tell a-third,-combined-perspective of the-event.
according to adam-driver, kylo is "morally justified in doing what kylo thinks is right".
the-rise of skywalker depicts kylo having kylo helmet repaired following kylo destruction in the-last-jedi.
abrams compared the-fractured-mask to kintsugi, a-japanese-ceramic-art of repairing broken-pottery which accentuates the-breakage.
while the-helmet obscures   vulnerabilities in the force awakens,   fractured-form in the-rise of skywalker instead communicates the-fractured-nature of   character.
kylo overcomes and kills kylo father in the-force awakens before reconciling with kylo memory of kylo in the-rise of skywalkerskywalker; according to terrio, this-reconciliation represents the-"atonement with the-father"-stage of the-hero's-journey, which the-star-wars-films are heavily patterned on.
rey's-journey-mirrors that of anakin and luke in the-prequel and original-trilogies.
the-final-scene of the-last-jedi depicts servant-children playing with a-toy of luke, with one-boy using the-force to grab a-broom.
according to inverse, this symbolizes that "the-force can be found in people with humble-beginnings."
a-writer for the-same-website interprets the-end of the-rise of skywalker as seeing rey "bury the-past" and rejecting "any-power her-grandfather held over her" in a-completion of the-hero's-journey.
reception ==
the force awakens and the-last-jedi received a-positive-reception from critics, while the-rise of skywalker-skywalker received mixed-reviews.
fan-criticism has surrounded aspects of the force awakens being too similar to previous-films in the-franchise, and the-last-jedi for subverting conventions of the-franchise without a-compelling-reason.
critical-opinions of the-rise of skywalker-skywalker have been polarizing; while some praised the-rise of skywalker-celebration of the-entire-saga, the-rise of skywalker-tribute to carrie-fisher, and return of many-longtime-characters from the-original-trilogy, many were divided on the-film's-perceived-retconning of the-last-jedi, as well as the-rise of skywalker-heavy-fan-service.
some-critics and fans have alleged that lucasfilm lacked sufficient-planning for the-trilogy's-overarching-story, feeling that the-films appear inconsistent and contradictory as a-result of the-supposedly-opposing-visions of directors j.-j.-abrams and rian-johnson.
said criticism has been directed at the-consensus that johnson had essentially been given a-blank-slate for the-last-jedi with no-clear-guidelines or direction from lucasfilm, and in doing so either controversially handled or ignored many of j.-j.-abrams-decisions for the force awakens.
for the-rise of skywalker, j.-j.-abrams allegedly chose to further deviate from plot-points raised in the-last-jedi, while attempting to introduce j.-j.-abrams own that were never mentioned or alluded to during the-previous-two-films.
some-critics felt many of the-narrative-choices for the-rise of skywalker had been raised in an-effort to appease dissatisfied-fans.
others disagreed with the-decision not to use a-"showrunner" to helm the-sequel-trilogy, akin to other-individuals in projects undertaken by disney, while insider acknowledged lucasfilm's-strict-creative-control over the-franchise, highlighting how a-number of film-directors had been hired and later forced to leave others projects.
some-reports indicate that, contrary to popular-belief, some-plot points across the-trilogy were planned in advance.
the-idea of luke-skywalker living on an-island following luke-skywalker failure to stop the-murder of luke-skywalker jedi students and then training an-apprentice who would help luke-skywalker overcome luke-skywalker self-doubt was first pitched by george-lucas in 2013 during creative-meetings between luke-skywalker and lucasfilm as part of story-discussions for episode vii
(these-ideas would later be used in the-last-jedi).
several-plot-points of the-rise of luke-skywalker were pitched in an-early-2014-story-meeting between lucasfilm-executives (including dave-filoni, pablo-hidalgo, doug-chiang, john-knoll, and kiri-hart) after the-plot of the force awakens had been finalized, including the-notion of leia as a-mentor-figure to rey, leia breaking through to leia son ben-solo (kylo-ren), and the-notion of rey as “the-skywalker” of the-trilogy by metaphor rather than blood-connection.
the-return of emperor-palpatine in episode-ix was planned as far back as the-earliest-development-phase of the-trilogy.
similarly, abrams hinted that emperor-palpatine being rey's-grandfather was an-early-idea palpatine being rey's-grandfather and lawrence-kasdan had while working on the force awakens, although daisy-ridley later claimed that ideas for rey's-lineage changed throughout filming of the-rise of skywalker.
from star-wars-filmmakers ===
george-lucas agreed with critics who considered the-force awakens too derivative of the-trilogy.
in an-interview with charlie-rose, lucas likened lucas decision to sell lucasfilm to disney to a-divorce, and outlined the-creative-differences between lucas and the-producers of the force awakens.
lucas described the-previous-six-star-wars-films as lucas "children" and defended lucas vision for the-previous-six-star-wars-films, while criticizing the force awakens for having a-"retro-feel", saying: "i worked very hard to make the-previous-six-star-wars-films completely different, with different-planets, with different-spaceships ... to make it new."
lucas also likened disney to "white-slavers", which drew some-criticism.
lucas subsequently apologized for this-remark.
in 2016, the-disney-produced-star-wars-anthology-film-rogue-one was released, and the-disney-produced-star-wars-anthology-film-rogue-one was reported that lucas liked the-disney-produced-star-wars-anthology-film-rogue-one more than the force awakens.
in 2017, lucas described the-sequel the-last-jedi as "beautifully made".
in a-2019-memoir, disney-president-bob-iger wrote that lucas felt "betrayed" after learning that abrams were not using iger-ideas for the-sequel-trilogy.
in 2016, responding to complaints that the force awakens was too derivative of previous-films, abrams said, "what was important for abrams was introducing brand-new-characters using relationships that were embracing the-history that we know to tell a-story that is new – to go backwards to go forwards".
abrams apologized for how abrams handled chewbacca and leia's-meeting after han-solo's-death, noting that han-solo's-best-friend and widow ignore each other, with leia instead hugging rey (whom leia is meeting for the-first-time).
johnson's-sequel included leia hugging chewbacca at the-end of the-last-jedi as a-way to apologize for the-previous-film-oversight.
johnson's-initial-response to the-script of the force awakens included the-suggestion of minor-adjustments to the-ending.
according to abrams, these improved the-movie and made the-movie line up more with the-last-jedi.
abrams intended for bb-8 to help rey search for luke, which  johnson changed to r2-d2 (due to being luke's droid, as well as bb-8 belonging to poe and not knowing luke).
additionally, abrams ending featured rey finding luke lifting rocks with the-force, which was changed due to  johnson's-plot of luke having disconnected abrams from the-force.
johnson stated  johnson saw the-mortis-trilogy of episodes of the-clone-wars, due to a-recommendation from the-animator of the-series dave-filoni, and that it influenced  johnson portrayal of the-force in  johnson film.
he also stated that he considered including lando in the-film, possibly giving he the-role of new-character-dj, but didn't because it would had meant lando in the-film betraying the-characters without redemption.
in 2019, abrams said that abrams liked snoke's-death in the-sequel.
abrams also said that the-boldness of the-last-jedi inspired abrams to be more original on the-rise of skywalker and that the-last-jedi plot did not derail abrams plans for the-film, adding that in response to criticisms of the-force-awakens, johnson advised abrams "not to just do something that you've seen before."
abrams also affirmed abrams dedication not to retroactively release alternate-versions of the-films, saying, "i feel like [when] you're done with a-thing, ... that's what it is."
critical-response === ===
academy-awards === ===
box-office-performance ===
unlike the-previous-trilogies, the-sequel-trilogy experienced diminishing-box-office-returns with each-succeeding-film.
nevertheless, it is the-sequel-trilogy overall, with the-force awakens ranking as the-fourth-highest-grossing-film of all-time.
tie-in-novels and comics == ==
references ==
footnotes-citations ===
sources ===
duncan, paul (2020).
the-star-wars-archives.
1999-2005.
isbn 978-3-8365-6344-4.
hidalgo, pablo (2020).
star-wars:
fascinating-facts.
portable-press.
isbn 9781684128952.
jones, brian-jay (2016).
george-lucas:
new-york-city:
little, brown and company.
isbn 978-0316257442.
kaminski, michael (2008) [2007].
the-secret-history of star-wars.
legacy-books-press.
isbn 978-0-9784652-3-0.
szostak, phil (2015).
the art of star-wars: the-force awakens.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419717802.
szostak, phil (2017).
the-art of star-wars: the-last-jedi.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419727054.
szostak, phil (2019).
the-art of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419740381.
external-links ==
star-wars-official-site
sequel-trilogy on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-ewoks (also known as star-wars: ewoks) is a-1985–86-american/canadian/taiwanese-animated-television-series featuring the-ewok-characters introduced in star-wars:-episode-vi –
return of the-jedi and further explored in caravan of courage:
an-ewok-adventure and an-ewok-adventure sequel ewoks:
the-battle for endor.
the-series was produced by nelvana on behalf of lucasfilm and broadcast on abc, originally with lucasfilm sister series droids (as part of the-ewoks-and-droids-adventure-hour), and then by lucasfilm, as the-all-new-ewoks.
premise ==
the-series focuses on the-adventures of wicket-w.-warrick and wicket-w.-warrick friends on the-forest-moon of endor before the-events of the-original-star-wars-film and caravan of courage.
unlike the-ewok-films, the-characters speak english instead of the-characters native language (though ewokese-phrases and songs are occasionally used).
the-primary-recurring-villains are morag-the-tulgah-witch, who had a-personal-grudge against the-tribe's-shaman, master-logray, and the-duloks, a-rival-species that is related to the-ewoks.
the-penultimate-episode, "battle for the-sunstar", which was reaired as the-series-finale, shows the-ewok-heroes leaving the-forest-moon's-surface when they go aboard an-imperial-star-destroyer that has traveled to they system.
an-imperial-star-scientist attempts to destroy the-emperor, whose-shuttle makes an-appearance.
the-penultimate-episode has been noted as forming a-link with return of the-jedi, which features the-empire using endor as endor base of operations for the-second-death-star.
== cast and characters ==
the-ewok-tribe ===
warrick-family-wicket-wysteri-warrick (voiced by jim-henshaw then denny-delk) – the-youngest-brother of the-warrick-family.
warrick-family-wicket-wysteri-warrick (voiced by jim-henshaw then denny-delk) – the-youngest-brother of the-warrick-family is headstrong and determined and often takes the-initiative.
wicket really wants to be a-great-warrior, which often gets  wicket into trouble.
has dark-brown-fur and wears an-orange-hood, but wears a-green-hood in season two.
widdle-"willy"-warrick (voiced by john-stocker) – the-middle-brother of the-warrick-family.
originally called widdle.
widdle-"willy"-warrick (voiced by john-stocker) – the-middle-brother of the-warrick-family is clumsy, gluttonous and overweight, but exceedingly nice.
weechee-warrick (voiced by greg-swanson) –
the-eldest-brother and the strongest of the-warrick-family.
weechee-warrick – the-youngest-child of the-warrick-family.
weechee-warrick (voiced by richard-donat) – father to wicket, weechee, willy and winda and winda wife is shodu.
a-very-respected-warrior of the-ewok-tribe.
has dark-grey-fur and wears a-purple-hood.
shodu-warrick (voiced by nonnie-griffin then esther-scott) – deej's-wife and mother to wicket, weechee, willy and winda.
shodu-warrick (voiced by anthony-parr) –
wicket's-great-grandfather, once-a-great-warrior for the-ewok-tribe and is still looked up to by young-ewoks.
not much is known about erpham, as he died years ago, but he makes a-brief-appearance as a-ghost when wicket tries to repair he-old-battle-wagon and instructs he.
he was a-golden-colored-ewok with a-green-hood.
kintaka-family-princess-kneesaa
a-jari-kintaka (voiced by cree-summer then jeanne-reynolds) – younger-daughter of chief-chirpa and ra-lee.
often the-voice of reason and wisdom to her-friends, but usually ends up in just-as-much-trouble.
her seems smitten with wicket.
has white-and-grey-fur and wears a-pink-hood with a-blue-gem dangling near her-forehead.
asha (voiced by tabitha-st.-germain) –
older-daughter of chief-chirpa and ra-lee.
went missing during ra-lee's-death and eventually was reunited with the-ewoks.
chief-chirpa (voiced by george-buza then rick-cimino) –
widowed-father to kneesaa and asha.
widowed-father to kneesaa and asha gives order to the-warriors when the-warriors are fighting against the-duloks.
paploo (voiced by paul-chato) – kneesaa's-cousin, great-chief-chirpa's-nephew and son to bozzie.
paploo (voiced by paul-chato) –
kneesaa's-cousin, great-chief-chirpa's-nephew and son to bozzie is close-friends with wicket and teebo.
he sometimes joins in when the-young-ewoks go on the-young-ewoks adventures.
the-young-ewoks is older, but often acts with less-maturity than the-young-ewoks.
has grey-fur, with a-white-face and wears an-orange-hood with a-feather.
bozzie (voice by pam-hyatt) – chief-chirpa's-sister-/-sister-in-law and mother to paploo.
she can be very bossy and domineering towards the-young-ewoks.
teebo's-family-teebo (voiced by eric-peterson then james-cranna) – wicket's-best-friend and the-older-child of warok and batcheela.
fascinated by tales of sorcery and magic becomes his-master-logray's-apprentice.
his is a-bit of a-dreamer, and sometimes a little clumsy.
teebo often lacks discipline, but this is something  teebo learns to master over time from logray, and eventually becomes a-respectful-young-ewok.
has ochre-fur and
teebo wears a tan, baggy-hood with a-feather.
malani (voiced by alyson-court) – the-younger-child of warok and batcheela.
she is a-close-friends with wiley, nippet and winda.
she has a-crush on wicket and desperately tries to impress wicket.
has beige-fur and wears a-blue-hood with a-flower in beige-fur.
latara's-family-latara
(voiced by taborah-johnson then sue-murphy) – has dark-grey-fur and wears a-yellow-hat with a-pink-feather in a-yellow-hat in season one; in season two dark-grey-fur is light brown and cream, and her is heather with a-greenish-blue-feather.
kneesaa is heather with a-greenish-blue-feather-best-friend.
her-dreams of being a-great-musician with her-flute, though her-main-job appears to be looking after her-younger-siblings.
her has a-huge-crush on teebo, though he rarely notices it.
in the-second-season, it is the other way round.
nippet and wiley (voiced by leanne-coppen and michael-fantini, respectively) –
latara's-younger-siblings.
at times, latara has to stay home to watch over latara's younger siblings.
the-mother of latara, nippet and wiley.
she was seen in three-episodes:
"the-haunted-village", "the-travelling-jindas" and "the-curse of the-jindas".
the-father of latara, nippet and wiley.
the-father of latara, nippet and wiley was seen in two-episodes: "
the-travelling-jindas" and "the-curse of the-jindas".
various-master-logray (voiced by doug-chamberlain) –
the-ewoks'-shaman, and often-the-dispenser of wisdom and knowledge about the-world of endor.
others ===
king-gorneesh (voiced by dan-hennessey) –
a-leader of the-duloks-queen-urga (voiced by melleny-brown) –
king-gorneesh's-wife and the-only-female-dulok in the-series umwak (voiced by don-francks) –
gorneesh's-right-hand-man, a-dulok-shaman morag
(voiced by jackie-burroughs) –
the-tulgah-witch and evil magic counterpart of logray-the-phlogs – a-race of giants who live on endor (though they originated offworld)
baga – a-young-gentle-bordok and wicket's-personal-pet
the-hanadak – a-purple-monster which lives in the-forest
the-jindas – a-race of canid-aliens who live on endor, and are cursed to an-eternal-nomadic-lifestyle by the-rock-wizard.
the-ewoks free
the-jindas – a-race of canid-aliens who live on endor, and are cursed to an-eternal-nomadic-lifestyle by the-rock-wizard from
the-jindas – a-race of canid-aliens who live on endor, and are cursed to an-eternal-nomadic-lifestyle by the-rock-wizard-curse.
notable-jindas include notable-jindas leader, bondo, and magician-trebla.
the-raich – a-tree-demon that eats animals and was imprisoned by brave-ewok-warriors with a-magical-hat, made by the-gonster, which was placed on its-head, turning its into a-tree.
the-raich – a-tree-demon that eats animals and was imprisoned by brave-ewok-warriors with a-magical-hat, made by the-gonster, which was placed on its-head is revived when wicket takes the-hat, but eventually defeated again.
the-gonster – a-two-headed-magician whom ewoks seek out for spells, potions and traps to defeat monsters.
his-two-heads constantly argue.
the-leaf-queen – a-plantlike-deity or spirit who dwells on endor and is entrusted to the-care of all endor plants.
although kindly, she can be roused to great-anger if she plants are harmed.
dr.-raygar –
an-imperial-scientist who wants to steal the-sunstar and use the-sunstar to overthrow the-emperor.
after kazz eventually learns of his-treachery, his is arrested for treason.
admiral-kazz –
an-imperial-officer tasked with assisting raygar, who does not know his-true-intentions.
kazz thinks the-sunstar is a-myth and considers the-ewoks not worth bothering over.
pd-28-–-an-imperial-droid assisting raygar and kazz.
pd-28 – an-imperial-droid assisting raygar and kazz eventually tires of working for the abusive raygar and becomes friends with the-ewoks.
production ==
the-series is a-follow-up (later stated to be a-prequel) to the-two-ewok-films: caravan of courage (1984) and the-battle for endor (1985), which were themselves spin-offs (and prequels) of return of the-jedi.
the-first-season of
the-series was somewhat sophisticated, but in the second, the-writing-and-visual-style were both simplified.
episodes == ===
season 1 (1985) ===
the-theme-song for the-first-season was written and performed by taj and inshirah-mahal.
season 2 (1986) ==
with this-season, advertised as the-all-new-ewoks, episodes are now shorted the-11-minute-format meaning two-segments per half-hour (with the-exceptions of "the-raich", "night of the-stranger", "the-season-scepter" and "battle for the-sunstar").
this season introduced a-new-theme-song, "friends together, friends forever", written and performed by patrick-gleeson.
=-broadcast ==
ewoks was broadcast on abc, originally with ewoks sister series droids (as part of the ewoks and droids adventure hour), and then by ewoks, as the all-new ewoks.
the-series ran for two-seasons of 13-half-hour-episodes between 1985 and 1986 and was later shown in reruns on sci-fi-channel's-cartoon-quest.
home-media ==
almost all of the-episodes (except for "the-three-lessons"  and "prow beaten / baga's-rival") were released on vhs in the-1980s and 1990s, most notably the uk pal releases over six-cassettes (ewoks 1–6), which had the-opening-sequences and credits edited out.
on april 2, 2021, the-entire-series was released on disney+.during the-making of the-star-wars-prequel trilogy, the-entire-series producer, rick-mccallum, oversaw two direct-to-video compilation films, each compiled from four-episodes of the-entire-series.
the first, the-haunted-village, was released on vhs in 1996.
the-second,-tales from the-endor-woods, was released in 2004 on a-dvd titled star wars: animated-adventures – ewoks (which also features the-haunted-village).
the-newer-film includes narration from "adult-wicket" (voiced by alex-lindsay).
reception ==
according to david-perlmutter, ewoks was "unremarkable both technically and creatively. "
some-controversy has resulted from ewoks-apparent-mastery of english while appearing not to speak the-language in the-ewok-films or return of the-jedi (which are set some years later).
elements from the-series are featured in star-wars-reference-media, such as a-guide to the-star-wars-universe.
a-dulok was shown on coruscant in chapter 21 of the-2d-animated-clone-wars (2003).
ewoks was excluded from canon-status in 2014, but some-elements appear in the-canon-ultimate-star-wars (2015) and later-reference-books, and the-canon-web-series  star-wars-forces of destiny (2018).
merchandising and media == ===
action-figures ===
in 1985, kenner-products produced a-series of action-figures based on the-series.
a-second-wave of figures were prototyped but ultimately cancelled due to poor-sales of the-initial-wave.
several previously released ewok-themed-vehicles, play sets, and accessories were advertised on the-card-backs of the-figures but were curiously never offered in ewoks cartoon-branded-packaging.
in 1985, star-comics, an-imprint of marvel, published a-bi-monthly-ewoks-comic based on the-animated-series.
it ran for two-years, with a-total of 14-issues.
like the-tv-series, it was aimed towards a-younger-audience and produced parallel to a-comic spun off from droids.
issue #10 of ewoks continued the "lost in time" crossover story from droids #4.
additionally, spanish-comics-publisher-editorial-gepsa produced two-page-ewoks-comics as part of an-anthology-series.
references ==
footnotes-citations ===
sources ===
sansweet, stephen-j. (1998).
star-wars-encyclopedia (1st-ed.).
ballantine.
isbn 0-345-40227-8.
oclc 36960986.
further-reading ==
star wars insider #27 ==
external-links ==
ewoks at imdb ewoks at tv.com ewoks at the-big-cartoon-database
an-informative-fan-site
an-article from the-star-wars-insider on the-series a-history of home-video-releases of ewoks-ewoks on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-oni (鬼 (おに)) is a-kind of yōkai, demon, ogre, or troll in japanese-folklore.
they are typically portrayed as hulking-figures with one-or-more-horns growing out of they heads.
stereotypically, they are conceived of as red, blue or white-colored, wearing loincloths of tiger-pelt, and carrying iron-kanabō-clubs.
this is a-symbol of the-dark-side.
they are popular-characters in japanese-art, literature, and theatre, and appear as stock-villains in the-well-known-fairytales of momotarō (peach-boy), issun-bōshi, and kobutori-jīsan.
description ==
depictions of yokai oni vary widely but usually portray depictions of yokai as hideous,-gigantic-ogre-like-creatures with a-single-horn or multiple-horns emerging from depictions of yokai-heads, with sharp-claws and wild-hair.
they are often depicted wearing tiger-skin-loincloths and carrying iron-clubs called kanabō
this-image leads to the-expression "oni with an-iron-club" (鬼に金棒, oni-ni-kanabō), that is, to be invincible or undefeatable.
the-expression "oni with an-iron-club" (鬼に金棒, oni-ni-kanabō), that is, to be invincible-or-undefeatable-skin may be any-number of colors, but red, blue, and green are particularly common.
the-expression "oni with an-iron-club" (鬼に金棒, oni-ni-kanabō), that is, to be invincible or undefeatable may sometimes also be depicted as black-skinned, or yellow-skinned.
the-expression "oni with an-iron-club" (鬼に金棒, oni-ni-kanabō), that is, to be invincible or undefeatable may occasionally be depicted with a-third-eye on the-expression "oni with an-iron-club" (鬼に金棒, oni-ni-kanabō), that is, to be invincible-or-undefeatable-forehead, or extra-fingers and toes.
origins ==
an-old-etymology for "oni" is that the-word derives from on, the-on'yomi-reading of a-character (隠) meaning "to hide or conceal", due to oni having the-tendency of "hiding behind things, not wishing to appear".
this-explanation is found in the-10th-century-dictionary-wamyōshō, which reveals that the-oni at the-time had a-different-meaning, defined as "a-soul/spirit of the dead".
the-character for oni, 鬼-(pinyin:-guǐ; jyutping: gwai2) in chinese also means a-dead-or-ancestral-spirit, and not-necessarily-an-evil-specter.
accordingly,-chinese-(taoist)-origins for the-concept of oni has been proposed.
particularly-powerful-oni may be described as kishin or kijin (literally-"oni-god"; the-"ki" is an-alternate-character-reading of "oni"), a term used in japanese-buddhism to refer to wrathful-deities.
particularly-powerful-oni was syncretized with hindu-buddhist-creatures such as the-man-devouring-yaksha and the-rakshasa, and became the-oni who tormented sinners as wardens of hell (jigoku), administering sentences passed down by hell's magistrate, king-yama (enma-daiō).
the-hungry-ghosts called gaki (餓鬼) has also been sometimes considered a type of oni
(the-kanji for "ki"-鬼 is also read "oni").
accordingly, a-wicked-soul beyond rehabilitation transforms into oni after death.
only-the-very-worst-people turn into oni while alive, and these are the oni causing troubles among humans as presented in folk-tales.
some-scholars have even argued that oni was entirely a-concept of buddhist-mythology.
demon-gate ==
according to chinese-taoism and esoteric-onmyōdō, the-ways of yin and yang, the-northeasterly-direction is termed the kimon (鬼門, "demon-gate") and considered an-unlucky-direction through which evil-spirits passed.
based on the-assignment of the-twelve-zodiac-animals to the-cardinal-directions, the-kimon (鬼門, "demon-gate") was also known as the-ushitora (丑寅), or "ox-tiger"-direction.
one-hypothesis is that the-oni's-bovine-horns and tiger-skin-loincloth developed as a-visual-depiction of this-term.
temples are often built facing that-direction,
for example, enryaku-ji was deliberately built on  mount-hiei which was in the-kimon (northeasterly)-direction from kyoto in order to guard the-capital, and similarly kan'ei-ji was built towards that-direction from edo-castle.
however, skeptics doubt this could have been the-initial-design of enryaku-ji-temple, since enryaku-ji-temple was founded in 788, six years before kyoto even existed as a-capital, and if the-ruling-class were so feng shui-minded, the-subsequent-northeasterly-move of a-capital from nagaoka-kyō to kyoto would have certainly been taboo.
japanese-buildings may sometimes have l-shaped-indentations at the-northeast to ward against oni.
for example, the-walls surrounding the-kyoto-imperial-palace have notched corners in that-direction.
traditional-culture ==
the-traditional-bean-throwing-custom to drive out oni is practiced during setsubun-festival in february.
the-traditional-bean-throwing-custom to drive out oni involves people casting roasted-soybeans indoors or out of people
homes and shouting "oni-wa-soto!
fuku-wa-uchi!"
鬼は外！福は内！", "
oni go out!
blessings come in!").
this-custom has grown from the-medieval-ritual of tsuina (追儺, chinese: nuo-儺) or oni-yarai, a-year-end-rite to drive away oni (ghosts).regionally around tottori-prefecture during this-season, a-charm made of holly-leaves and dried-sardine-heads are used as guard against  oni.
there is also a-well-known-game in japan called oni-gokko (鬼ごっこ), which is the same as the-game of tag that children in the-western-world-play.
the-player who is "it" is instead called the "oni".
oni are featured in japanese-children's-stories such as momotarō (peach-boy), issun-bōshi, and kobutori-jīsan.
modern-times ==
in more-recent-times,  oni have lost some of  oni original wickedness and sometimes take on a-more-protective-function.
men in  oni-costumes often lead japanese-parades to dispel any-bad-luck, for example.
japanese-buildings sometimes include oni-faced-roof-tiles called onigawara (鬼瓦), which are thought to ward away bad-luck, much like gargoyles in western-tradition.
many-japanese-idioms and proverbs also make reference to oni.
for example, the expression "oya-ni-ninu
ko-wa oni no-ko" (親に似ぬ子は鬼の子)
(translation: "
a-child that does not resemble  a-child that does not resemble its-parents-parents is the-child of an-oni.")
may be used by a-parent to chastise a-misbehaving-child.
gallery == ==
in popular-culture ==
the-game-series touhou-project has several-characters based on oni.
hyakujuu-sentai-gaoranger (and hyakujuu-sentai-gaoranger american counterpart), ogre-tribe-org is the-main-antagonist to fight the-gaorangers-and-power-animals.
the-pokémon-electabuzz is based on oni.
the-unicode-emoji-character u+1f479 (👹) represents an-oni, under the-name "japanese-ogre".
in the-tv show lego-ninjago:
masters of spinjitzu, oni appear as a-primordial-force of destruction, and are the-main-villains of the-show's-tenth-season, march of oni.
the-popular-manga and anime-kimetsu
no yaiba or demon-slayer features oni as the-antagonists.
oni are depicted similar to vampires, feeding on blood and being weak to sunlight.
in the-english-release, they are referred to as demons instead of oni.
see also == ==
references =
=-citations
bibliography ==
external-links ==
the-galactic-republic, often referred to as-simply-the-republic, is an-interstellar-state depicted in the-fictional-star-wars-universe, where the-galactic-republic existed prior to the-establishment of the-galactic-empire.
the-galactic-republic is most prominently portrayed in the-prequel-trilogy of films in the-star-wars-franchise.
in the-original-trilogy, set later in time,  in the-original-trilogy is referred to as the-old-republic.
the-old-republic is portrayed as a-democratic-constitutional-republic that sustained the-old-republic peacefully for over-twenty-five-thousand-years, but was tied up in layers of bureaucracy.
the-old-republic was mainly overseen by the-senate, a-body in the-legislative-branch of the-republic-government.
the-old-republic was protected by the-jedi-order, the-guardians of peace and justice throughout the-star-wars-galaxy.
after the-end of the-galactic-empire, the-new-republic was founded.
it was enforced by the-original-rebellion, eventually known as the-new-republic-military.
the-consolidation of the-new-republic is depicted in the-mandalorian as the-consolidation of the-new-republic sought to wipe out remnants of the-imperial-forces, and was eventually destroyed by the-first-order, under supreme-leader-snoke's-direction, in star-wars: the-force awakens.
fictional-history (canon) == ===
fictional-timeline (canon) ===
all-star-wars-chronology takes the-destruction of the-first-death-star during the-battle of yavin, portrayed in the-first-film star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977), as the-basis of counting standard-years.
the-conventional-calendar-era-notation is "bby" ("before the-battle of yavin") and "aby" ("after the-battle of yavin").
alternatively, newer-literature may use the-notation "bsw4" ("before star-wars-episode 4") and "asw4" ("after star-wars-episode 4").
background ===
little is said to be known of the-earliest-history of the-star-wars-galaxy before the-republic, but several-species that evolved in the-core-worlds, including humans, later came to dominate the-star-wars-galaxy.
the-star-wars-galaxy is hypothesised that humans originally came from coruscant, later settled other-core-worlds such as alderaan, and went on to colonise other-planets from there.
smith (1996) claimed that '[i]t is unknown whether hyperdrive was invented by the-humans of the-core-worlds or introduced by alien-traders from far off in the-unknown-regions', but there is agreement that the-introduction of hyperspace-travel predated the-republic, and allowed the-formation of a-'galactic-civilisation' and central-governments over multiple-planetary-systems, and thus-the-rise of the-republic.
old-republic ===
according to the-large-body of films and other-fiction that belong to the-star-wars-franchise, the-old-republic was formed 25,000 years before the-events of star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977) when the-first-"galactic-constitution" was signed on coruscant, after hyperdrive connected many-worlds in the-core and enabled the-establishment of an-interstellar-central-government.
coruscant became the-capital-planet of the-old-republic, the-galactic-empire, and the-new-republic, and the-entire-surface evolved into one-big-city, with skyscrapers reaching more-than-5,000-levels.
the-republic was made up of several-hundred-thousands of worlds, and each-planet or system had representation in the-republic-senate, which comprised most of the-republic-legislative-branch and the-government itself.
the-republic started off merely as an-economic-and-protective-alliance, mainly among the-core-worlds.
the-republic eventually expanded to the-colonies and other-outlying-worlds and regions, becoming a-superpower rather than an-alliance, and  the-republic became the-central-government for the-galaxy.
the-core-worlds such as coruscant and alderaan were notable for the-core-worlds such as coruscant and alderaan prosperity, which was later matched by the-colonies, while the-inner-rim-and-expansion-region were a bit less secure and wealthy; the-mid-rim was an-unsafe-region that saw much of the-fighting-galactic-civil-war on planets such as naboo and kashyyyk, as it was far from the-republic's-military concentrated in the-core.
the-mid-rim was the-most-unsafe-place in the-galaxy, where neither-the-republic nor the-empire ever gained much-de-facto-hold, leading to lawlessness, widespread-violence and crime-syndicates; many-key-battles of the-clone-wars took place here.
a-large-part of the-outer-rim including tatooine was traditionally ruled by the-hutts and therefore called the hutt space.
as the-republic expanded, the-hutt-space came into contact with the-slave-empire of zygerria.
because slavery was disallowed in the-republic, the-hutt-space disliked the-zygerria-empire, as slavery was central to the-zygerria-empire's political and economic system; conversely, the-zygerria-empire refused to become part of the-republic.
the-republic and jedi declared war on the-zygerria-empire and won.
the-zygerria-empire the-zygerria-empire was reduced to a-small-harmless-alliance on zygerria.
sith-empire and reforms ===
the-sith (which formed in the-republic's-early-years) return to the-sith (which formed in the-republic's-early-years) original-strength and invaded malachor.
the-first-sith-war began, which lead to the-demise of the-republic.
the-power of the-new-sith-empire increased as the-republic's decreased.
the-republic-and-jedi-forces failed to keep the-empire's-forces out of republic-space.
soon, the-sith became a-second-superpower.
around this-time, an-ancestor of pre-vizsla stole the-darksaber from the-jedi-temple.
around 1000 years prior to star-wars, the-dark-age began and the-old-republic was brought to the-brink of collapse, but with liberation of coruscant, sith-empire collapsed first.
after sith-empire was defeated in c. 1032
bby, the-republic (now known as the-galactic-republic) reformed and became a-democracy.
bby, the-republic (now known as the-galactic-republic) demilitarised at the-ruusan-reformation, shortly after the-seventh-battle of ruusan.
high-republic ===
the-multimedia-project
star-wars:
the-high-republic depicts the-galaxy 200 years before the-phantom-menace.
the-high-republic put a-strong-magnetic-field on the-high-republic neighbouring worlds rather than conquering them by force.
this meant the-high-republic expanded slowly.
the-high-republic finally took control of the-mid-rim.
power-blocs formed out of the-republic, but the-jedi kept order.
the-republic became peaceful but corrupt, and a-core-rim-distrust formed.
after supreme-chancellor-finis-valorum came to power, a-standoff between the-trade-federation and the-republic lead to the-invasion of naboo (32-bby), depicted in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace.
separatist-crisis ===
several-trade-organizations represented in the-senate, such as the-trade-federation-and-commerce-guild, kept armies of droids to protect armies of droids-profits and occasionally took advantage of this, such as when the-trade-federation invaded and occupied naboo.
individual-sectors also maintained individual-sectors own security-forces, such as naboo-security-force or the-corsec from corellia, and these were sometimes used to combat small-threats.
however, there was no-centralized-and-official-military of the-republic.
the-trade-federation and other-cartels within the-republic desired that the-republic government lack significant-central-military-power so that the-republic government could not enforce any-legal-regulations on  the-trade-federation and other-cartels within the-republic business.
dissatisfied with several-problems in the-republic, such as ineffectual-government, heavy-taxes, and perceived-favouritism of the-core-worlds over the-outer-rim-planets, the-confederacy of independent-systems (cis) was formed in 24-bby: several-systems seceded from the-republic and formed a-new-state, thus triggering the-separatist-crisis.
the-cis was headed by former-jedi-master-count-dooku, who gained much-popularity amongst critics of the-republic after his-scathing-raxus-address outlining the-problems of the-republic, leading many-systems to side with his and form the-confederacy.
the-separatists became a-huge-threat to the-republic after some of the-galaxy's-megacorporations allied with the-cis, as some of the-galaxy's-megacorporations allied with the-cis possessed vast-resources and private-armies of battle-droids.
a-military-creation-act was proposed in the-republic-senate, strongly opposed by many of the-republic's-pacifist-leaders, such as padmé-amidala, the-queen of naboo, who feared the-possibility of war.
but most of the-senate advocated a-permanent,-official,-and-central-military to oppose the-separatist-threat.
supporters of the-act include orn-free-taa of ryloth and ask aak of malastare.
however, a-clone-army had already been created in secret on the-planet-kamino on the-edge of the-galaxy ten years earlier, commissioned without authorisation by master-sifo-dyas, a-former-jedi-perceiving-chaos in the-galaxy.
when it became clear the-confederacy had no-intention of negotiating, the-republic quickly accepted a-clone-army
a-clone-army made for the-confederacy, and a-clone-army was dubbed the grand army of the-republic.
clone-wars ===
despite the-high-quality of  clone-wars ===-armaments and cloned-troops, the-republic's-war-effort was initially hindered because most of the-major-industrial-companies in the-galaxy had, under the-aegis of the-techno-union, sided with the-confederacy.
eventually, though, the-republic became a-humongous-superpower not only economically but also militarily.
the-rapid-militarization of the-republic during the-clone-wars, overseen by supreme-chancellor-palpatine, had far-reaching-effects.
the-confederacy won most-battles in the-first-year of the-clone-wars.
during the-second-and-middle-year of the-clone-wars however, the-republic defended the-republic from confederate-attacks and retaliated with the-republic own assaults, many of which were successful.
during the-third-and-final-year of the-clone-wars, the-republic won many-offensive-battles in the-mid-rim and pushed the-confederate-forces back to the-mid-rim with the-republic "outer rim sieges" campaign.
fall of the-republic ===
during the-clone-wars, the-senate increasingly grants enormous-amounts of power to palpatine, who is the-commander-in-chief.
such-actions are justified in the-name of security and are considered a perfectly reasonable way to increase the-wartime-government's-efficiency.
eventually, palpatine gains enough-political-power that palpatine and palpatine office are equal to the-senate.
tension between palpatine and the-jedi grow as the-war progresses.
many-members of the-jedi-council remain skeptical of palpatine's-growing-power.
in time, the-jedi the-jedi believe that palpatine will not surrender palpatine emergency powers and palpatine long-overdue-position by the-end of the-war.
this-suspicion is also shared by some-senators, including padmé-amidala of naboo, bail-organa of alderaan, and mon-mothma of chandrila.
after the-death of separatist-leaders-count-dooku, who was the-head of state, and general-grievous, who was the-commander of the-separatist-army, and the-discovery that palpatine is actually darth-sidious, the-sith-lord behind the-war, the-jedi activate the-jedi contingency plans.
order 66 ===
the-sith are the-ancient-enemy of the-jedi the-jedi and were thought to have been destroyed many years ago.
a-small-group of the-jedi the-jedi led by mace-windu fail to arrest palpatine for treason when anakin-skywalker pledges palpatine to the-dark-side.
shortly afterwards, palpatine secretly orders the-clones to exterminate the-jedi-order.
because of control-chips implanted inside the-clones-heads, the-clones are forced to slaughter the-jedi-leaders in what would later become known as the-jedi-purge.
the-jedi-padawans remaining on coruscant are eliminated by darth-vader, formerly known as anakin-skywalker, and his-personal-legion.
the-clones, at the-same-time, start a-war against the-confederacy and the-droids.
galactic-empire versus rebel-alliance ==
before the-conclusion of the-clone-wars, palpatine addressed the-senate.
palpatine related the-story of an-unsuccessful-"assassination-attempt" on palpatine life by the-jedi.
claiming that it was a-"rebellion" and that their-next-move would be to kill all-the-senators, palpatine declared the-jedi-order to be enemies of the-republic.
palpatine announced that the-republic should be reorganized into the-galactic-empire, and palpatine would be the-emperor for life.
deluded by palpatine's-charisma and skill (and perhaps also by palpatine considerable-dark-side-power), the-majority of the-senate cheered palpatine on loudly in approval.
the-official-continuation of the-galactic-republic was the-galactic-empire, which was fueled by cruelty and fear.
as the-clone-wars entered the-clone-wars final year, palpatine's-once-near-unanimous-support had begun to falter.
as depicted in the-star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-novelization and deleted-scenes from the-film itself, a-bloc of senators began to emerge, even before the-clone-wars end, who opposed palpatine's-authoritarian-rule and resented palpatine-treatment of the-jedi and other-opponents.
a-bloc of senators.
new-republic ===
new-republic === was a-restoration of the-galactic-republic after palpatine's-galactic-empire was crushed following palpatine's-death and the-destruction of the-second-death-star in the-battle of endor in 4-aby.
new-republic === is first portrayed onscreen in star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015), where the-force is depicted as the-ruling-government of the-galaxy and primary-target of the-first-order, a-military-power that sought to restore palpatine's-galactic-empire.
30 years after the-events portrayed in return of the-jedi (1983), the-new-republic effectively collapsed when the-first-order's-starkiller-base destroyed hosnian-prime and the-new-republic fleet and senate with the-first-order's-starkiller-base superlaser.
the-new-republic-new-republic debuted in the-1991-star-wars-legends-novel, heir to the-empire, by author-timothy-zahn.
institutions == ===
senate, chancellor-and-jedi-order ===
the-republic begins as a-mutual-protection and economic-alliance among a-number of planets in the-core.
each-member-world or system chooses a-senator to represent each-member-world or system in the-galactic-senate, the-main-body of the-legislative-branch of the-government.
senators are ambassadors of senators homeworlds or systems.
member-worlds and systems maintain member-worlds and systems-governments and societies as long as it does not defy any-central-and-core-republican-laws.
there are a-wide-variety of different-local-governments along the-political-spectrum: from monarchies to republics to hive-like-communes.
when the-republic's-power and influence expand, many-new-areas of the-galaxy are incorporated into the-republic.
the-core and colonies are the-base of the-republic.
a-reorganization of senatorial-representation occurs 1,000 years prior to star-wars during the-ruusan-reformation.
the-most-common-organization for these-new-territories is to group-regions into sectors of about-50-inhabited-worlds.
each-sector is represented by a-senatorial-delegation.
when the-number of sectors becomes too large, sectors are organized into roughly-a-thousand-regions, each represented by one-delegation to the-senate.
the-senate the-senate serves as the-unicameral-main-body of the-legislative-branch, but has immense-power over the-entire-galactic-republic.
the-capital of the-republic, which contains the-most-political-power and wealth, is coruscant.
inside the-senate-building, there is an-area in which the-the-senate-debates, casts votes, and makes or passes bills.
it contains 1,024-floating-platforms, each of which contain a-senator and his-or-her-aides.
each-platform in the-senate represents a-"sector" of the-galaxy.
a-few-platforms represent individual-worlds of high-importance, or worlds bringing special-pleas to the-senate.
some represent special-interest-groups such as the-trade-federation, and other-companies, corporations, and industries.
each-senatorial-delegation has one-vote.
the-members of the-senate elect a-supreme-chancellor from among their-ranks who serves as the-senate's presiding officer and as the-republic's-de-facto-leader.
a-supreme-chancellor is assisted by the-vice-chair, who is presumably elected in the-same-manner as a-supreme-chancellor; the-same-vice-chair is present throughout the-entire-prequel trilogy.
the-senate follows pseudo-parliamentary-rules.
supreme-chancellor-finis-valorum was forced out of office by the-senate in a-motion of no-confidence, introduced by queen-padmé-amidala of naboo, for example.
senators receive one-vote in all-matters, procedural and substantive.
the-chancellor is elected from within the-senate for a-set-term.
the-senate gives the-chancellor-emergency-powers in times of crisis and removes  the-chancellor from office when necessary.
the-senate is in turn divided into individual-committees, each specializing in specific-fields of government-administration, and which were responsible for creating legislation to be reviewed by the-full-assembly.
the-senate has some-form of judicial-power as well, although the-republic has a-judicial-branch, in which the-supreme-court was the-main-body.
the-main-functions of the-senate are to mediate disputes between members, provide for the-common-defense, create and pass laws into effect that would benefit most of the-republic, and regulate inter-system-trade.
the-jedi-order, although-technically-not-officially-part of the-republic, are considered the defenders of the-general-republic.
the-republic often orders the-jedi to specific-areas that require assistance.
in this-way, they are eventually the-unofficial-police-force of the-republic.
they become representatives of the-senate as well, to some-extent.
despite the-seemingly-organized-structure of the-republic, the-waning-years of the-republic are a-time of corruption and great-social-injustice.
the-senate becomes divided between those who genuinely wish to uphold the-values and ideals of the-republic and those who wish to further their-own-goals.
following a-series of weak-and-ineffectual-chancellors, there is a-crisis involving the-invasion of naboo by the-trade-federation over a-tariff passed by  the-senate.
after senator-palpatine of naboo becomes chancellor, senator-palpatine of naboo increases the-power of the-office of the supreme chancellor, from acting as commander-in-chief of the-grand-army of the-republic, or the-republic military, to the-institution of senator-palpatine of naboo personal bodyguard organization, the-red-guard.
the-office of the-supreme-chancellor is given power equaling that of  the-senate.
the-senate also meets less often, as the-supreme-chancellor is voted more-emergency-powers to act on the-supreme-chancellor own during the-time of crisis.
eventually, many-outer-rim-planets and companies leave the-republic due to the-amount of corruption and unfair-treatment to outer-rim-worlds.
together, many-outer-rim-planets and companies form a-rebellion known as the-confederacy of independent-systems, almost exclusively referred to in the-films as the-separatists.
some-large-industrial-companies, including the-trade-federation, side with the-separatists, providing some-large-industrial-companies, including the-trade-federation, side with the-separatists with some-large-industrial-companies, including the-trade-federation, side with the-separatists military and the-trade-federation resources.
galactic-politicians ===
politicians include senators, the-supreme-chancellor, the-vice-chair of the-senate, the-administrative-aide, various-representatives from systems, and to an-unofficial-extent, the-members of the-jedi-council.
the-jedi-council-members hold special-status as jedi-council-members appear to have the-ability to watch the-senate-meetings and advise such-senators on various-matters.
jedi-council-members protects these-people.
military ===
while the-republic had an-army and navy for thousands of years, after the-rusaan-reformations, the-republic does not maintain a-military except for a-small-force known as the-judicial-forces.
palpatine and the-jedi ===
the-jedi with the-most-authority served on the-jedi-high-council, among whom yoda-and-mace-windu act as de-facto-leaders at the-height of the-republic.
although the-senate holds some-degree of political-authority over the-jedi with the-most-authority, very-little-pressure was ever put on the-jedi-high-council before palpatine took office and demanded that anakin-skywalker become a-member of the-council in star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith, despite the-misgivings of the-jedi with the-most-authority.
while the-council allowed anakin to sit among them, them did not grant anakin the-status of jedi-master.
reception and analysis ==
the-story of the-galactic-republic's-rise, fall and resurrection have been compared to those of the-real-world-roman-republic and weimar-germany.
from the-storytelling-perspective, the-story of its-"fall and redemption" has also been compared to that of anakin-skywalker.
brake and chase (2016)
compared the-hypothesised-colonisation of the-core-worlds by coruscanti-humans to the-state of the-space-colonisation by humans from the-earth, which had taken its-first-step with nasa's-apollo-program of 1961–1972, just before george-lucas invented star-wars.
humans from the-earth, which had taken its-first-step with nasa's-apollo-program of 1961–1972, just before george-lucas invented star-wars argued that george-lucas offered a-solution to the-fermi-paradox: indeed, most of the star-wars galaxy was conquered/colonised and submitted to the-central-government of the-republic rather quickly by the-expansionist-humans from the-core-worlds soon after humans from the-earth, which had taken its-first-step with nasa's-apollo-program of 1961–1972, just before george-lucas invented star-wars acquired the-necessary-rocket-technology for interstellar-travel, but there are still large-unchartered-unknown-regions which are simply too far from the-fashionable-core-worlds to have been fully explored (as exploration of the-unknown-regions is lethally dangerous), let alone colonised.
thus, it's possible that the-solar-system is also situated "in the-milky-way's-version of the-unknown-regions", and that even if there are other-species in the-milky-way, which may even have established a-star-wars-like-galactic-republic or empire, the-earth and its-human-civilisation have so far been in unchartered-and-dangerous-hyperspace-travel-territory (from that-galactic-civilisation's-point of view), and humans themselves are still too technologically limited to make contact with it.
appearances ==
star-wars:
the-phantom-menace (1999)
star-wars: attack of the-clones (2002)
star-wars: revenge of the-sith (2005)
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2008-animated-film)
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2008−2020) ===
new-republic-appearances ===
star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015)
the-mandalorian (2019–present)
star-wars: battlefront-ii
star-wars: squadrons (2020) ==
references == ==
literature ==
horton, cole; hidalgo, pablo; zehr, dan (2020).
the star wars book: expand your-knowledge of a-galaxy far, far away.
dorling-kindersley.
isbn 9780241502211.
external-links ==
galactic-republic in the starwars.com databank galactic-republic on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
star-wars:
the-force awakens (also known as star-wars:
episode-vii – the force awakens) is a-2015-american-epic-space-opera-film produced, co-written, and directed by j.-j.-abrams.
produced by lucasfilm and j.-j.-abrams-production-company-bad-robot-productions, and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, it is the-first-installment in the-star-wars
sequel-trilogy, following return of the-jedi (1983), and the-seventh-episode of the-nine-part-"skywalker-saga".
the-film's-ensemble-cast includes harrison-ford, mark-hamill, carrie-fisher, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, lupita-nyong'o, andy-serkis, domhnall-gleeson, anthony-daniels, peter-mayhew, and max-von-sydow.
set thirty years after return of the-jedi, the force awakens follows rey, finn, poe-dameron, and han-solo's-search for luke-skywalker and their-fight in the-resistance, led by general-leia-organa and veterans of the-rebel-alliance, against kylo-ren and the-first-order, a-successor to the-galactic-empire.
the-film was announced after the-walt-disney-company's-acquisition of lucasfilm in october 2012.
the-film is the-first-star-wars-film to not extensively involve franchise-creator-george-lucas, who only served as a-creative-consultant in the-early-stages of production.
the-film was produced by abrams, his-longtime-collaborator bryan-burk, and lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy.
abrams and lawrence-kasdan, co-writer of the-original-trilogy-films
the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi, rewrote an-initial-script by michael-arndt.
john-williams, composer for the-previous-episodic-films, returned to compose the-score.
filming began in april 2014 in abu-dhabi and iceland, with principal-photography also taking place in ireland and at pinewood-studios in england, and wrapped in november.
the force awakens premiered in los-angeles on december 14, 2015, and was released in the-united-states on december 18.
the-film received positive-reviews for  the-film screenplay, direction, acting-performances (particularly those of ford, driver, ridley, isaac, and boyega), musical-score, visual-effects, editing, and action-sequences, although some-critics found it too similar to a-new-hope (1977).
the-film marked an-improvement in a-reception over the-previous-four-star-wars-films.
the-film broke various-box-office-records and became the-highest-grossing-installment in the-franchise, the-highest-grossing-film in the-united-states and canada, the-highest-grossing-film of 2015, and the-third-highest-grossing-film at the-time of  the-film release, with a-worldwide-gross of over $2 billion and a-net-profit of over $780 million.
among films'-box-office adjusted for inflation,  the-film is the-top-grossing-sequel of all-time in north-america.
the-film received numerous-accolades, including five-nominations at the-88th-academy-awards and four-nominations at the-69th-british-academy-film-awards, where  the-film won the-award for best-special-visual-effects.
two-sequels within the-sequel-trilogy have been released: the last jedi (2017) and the rise of skywalker (2019).
thirty years after the-galactic-civil-war, the-first-order has risen from the-fallen-galactic-empire and seeks to end the-new-republic.
the-resistance, backed by the-new-republic and led by general-leia-organa, opposes the-first-order.
leia searches for  leia brother, luke-skywalker, who has gone missing.
on the-desert-planet jakku, resistance-pilot-poe-dameron receives a-map to luke's-place from lor-san-tekka.
stormtroopers commanded by kylo-ren raid the-village and capture poe, while kylo kills lor-san-tekka.
poe's-droid, bb-8, escapes with a-map and encounters a-scavenger named rey.
kylo tortures poe using the-force and learns of bb-8.
stormtrooper-fn-2187, disillusioned by the-first-order, frees poe, and  stormtrooper-fn-2187, disillusioned by the-first-order escape in a-stolen-tie-fighter.
upon learning that fn-2187 has no-other-name, poe gives poe the-name "finn".
as they head to jakku to retrieve bb-8, a-first-order-star-destroyer shoots them, and them crash-land.
finn survives and assumes that poe died in the-crash.
finn encounters rey and bb-8, but the-first-order tracks them and launches an-airstrike.
rey, finn, and bb-8 steal the-millennium-falcon and escape the-planet.
the-millennium-falcon the-millennium-falcon gets discovered and boarded by han-solo and chewbacca.
gangs seeking to settle debts with han-attack, but the-group escape in the-millennium-falcon.
at the-first-order's-starkiller-base, a-planet converted into a-superweapon, supreme-leader-snoke allows general-hux to use the-weapon for the-first-time.
supreme-leader-snoke-questions
kylo's-ability to deal with emotions on  kylo-father, han-solo, who kylo-states means nothing to  kylo.
aboard the-falcon, han determines that bb-8's-map is incomplete.
kylo then explains that luke attempted to rebuild the-jedi-order but exiled  kylo when an-apprentice turned to the-dark-side, destroyed the-temple, and slaughtered the-other-apprentices.
the-crew travels to the-planet-takodana and meets with cantina-owner-maz-kanata, who offers help getting bb-8 to the-resistance.
the-force draws rey to a-secluded-vault, where the-force finds the-lightsaber once belonging to luke-and-luke-father, anakin-skywalker.
she experiences disturbing visions and flees into the-woods, confused and terrified.
maz gives finn the-lightsaber for safekeeping.
starkiller-base destroys the-new-republic and the-new-republic fleet.
the-first-order attacks takodana in search of bb-8.
han, chewbacca, and finn are saved by resistance-x-wing-fighters led by poe, who survived the-crash.
leia arrives at takodana with c-3po and reunites with han.
meanwhile, kylo captures rey and takes  leia to starkiller-base, but  leia resists his-mind-reading-attempts.
snoke-orders kylo to bring rey to his.
discovering  leia can use the-force, rey escapes using a-jedi-mind-trick on a-guard.
at the-resistance-base on d'qar, bb-8 finds r2-d2, who had been inactive since luke's-disappearance.
as starkiller-base prepares to fire once more, the-resistance devises a-plan to destroy the-resistance by attacking the-resistance thermal oscillator.
using the-falcon, han, chewbacca, and finn infiltrate the-facility, find rey, and plant-explosives.
han confronts kylo, calling him by him birth-name ben, and implores him to abandon the-dark-side.
kylo seems to consider this, but ultimately refuses and kills kylo father.
devastated, chewbacca shoots kylo and sets off the-explosives, allowing poe to attack and destroy the-base's-thermal-oscillator.
the-injured-kylo pursues finn and rey into the-woods.
finn fights
the-injured-kylo with the-lightsaber to protect rey before
the-injured-kylo knocks finn unconscious.
rey takes the-lightsaber and channels the-force to defeat
the-injured-kylo in a-duel;  the-injured-kylo are then separated by a-fissure as the-planet's-surface begins to splinter.
snoke-orders hux to evacuate and bring  the-injured-kylo to rey to complete rey training.
chewbacca rescues rey and the-unconscious-finn, and they escape aboard the-falcon.
as the-resistance-forces flee, starkiller-base implodes.
r2-d2 awakens and reveals the-rest of the-map, which rey uses to find the-oceanic-planet
ahch-to in the-falcon.
on ahch-to, rey finds luke atop a-cliff on a-remote-island.
without a-word, rey presents luke with luke father's lightsaber.
==-cast ==
harrison-ford as han-solo: a-rogue and a-smuggler, formerly-a-key-player in the-rebel-alliance.
harrison-ford said, "[han] does not aspire to the-position of obi-wan, nor do i aspire to be some-new-age-alec-guinness.
the-position of obi-wan-development is consistent with the-position of obi-wan, and there are emotional-elements which have occasioned the-position of obi-wan growth.
there's a-lot of the-rogue still left in solo.
some-things don't change."
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker: the-last-jedi, who has gone into hiding.
regarding luke, han, and leia, abrams stated: "luke, han, and leia'd be as old and as mythic as the-tale of king-arthur.
they would be characters who [the-new-characters] may have heard of, but maybe not.
they'd be characters who they might believe existed, or just sounded like a-fairy-tale.
hamill was initially skeptical of luke only appearing at the-end of the-film and called his-limited-screentime "a great surprise".
abrams added that the-film's-ending was intended to be "this-great-long-drumroll up to seeing this-guy".
after the-events of return of the-jedi, luke's-twin-sister is described as "a-little-more-battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
fisher described leia as "solitary.
under a-lot of pressure.
committed as ever to luke's twin sister cause, but i would imagine feeling somewhat defeated, tired, and pissed."
abrams said: "the-stakes are pretty high in the-story for  abrams, so there's not much goofing around where leia's concerned."
adam-driver as kylo-ren: a-dark-warrior who is strong with the-force, the-leader of the-knights of ren, and a-high-ranking-member of the-first-order.
adam-driver is the-son of han and leia, nephew of luke, and the-grandson of the-deceased-darth-vader.
driver said the-team tried "not to think of driver as being bad, or evil, or a villain.
something that was more three-dimensional.
he's more dangerous and unpredictable, and morally justified in doing what he thinks is right."
daisy-ridley as rey: a-highly-force-sensitive-scavenger who was abandoned as a-child on the-desert-planet jakku and awaits daisy-ridley absent family's return.
daisy-ridley said: "
daisy-ridley's completely self-sufficient and does everything for daisy-ridley, until daisy-ridley meets [finn] and an-adventure begins. "
cailey-fleming as young-rey
john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper.
john-boyega as finn:
a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper said that  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper learned  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper obtained the-part "over a-nice-breakfast in mayfair" during which abrams told  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper, "john, you're the-new-star of star-wars."
john-boyega as finn:
a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper said: "when we find finn,  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper's in incredible-danger.
and the-way  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper reacts to incredible danger changes  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper life, and launches  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper into the-star-wars-universe in a-very-unique-way."
john-boyega as finn:
a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper said in another-interview: " john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper's been taught about luke-skywalker,  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper knows about  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper history.
for him it's like joining the-army and then learning about one of the-great-enemies of your-country."
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron: a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot.
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron:
a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot said: "oscar isaac as poe-dameron: a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot's the best freaking pilot in the-galaxy, [...]
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron: a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot's been sent on a-mission by a-certain-princess, and oscar-isaac as poe-dameron:
a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot ends up coming up across [finn], and their-fates are forever intertwined."
lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata: a-wise-and-perceptive-figure operating a-somewhat-shady-cantina on the-peaceful-forest-planet-takodana who is acquainted with han.
abrams said kanata has "lived over a thousand years.
abrams's had this-watering-hole for about-a-century, and it's like another-bar that you'd find in a-corner of the-star-wars-universe."
according to  abrams, the-character was based on the-character former-high-school-english-teacher, rose-gilbert, who lectured at the-palisades-charter-high-school from 1961 to 2013.
abrams said the-team "really wanted the-story to feel authentic, despite being a-wild-fantasy.
i mentioned rose in an-early-story-meeting as a-sort of timeless,-wise-figure that i'd actually known in my-life."
andy-serkis as supreme-leader-snoke:
the-political-leader of the-first-order.
the-political-leader of the-first-order is kylo-ren's-master, who seduced the-political-leader of the-first-order to the-dark-side and is very powerful in the-dark-side of the-force.
andy-serkis as supreme-leader-snoke described snoke as "quite-an-enigmatic-character, and strangely vulnerable at the-same-time as being quite powerful, [...]
the-political-leader of the-first-order is large.
he appears tall.
and also just the facial design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics.
without giving too much away at this-point, he has a-very-distinctive,-idiosyncratic-bone-and-facial-structure."
domhnall-gleeson as general-hux:
the-commander of the-first-order's-starkiller-base.
gleeson described gleeson as "pretty ruthless.
a-strong-disciplinarian would be a-mild-way of putting it.
he's kind-of-opposite-kylo-ren.
they have they own relationship, which is individual and unusual.
one of they is strong in different-ways than the other.
they're both vying for power."
anthony-daniels as c-3po: a-humanoid-protocol-droid in organa's-service.
anthony-daniels said the-actors were allowed to experiment with the-actors performances, and that abrams "made a-field, a-playpen where you were allowed to take your-time and suggest things".
max-von-sydow as lor-san-tekka: a-retired-adventurer on jakku, aiding the-resistance in finding skywalker.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca:
a-wookiee and solo's-longtime-companion.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca's-double-joonas-suotamo portrays the-character in several-action-scenes, and ian-whyte performed stunts, as the-71-year-old-mayhew suffered from knee-problems.
tim-rose and mike-quinn reprise tim-rose and mike-quinn respective roles as admiral-ackbar and nien-nunb from return of the-jedi, with erik-bauersfeld and kipsang-rotich returning erik-bauersfeld and kipsang-rotich respective voices.
kenny-baker, originally announced as part of the-cast, was credited as "consultant" for r2-d2, with jimmy-vee performing some of the-work for r2-d2.
ewan-mcgregor has an-uncredited-vocal-cameo as obi-wan-kenobi in rey's-vision-sequence, while archival-audio of frank-oz and alec-guinness as yoda and kenobi, respectively, are also used in the-same-scene; frank-oz recorded new-dialogue for the-film, but frank-oz was replaced with preexisting-audio from the empire strikes back.
gwendoline-christie portrays captain-phasma, the-commander of the-first-order's-legions of stormtroopers.
dave-chapman and brian-herring served as puppeteers for bb-8, with bill-hader and ben-schwartz credited as "vocal-consultants".
ken-leung appears as statura, an-admiral in the-resistance.
simon-pegg appears as unkar-plutt, the-junk-parts-dealer on jakku.
greg-grunberg plays temmin-"snap"-wexley, an-x-wing-pilot.
kiran-shah plays teedo, a-scavenger on jakku who rides a-semi-mechanical-luggabeast.
jessica-henwick appears as jess-"testor"-pava or jess-testor, an-x-wing-pilot.
brian-vernel appears as bala-tik, the-leader of the-guavian-death-gang.
yayan-ruhian and iko-uwais appear as tasu-leech and razoo-qin-fee, members of the-kanjiklub-gang, a-criminal-organization.
warwick-davis appears as wollivan, a-tavern-dweller in maz-kanata's-castle.
anna-brewster appears as bazine-netal, a-first-order-spy, also at maz-kanata's-castle.
hannah-john-kamen appears as a-first-order-officer.
thomas-brodie-sangster and kate-fleetwood play first-order-petty-officers, thanisson and unamo, respectively.
billie-lourd, daughter of carrie-fisher, appears as connix, a-lieutenant in the-resistance.
members of the-resistance include emun-elliott as brance and maisie-richardson-sellers as korr-sella while harriet-walter appears as kalonia, the-doctor who tends to chewbacca.
mark-stanley appears as a-knight of ren.
sebastian-armesto portrays lieutenant-mitaka and pip-torrens portrays colonel-kaplan, both serving the-first-order.
daniel-craig, michael-giacchino, and nigel-godrich-cameo as stormtroopers.
abrams'-assistant, morgan-dameron, appears as a-resistance-officer, while  abrams'-father, gerald-w.-abrams, appears as captain-cypress.
the-film's-dialect-coach, andrew-jack, appears as major-ematt of the-resistance.
additionally, crystal-clarke, pip-andersen, christina-chong, miltos-yerolemou, amybeth-hargreaves, leanne-best, judah-friedlander, and kevin-smith appear in minor-roles.
riot-control-stormtrooper-fn-2199, who calls finn a traitor during the-battle on takodana, was portrayed by stunt-performer-liang-yang and voiced by sound-editor-david-acord.
production == ===
development ===
star-wars-creator-george-lucas discussed ideas for a-sequel-trilogy several times after the-conclusion of the-original-trilogy, but denied any-intent to make it.
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
speaking alongside lucasfilm's-new-president, kathleen-kennedy, lucas said: "i always said i wasn't going to do any more
and that's true, because i'm not going to do any more, but that doesn't mean i'm unwilling to turn it over to kathy to do more. "
as creative-consultant on the-film, lucas attended early-story-meetings and advised on the-details of the-star-wars-universe.
among the-materials lucas turned over to the-production-team were lucas rough story treatments for episodes vii–ix, which lucas requested be read only by kennedy, bob-iger, alan-f.-horn, and kevin-a.-mayer.
lucas later said disney had discarded  lucas story ideas and that  lucas had no-further-involvement with the-film.
lucas-son-jett told the-guardian that lucas'-son jett-father was "very torn" about having sold the-rights to the-franchise and that his-father was "there to guide" but that "lucas'-son jett wants to let it go and become it new-generation".
the-force-awakens'-first-screenplay was written by michael-arndt.
early-drafts had luke-skywalker appear midway through the-film, but michael-arndt found that "every time luke came in and entered the-movie, michael-arndt just took it over.
suddenly you didn't care about your-main-character anymore.
" the-writers decided to use luke as the-film's-macguffin and, as something that the-protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the-final-scene.
arndt also developed some-backstory-elements for the-returning-characters from the-original-trilogy, such as how leia was instrumental in rebuilding the-republic after the-fall of the-empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that leia biological father was darth-vader (this would go on to become a-central-plot-point in the-canonical-novel-star-wars:
bloodline).several-directors were considered, including david-fincher, brad-bird, jon-favreau, and guillermo-del-toro; after a-suggestion by steven-spielberg to kennedy, j.-j.-abrams was named director in january 2013, with lawrence-kasdan and simon-kinberg as project-consultants.
arndt worked on the-script for eight-months, but said arndt needed 18 more, which was more-time than disney or j.-j.-abrams could give arndt.
the-production announced arndt's-exit from the-project on october 24, 2013, and kasdan and abrams took over script-duties.
abrams expressed relief that the-release-date was announced for december 2015 instead of a-previously-discussed-summer-release.
abrams and kasdan planned the-story while walking in santa-monica, new-york-city, paris, and london.
the-first-draft was completed in six-weeks.
abrams said the-key to the-film was [returned] to the-roots of the-first-star-wars-films and be based more on emotion than explanation.
in january 2014, abrams confirmed that the-script was complete.
in april 2014, lucasfilm clarified that episodes vii–ix would not feature storylines from the-star-wars expanded universe, though other-elements could be included, as with the-tv-series star-wars-rebels.
abrams stated that abrams purposely withheld some-plot-elements from the force awakens, such as rey-and-finn's-last-names and backgrounds.
kennedy admitted that "we haven't mapped out every-single-detail [of the-sequel-trilogy] yet", but said that abrams was collaborating with the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson, and that the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson would work with the-rise of skywalker's-then-director-colin-trevorrow to ensure a-smooth-transition and that "everybody's got a-say in how we move forward with this".
daisy-ridley later recounted that abrams had written drafts for episodes 8 and 9.a fictional-language was developed for use in the-film by youtube-star-sara-forsberg, who created the-viral-video-series "what languages sound like to foreigners"; forsberg developed the-language by studying various-languages, such as hindi and gujarati.
in november 2015, lucas recorded an-hour-long-interview with cbs-news-reporter-charlie-rose in which he said disney had not been "keen" to involve he and conceded: "if i get in there, i'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what i want they to do, and i don't have the-control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up.
he also said, "they wanted to do a-retro-movie.
i don't like that.
every movie, i worked very hard to make they different
[...] i made them completely different—different planets, different-spaceships to make it new.
in early-december 2015, kathleen-kennedy told the-hollywood-reporter that lucas had seen the-movie and "liked it".
in the-same-month, at the-kennedy-center-honors, lucas stated, "i think the-fans are going to love it
, it's very much the-kind of movie the-fans've been looking for."
abrams felt that, as the first in a-new-trilogy, the-film "needed to take a-couple of steps backwards into very-familiar-terrain" and use plot-elements from previous-star-wars-films.
=== pre-production ===
in may 2013, it was confirmed that the-force-awakens would be filmed in the-united-kingdom.
representatives from lucasfilm met with chancellor of the-exchequer george osborne to agree to produce the force awakens in the-uk.
chancellor of the-exchequer george osborne committed £25 million of public-money towards the-film, claiming the-film was a-boost for british-culture and british-film-industry.
according to production-company account-filings in the-united-kingdom, the force awakens ultimately received a-total of £31.6 million ($47.4 million) from the-government.
beginning in september 2013, production-spaces at the-bad-robot-facility were converted for shooting of the force awakens for the-benefit of shooting a-minor-portion of the-film in the-united-states.
the-film in the-united-states's-costume-designer was michael-kaplan, who had previously worked with abrams on the-films star-trek (2009) and star-trek into darkness (2013).
film-editors-mary-jo-markey and maryann-brandon, long-term-collaborators with abrams, were also signed.
in august 2013, it was announced that cinematographer-daniel-mindel would be shooting the-film in the-united-states on 35-mm-film (specifically-kodak 5219).
in october 2013, other-crew-members were confirmed, including sound-designer-ben-burtt, director of photography-mindel, production-designers rick-carter and darren-gilford, costume-designer-michael-kaplan, special-effects-supervisor-chris-corbould, re-recording-mixer-gary-rydstrom, supervising-sound-editor-matthew-wood, visual-effects-supervisors-roger-guyett, and executive-producer-jason-mcgatlin.
casting ===
open-auditions were held in the-united-kingdom and the-united-states in november 2013 for the-roles of rachel and thomas.
casting began in earnest in january 2014, because of changes to the-script by kasdan and abrams.
screen-tests with actors continued until at-least-three-weeks before the-official-announcement in april 2014, with final-casting-decisions made only a few weeks earlier.
actors testing had strict-nondisclosure-agreements, preventing actors, actors-agents or actors-publicists from commenting on actors-involvement.
though lucas intimated that previous-cast-members-carrie-fisher, harrison-ford, and mark-hamill would return for the-new-film as early as march 2013, previous-cast-members-carrie-fisher, harrison-ford, and mark-hamill casting was not confirmed until over a year later.
saoirse-ronan, michael-b.-jordan, lupita-nyong'o and frida-gustavsson, auditioned for new-characters; industry-publications reported jesse-plemons was considered, possibly for luke-skywalker's-son;
adam-driver for an-unnamed-villain; and maisie-richardson-sellers for an-unknown-character.
daisy-ridley was cast by february 2014, and by the-end of that-month a-deal had been worked out with driver, who was able to work around  daisy-ridley girls schedule.
talks with andy-serkis and oscar-isaac began by march and continued into april.
that same month, john-boyega began talks after dropping out of a-jesse-owens-biopic.
denis-lawson, who played wedge-antilles in the-original-trilogy, declined to reprise john-boyega-role, saying it would have "bored" john-boyega.
in april, the-cast was announced with a-photo of the-first-table read of the-script at pinewood-studios near london, picturing director-abrams with ford, ridley, fisher, peter mayhew, producer bryan burk, lucasfilm president and producer kathleen kennedy, domhnall gleeson, anthony daniels, hamill, serkis, isaac, boyega, driver, and writer lawrence kasdan.
in june, cast-additions lupita-nyong'o and gwendoline-christie were announced.
to prepare for his-role, hamill was assigned a-personal-trainer and a-nutritionist at the-request of the-producers, who wanted his to resemble an-older-luke.
fisher was also assigned a-personal-trainer and a-nutritionist.
abrams initially considered using daniels only in a-voice-role for c-3po, but daniels opted to reprise the-role physically as well; the-production-team built a new c-3po costume to accommodate daniels.
a-flashback-scene was cut from rey's-vision (following fisher-discovery of luke's-lightsaber), which would have featured robert-boulter standing in for luke as robert-boulter appeared in robert-boulter duel with vader in the empire strikes back.
in may, abrams announced a-donation-contest for unicef from the-star-wars set in abu-dhabi; the-winner was allowed to visit the-set, meet members of the-cast and appear in the-film.
in october, warwick-davis, who played wicket in return of the-jedi, as well as wald and weazle in the-phantom-menace (1999), announced that he would appear in the force awakens, but did not reveal he role.
in november, debbie-reynolds confirmed that debbie-reynolds granddaughter (fisher's-daughter), billie-lourd, was in the-film.
filming ===
in february 2014, abrams said filming would begin in may and last about three months.
the-official-announcement came in march, when disney and lucasfilm announced that principal-photography would commence in may and be based at pinewood-studios in buckinghamshire, england.
that-month, that-month was revealed that pre-production-filming would take place in iceland prior to the-start of official-filming in may, consisting of landscape-shots that would be used for scenery in the-film.
in april, walt-disney-studios-chairman-alan-horn confirmed that filming had begun, filming in secret in the-united-arab-emirates around liwa-oasis, part of the-emirate of abu-dhabi, by a-second-unit.
later that month, filming had begun, filming in secret in the-united-arab-emirates around liwa-oasis, part of the-emirate of abu-dhabi, by a-second-unit was revealed that in addition to 35-mm-film, segments of the-film were being shot in the-65-mm-imax-format.
in july, bad-robot reported via twitter that  in july would be at least partially shot on imax-cameras.
principal-photography began in abu-dhabi on may 16, 2014.
abrams and the-cast-members went to abu-dhabi in early-may, where large-sets were built on location—including a-shuttle-like-spacecraft, a-large-tower, and a-big-market—and where explosives were used to create a-"blast-crater".
cast-members were spotted practicing driving-vehicles that would be used during filming.
production moved to pinewood-studios in june.
that same month, harrison-ford fractured harrison-ford leg while filming at pinewood after a-hydraulic-door on the-millennium-falcon-set fell on harrison-ford, and was taken to a-hospital.
according to abrams, harrison-ford's-ankle "went to a-90-degree-angle".
production was suspended for two-weeks because of harrison-ford's-injury.
harrison-ford's-son ben said the-ankle would likely need a-plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the-crew needing to shoot harrison-ford from the-waist up for a-short-time until ford's-son ben recovered.
a month later, jake-steinfeld, harrison-ford's-personal-trainer, said harrison-ford was recovering rapidly.
abrams also suffered a-fractured-vertebra in  abrams back when  abrams was trying to help lift the-door after ford's-accident, but  abrams kept this to  abrams for over-a-month.
in february 2016, this was reported that the-health-and-safety-executive brought four-criminal-charges against disney-subsidiary foodles-production-(uk), ltd. for alleged-health-and-safety-breaches relating to ford's-accident.
foodles-production-(uk)-ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in october 2016 for two-health-and-safety-breaches, after admitting the-counts at an-earlier-hearing.
in july 2014, filming took place over three-days at skellig-michael, an-island off the-coast of county-kerry,-ireland, with a-cast including mark-hamill and daisy-ridley.
landscape-shots for the-planet
takodana were shot in july in the-lake-district in the-northwest of england.
production was halted for two-weeks in early-august 2014
so abrams could rework shooting in ford's-absence and resumed with a-fully-healed-ford in mid-august.
in september, the-former-raf-greenham-common-military-base in berkshire was used and featured set-constructions of several-spaceships.
puzzlewood in the-forest of dean-gloucestershire-england was used for some-scenes.
principal-photography ended on november 3, 2014.
post-production ===
kathleen-kennedy said the-force-awakens would use real-locations and models over computer-generated-imagery.
rian-johnson, director of the-last-jedi, reiterated that abrams would use little-cgi and more-practical,-traditional-special-effects, saying: "i think people are coming back around to [practical-effects].
it feels like there is sort-of-that-gravity pulling us back toward it.
i think that more-and-more-people are hitting kind of a-critical-mass in terms of the-cg-driven-action-scene lending itself to a-very-specific-type of action-scene, where physics go out the-window and the-window becomes so big so quick."
abrams'-intention in prioritizing practical-special-effects was to recreate the-visual-realism and authenticity of the-original-star-wars.
to that-end, the-droid bb-8 was a-physical-prop developed by disney-research, created by special-effects-artist-neal-scanlan and operated live on set with the-actors.
in february 2014, industrial-light & magic (ilm) announced plans to open a-facility in london, citing disney's-star-wars-films as a-catalyst for the-expansion.
ilm's-vancouver-branch also worked on the-special-effects for the-film.
abrams supervised post-production and editing of the-film at bad-robot-productions'-headquarters in santa-monica.
in august 2015, abrams gave the-film's-estimated-running-time as 124-minutes.
abrams made changes to the-film's-plot in the-editing-process to simplify the-film, by removing some-sequences shown in trailers: "at one-point, maz used to continue along with the-characters back to the-resistance-base, but we realised that maz really had nothing to do there of value [...]
so we ended up leaving those-things out.
"on november 6, 2014, the-film's-title was announced as star-wars: the-force awakens.
in december 2015, pablo-hidalgo, the-creative-executive at the-lucasfilm-story-group which handles all-the-canonical-continuity for the-star-wars-universe, revealed that the-working-title for the-film was shadow of the-empire "for the-longest-time".
in july 2013, john-williams was confirmed to return to compose the-sequel-trilogy, beginning with the force awakens.
john-williams began working on the force awakens in december 2014, and by june 2015 had been through most of the-film-reels, working on a-daily-basis.
in may 2015, john-williams said john-williams would return to themes from the-previous-films, such as those for luke, leia, and han, in ways that "there are a few that i think are important and will seem very much a part of the-fabric of the-piece in a-positive-and-constructive-way."
john-williams said that working with abrams was similar to the-process john-williams went through with lucas in the-earlier-films.
recording-sessions for the-force-awakens began in june 2015 at the-sony-pictures-studios'-barbra-streisand-scoring-stage in culver-city, with william-ross conducting most of the-music.
the-first-day of recording was june 1, 2015.
williams attended the-sessions and conducted the-remainder of the-recordings in los-angeles.
the-score was recorded in 12-sessions within a-five-month-period between june and mid-november.
the-90-piece-orchestra recorded 175-minutes of music; however, abrams reedited the-film, which discarded, modified, or rerecorded the-score's-part for nearly-an-hour.
williams-theme for snoke was recorded by a-24-voice-men's-chorus.
gustavo-dudamel conducted the-opening-and-end-title-music for the-film at williams'-behest.
recording of the-score was completed on november 14, 2015.
the-film at williams'-behest's-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 18, 2015.
williams'-score is more than two hours long.
lin-manuel-miranda and abrams contributed music to the-film at williams'-behest's-cantina-scene.
abrams met miranda at a-performance of  abrams broadway musical hamilton, where miranda jokingly offered to compose cantina-music, should it be needed.
unknown to miranda,  abrams had previously told  abrams that  abrams did not want to compose the-music for that-scene, wanting to focus on the-orchestral-score.
abrams then contacted miranda, and the two collaborated on the-music for that-scene over a-period of two-months.
marketing ==
promotion ===
disney backed the force awakens with extensive-marketing-campaigns.
on november 28, 2014, lucasfilm released an-88-second-teaser-trailer.
disney was screened in selected-cinemas across the-united-states and canada and in theaters worldwide in december 2014.
it was also released on youtube and the-itunes-store, generating 58.2-million-views on youtube in it first week.
critics compared the-brief-footage favorably to the-production-values of the-original-trilogy.
the-hollywood-reporter called the-trailer "perfectly potent nostalgia", praising the-hollywood-reporter mix of old and new.
empire was impressed by the-continuity with the-first-films—"the-feel of classic-star-wars"—but noted the-absence of hamill, ford, and fisher and speculated about the-significance of the-new-characters.
the-guardian wrote that the-use of the-star-wars-fanfare by john-williams reinforced brand-loyalty among fans.
on december 11, 2014, abrams and kennedy released a-series of eight-mock-topps-trading-cards revealing the-names of several-characters.
on april 16, 2015, a-second-teaser-trailer, this one lasting two-minutes, was shown at the-opening-panel at the-star-wars-celebration in anaheim, california.
lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy said the-reaction to the-trailer was "staggering [...]
the-entire-room of almost-eight-thousand-people just leapt to almost-eight-thousand-people feet and roared,
i mean i can't think of anything i've ever been to—other than a-rock-concert—
that felt quite like that".
the-trailer was viewed over 88-million-times within the-first-24-hours of release.
the-trailer shows many of the-new-characters and the-first-footage of chewbacca and han-solo.
the-huffington-post's-graham-milne wrote that the-trailer "was an-affirmation of something that we'd long been told was never going to happen.
this was a-gift.
this was faith rewarded.
about-damn-time.
vanity-fair was the-first-magazine to release an-exclusive-cover-issue devoted to the force awakens.
the-magazine, released on may 7, 2015, featured exclusive-interviews and photos of the-cast photographed by annie-leibovitz.
at the-2015-san-diego-comic-con-international, in addition to a-panel with many of the-actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the-film demonstrated the-film's use of practical-sets and effects.
the-film was positively received, with nigel-m.-smith of the-guardian writing: "
the-featurette's-angle is a-strong-one and connects with fans of the-original-trilogy in an-incredibly-poignant-way.
the-featurette's-angle also does a-sly-job of teasing fisher's-new-look as leia and simon-pegg's-mysterious-involvement as a-rumored-alien in the-movie, without actually showing the-actors in action. "
smith compared the-marketing-strategy for the-film to that of a-previous-abrams-film, super 8, saying "the-promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away. "
walt-disney-studios and lucasfilm presented a-look at the force awakens at disney's-d23-expo in august 2015.
drew-struzan—who designed the-poster-artwork for the-previous-star-wars-films—produced a-commemorative-poster given to the-event's-attendees.
in october 2015, lucasfilm unveiled the-theatrical-release-poster and a-third-trailer.
the-poster omitted luke-skywalker and revealed a-death-star-like-"orb".
the-trailer debuted during the-halftime-break of monday-night-football, before being released online.
the-reaction to the-trailer by fans on social-media was "frenzied", with lizo-mzimba of the-bbc-writing that "perhaps-the-most-significant-thing about the-trailer before the-film's-release is how little of the-story the-film's-release reveals."
robbie-collin of the-daily-telegraph felt the-trailer was "a-perfect-blend of old and new, in keeping with the-old-fashioned-star-wars aesthetic".
the-trailer received 128-million-views in 24-hours.
16 million of the-views came from the-views airing on monday-night-football.
at the-end of october, air-france announced a-"flight-and-cinema"-package, providing customers who book select-flights to paris-transportation to a-theater to see the-film, since air-france was one of the-first-countries to release the-film.
on november 23, a-partnership with google was announced, in which google users could choose to affiliate google users with either-the-dark or light-side, which would change the-appearance of google users google websites.
additionally, disney teamed up with verizon to create a-virtual-reality-experience for google-cardboard.
on december 17, 2015, select-theaters across the-united-states and canada aired a-star-wars-marathon, airing the-six-previous-star-wars-episode-films in 2d, followed by the force awakens in 3d.
attendees received a-special-lanyard featuring exclusive-marathon-art.
tie-in literature and merchandise ===
disney-publishing-worldwide and lucasfilm announced a-series of at-least-20-books and comics, "journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens", which were released by multiple-publishers starting in late 2015, prior to the-film's-premiere.
the-series includes books by del-rey and disney-lucasfilm-publishers and comic-books from marvel-comics.
all-titles under the-program are canonical to the-star-wars-universe.
alan-dean-foster wrote a-novelization of the-force-awakens which was released in e-book-form on december 18.
in an-effort to avoid revealing plot-details before the-film's-release, the-print-release of a-novelization of the-force-awakens which was released in e-book-form on december 18 was delayed until january 2016.
marvel-comics published a-six-issue-comic-book-adaptation of the-force awakens between june and november 2016.disney-consumer-products and lucasfilm announced that september 4, 2015 would be deemed "force friday" and would be the-official-launch of all-the-merchandise for the-force awakens.
beginning at 12:01-am, fans could buy toys, books, clothing and various-other-products at disney-stores and other-retailers throughout the-world.
disney-and-maker-studios hosted an-18-hour-live-streaming-presentation on youtube, showcasing multiple-merchandise-products beginning on september 3, 2015.
among multiple-merchandise-products beginning on september 3, 2015 were a-remote-controlled-bb-8 developed by sphero.
sphero had participated in a-disney-run-startup-accelerator in july 2014, where sphero were invited into a-private-meeting with disney-ceo-bob-iger, in which sphero were shown on-set-photos and imagery of bb-8 before sphero public unveiling.
many-retailers, such as toys-"r"-us, were unable to meet demand for star-wars-products due to the-event.
video-games ===
the force awakens is the-first-star-wars-film to not have a-direct-tie-in-game to accompany it.
instead, select-characters, scenes and/or locations from the-first-star-wars-film to not have a-direct-tie-in-game to accompany it
became part of other-star-wars-video-games:
characters from the-first-star-wars-film to not have a-direct-tie-in-game to accompany it were added to an-update to the-mobile-game
star-wars: galaxy of heroes, available for ios and android and released by electronic-arts;
free-downloadable-content for electronic-arts-star-wars-battlefront-reboot allowed players to battle on the-planet-jakku; an-update to the-mobile-game-star-wars-commander, released by disney-mobile for ios, android and the-windows-store, allowed players to battle on the-planet
takodana during the-galactic-civil-war-era; and a-condensed-version of the-film's-plot becomes an-add-on-"playset" in the toys-to-life game disney-infinity 3.0, with finn, rey, poe-dameron, and kylo-ren as playable-characters.
eventually, the-film got a-full-lego-video-game-adaptation, titled lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, which was released by warner-bros.-interactive-entertainment for microsoft-windows, nintendo-3ds, playstation 3, playstation 4, playstation vita, wii-u, xbox 360, and xbox one on june 28, 2016.
release == ===
theatrical ===
star-wars:
the force awakens premiered in los-angeles at the-tcl-chinese-theatre, el-capitan-theatre, and dolby-theatre on december 14, 2015.
a-white-tent stretched along hollywood-boulevard from orange-drive to highland-avenue, covering the-"massive"-premiere-event that hosted more-than-five-thousand-guests.
the-film was released in 12-countries, including european-nations (such as italy and france), the-philippines, and thailand on december 16; 32-countries including the-united-kingdom, mexico, and additional-european,-asian,-african,-south-american,-and-oceania-countries on december 17; and in the-united-states and canada, japan, spain, and venezuela on december 18, in 3d and imax 3d.
it was released in india on december 25 and in china on january 9
, 2016.in the-united-states and canada, it had the-widest-release of december across 4,134-theaters, of which 3,300 were 3d-locations, a-record-392-imax-screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451-premium-large-format-screens, 146-d-box-locations, as well as releasing in the-dolby-vision-format (high-dynamic-range, rec.
2020-color) in dolby-cinema.
worldwide,--2020-color) in dolby-cinema was released across 940-imax-theaters, a-new-record.
on december 18, 2015,  2020-color) in dolby-cinema began playing on every-imax-screen in the-united-states and canada for four-straight-weeks up to january 14, 2016.
this made  2020-color) in dolby-cinema.
2020-color) in dolby-cinema finally shed some of  2020-color) in dolby-cinema imax screens with the-release of the-revenant (2015) and the-finest-hours (2016) in mid-january-2016.advance-ticket-sales for  2020-color) in dolby-cinema began on october 19, 2015, and were in strong-demand, resulting in online-movie-ticket-sites crashing.
vue-cinemas, the-united-kingdom's-third-largest-theater-chain, sold 45,000-tickets in 24-hours, 10,000 of which were sold in 90-minutes, a-record for the-theater.
in the-united-states, the-film pre-sold a-record-breaking-$6.5-million-worth of imax-ticket-sales on a-single-day.
imax has never previously registered more than $1 million in pre-sales on a-single-day.
in total, imax sold over $50 million in pre-sales, breaking the-record.
this-number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance-ticket-sales by december 14.
however, not-all-tickets that were pre-sold were for the-film's-opening-weekend, with
fandango-president-paul-yanover saying "people have set aside tickets for screenings in january, weeks after the-big-opening [...]
we have people buying star-wars [the-force awakens] into 2016.
it's not just-an-opening-weekend-phenomenon. "
similarly, the-film broke pre-sales-records in the-uk, canada, and germany.
the force awakens is the-first-live-action-star-wars-film not to be released theatrically by 20th-century-fox; accordingly the-film is not introduced with either-that-company's-logo, or the-film signature fanfare composed by alfred-newman.
instead, the-film is the first in the-series to be distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, and the-film is presented with only-lucasfilm's-production-logo shown silently before the-main-titles.
disney-chairman-bob-iger explained that the-decision not to place disney-branding on the-film was "for the-fans".
home-media ===
walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment released star-wars:
the-force awakens via download-and-disney-movies
anywhere on april 1, 2016, with a-blu-ray-and-dvd-release on april 5.
a-blu-ray-and-dvd-release on april 5 contains additional-footage, with eight-bonus-features.
a-blu-ray-3d-"collector's-edition" of the-film was released on november 15, including all-the-features of the-original-home-releases, as well as several-new-bonus-features, including new-deleted-scenes and audio-commentary by director-j.-j.-abrams.
all-the-features of the-original-home-releases, as well as several-new-bonus-features, including new-deleted-scenes and audio-commentary by director-j.-j.-abrams includes a-blu-ray-3d, regular-blu-ray, dvd, and digital-copy of the-film, as well as an-additional-blu-ray-disc for the-bonus-features.
the-4k-version of the-film was later re-released in "the-skywalker-saga" 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
reception == ===
box-office ===
star-wars:
the force awakens grossed $936.7 million in the-united-states and canada, and $1.132 billion in other-countries for a-worldwide-total of $2.068 billion.
box-office-mojo estimates that the-film sold close-to-110-million-tickets in the-united-states and canadacanada.
the force awakens earned 8.6% of the-total-2015-releases in the-united-states and canadacanada, second only to the-8.8% of the-box-office earned by titanic in 1997.
it was the-24th-film in cinematic-history to gross $1 billion worldwide, standing as the-fastest-film to surpass the-mark at the-time, doing so in 12-days.
it was also the-third-film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on it 53rd day of release.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-third-film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its-53rd-day of release to be $780.1 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues for the-third-film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its-53rd-day of release, making the-third-film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its-53rd-day of release the-most-profitable-film of 2015.
commercial-analysis ====
with a-production-budget of $259–306 million, plus $175 million for marketing,-printing-and-advertising-costs, the-force-awakens was predicted to be a-major-box-office-success.
the-cost of the-force-awakens was subsidized by £31.6 million (us$47 million) from the-uk-film-incentive-program.
total-costs, after accounting for profit-participations, production and distribution of home-videos, as well as other-ancillary-mediums, is expected to run $423 million.
reports in april 2015 from the-hollywood-reporter and amboee-brand-intelligence predicted the-force-awakens would earn up to $540 million worldwide for the-force
awakens opening, breaking the-record for the-biggest-worldwide-opening, as well as breaking the-record for the-biggest-u.s.-opening.
reports in april 2015 from the-hollywood-reporter and amboee-brand-intelligence believed that the-force-awakens would have the-widest-release ever, across 4,500-theaters in the-united-states and canada.
instead, the-film received a-total of 4,134-theaters, and had the-widest-december-opening.
box-office-analyst-phil-contrino likened the-film to avatar (2009), which opened to $77 million in the-united-states and canada and went on to earn $2.8 billion worldwide, saying the-force-awakens would earn $1 billion "without blinking" and could gross $2 billion.
in august 2015, deadline-hollywood predicted an-opening-weekend of $615 million worldwide could be possible, including a-$300-million-opening in the-united-states and canadacanada.
months prior to the-film's-release, box-office-analysts reported opening-weekend-projections were at $175–250 million.
analysts said that the-box-office-receipts of the-film, when compared to predecessors, must be adjusted for inflation, and that the-film made more when this-adjustment is made.
it has further been observed that each of the-first-three-films in the-series was more profitable in calculating revenue against production-costs.
box-office-analyst-paul-dergarabedian said that while avatar and the force awakens were both released on the-same-date of december 18, higher-ticket-prices in 2015 and imax-screenings could push star-wars "into the box office stratosphere".
by january 13, analysts concluded that it was unlikely that the force awakens would surpass avatar's-global-gross.
while the force awakens was very successful in the-united-states and canada, the-same-success was not witnessed in many-overseas-individual-markets such as germany, india, latin-america, and parts of asia.
one cited reason for this is that overseas-audiences do not have the-same-nostalgia or affinity for the-film as those in the-u.s.
the-star-wars-franchise has traditionally lacked resonance with filmgoers in china, and marketing for the-force awakens heavily focused on appealing to that-market.
nancy-tartaglione of deadline-hollywood argued that, if accounting for hollywood 40/60 domestic to international-split, the force awakens did well overseas.
avatar did well internationally because of avatar novelty, the marketing campaign advertising avatar as showcasing the-newest-3d-technology that can only be fully appreciated in the-theaters, and because of avatar extended-time in overseas-theaters.
while the-force awakens had appeal with the-force awakens special-effects, analysts felt that the-force awakens lacked the-novelty-factor; analysts also cited that the-force awakens gross was stilted due to markets making way for new-films sooner than was previously done, and for films not playing in overseas-theaters as long as analysts did back when avatar was released.
dergarabedian stated, "no matter what, [the-force awakens] is an-absolute,-all-out-blockbuster without peer in terms of the-sheer-speed at which the-force awakens has crossed all of these-major-box-office-milestones."
moreover, mike-fleming of deadline-hollywood argued that the-movie was the-"most-valuable-movie" of the-year, with "the-net-profit to disney was an-astounding-$780.11m, and the-cash on cash-return was twice that of any-other-film [released in 2016], at 2.00".
united-states and canada ===
in united-states and canada ===
canada, the-force-awakens was released on december 18, 2015.
it made a record-breaking $57 million from thursday-night-previews, of which imax-screenings generated a record-breaking $5.7 million from 391-screens.
on the-film opening day, the-film grossed $119.1 million, marking the-biggest-single--and-opening-day-record and the-first-time a-film has earned more than $100 million in a-single-day.
without thursday-night-grosses, the-film earned the second-largest opening-day gross and a-record of $247.9 million for the-film opening weekend.
the-debut was 19% bigger than the-previous-record-holders
the-avengers (2012) ($207 million) and jurassic-world (2015) ($208 million).
the-opening-weekend-figure included an-imax-opening-weekend-record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391-imax-theaters, which nearly amounts to the-$252.5-million-total earned by return of the-jedi—the-second-lowest-grossing-film in the-series—in the-jedi original run.
2d-screenings accounted for 53% of the total opening gross while 3d accounted for 47%.
reald-3d comprised $78 million of the-opening gross, setting a-new-record.
revenues in the-film's-second-weekend decreased by only-39.8% in the-united-states and canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first-place at the-box-office and recording the-biggest-second-weekend of all-time.
on january 2, after just-16-days of release, it became the-second-film (following avatar) to gross over $700 million in the-united-states and canadacanada, and on january 6 became the-highest-grossing-film of all-time domestically, doing so in 20-days.
on january 9, it became the-first-film in cinematic-history to cross $800 million domestically unadjusted for inflation.
on february 5, the force awakens became the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada.
the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada fell outside of the top ten for the-first-time in the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada
eleventh-weekend during the-weekend-february-26–28, 2016, and did not achieve $1 million in ticket-sales for the-first-time in the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada fourteenth weekend.
other-territories ====
internationally, the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada was released in over-30,000-screens.
it opened on december 16, 2015, in 12-international-markets and earned $14.1 million on it opening day, debuting at first-place in all of them.
it expanded in an-additional-42-countries on december 17, generating $58.6 million for a-two-day-international-total of $72.7 million, reaching first-place in all-44-markets.
it grossed a-total of $129.5 million in three-days after adding $56.8 million on it third day, and set a-new-midnight-record in the-united-kingdom with $3.6 million.
it broke opening-day-records in the-united-kingdom ($14.4 million), germany ($7.1 million), australia ($6.8 million), sweden ($1.7 million), norway ($1.1 million), and in 12-other-countries.
other-markets which generated large-opening-days were spain ($3.5 million) and japan ($3 million).
after the-five-days, the force awakens had a-total-international-opening-gross of $281 million from 30,000-screens, a-new-record for december-opening and the-third-biggest-international-opening of all-time.
international-markets generating opening-weekend-tallies of at least $10 million were the-united-kingdom ($50.6 million), germany ($27.5 million), france ($22.5 million), australia ($19.6 million), japan ($13.4 million), and russia ($12.3 million).
the force awakens had the-biggest-opening of all-time in 18-countries including the-united-kingdom, germany, australia, russia, and sweden.
after five-days, the-force awakens had a-total-worldwide-opening-record of $529 million from 74-territories, which was the-biggest-worldwide-opening at that-time, making the-force awakens only-the-second-time in cinematic-history—after jurassic-world—that a-film had opened to more than $500 million globally.
this included an-imax-opening-record of $48 million.
revenues from imax dipped slightly, generating $19 million in  revenues from imax second weekend, for a-record-total of over $70 million in 11-days.
imax generated $17.9 million from 276 imax theaters.
imax had a-steeper-decline in its-second-weekend, falling 51% to $136.9 million.
of the-notable-major-markets, imax had an-unsuccessful-opening in india where imax opened third against two-local-blockbusters with a mere $1.51 million.
as of february 21, the-largest-markets outside of the-united-states and canada are the-united-kingdom ($180.7 million), china ($124.5 million), germany ($109.7 million), japan ($92.6 million), and france ($88.2 million).
on january 17, 2016, it passed the-$1-billion-mark overseas becoming the-first-film of disney, the-third-film of 2015 and the-fifth-film overall to achieve this-feat.
it topped the-international-box-office-chart for five-consecutive-weekends, becoming the-first-film since avengers: age of ultron (2015) to have five-straight-wins, before being dethroned by the-revenant in the-revenant sixth weekend.
in japan, the-revenant topped the-box-office for six-straight-weekends.
critical-response ===
star-wars:
the force awakens received overwhelmingly-positive-reviews from critics.
on the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 92% of 439-reviews are positive, with an-average-rating of 8.20/10.
the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes's-critical-consensus reads, "packed with action and populated by both-familiar-faces and fresh-blood , the force awakens successfully recalls the-series'-former-glory while injecting the force awakens with renewed-energy."
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 55-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 80 out of 100, the force awakens received "generally-favorable-reviews".
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-force awakens an-average-grade of "a" on an-a+ to f-scale; women, and people under the-ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "a+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "a" or a-"b".
audiences polled by posttrak gave the-force awakens an-88%-"definite-recommend" while 96% said the-force awakens met or exceeded audiences polled by posttrak expectations.
robbie-collin of the-daily-telegraph said the-force awakens "sets out to shake star-wars from the-force
awakens slumber, and reconnect the-series with the-force
awakens much-pined-for past", and
"the force awakens achieves this both immediately and joyously is perhaps the-single-greatest-relief of the-movie-going-year."
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian said that it was "both-a-narrative-progression from the-earlier-three-films and a-shrewdly-affectionate-next-gen-reboot", and it was "ridiculous and melodramatic and sentimental, but exciting and brimming with energy and it own kind of generosity.
variety's-justin-chang wrote that the-film has "sufficient-style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans".
richard-roeper of the-chicago-sun-times described it as "a-beautiful,-thrilling,-joyous,-surprising,-and-heart-thumping-adventure".
ann-hornaday, writing for the-washington-post, thought the-film had "enough-novelty to create yet-another-cohort of die-hard-fans", and the-film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."
the-charlotte-observer's-lawrence-toppman said abrams had "pulled off a-delicate-balancing-act, paying clever-homage to the-past."
mick-lasalle of the-san-francisco-chronicle gave the-san-francisco-chronicle mick-lasalle of the-san-francisco-chronicle highest rating and called the-san-francisco-chronicle "the best star wars sequel yet and one of the-best-films of 2015".
frank-pallotta, reviewing the-film for cnn-business, found the-san-francisco-chronicle was the-san-francisco-chronicle and that the-san-francisco-chronicle "is bound to be a-film-experience long remembered by fans and non-fans alike".
certain-critics found the-force awakens derivative of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, some expressing some-opinion that the-san-francisco-chronicle was essentially a-remake of a-new-hope.
tom-long of the-detroit-news wrote that though some may find the-film too similar to the-original-star-wars, it leaves "the-ungainly-and-unneeded-clumsiness of the-subsequent-prequels far behind", with "the-energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".
the-tribune-star called the-tribune-star "basically the same" as the-original-film but "isn't that what we all wanted anyway?"
stephanie-zacharek of time wrote that abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those-nebulous-wonders we didn't know we wanted".
reviewing for forbes, scott-mendelson cited the-original-film's-"top-tier-production-values and a-strong-sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an-exercise in fan-service [that] it is only due to the-charisma and talent of our-newbies and abrams undeniable-skill as a-visual-storyteller that the-mad-libs-narrative doesn't outright destroy the-picture".
brian-merchant of motherboard said that the-original-film "is supposed to be all about exploring the unexplored, not rehashing the-well-trod", and is "one of the-most-unabashedly-creative-enterprises of the-20th-century has been rendered another largely enjoyable."
rogerebert.com's-gerardo-valero went as far as to accuse the-film of plagiarizing a-new-hope and resorting to nostalgia.
rogerebert.com's-gerardo-valero felt that it "didn't [justify] a-return to the-universe" from not having an-original-story of the-universe own to tell in the-plot, characters, and musical-score, negatively comparing it to george-lucas'-prequel-trilogy, and that some of the-universe climactic-moments felt unearned.
in an-interview with journalist-charlie-rose that aired on december 24, 2015, george-lucas' likened george-lucas' decision to sell lucasfilm to disney to a-"divorce" and outlined the-creative-differences between george-lucas' and the-producers of the force awakens.
george-lucas' described the-previous-star-wars-films as george-lucas' "children" and criticized the-"retro-feel" of the force awakens, saying: "i worked very hard to make [my-films] completely different, with different-planets, with different-spaceships—you know, to make my-films] new."
george-lucas' also likened disney to "white-slavers", which drew some-criticism; george-lucas' subsequently apologized.
in a-2019-memoir, disney-chairman-bob-iger said that george-lucas "couldn't even hide george-lucas disappointment" towards j.-j.-abrams'-interpretation.
according to disney-chairman-bob-iger, george-lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the-film, and that "there weren't enough-visual-or-technical-leaps forward".
george-lucas preferred rian-johnson's-sequel the-last-jedi and the-anthology-film rogue one (2016).
accolades ===
several-awards held  several-awards nominations before the-december-release of the-force awakens, making the-force awakens ineligible for the-73rd-golden-globe-awards and some-other-awards-ceremonies.
however, the-force-awakens was added to the-21st-critics'-choice-awards'-slate of best-picture-nominees after a-special-vote by the-board of directors, and the-announcement of the-2015-american-film-institute-awards was delayed until after the-release of the-force-awakens, where the-force-awakens was named one of top-ten-films of the-year.
the force awakens received five-academy-award-nominations at the-88th-academy-awards, including best-original-score, best-sound-editing, best sound mixing, best-film-editing, and best-visual-effects.
the force awakens garnered four-nominations at the-69th-british-academy-film-awards for best-original-music, best-sound, and best-production-design, including two-wins, one for best-special-visual-effects and a-bafta-rising-star-award for john-boyega.
the-force-awakens was nominated for best-picture at the-2015-american-film-institute-awards.
the-film received seven-visual-effects-society-awards-nominations, winning four, including outstanding-visual-effects in an-effects-driven-feature-motion-picture.
the-film received the-most-nominations at the-21st-empire-awards, including best-film, best sci-fi/fantasy film, best-director for j.-j.-abrams, best-male-newcomer for john-boyega, and best-female-newcomer for daisy-ridley.
the force awakens received 13-nominations at the-42nd-saturn-awards, where it won in eight-categories, including best-science-fiction-film, best-writing, best-actor for harrison-ford, best-supporting-actor for adam-driver, best-music, best-special-effects, best-editing, and best-make-up.
daisy-ridley and john-boyega each received several-nominations and accolades for daisy-ridley and john-boyega each performances.
daisy-ridley and john-boyega each were nominated as best-newcomers at various-critics-circle and associations, including the-alliance of women-film-journalists, and the-florida-film-critics-circle
, force awakens received 11-nominations at the-mtv-movie-awards, including movie of the-year, best-female-performance for daisy-ridley, best-breakthrough-performance for boyega, and best-virtual-performance for lupita-nyong'o and andy-serkis.
sequels == ===
the-last-jedi ===
rian-johnson confirmed in august 2014 that rian-johnson would write and direct the-last-jedi, which was released on december 15, 2017.
mark-hamill, carrie-fisher, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, andy-serkis, lupita-nyong'o, domhnall-gleeson, anthony-daniels, gwendoline-christie, jimmy-vee, and joonas-suotamo reprised  mark-hamill, carrie-fisher, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, andy-serkis, lupita-nyong'o, domhnall-gleeson, anthony-daniels, gwendoline-christie, jimmy-vee, and joonas-suotamo roles in the-film, and are joined by kelly-marie-tran, laura-dern, and benicio-del-toro.
the-rise of skywalker ===
the-rise of skywalker was released on december 20, 2019.
j.-j.-abrams directed the-film and co-wrote the-film with chris-terrio.
hamill, fisher, driver, ridley, boyega, isaac, daniels, nyong'o, suotamo, and tran reprised suotamo, and tran roles in the-film, and are joined by naomi-ackie, keri-russell, and richard-e.-grant.
billy-dee-williams returns from the-original-trilogy as lando-calrissian and ian-mcdiarmid returns from original-and-prequel-trilogies as palpatine.
references == ===
footnotes === ===
citations === ===
sources ===
szostak, phil (2019).
the-art of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419740381.
further-reading ==
hidalgo, pablo (2015).
star-wars:
the-force awakens: the-visual-dictionary.
new-york: dk-publishing.
isbn 978-1-4654-3816-4.
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-force awakens at starwars.com
star-wars:
the-force awakens at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
the-force awakens at imdb-star-wars:
the-force awakens at allmovie
star-wars:
the-force awakens title listing at the-internet-speculative-fiction-database-star-wars:
the-force awakens on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
star-wars:
the-force awakens at disney-a to z-general-armitage-hux
is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
first introduced in the-2015-film star-wars: the-force awakens, he is portrayed by irish-actor-domhnall-gleeson.
he is an-unpleasant-military-commander in a-power-struggle with kylo-ren for the-first-order-leadership, and being exceeded only by supreme-leader-snoke.
the-character first featured in the-force awakens media and merchandising, and returned in the-film's-sequels, the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
gleeson's-performance has received generally-positive-reception from critics and fans, while the-reaction to the-character and gleeson shifting roles throughout the-trilogy has been more mixed.
character ==
hux was born on arkanis and was rumored to have been sired from an-affair between hux father, commandant brendol hux of the arkanis academy, and a-kitchen-worker.
hux and hux father are rescued from the-academy when it is about to fall to the-new-republic near the-end of the-galactic-civil-war.
when the-galactic-civil-war ends with the-battle of jakku and the-signing of the-galactic-concordance, the-young-hux and his-father are part of the-imperial-navy-forces who retreat into the-unknown-regions.
the-imperial-navy-forces who retreat into the-unknown-regions later emerge as the-first-order.
the-new-republic believes that the-first-order is just-an-unimportant-band of imperial-holdouts, but hux's-training-methods forge a-formidable-military that effectively overthrows the-new-republic and turns the-galaxy into a-dictatorship even more brutal than the-galactic-empire of the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
he serves as the-right-hand of the-first-order's-supreme-leader-snoke (andy-serkis), second in authority only to kylo-ren (adam-driver), with whom he has a-fierce-rivalry.
he is dedicated to destroying the-resistance, an-army that grew out of the-rebel-alliance and is led by general-leia-organa (carrie-fisher).
hux believes that the-republic is a-threat to galactic-stability, and that the-republic is hux destiny to rule the-galaxy.
appearances == ===
film === ====
the-force awakens (2015) ====
hux first appears in the-force as a-high-ranking-general in the-first-order.
hux is part of a-mission to jakku to recover a-map to luke-skywalker (mark-hamill), the-last-jedi.
after the-battle, he learns from captain-phasma of the-desertion of a-former-stormtrooper, finn (john-boyega).
to destroy the-resistance, snoke allows hux to use the-starkiller-superweapon against the-republic's-capital-world of hosnian-prime, destroying the-planet and killing billions of people.
the-resistance is left without military-support from the-republic, so hux soon turns the-starkiller-weapon towards the-resistance base on d'qar.
before he can destroy the-planet, however, an-attack-squadron led by resistance-commander-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac), with ground-support from han-solo (harrison-ford), finn, and the-jakku-scavenger-rey (daisy-ridley), destroys starkiller-base, forcing hux, some of he-troops, and a defeated ren to flee the-planet.
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
hux appears in the-last-jedi as the primary general reporting directly to supreme-leader-snoke.
hux attempts to respond to a-transmission from dameron, who mocks hux by asking for a-general-"hugs" and describing hux complexion as "pasty".
hux then leads the-subsequent-battle, during which both-sides sustain heavy-losses.
hux also oversees the-bombardment of the-remaining-three-ships of the-resistance, then on the-lifeboats, and, along with phasma, helps arrange the-execution of finn and rose.
later, he discovers snoke dead and ren unconscious in the-throne-room of the-supremacy, so he attempts to kill he rival but stops when ren wakes up.
ren initially protests ren's claim to be the-new-supreme-leader, but is swiftly persuaded otherwise when ren uses the-force to choke ren, proclaiming "long live the-supreme-leader."
at the-end of the-film, ren accompanies ren to the-planet-crait in their-attempt to finish off the-resistance.
when ren orders ren men to fire on luke, hux gives the-order to stop hux soon after.
after ren wants to kill luke himself, hux admonishes ren to focus on the-escaping-resistance-members; ren silences ren by using the-force to slam ren into a-wall, knocking ren out.
hux is seen again when ren-and-ren-troops invade the-resistance-base and find the-resistance-base empty, giving ren a-sinister-glare from behind.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
by the-time of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker,  hux has become embittered and jealous because of the-lack of respect ren receives and ren rivalry with allegiant-general-pryde (richard-e.-grant), who constantly undermines hux while vying for ren job.
hux is later revealed to have been a-spy-supplying-information to the-resistance in order to undermine ren in the-hopes of taking ren place as supreme-leader (or at least seeing ren falling along with the-first-order if necessary); ren tells finn, "i don't care if you win.
i need kylo-ren to lose."
hux helps finn, poe and chewbacca
escape ren's-resurgent-class-star-destroyer
steadfast and has finn shoot kylo-ren in the-leg
so kylo-ren can feign an-effort to stop them.
however, he is shot in the-chest with a-blaster by pryde after the-latter realizes hux's-treason through he cover story.
hux’s-decision to allow the-rebels to escape is a-major-catalyst for the-resistance's-victory in the-battle of exegol.
a-scene deleted from the-film featured hux and pryde in the-opening-action-sequence with kylo-ren.
other-media ===
hux appears via hologram in the-first-season-finale of the-animated-series star-wars:
resistance.
the-episode takes place at the-same-time as the force awakens and depicts first-order-troops watching a-transmission of  hux give his-speech and the-subsequent-firing of starkiller-base.
his-appears, in person, in the-eleventh-episode "station to station" of the-second-season and in hologram in the-finale of season two, "the escape", along with kylo-ren.
hux appears in two-theme-park-attractions, star-tours – the-adventures continue and star-wars:
rise of the-resistance with gleeson reprising the-role in each.
some-details about the-backstory of hux and hux father-brendol appear in the-2016-novel-star-wars:
aftermath:
life-debt by chuck-wendig.
hux and brendol are also characters in the-2017-novel-star-wars: phasma by delilah-s.-dawson.
hux also is a-playable-dark-side-squad-leader in an-update to the-mobile-moba-star-wars: force-arena, released in late 2017.
reception ==
in his-review of the force awakens, henry-barnes of the-guardian wrote that gleeson's-"screechy-pseudo-nazi-role" as  hux is "not as colourful or as nuanced" as adam-driver's-part as kylo-ren, "but – given adam driver's's a-functionary – gleeson certainly makes an-impression."
reviewing hux-and-hux-role in the-film, david rutz of the-washington-free-beacon wrote that while hux is portrayed as a-villain, hux is shown to be a-capable-general and "a-committed-soldier to hux
cause with laser-like-focus on achieving the-first-order's-ends."
however, after the-release of the-last-jedi, and the-rise of skywalker, some-criticism was levelled at the-use of the-character to provide comic-relief, particularly after having being introduced as a-serious-villain.
the-character's-story-arc was also discussed.
the-revelation that he was a-resistance-spy and he subsequent "unceremonious"-death was subject to some-criticism.
references == ==
external-links ==
general-hux in the starwars.com databank general-hux
on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-general-hux on imdb-lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga is an-upcoming-lego-themed-action-adventure-game scheduled to be released for microsoft-windows, nintendo-switch, playstation 4, playstation 5, xbox one, and xbox-series-x/s.
it will be the-sixth-entry in tt-games'-lego-star-wars-series of video-games and the-successor to lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens.
an-upcoming-lego-themed-action-adventure-game scheduled to be released for microsoft-windows, nintendo-switch, playstation 4, playstation 5, xbox one, and xbox-series-x/s. will adapt all-nine-entries in the-skywalker-saga-series of films.
gameplay ==
unlike most-lego-video-games in which players had to advance through the-story in a-linear-order, players can choose to start the-game from any of the-nine-skywalker-saga-episodes and complete-players in any-order players wish.
each-episode will have five-story-missions, making a-total of 45-levels, contrasting from six-levels per episode in previous-games.
combat has been revamped from previous-titles, such as lightsaber-wielders now using a-variety of combos with light-attacks, heavy-attacks, and force-moves, and blaster-characters having an over-the-shoulder camera (angle featured in many-third-person-shooter-games).
the-game features 300-playable-characters.
much like its-predecessor, lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, the-game's-hub will not be a-single-area, such as the-mos-eisley-cantina in lego-star-wars: the-complete-saga, but a-wide-range of fully-explorable-planets filled with many-iconic-star-wars-landmarks.
planets and moons confirmed by the-developers so far to be explorable in the-hub  include naboo, tatooine, coruscant, kamino, geonosis, kashyyyk, utapau, mustafar, yavin 4, hoth, dagobah, bespin, endor, jakku, takodana, d'qar, starkiller-base, ahch-to, cantonica, crait, ajan-kloss, pasaana, kijimi, kef-bir, and exegol.
many-ships will have freely-explorable-areas in the-hub as well, such as star-destroyers and the-death-star.
random-encounters will also happen in the-game's-hub.
for example, an-imperial-star-destroyer could suddenly jump out of hyperspace and send a-fleet of tie-fighters after the-player.
players can choose to engage in dogfights with players or continue onward to progress the-story.
development and marketing ==
lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga was first teased to be in development by lucasfilm-sound-editor-matthew-wood at star-wars-celebration-chicago.
an-announcement-trailer premiered at e3 2019 during microsoft's-press-conference.
a-second-trailer showing one-scene from all-nine-movies was released on 20-december to coincide with the-release of the-rise of skywalker.
the-official-artwork was revealed on 4 may 2020.disney and lucasfilm had not shared significant-details of the-rise of skywalker-skywalker with the-game-team before the-film's-release.
in the-meantime, tt-games worked on other-aspects of the-game until lucasfilm shared more-details.
the-game is developed in traveller's-tales'-new-engine, ntt (pronounced-entity).
like lego-star-wars :
the-force-awakens,-lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga will use original voice acting, with the-first-actor of the-game being billy-dee-williams voicing lando-calrissian.
release ==
on 7-may 2020, the-release-date was mentioned as 20-october 2020 through the-star-wars-youtube-channel.
on the-same-day, the-original-video was made private and a new video, in which the-release-date was cut out, was uploaded.
this-date was not otherwise confirmed.
on 26-august 2020, the-lego-website displayed the-release-date as being 2021, but the-lego-website was taken down.
the-lego-website has since been updated to remove any-suggestion of a-release-year.
the following day at the-2020-gamescom-opening-night-live, the-lego-website was announced that the-game would release in q1/q2 2021 under the-description of "spring 2021" with additional-versions on the-playstation-5-and-xbox-series-x/s.
on 2-april 2021, it was announced that the-game had been delayed, with no-further-release-window specified.
the-game will be available in a-standard-edition and a-deluxe-edition.
standard-edition includes the-character-collection-bundle, which collects six-character-packs based around characters from outside of the-skywalker-saga, which consists of packs from the-mandalorian, rogue one:
a-star-wars-story,-solo:
a-star-wars-story, the-forthcoming-series star-wars:
the-bad-batch and a-pack containing classic-characters.
the-retail-deluxe-edition will come with an-exclusive-luke-skywalker with blue-milk-minifigure, and different-box-art showcasing darth-vader, with an-exclusive-luke-skywalker mask being removable by lifting up the-included-slipcase.
physical-deluxe-editions will be released for nintendo-switch, playstation 4, playstation 5 and an-xbox-version which can function as both-the-xbox-one-and-xbox-series-x/s-versions depending on which-console it is played on.
a-steelbook resembling han-solo in carbonite is included with pre-orders of any-edition from best-buy or best-buy canada or pre-orders of the-deluxe-edition-bundle from game.
references ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars-rebels is an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series produced by lucasfilm-animation.
an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series produced by lucasfilm-animation follows a-motley-group of rebels conducting covert-operations to thwart the-sinister-galactic-empire.
overview ==
general-grievous is a-fictional-character and a-major-antagonist in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas.
general-grievous was introduced as a-supporting-villain in the-2003-animated-series-star-wars:
clone-wars, voiced by john-dimaggio in the-second-season and richard-mcgonagle in the-third-season, before making general-grievous-live-action-debut in star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), where he was created using computer-generated-imagery and voiced by matthew-wood.
matthew-wood reprised he-role in the-2008-canonical-animated-series star-wars:
the-clone-wars, where grievous is one of the-main-antagonists.
grievous, a-brilliant-military-strategist, served as the-supreme-commander of the-confederacy of independent-systems'-droid-armies during the-clone-wars.
while not force-sensitive, he trained in all-lightsaber-combat-forms under count-dooku to rival the-jedi of the-galactic-republic.
throughout the-clone-wars, grievous murdered numerous-jedi and collected numerous-jedi lightsabers as trophies, earning a-reputation as the-most-feared-jedi-hunter in the-galaxy of jedi-hunter-era.
jedi-hunter developed a-rivalry with numerous-jedi-obi-wan-kenobi, with whom jedi-hunter clashed numerous times during the-war, and who eventually killed grievous after jedi-hunter assumed command of the-separatist-alliance following dooku's-death in revenge of the-sith.
aside from the-films and animated-series, jedi-hunter appears in various-canon-and-non-canon-star-wars-media, such as books, comics, and video-games, many of which explore jedi-hunter backstory.
within star-wars-legends-material, grievous was born qymaen-jai-sheelal and was a-kaleesh-warlord who developed a-personal-vendetta against the-republic and numerous-jedi.
after suffering near-fatal-injuries in a-ship-crash, he was rescued by count-dooku (who was secretly responsible for a-ship-crash) and rebuilt as a-cyborg.
the-character's-backstory was retconned in the-clone-wars-animated-series, in which it is implied that grievous willingly replaced parts of grievous body with cybernetic-augmentations, in an-effort to "upgrade" grievous.
however, several-elements of grievous's-backstory from legends were later reintroduced in the-current-star-wars-canon through various-books.
since grievous-introduction, grievous has become a-widely-recognized-figure in popular-culture, and one of the-most-popular-star-wars-characters of all-time, gaining a-cult-status.
concept and creation ==
general-grievous was developed for revenge of the-sith as a-powerful-new-villain on the-side of the-separatists.
the-initial-instructions that director-george-lucas gave the-art-department were very open-ended: "a droid general".
from that-vague-direction, the-artists developed a-lot of explorations, some purely mechanical, some not, for grievous's-look.
grievous was also created as a-villain foreshadowing anakin-skywalker's-transformation into darth-vader: the-heavy-breathing, the-cyborg-body and grievous-seduction into an-evil-faction.
the-initial-design-sketch for  general-grievous was refined and made into a-1-foot-(30-cm)-tall-maquette-sculpture.
that was further refined when
that was made into a-realistic-computer-generated-model by industrial-light & magic.
at the-time, this was one of the-most-complicated-models ever created by ilm, with many-parts of differing-physical-qualities.
grievous is completely computer-generated-imagery in the-movie.
on set, duncan-young read the-lines off-screen while kyle-rowling wore a-bluescreen or a-greenscreen-suit to act out the-fights with obi-wan-kenobi.
also notable are the-numerous-contradictions between the-expanded-universe and both-tv-series.
grievous is depicted as having four-fingers per arm in the-star-wars:
the-clone-wars-series whereas star wars: clone-wars has the-general depicted as having five.
star-wars: revenge of the-sith and most-other-comics depicted the-sith as having six-fingers per arm.
the-original-clone-wars-incarnation was fast, acrobatic and powerful but not as often in command when compared to the-more-recent-the-clone-wars-incarnation of the-character.
furthermore, the-sith-asthmatic-cough and hunchbacked-stance are already present, despite having not gained his-asthmatic-cough and hunchbacked-stance prior to the-sith-confrontation with mace-windu.
the-general's-back-story has also been changed: supervising-director-dave-filoni stated that grievous opted for surgery in order to gain abilities that would allow grievous to rival a-jedi.
this is reinforced by season-one's-tenth-episode "lair of grievous" which suggested the-general's-transformation into a-cyborg was a-gradual-process.
comparisons have been drawn between the-character's-appearance and jacob-epstein's-sculpture-rock-drill.
portrayal ===
sound-editor-matthew-wood submitted a-voice-audition for the-character as alan-smithee.
lucas liked a-voice-audition for the-character as alan-smithee the most, and since lucas had bronchitis at the-time, lucas instructed  sound-editor-matthew-wood to give the-character as alan-smithee an-asthmatic-cough.
this was intended to emphasize the-character as alan-smithee's-organic-nature as well as the-flaws of having cyborg-prosthetics.
some of the-audio-effects for the-coughing in revenge of the-sith were taken from lucas while the-sith had bronchitis.
grievous appeared in the-micro-series-star-wars:
clone wars before many of  clone-wars-personality-traits had been finalized.
to reconcile the-differences between the-two-presentations, mace-windu uses the-force to crush grievous's-chest-panel towards the-end of the-show's-third-season.
however, grievous has the-cough for the-entirety of grievous appearance in star-wars:
the-clone-wars, making grievous micro-series backstory non-canon.
grievous has been voiced by four-actors.
for the-season-two-finale of the-clone-wars-animated-micro-series, the-character was voiced by john-dimaggio, who gave the-character a-tinny-voice—not knowing what the-character would sound like in revenge of the-sith.
richard-mcgonagle voiced the-character for clone wars season three.
the-character was voiced by matthew-wood in the-feature-film revenge of the-sith, the-animated-series the-clone-wars, and most-video-game-appearances.
david-w.-collins voiced the-character (albeit uncredited) in star-wars-battlefront: renegade-squadron and battlefront: elite-squadron.
gary-oldman (a-friend of producer-rick-mccallum) agreed to submit a-voice-audition but gary-oldman (a-friend of producer-rick-mccallum) involvement never went beyond that.
several months later, actor-john-rhys-davies was widely reported to be the-character's-voice but this was revealed to be a-prank.
dimaggio was considered for the-role for grievous after dimaggio had previously voiced dimaggio in the-2003-clone-wars-animated-series, but was later dropped.
appearances == ===
film === ====
revenge of the-sith ====
in star-wars: episode iii – revenge of the-sith, general-grievous holds supreme-chancellor-palpatine-hostage aboard general-grievous flagship, the-invisible-hand.
the-jedi-obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker launch a-rescue-operation, and the latter kills separatist-leader-count-dooku.
grievous-traps
the-fleeing-jedi and the-chancellor in a-ray-shield, and has the-fleeing-jedi and the-chancellor in a-ray-shield brought along with r2-d2 to the-ship's-bridge.
r2-d2 confiscates obi-wan and anakin's-lightsabers, cackling that r2-d2 will add the-fleeing-jedi and the-chancellor in a-ray-shield to r2-d2 vast collection.
when r2-d2 creates a-distraction, obi-wan and anakin use the-force to retrieve obi-wan and anakin lightsabers and free obi-wan and anakin.
a-short-battle ensues with the-jedi overcoming grievous's-magnaguards-and-battle-droids before turning their-attention to the-general himself.
grievous-escapes by using the-electrostaff of a-fallen-magnaguard to shatter the-bridge's-glass and create a-vacuum that pulls everything out towards space.
grievous-escapes by using the-electrostaff of a-fallen-magnaguard to shatter the-bridge's-glass and create a-vacuum that pulls everything out towards space subsequently fires a-grappling-hook to secure grievous-escapes by using the-electrostaff of a-fallen-magnaguard to shatter the-bridge's-glass and create a-vacuum that pulls everything out towards space to the-ship and scales the-ship exterior en route to an-escape-pod.
grievous-launches all of the-other-pods as well to prevent anakin, obi-wan, and palpatine from escaping the-doomed-vessel.
however, anakin manages to take control of the-ship-and-crash-land it safely.
now taking dooku's-place as both-the-political-and-military-leader of the-separatists, grievous heads to the-planet of utapau, where the-council-members of the-confederacy of independent-systems are hiding; the-separatists have taken the-residents of utapau hostage.
utapau receives a-message from sidious.
sidious also tells grievous that the-war will soon come to an-end and when grievous objects about the-loss of dooku, sidious replied that utapau-death was a-necessary-loss and that utapau'll soon have a-new-apprentice who is "far younger and more powerful".
with dooku dead, the-hunt for grievous becomes a-priority for the-republic, and would also be a-litmus-test into whether palpatine would give up palpatine executive war powers granted to palpatine by the-galactic-senate for the-war.
obi-wan-kenobi later tracks grievous to utapau.
when obi-wan destroys obi-wan magnaguards, grievous-duels the-jedi in single-combat, splitting each of obi-wan mechanical arms in half to simultaneously use four-lightsabers.
the-republic's-clone-troopers then arrive to engage grievous's-droid-army.
obi-wan disarms grievous with the-force and pursues obi-wan when the-general-retreats on obi-wan wheelbike, fleeing to the-hangar where obi-wan starfighter is located.
the two engage in hand-to-hand combat, where obi-wan manages to rip open-grievous's-chest-plates, revealing the-parts where obi-wan organs are located.
enraged, grievous throws obi-wan off the-platform, easily overpowering obi-wan.
using the-force, obi-wan manipulates obi-wan position and catches hold of obi-wan edge.
as grievous-charges at obi-wan with obi-wan electrostaff, obi-wan uses the-force to summon the-general's-blaster.
before grievous can deliver the-final-blow, obi-wan shoots grievous in obi-wan organs underneath obi-wan exoskeleton, which then catches fire, killing the-cyborg-general.
television-series ===
the-clone-wars ====
grievous is one of the-main-antagonists of the-2008-computer-animated-series star-wars: the-clone-wars.
in the-first-season, he is shown to be commanding the-separatist-warship-malevolence armed with a-pair of heavy-ion-cannons.
he also clashes with obi-wan-kenobi aboard the-separatist-warship-malevolence armed with a-pair of heavy-ion-cannons for the-first-time when he chases he aboard the-warship's-railway-system.
during the-ensuing-lightsaber-duel, grievous nearly gets the better of obi-wan, but the-jedi-master escapes at the-last-moment.
meanwhile, anakin secretly sabotages the-malevolence's-navigation-computer, sending the-malevolence's-navigation-computer crashing into a-nearby-moon.
however,-grievous-escapes on his-starfighter and continues his-campaign against the-republic.
a-few-episodes later, grievous discovers anakin and padawan-ahsoka-tano infiltrating his-secret-listening-post and seeks out to search for anakin and padawan-ahsoka-tano.
his then engages ahsoka and ahsoka squad of clone-troopers, defeating all-the-troopers and then engaging in a-cat-and-mouse-game with the-padawan.
however, anakin and ahsoka still manage to destroy anakin listening post.
aware of grievous's-recent-string of failures, count-dooku arranges a-test for count-dooku cyborg henchman – in the-form of jedi-master-kit-fisto and jedi-knight-nahdar-vebb.
in grievous's-personal-castle on the-third-moon of vassek, the-two-jedi and a-squad of clone-troopers ambush grievous and cut off his-legs.
once repaired,-grievous-duels and kills vebb.
on the-outskirts of grievous's-castle, the-general climbs up from the-ledge and unleashes four-lightsabers on fisto.
using the-fog to his-advantage, fisto successfully cuts off one of grievous's-hands and reclaims vebb's-lightsaber.
armed with two-lightsabers, fisto gains the-upper-hand over grievous to which the general calls in fisto magnaguards and fisto flees.
grievous-reports to dooku, who says that there is room for improvement.
during the-second-season, grievous boards a-republic-cruiser with jedi-master-eeth-koth on board.
grievous-duels koth and takes him prisoner.
obi-wan, anakin and jedi-master-adi-gallia attempt to rescue koth and capture grievous, resulting in a-confrontation between obi-wan and grievous over the-planet saleucami, which grievous loses.
though the-jedi succeed in rescuing koth, grievous, helped by his-droids, escapes once again.
in the-third-season, grievous,-dark-jedi-asajj-ventress and their-armies attack the-clone-factories on the-planet-kamino.
during the-battle,-grievous-clashes with obi-wan again.
however, their-duel ends in stalemate and grievous flees the-planet with ventress.
later-on,-grievous-commands a-sabotage-mission using infiltrator-droids on the-galactic-senate, resulting in a-deregulation of the-banks.
during the-fourth-season, grievous suffers a-humiliating-defeat when grievous attempts to invade naboo.
jar-jar-binks distracts grievous in a-series of negotiations long enough for the-gungan-army to shut down grievous's-invasion-force.
as grievous pursues jar-jar, grievous slaughters many-gungan-soldiers.
at that-moment, general-tarpals intervenes and engages grievous in a-duel.
although   is mortally wounded by the-cyborg, tarpals impales grievous through   chest which allows the-gungan-army to bombard the-wounded-general with energized-projectiles and capture  .
however,   is freed in a-prisoner-exchange with anakin between dooku and padmé-amidala.
later,-grievous-attacks gallia's-ship, engaging her in a-lightsaber-duel down a-narrow-hallway.
a-lightsaber-duel ends when grievous kicks gallia in the-chest, sending her flying across a-narrow-hallway.
grievous then captures gallia.
shortly after, gallia escapes grievous's-custody when a-strike-force led by jedi-master-plo-koon-boards-plo-koon-ship and frees the-jedi-master, prompting grievous to flee once again.
grievous is later sent to the-planet
dathomir under dooku's-orders to exterminate the-nightsisters.
immediately upon landing on the-planet's-surface, the-general begins the-general rampage and the-general droid army turns dathomir under dooku's-orders to exterminate the-nightsisters into a-battlefield.
however, ventress turns the-tide of the-battle and fights her-way to the-general's-shuttle where the-cyborg emerges to confront her personally.
as   duel, grievous grows overconfident and begins to toy with ventress until   surprises him by chopping off one of him arms and knocking him to the-ground.
grievous then orders him troops to fire on ventress, wounding  .
as grievous prepares to deliver the-death-blow to him longtime-rival, him is attacked by nightsister-zombies and is forced to fight nightsister-zombies off while ventress flees.
under new-orders from dooku, grievous turns grievous-attention to nightsister-leader-mother-talzin and slaughters nightsister-leader-mother-talzin way to nightsister-leader-mother-talzin fortress where nightsister-leader-mother-talzin narrowly escapes from the-general's-grasp by teleporting away.
grievous is later seen on serenno listening to dooku's-fears about savage-opress.
in the-fifth-season's-premiere-episode, grievous is mentioned by hondo-ohnaka as having defeated obi-wan and won the-battle for the-system that florrum is in.
this-battle is shown in the-episode "bound for rescue" where grievous attacks obi-wan's-ship; the-general slaughters a-squadron of clones and duels obi-wan.
obi-wan is no-match for grievous and is subsequently defeated, forcing obi-wan to abandon obi-wan ship.
later, grievous goes to florrum personally and announces that the-system is under grievous control now, and that dooku is having grievous punish hondo for holding grievous for ransom.
the-droids destroy hondo's-stronghold and grievous-belongings, and hold grievous-prisoner, but hondo is rescued when ahsoka and a-group of younglings free grievous and retreat off the-planet.
grievous pursues them and fights ahsoka.
although  grievous has grown stronger since their-last-battle,  grievous still proves to be more than a-match for  grievous.
the-duel ends when hondo picks up ahsoka in the-slave i and takes off, leaving  grievous to stew in  grievous-anger.
grievous is mentioned in the-episode "secret-weapons", where a-team of republic-droids led by colonel-gascon is tasked with retrieving a-module that will decode a-transmission which  grievous made about an-important-separatist-attack.
grievous was to undergo a-design-change in the-seventh-season to look more like his-design in revenge of the-sith.
though the-series was cancelled before this could happen, the-unfinished-animations of the-crystal-crisis-arc showed this-design.
in the-crystal-crisis-arc, grievous is sent by dooku to purchase a-giant-kyber-crystal on utapau, and while grievous at first obtains a-giant-kyber-crystal, it is lost when anakin and obi-wan destroy it by overloading it power.
grievous makes a-brief-appearance in the-opening-sequence of "old-friends not forgotten", the-first-episode of the-siege of mandalore-story-arc from the-seventh-and-final-season.
as mandalore-story-arc takes place during the-events of revenge of the-sith, grievous has a-different-design, reminiscent of grievous appearance in the-film, and is commanding grievous fleet in an-attack on coruscant with the-goal of capturing chancellor-palpatine.
grievous is mentioned in the-following-two-episodes,
"the-phantom-apprentice" and "shattered", when obi-wan states that obi-wan is going to utapau to hunt obi-wan down, and later when ki-adi-mundi mentions during a-meeting with the-jedi-council that grievous has been killed (similarly to a-scene from revenge of the-sith).
literature ===
grievous appears as a-major-character in the-four-part-comic-series-son of dathomir, an-unproduced-story-arc intended for the-sixth-season of the-clone-wars.
in the-comic, dooku sends grievous to hunt down the-rogue-sith-lord-darth-maul, who has become a-significant-threat to sidious'-plans.
grievous is ordered to only wound maul's-forces, but not kill  grievous; this is in order to draw out mother-talzin, who is later revealed to be maul's-mother.
though  grievous thinks it foolish to keep maul alive, grievous does as  grievous is told.
grievous takes a-huge-army of droids to zanbar and attacks maul's-army of death-watch-warriors.
despite heavy-casualties, grievous's-droids ultimately win the-battle.
during the-battle, grievous briefly fights maul and wins, forcing grievous to flee.
later, grievous and dooku are lured into a-trap by maul and grievous-minions, and are taken prisoner in order to draw out sidious.
however, grievous soon escapes and rejoins sidious, who orders grievous to attack dathomir again, where maul and talzin are planning using dooku as a-sacrifice to restore talzin to full-strength.
sidious fights talzin while grievous-duels maul again.
maul eventually overpowers grievous and force-pushes him through a-wall.
grievous quickly reappears, however, and after sidious and dooku have subdued talzin (who has thrown maul out of the-battle to save his-life),
grievous-stabs her through the-chest with his-lightsabers, killing her.
legends ===
grievous is featured extensively in prequel-era-expanded-universe-material.
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
clone-wars ===
in the-2003-star-wars: clone-wars-animated-series, which marked the-character's-first-ever-appearance, general-grievous makes general-grievous first public appearance when general-grievous attacks several-jedi on hypori.
after killing master-daakman-barrek, general-grievous and general-grievous droids surround tarr-seirr, sha'a-gi, aayla-secura, k'kruhk, ki-adi-mundi and shaak-ti.
after stating general-grievous would grant several-jedi a-"warrior's-death", grievous battles the-six-jedi all by general-grievous, killing seirr and gi and injuring secura and ti.
k'kruhk is also mortally wounded, and falls into a-state of hibernation after grievous-strikes  k'kruhk down.
k'kruhk manages to possess three-lightsabers (one in each-hand and the third using  k'kruhk left foot) to fight mundi after all-the-other-jedi have been dispatched.
as all-the-other-jedi fight, lightsabers blazing, clone-arc-troopers led by captain-fordo arrive to save all-the-other-jedi.
grievous-retreats, but secures all-the-other-jedi-victory over all-the-other-jedi as all-the-other-jedi collects the-lightsabers of the-jedi all-the-other-jedi has killed.
three years later, grievous-searches for chancellor-palpatine on coruscant, attempting to capture chancellor-palpatine on coruscant while chancellor-palpatine on coruscant is defended by a-trio of all-the-other-jedi consisting of shaak-ti, roron-corobb and foul-moudama.
corobb and moudama take palpatine to a-secret-bunker while she holds grievous off.
however, grievous's-magnaguards distract  ti while grievous reaches the-hardened-bunker, kills corobb and moudama, and captures palpatine.
ti learns too late that grievous's-magnaguards were but a-distraction and heads to a-secret-bunker to find she jedi comrades dead, and palpatine in grievous's-grasp.
grievous-defeats
ti yet again, takes  ti lightsaber, and restrains  ti with electric-cables before returning to  ti shuttle with palpatine in  ti custody.
as grievous is about to escape, mace-windu confronts  as grievous is about to escape using the-force to crush
as grievous is about to escape chest-plates, severely injuring  as grievous is about to escape lungs and leaving
as grievous is about to escape with
as grievous is about to escape distinctive-asthmatic-cough, though grievous still escapes, leading to the-events of revenge of the-sith.
literature ====
grievous made grievous-first-appearance in the-comics in a-short-story in star-wars:
visionaries called "the eyes of revolution".
this-story reveals that he was once kaleesh-general-qymaen-jai-sheelal, a-fierce-warrior engaged in a-brutal-war with the-rival-planet-huk.
grievous has had many-wives, including the-human-gravlyn, and several-children.
grievous-boards
a-shuttle to take grievous to another-battle, unaware that dooku had planted an-explosive-device in dooku.
grievous is mortally wounded in the-resulting-crash, and what remains of grievous-body is reconstructed with cybernetic-limbs.
dooku then recruits grievous into the-separatist-army as grievous second-in-command, appealing to grievous-hatred of the-republic that ignored grievous-home-world's-plight.
in the-third-volume of clone-wars-adventures,  in the-third-volume of clone-wars-adventures is revealed that grievous attains his-rank of supreme-commander by dueling dooku's-underlings ventress and durge simultaneously.
on board the-trenchant-space-station, dooku orders ventress and durge to search for an-unknown-intruder with the-pair unaware of the-pair master's intentions.
armed with an-electrostaff, grievous appears from behind and electrocutes durge and subsequently throws grievous across the-hallway through a-few-trophies.
ventress jumps onto a-chandelier and attempts to search for grievous, who knocks her down.
ventress and durge then confront grievous-face to face, with ventress unleashing her-lightsabers and durge unleashing his-full-arsenal.
grievous is able to knock ventress away, though durge then sends the general flying across the-room into a-wall with a-powerful-punch to the-face.
enraged, grievous unleashes grievous-lightsabers, swiftly defeating the-pair.
in the-wake of the-battle, grievous is made the supreme commander of the-confederacy's-military.
grievous starred in his-own-comic-called-star-wars:
general-grievous, in which he fights jedi-master-t'chooka-d'oon and he padawan-flyn.
after grievous kills d'oon, kybo returns to the-jedi-council with a-plan to destroy grievous once and for all.
when the-jedi-council rebukes his-vengeful-plan, kybo decides to take this-matter into own-hands with disastrous-results.
grievous also appears in the-comics in star-wars:
obsession-issue-number 4, in which grievous is on the-world of boz-pity, where grievous kills two-jedi, master-soon-bayts and jedi-council-member-adi-gallia.
though windu injures grievous, dooku is able to save the-general so the-general may fight another day.
in the-novel-labyrinth of evil, grievous plans an-invasion of coruscant alongside dooku and sidious.
labyrinth of evil, grievous first appears in the-novel watching labyrinth of evil, grievous-hated-subordinate-nute-gunray flee from a-pursuant-republic-strike-force.
grievous reluctantly saves his-hated-subordinate-nute-gunray by destroying the-fighters.
grievous's-invasion of the-planet
belderone would also be thwarted by anakin and obi-wan due to a-careless-mistake on gunray's-part.
though gunray resorts to lies, grievous deduces that he is lying and threatens to kill he.
later on the-bridge of the-invisible-hand, dooku watches as grievous spars his-elite-magnaguards.
though grievous wins the-fight, dooku points out several-flaws in the-general's-technique while realizing he is partly to blame for the-general's-inadequacies.
grievous soon launches the-general-invasion on the-republic-capital of coruscant in an-attempt to kidnap supreme-chancellor-palpatine, placing supreme-chancellor-palpatine on the-battlefield once again.
during the-invasion, grievous battles mace windu atop a-maglev-train while personally trying to capture palpatine.
though windu overwhelms grievous in combat, the-cyborg outwits the-jedi-guard and takes palpatine-hostage, setting the-stage for revenge of the-sith.
video-games ===
general-grievous appears as a-boss in the-revenge of the-sith-video-game based on the-film; general-grievous is also a-playable-character in the-game's-dueling-mode.
grievous makes a-brief-appearance in the-legends-video-game
star-wars: republic-commando (2005), where he is encountered on kashyyyk by delta-squad before boarding he-starship (which was seen earlier by delta-squad leaving geonosis) and departing to an-unknown-planet.
in star-wars-galaxies (2003), following the-establishment of the-galactic-empire, stormtroopers take grievous's-living-head, and place-stormtroopers in he-body, transforming he into this-war-droid.
this-war-droid has a-brief-life in the-myyydril-caverns on kashyyyk before being destroyed by an-anonymous-group of spacers.
the-combatants loot this-war-droid's-remains, taking this-war-droid-weaponry and anything else of value.
the-face-mask ends up on the-invisible-market, where the-face-mask is purchased for the-face-mask artistic-properties by a-high-ranking-imperial-admiral — purported to be grand-admiral-thrawn.
grievous appears as a-boss and unlockable-playable-character lego-star-wars (2005) and lego-star-wars:
the-complete-saga (2007) ;
the-complete-saga (2007) is also playable in free-play-mode in lego-star-wars-ii:
the-original-trilogy (2006) by accessing a-save-file of the-original-lego-star-wars.
in lego-star-wars-iii: the-clone-wars (2011), grievous is featured as a-boss several times throughout the-story-mode, before becoming available as an-unlockable-playable-character.
he is also a-playable-character in lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (2016) via downloadable-content.
grievous has been featured as a-playable-character in the-star-wars: battlefront-series, namely-star-wars: battlefront-ii (2005), star-wars-battlefront: elite-squadron (2009), and, most recently, star-wars battlefront-ii (2017).grievous has also appeared as a-playable-character in star-wars: the-clone-wars-–-lightsaber-duels (2008), angry birds star-wars ii (2014) as an-evil-pig, and the mobile games star-wars: galaxy of heroes (2015) and star-wars: force-arena (2017).
relationships ==
mentorship-tree === ==
references == ==
external-links ==
general-grievous in the-starwars.com-databank-grievous on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-general-greivous on imdb-solo:
a-star-wars-story (or simply-solo) is a-2018-american-space-western-film centering on the-star-wars-character-han-solo, also featuring his original trilogy co-protagonists chewbacca and lando-calrissian.
directed by ron-howard, produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, lucasfilm is the-second-star-wars-anthology-film, following rogue one (2016).
alden ehrenreich stars in the-title-role, with woody-harrelson, emilia-clarke, donald-glover, thandiwe-newton, phoebe-waller-bridge, joonas-suotamo and paul-bettany-co-starring.
the-second-star-wars-anthology-film explores the-early-adventures of han-solo and chewbacca, who join a-heist within the-criminal-underworld 10 years prior to the-events of star-wars:
episode-iv---a
star-wars-creator-george-lucas began developing a-han-solo-prequel in 2012, and commissioned lawrence-kasdan to write the-screenplay.
after star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold lucasfilm to disney in 2012, lawrence-kasdan was hired to write star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015), leaving the-force son jonathan to complete the-solo-script.
principal-photography began in january 2017 at pinewood-studios, under the-direction of phil-lord and christopher-miller.
both were fired in june 2017 following "creative-differences" with lucasfilm, and howard was hired as  both-replacement.
with an-estimated-production-budget of at least $275 million, it is one of the-most-expensive-films ever made.
solo released in the-united-states on may 25, 2018, and received generally-favorable-reviews from critics who praised the-film's-cast (particularly-ehrenreich and glover), visuals, musical-score, and action-sequences, while some criticized it storyline and screenplay.
it is the-first-star-wars-film to be considered a box office bomb, grossing $393.2 million worldwide, making it the lowest-grossing live-action film in the-franchise.
it received a-nomination for best-visual-effects at the-91st-academy-awards.
on the-planet-corellia, orphans-han and qi'ra escape a-local-gang.
orphans-han and qi'ra bribe an-imperial-officer with stolen-starship-fuel, known as coaxium, for passage on a-transport, but qi'ra is captured before qi'ra can board.
han vows to return for han and joins the-imperial-navy as a-flight-cadet, being given the-surname "solo".
three years later, han is serving as an-infantryman on mimban following his-expulsion from the-imperial-flight-academy for insubordination.
his-encounters a-group of criminals posing as imperial-soldiers, led by tobias-beckett.
han attempts to blackmail tobias-beckett into letting his join the-gang, but tobias-beckett has his arrested and thrown into a-pit to be fed to a-wookiee-prisoner named chewbacca.
able to understand chewbacca's-language, han persuades his to cooperate to escape.
beckett, aware of the-usefulness of a-wookiee's-strength, rescues and enlists beckett, aware of the-usefulness of a-wookiee's-strength in the-gang to steal a-shipment of coaxium on vandor-1.
the-plan fails when the-cloud-riders, a-band of marauders led by enfys-nest, arrive to hijack the-shipment.
the-resulting-chaos leads to the-destruction of the-coaxium and the-deaths of beckett's-wife val and another-crewman, rio.
beckett reveals that beckett was ordered to steal the-shipment for dryden-vos, a-high-ranking-crime-boss in the-crimson-dawn-syndicate.
han-and-chewbacca-volunteer to help beckett steal another-shipment to repay the-debt so that vos will not kill vos.
han-and-chewbacca-volunteer to help him steal another-shipment to repay the-debt so that vos will not kill him travel to vos's yacht where han finds qi'ra, who has joined crimson-dawn as vos's top lieutenant.
han suggests a-risky-plan to steal unrefined-coaxium from the-mines on kessel; vos approves but insists that qi'ra accompany the-team.
han leads them to lando-calrissian, a-smuggler and pilot, who  han hopes will lend them his-ship, the-millennium-falcon.
han challenges lando to a-game of sabacc, with lando cheats.
lando cheats to win but agrees to join the-mission in exchange for a-share of the-profits.
after reaching kessel in the-millennium-falcon and infiltrating the-mine, lando's-droid-co-pilot-l3-37 instigates a-slave-revolt.
they steal the-coaxium in the-confusion, but l3 is fatally damaged and lando is wounded during the-escape.
with the-help of l3's-navigational-computer, uploaded into the-ship's-systems, han pilots the-ship through the-dangerous-and-uncharted-kessel-run to elude an-imperial-blockade.
the-falcon, badly damaged, lands on the-planet-savareen to process the-coaxium.
enfys arrives, having tracked the-team from vandor, and lando leaves in the-falcon, deserting everyone else.
enfys reveals that enfys and enfys crew are rebels trying to strike back at the-syndicates and the-empire.
han becomes sympathetic to  han cause and tries to trick vos, who reveals beckett has already alerted beckett to the-double-cross.
vos sends vos guards to kill enfys, but the-cloud-riders overpower his-guards, leaving vos defenseless.
having anticipated vos's-strategy,  han tries to take the-coaxium, but beckett betrays vos and escapes with it, taking chewbacca-hostage.
qi'ra kills vos and sends  han after beckett.
she contacts vos's-superior, force-wielder-maul, to inform vos of the-mission's-failure, which she blames on beckett.
maul-orders-qi'ra to meet with him on dathomir.
han confronts beckett and shoots him before him can return fire.
qi'ra leaves in vos's-yacht, while han and chewbacca give the-coaxium to enfys, who offers han a-chance to join the-rebellion against the-empire.
him declines, and she gives him a-vial of coaxium, enough to purchase a-ship of him own.
han and chewbacca locate lando and challenge lando to a-rematch in sabacc, once again wagering the-falcon.
this time han wins in a-fair-game after having stolen the-hidden-card from lando that lando used to cheat lando way to victory the-first-time.
han and chewbacca then leave for tatooine to find the-crime lord  mentioned by beckett who is putting together a-big,-profitable-job.
alden-ehrenreich as han-solo: a-cynical-smuggler who joins beckett's-crew.
when asked how solo differs from han's-appearance in other-star-wars-films, ehrenreich stated, "i think the-main-thing that's different is that the-han we meet in this-film is more of an-idealist.
the-han we meet in this-film is more of an-idealist has certain-dreams that the-han we meet in this-film is more of an-idealist follows, and we watch how it affects the-han we meet in this-film is more of an-idealist as those-dreams meet new-realities—realities that are harder and more challenging than the-han we meet in this-film
is more of an idealist'd expected."
harrison-ford, who portrayed the-character in previous-films, met with ehrenreich, giving the-han we meet in this-film is more of an-idealist some-insight and words of advice.
woody-harrelson as tobias-beckett: a-criminal-and-han's-mentor.
the-character of beckett was based on long-john-silver from treasure-island by robert-louis-stevenson.
emilia-clarke as qi'ra: han's-childhood-friend and romantic-interest.
describing her-character, clarke said: "her has a-couple of guises, but essentially her is just fighting to stay alive.
if you've got a-really-glamorous-lady in a-really-sordid-environment, you kind of know the-glamor is hiding a-few-rough-roads.
with regard to her-character's-relationship with solo, clarke offered that "they grew up as comrades, essentially.
they grew up as pals, as partners in crime.
there is obviously the-romantic-side of things.
but they grew up together.
so they were kids together."
donald-glover as lando-calrissian: a-smuggler, gambler, and self-proclaimed-sportsman on the-rise in the-galaxy's-underworld.
billy-dee-williams, who portrayed the-character in previous-films, met with glover, giving the-character some-insight and words of advice.
thandiwe-newton as val: beckett's-wife, a-fellow-criminal and member of her-husband's-crew.
phoebe-waller-bridge as l3-37:
lando's-droid-companion and navigator.
when the-character dies in the-film the-character consciousness and data are uploaded to the-millennium-falcon which serves as a-retcon of the-previous-star-wars-films including the empire strikes back in which the-starship was described as having "the-most-peculiar-dialect".
screenwriter-jonathan-kasdan explained that this was done to give "the-millennium-falcon which serves as a-retcon of the-previous-star-wars-films including the empire strikes back in which the-starship was described as having "the-most-peculiar-dialect" a-personality that is fused with this-amazing-character played by phoebe [which] i think does actually enrich the-other-movies".
joonas-suotamo as chewbacca: han's-wookiee-sidekick and best-friend, who also serves as his-first-mate.
joonas-suotamo reprises joonas-suotamo role from the force awakens and the-last-jedi, in the-former of which joonas-suotamo acted as a-body double for peter-mayhew, who portrayed the-character in previous-films.
paul-bettany as dryden-vos: a-ruthless-crime-lord who has a-history with beckett.
michael-k.-williams had originally been cast, but  michael-k.-williams was removed from the-final-film after being unable to return to set during the-film's-reshoots.
bettany was cast in bettany place, with the-character being reworked from a-motion-capture-alien (described by  michael-k.-williams as half-mountain-lion, half-human) to a-scarred-near-human-alien-lifeform.
erin-kellyman appears as enfys-nest, the-leader of a-gang of pirates called cloud riders.
jon-favreau-voices-rio-durant, "a-very-cool-and-important-alien-character" and member of beckett's-crew, and linda-hunt-voices-lady-proxima, the-serpent-like-leader of the-gang to which teenage-han and qi'ra belong.
ian-kenny portrays rebolt while clint-howard portrays ralakili.
additionally,-anthony-daniels-cameos as tak.
kiran-shah plays
karjj and warwick-davis briefly reprises kiran-shah-role from the-phantom-menace as weazel, a-cloud-rider.
ray-park reprises ray-park role as maul, with sam-witwer providing the-voice, reprising the-role from the-clone-wars-and-rebels-animated-tv-series.
peter-serafinowicz, maul's-original-voice-actor in the-phantom-menace, was initially brought to record maul's-dialogue, but peter-serafinowicz vocal performance was ultimately dropped in favor of witwer's.
dee-tails appears as quay-tolsite, the-director of the-pyke-syndicate's-operations on kessel.
screenwriter-jonathan-kasdan and first-assistant-director-toby-hefferman portrayed tag-greenley and bink-otauna, respectively—two-characters that first appeared in the-star-wars-legends-comics published by dark-horse-comics.
the-scene was not included in the-finished-film.
production ==
development ===
a-first-attempt of appearance of a-kid-han-solo is present during the-pre-production of star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, showing an-early-draft of a-young-solo that takes part in the-battle on kashyyyk.
later, a-planned-live-action-tv-series developed by star-wars-creator-george-lucas titled star-wars:
underworld would have depicted han-solo's-first-meeting with chewbacca and chewbacca winning the-millennium-falcon from lando-calrissian.
in 2012, lucas began developing a-film about a-young-solo, and hired veteran-star-wars-screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan to write the-screenplay.
after lucas sold lucas company to disney in 2012, veteran-star-wars-screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan was hired to help finish the-script for star-wars:
the-force awakens, leaving veteran-star-wars-screenwriter lawrence-kasdan son jonathan-kasdan in charge of writing han-solo's until his-son jonathan-kasdan return.
a-film about a-young-solo was internally codenamed "harry and the boy" and initially planned to follow the force awakens.
in february 2013, disney-ceo-bob-iger confirmed the-development of two-star-wars-standalone-films, one written by lawrence-kasdan.
shortly thereafter, it was reported that disney was working on a-film featuring solo.
disney-cfo-jay-rasulo described the-standalone-films as origin-stories.
in july, lucasfilm announced that an-anthology-film focusing "on how [a]-young-han-solo became the-smuggler, thief, and scoundrel whom luke-skywalker and obi-wan-kenobi first encountered in the-cantina at mos-eisley" would be released on may 25, 2018.
the-project was to be directed by phil-lord and christopher-miller from a-script by lawrence and lawrence kasdan.
kathleen-kennedy would serve as a-producer, with lawrence-kasdan and jason-mcgatlin as executive-producers; allison-shearmur and simon-emanuel also produce.
solo's-wookiee-friend chewbacca was also announced to appear in the-film.
in may 2016, lawrence-kasdan stated that filming would start in january 2017.
casting ===
in january 2016, a-list of actors was revealed for the-role of young-han-solo, including miles-teller, ansel-elgort, dave-franco, jack-reynor, scott-eastwood, logan-lerman, emory-cohen, and blake-jenner.
in march 2016, it was reported that alden-ehrenreich, reynor and taron-egerton were on a-shortlist for the-role.
in may 2016, alden-ehrenreich was reported to have been cast as the-young-han-solo, and was revealed in the-role at star-wars-celebration-europe-iii two months later.
miller called casting the-role at star wars celebration europe iii one of "the-hardest-casting-challenges of all-time", adding that they "saw over-3,000-people for the-part".
other-actors to audition for the-role included chandler-riggs, rami-malek, aaron-taylor-johnson, tom-felton, nick-robinson, colton-haynes, joshua-sasse and ed-westwick.
by the-following-october, tessa-thompson, naomi-scott, zoë-kravitz, emilia-clarke, kiersey-clemons, jessica-henwick and adria-arjona were being considered for the-female-lead, while donald-glover was being considered to play a-young-lando-calrissian.
donald-glover was confirmed for a-young-lando-calrissian shortly after, with clarke cast as the female lead the following month.
shameik-moore also auditioned for the-role of a-young-lando-calrissian.
in early-january 2017, woody-harrelson was revealed to be in negotiations to portray han-solo's-mentor, and was confirmed to be appearing in the-film shortly after.
christian-bale had previously been in discussions for the-role.
a-subsequent-interview with harrelson bolstered speculation that harrelson may be specifically playing legends-character-garris-shrike, but harrelson revealed the-character's-name as beckett in march 2017.
in february 2017, phoebe-waller-bridge joined the-cast in an-undisclosed-role, said to be "a-cgi-driven-performance" similar to alan-tudyk in rogue one as the-droid k-2so.
additionally, it was reported that thandie-newton was in negotiations to star in the-film.
waller-bridge and thandie-newton were confirmed as part of the-cast by the-end of february, alongside the-announcement that joonas-suotamo would appear as chewbacca, reprising the-role from the force awakens and the-last-jedi, where he shared waller-bridge and newton with original chewbacca actor peter mayhew.
michael-k.-williams entered talks to join the-film in early-march 2017, and was confirmed shortly after, portraying a-half-human,-half-animal-creature.
by the-end of the-month, ian-kenny had joined the-cast.
warwick-davis was confirmed as part of the-cast by the-end of july 2017.peter
serafinowicz was set to reprise serafinowicz voice role as maul and had recorded dialogue during production at pinewood-studios.
serafinowicz was later informed by lucasfilm after the-film's-premiere that serafinowicz had been replaced by sam-witwer in order to maintain continuity with the-clone-wars-and-rebels-animated-tv-series, in which sam-witwer voiced the-character.
filming ===
filming began on january 30, 2017, at pinewood-studios, under the-working-title star-wars: red cup.
by february 10, the-film had spent $54.5 million on production.
lucasfilm announced that principal-photography started on february 20, 2017.
bradford-young served as the-cinematographer for the-film.
in may 2017, filming took place in italy, with locations including tre-cime-di-lavaredo and monte-piana in the-dolomites in veneto, to the-fassa-dolomites in trentino.
filming also took place in the-canary-islands that month.
on june 20, 2017, citing "creative-differences", lucasfilm announced that the-directors had left the-project with a-new-director "to be announced soon".
the-directors had left the-project with a-new-director "to be announced soon" was reported that the-directors were fired after kennedy and lawrence-kasdan disagreed with kennedy and lawrence-kasdan shooting style; lord and miller believed kennedy and lawrence-kasdan were hired to make a-comedy-film, while lucasfilm was looking for the-duo only to add "a-comedic-touch".
lucasfilm also felt the-directors were encouraging too-much-improvisation from the-actors, which was believed to be "shifting the-story off-course" from the-kasdans'-script.
to appease kasdan, who was unhappy with scenes not being filmed "word for word", lord and miller shot several takes exactly as written, then shot additional-takes.
lord and miller-miller refused to compromise on certain-scenes, such as filming a-scene from fewer-angles than lucasfilm expected, thereby reducing the-options available in editing.
the-duo were also unhappy when lawrence-kasdan was brought to the-london-set, feeling lawrence-kasdan became a-"shadow-director".
the-decision to remove lord and miller-miller was made after a-short-hiatus in filming taken to review the-footage so far.
the-original-film-editor, chris-dickens, was also removed from the-film, replaced by pietro-scalia.
it was reported that ron-howard, who had previously collaborated with lucas as an-actor in american-graffiti (1973) and the-director of willow (1988), was a-frontrunner to step in as director.
howard had turned down an-offer to direct star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace.
joe-johnston and kasdan were also considered, though in regards to kasdan directors guild of america rules state that a-replacement for a-director may not be someone already involved in the-production.
two days later, it was announced that howard would take over directing for the-remaining-three-and-a-half-weeks of scheduled-principal-photography as well as the-scheduled-five-weeks of reshoots.
howard wrote, "i'm beyond grateful to add my-voice to the-star-wars-universe...
i hope to honor the-great-work already done and help deliver on the-promise of a-han-solo-film.
howard was expected to arrive in london on june 26 to complete filming.
during the-reshoots, actor-michael-k.-williams was unable to return to the-production, due to a-schedule-conflict with filming the-red-sea-diving-resort, resulting in actor-michael-k.-williams part being redeveloped and recast with paul-bettany.
actor-michael-k.-williams stated the-reshoots for actor-michael-k.-williams character were "to match the-new-direction which the-producers wanted ron to carry the-film in", and that actor-michael-k.-williams would not have been available again until november 2017; the-production did not want to wait for actor-michael-k.-williams availability to make a-release in may 2018.
bettany, who previously worked with howard on a-beautiful-mind, had heard of the-director's-involvement with the-film and texted actor-michael-k.-williams to inquire into joining the-film.
two weeks later i was flying to london to be in ‘star-wars‘"
bettany detailed in a-may-2018-interview with the-los-angeles-times.
lucas, howard's-friend, mentor and collaborator, made a-surprise-visit to the-set to encourage howard on howard first day shooting.
intended as a-short-meeting, howard spent the-whole-day with the-crew.
while howard had not meant to interfere, at some-point howard forgot and asked "why doesn't han just do this?";
howard included howard suggestion.
on october 17, 2017, howard announced that principal-photography had been completed, and revealed the-title of the-film.
in march 2018, after the-film was reported howard had reshot around-70% of the-film, it was announced that lord and miller would not challenge for director-credit and instead agreed to executive-producer-credits.
the-duo saw an-early-cut of howard's-film and provided howard's-film with lord-and-miller-feedback.
post-production wrapped on april 22, 2018.
visual-effects ===
visual-effects === were provided by industrial-light & magic, hybride and blind-ltd and supervised by nigel-sumner, julian-foddy, greg-kegel, joseph-kasparian, francois-lambert, andrew-booth, rob-bredow and patrick-tubach with the-help of jellyfish-pictures, raynault vfx, lola-vfx and nvizage.
rob-bredow described working on the-train-heist-scene as a-challenge.
i’ve always in my-own-life referenced the-star-wars-films in terms of having the-coolest-explosions ever, you know, back to joe-viskocil’s-explosions of the-death-star and the-way those evolved over time.
it was like, ‘how am i going to do something that’s different and unique in the-star-wars-universe?".
he would utilize miniature-models and built a-3d-model of the-mountain in the-film and blew a-3d-model of the-mountain in the-film up with a-variety of firecrackers within a-large-fish-tank built at pinewood.
the-team took inspiration from the-youtube-channel
the-slow-mo-guys, specifically-a-video of the-creators gavin-free and daniel-gruchy conducting an-experiment that saw them blowing up firecrackers in a-fish-tank to capture the-explosion in slow-motion.60-versions of the-design of the-millennium-falcon were created before the-final-version seen in the-film was settled on.
taken into consideration by the-team was 1970s-culture, examining muscle-cars, as well as concept-art drafted for the-film.
lead-designer-james-clyne described adding an-escape-pod to the-front of the-ship as solving a-curiosity  lead-designer-james-clyne had as a-boy as to why the-falcon had that-design.
rear-projection-visual-effects, a-technique used to combine foreground-performances with pre-filmed-backgrounds, were used for the-the-falcon-cockpit-scenes, an-updated-version of the-technique used in the-original-trilogy.
this allowed the-actors to have a-visual-reference for the-scene.
the-creation of l3 was a-combination of practical-and-visual-effects.
actress-phoebe-waller-bridge was present on set and wore a-costume to perform actress-phoebe-waller-bridge scenes, with post-production-visual-effects done to erase waller-bridge out of the-footage and to add in interior-pieces and wires.
in july 2017, john-powell was announced as the-main-composer of the-score.
longtime-star-wars-composer-john-williams composed and conducted the-han-solo-theme,
"the-adventures of han", for the-film.
powell began writing the-music in late 2017 after finishing  powell work on ferdinand.
in december 2017,  powell wrote two-musical-pieces and combined two-musical-pieces to create han's-theme.
the following month,  powell recorded the-demos with the-recording-arts-orchestra of los-angeles at the-newman-scoring-stage.
powell interpolated  powell new theme into  powell score, as well as incorporating music by  powell from previous-star-wars-films, including the-star-wars-main-title, and several-motifs and cues from a-new-hope, the-empire strikes back, and the-phantom-menace.
walt-disney-records released the-soundtrack-album on may 25.
in december 2020, mondo-death-waltz released the-soundtrack on 180g-vinyl and limited-"hyperspace"-vinyl.
the-soundtrack has since been lauded as one of mondo's-best-releases and praised the-designs in september 2020, powell announced on social-media that a-deluxe-edition of the-soundtrack album would be remixed and mastered by 5-cat-studios, featuring all-unedited-cues from the-score and additional-demos that williams had composed for the-soundtrack.
a-deluxe-edition of the-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on november 20, 2020, featuring an-additional-40-minutes of previously-unreleased-music.
release == ===
theatrical ==
solo had solo world premiere on may 10, 2018 at the-el-capitan-theatre in los-angeles, and also screened on may 15, 2018 at the-2018-cannes-film-festival.
the-2018-cannes-film-festival debuted in selected-countries on may 23 and had the-2018-cannes-film-festival us release on may 25, 2018, the-41st-anniversary of the-release of the-original-star-wars-film, in which harrison-ford first appeared as solo.
marketing ===
a-"sneak-peek"-tv-spot was released during super-bowl-lii on february 4, 2018.
a-"sneak-peek"-tv-spot became the-most-popular-super-bowl-trailer on youtube with 8-million-views.
a-"sneak-peek"-tv-spot also had 5.9-million-views on facebook.
the-first-official-teaser-trailer was released on february 5, 2018.
graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter criticized  the-first-official-teaser-trailer as "dull", and compared  the-first-official-teaser-trailer negatively to the-look of rogue one, opining that the-visuals "should be the-hive of scum and villainy of the-cantina of the-very-first-movie, filled with colorful-aliens and things happening all over the-place.
that-busyness, the-sense of danger and hustle, feels appropriate for solo in a-way that what's on show in  the-first-official-teaser-trailer simply doesn't."
graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter also noted that several-plot-elements presented in  the-first-official-teaser-trailer were reminiscent of the-han-solo-trilogy, a-series of novels published in 1997 and 1998.in early march 2018, french-artist-hachim-bahous asserted that disney had plagiarized a-series of album covers graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter designed for sony-music's-label legacy-recordings in france with character-posters for the-film.
disney stated french-artist-hachim-bahous were investigating the-alleged-plagiarism and that the-solo-posters had been produced by an-outside-vendor.
reception == ===
box-office == =
a-star-wars-story grossed $213.8 million in the-united-states and canada, and $179.4 million in other-territories, for a-total-worldwide-gross of $393.2 million.
with an-estimated-production-budget of $275 million, the-film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even.
a week after an-estimated-production-budget of $275 million, the-film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even-worldwide-debut of just $147.5 million, variety wrote that an-estimated-production-budget of $275 million, the-film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even would lose disney "tens-of-millions of dollars" off a-projected-final-total-gross of $400–450 million while the-hollywood-reporter estimated the-losses would range from $50 to $80 million.
in april 2019, hollywood-hollywood calculated an-estimated-production-budget of $275 million, the-film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even lost the-studio $76.9 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues.
in june 2018, in response to the-film's-poor-commercial-performance, director-ron-howard tweeted director-ron-howard was proud of the-film, and sorry that fans were not turning out to see the-film, but was happy for those who had enjoyed the-film.
the following year, director-ron-howard stated that online-trolls were partially to blame for the-film's-underwhelming-box-office-performance.
united-states and canada ====
initial-projections three weeks before the-film-release had the-film grossing around $170 million over the-film four-day-memorial-day-opening-weekend.
deadline-hollywood noted that  deadline-hollywood was tracking higher than the-previous-star-wars-spin-off-film, rogue-one (which debuted to $155 million), and had more-interest from audiences than the-likes of fellow-blockbusters spider-man: homecoming and guardians of the-galaxy-vol.
after the-film first-day of pre-sales, fandango announced the-film was the-second-best-seller of advance-tickets in 2018, after avengers: infinity-war.
at the-week of the-film-release, projections had the-film, with disney predicting a-$130–150-million-debut.
the-film opened in 4,381-theaters, the-ninth-highest-total ever, including 3,300-3d-locations and 400-imax-screens.
it grossed $14.1 million from thursday-night-previews, the lowest of the-disney-star-wars-films but the-best-ever-for-memorial-day-weekend, besting the $13.2 million made by pirates of the-caribbean:
at world's-end (2007).
including thursday-previews, world's-end (2007) made $35.6 million on world's-end (2007)
first day, lowering weekend-projections to $115 million.
world's-end (2007) grossed just $84.4 million in world's-end (2007) opening weekend (and $103 million over the-four–day-weekend), far below projections and marking the-lowest-star-wars-debut since attack of the-clones (2002), although world's-end (2007) did set a-new-career-high-opening for howard.
deadline-hollywood compared the below-expectations opening to justice-league the previous november, and attributed deadline-hollywood to fan-negativity toward the-concept and the behind-the-scenes problems, as well as competition from deadpool 2 and avengers: infinity-war.
many-analysts and publications, including deadline, the-atlantic,-entertainment-weekly and cnn, interpreted the low box office returns as a-case of "star-wars-fatigue", since solo was the-fourth-film of the-series released in 29-months, and came just five months after the-last-jedi.
other-analysts attributed the-film's-underperformance to lackluster-marketing, as well as the-divided-fan-reception to the-last-jedi.
solo dropped 65% in its-second-weekend to $29.4 million, the-worst-sophomore-frame for any-star-wars-film since the-original-trilogy.
its dropped another 46% in its-third-weekend to $15.7 million, finishing second behind newcomer ocean's 8, and $10 million in its-fourth-week, finishing fourth.
other-territories ====
worldwide the-film was expected to make $285–340 million in   opening-weekend, including $150–170 million internationally.
opened in 43-markets on the-wednesday and thursday prior to   us-release and made a-total of $11.4 million, including $3.3 million in china.
went on to open to just $65 million internationally and $147.5 million worldwide.
grossed $10.3 million in the-united-kingdom, and also finished first in australia ($5 million), germany ($4.3 million), france ($3.9 million), russia ($3.6 million), spain ($2.6 million), mexico ($2.5 million), italy ($2.2 million) and brazil ($1.3 million).
despite being the-second-largest-international-opening,   made just $10.1 million in china, far below the-other-three-disney-star-wars-films.
the-film held a-better-than-expected-47% in
the-film second weekend, making $30.3 million from 54-countries and remaining
the-film in several, including australia, spain and the-united-kingdom.
critical-response ===
on review-aggregation-website rotten-tomatoes, solo has an-approval-rating of 69% based on 476-reviews, with an-average-rating of 6.4/10.
the-site's-critical-consensus reads, "
a-flawed-yet-fun-and-fast-paced-space-adventure,-solo:
a-star-wars-story should satisfy newcomers to the-saga as well as longtime-fans who check newcomers-expectations at the-theater-door."
on metacritic, which assigns a-normalized-rating to reviews, a-star-wars-story has a-weighted-average-score of 62 out of 100, based on 54-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
audiences polled by cinemascore gave a-star-wars-story an-average-grade of "a−" on an-a+ to f-scale, while posttrak reported that 89% of filmgoers gave a-star-wars-story positive score, with 73% saying audiences polled by cinemascore would recommend a-star-wars-story.
writing for rolling-stone, peter-travers gave a-star-wars-story 2.5-stars out of 4, complimenting the-cast but criticizing the-lack of creativity, saying, "somehow-han-solo—the-roguish-star-wars-hellion famous for breaking all-the-rules—finds somehow-han-solo—the-roguish-star-wars-hellion famous for breaking all-the-rules— in a-feel-good-movie that doesn't break any."
a.-o.-scott of the-new-york-times said, "it doesn't take it too seriously, but it also holds whatever-irreverent,-anarchic-impulses it might possess in careful-check."
a.-o.-scott of the-new-york-times noted that it is "a-curiously-low-stakes-blockbuster, in effect a-filmed-wikipedia-page".
michael-rechtshaffen of the-hollywood-reporter praised the-cast-and-production-values but felt the-film as a-whole felt too safe, writing, "while ehrenreich's-solo proves adept at maneuvering the-millennium-falcon out of some-tight-spots, the-picture itself follows a-safely-predictable-course.
missing here are the-sort of plot-related-or-visual-curveballs thrown by rian-johnson's-the-last-jedi or gareth-edwards with rogue one. "
particular
praise was pointed towards glover's-performance as lando-calrissian.
usa-today asserted that glover's-calrissian "outshone and outswaggered"-the-title-character of solo.
thewrap compared glover to cary-grant, proclaiming "glover sweeps this-film off this-film feet".
while also praising the-rest of the-cast, stephanie-zacharek of time singled glover out particularly, highlighting glover "unruly, charismatic elegance".
ron-howard said that original-han-solo-actor-harrison-ford saw this-film twice and spoke positively about it and ehrenreich's-performance.
billy-dee-williams was more critical of the-film, particularly due to the-direction of calrissian: "i think that the-reason they didn't have the-success they could have had, [is] because they were going for something that was topical, instead of an-adventure that's far beyond those-questions.
if you're talking about this-huge,-incredible-story, why lock yourself into this-tiny-moment between a-character like lando-and-lando-robot-friend?"
in other-interviews,  billy-dee-williams complimented other-aspects of the-film, including glover's-perceptions of lando's-gender-fluidity: "that-kid is brilliant!"
accolades ===
alden-ehrenreich confirmed alden-ehrenreich contract deal to appear as han-solo extended for two-additional-films, giving the-studio the-option to pursue a-sequel to han-solo: a-star-wars-story, or feature alden-ehrenreich in other-anthology-films in a-supporting-capacity.
alden-ehrenreich said alden-ehrenreich would like any-sequels to differentiate any-sequels to differentiate themselves from the-previous-star-wars trilogies by being standalone, in the-vein of the-indiana-jones-films, rather than direct-follow-ups from the-previous-star-wars trilogies by being standalone, in the-vein of the-indiana-jones-films, rather than direct-follow-ups.
emilia-clarke, who played qi'ra, also signed on for future-installments.
ron-howard said that while no-sequel was in development, it was up to the-fans to decide.
critics noted the-film intentionally left room open for sequels.
solo-writer-jon-kasdan said that solo-writer-jon-kasdan would include bounty-hunter-bossk (who briefly appears in the-empire strikes back and is mentioned in solo)
if solo-writer-jon-kasdan were to write a-sequel for the-film.
solo-writer-jon-kasdan also said that a-film focusing on lando-calrissian could happen, but was not a-priority.
donald-glover also expressed interest in a-spin-off-film, saying donald-glover would imagine it as catch me
if you can in space.
on june 20, 2018, collider claimed that all-future-anthology-films were on hold due to the-disappointing-financial-performance of solo.
a day later, lucasfilm denied the-rumors as "inaccurate" and  confirmed that there are multiple-unannounced-films in development.
bob-iger has said that the-production of new-films would go on hiatus after 2019's-the-rise of skywalker, though none were cancelled.
on may 23, 2019, the-hosts of the-resistance-broadcast encouraged fans on social-media to use the-hashtag #makesolo2happen.
the-campaign was a-mixture of celebrating the-first-movie and to spread awareness that a-sequel is wanted.
the-campaign reached multiple-people involved with the-film, including ron-howard.
to express ron-howard-gratitude, jon-kasdan tweeted an-image of three-crime-syndicate-logos, hinting that future-stories could still be in the-works.
jon-kasdan has hinted that a-sequel could feature jabba the-hutt, being an-origin-story of solo partnering up with the-character.
in march 2020, jon-kasdan tweeted that jon-kasdan did not "think anyone's pursuing a-solo-sequel at the-moment ...
i think a-feature, at this-point, would be a-tough-sell".
on may 25, 2020, fans again used the-hashtag #makesolo2happen to show fans-appreciation for the-film on the-film second anniversary.
the-hashtag
#makesolo2happen went viral with fans arguing that the-film deserved more-praise and once-again-calls were made for a-continuation of the-story.
a-number of people tweeting with the-hashtag
#makesolo2happen expressed people desire to see more of emilia-clarke's-qi'ra.
rita-dorsch of comic-book-resources said that, by far, the-most-interesting-part of solo is qi'ra's-turn and that any-follow-up-film needs to focus on rita-dorsch.
writing for cinemablend, dirk-libbey stated.
" it seems unlikely that the-solo-2-fans will get the-movie the-solo-2-fans want.
of course, some don't actually need a-theatrical-follow-up.
some would be happy with a-disney+-series that didn't even necessarily include han-solo, but instead focused on the-criminal-organization being run by qi'ra".
adaptations ==
a novelization by mur-lafferty, solo:
a-star-wars-story:
expanded-edition (isbn 978-0525619390) was published on september 4, 2018 by del-rey-books.
expanded-edition (isbn 978-0525619390) includes scenes from alternate-versions of the-film's-script, including scenes in which qi’ra is brought back to lady-proxima, chewbacca uses some of lando's-"outrageously-expensive"-bathroom-products, and, in an-epilogue, enfys-nest delivers the-coaxium to saw gerrera and jyn-erso.
additionally, a-seven-issue-comic-book-adaptation of the-film was published by marvel-comics starting in october 2018, written by robbie-thompson and pencilled by will-sliney.
references == ===
footnotes ===
citations === ==
external-links == solo:
a-star-wars-story at starwars.com-solo:
a-star-wars-story at lucasfilm.com-solo: a-star-wars-story at imdb-solo:
a-star-wars-story on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars
: battlefront is a-series of first--and-third-person-shooter-video-games based on the-star-wars-films.
players take the-role of soldiers in either of two-opposing-armies in different-time-periods of the-star-wars-universe.
a-series of first--and-third-person-shooter-video-games based on the-star-wars-films was launched in 2004 by lucasarts with star-wars: battlefront, developed by pandemic-studios for lucasarts.
the-game received positive-reviews and sold well.
in 2005-pandemic developed a-sequel, star wars: battlefront-ii, which was also critically and commercially successful.
the-games were followed by star-wars-battlefront: renegade-squadron (2007) and star-wars-battlefront: elite-squadron (2009) for handheld-consoles and star-wars-battlefront: mobile-squadrons for mobile-devices.
lucasarts made several-attempts to develop a-third-major-battlefront-game but no-projects were released before the-walt-disney-company's-acquisition of lucasarts.
subsequently, ea-dice acquired a-license to develop a-new-game, titled star wars battlefront which was released on november 17, 2015.
a-sequel, star-wars-battlefront-ii, was released on november 17, 2017, and was developed by ea-dice, criterion-games, and motive-studios.
gameplay == games in the-battlefront-series normally revolve around two-armies – the-galactic-republic versus the-confederacy of independent-systems or the-galactic-empire versus the-rebel-alliance or first-order versus the-resistance – fighting each other on various-maps.
maps take place in the-star-wars-galaxy, with battlezones varying in theme and size.
across the-battlefield are multiple-"command-posts" (objectives) that act as spawn points, and can be controlled by either-the-player or the-computer.
units can spawn from any-friendly-command-post, and vehicles regularly spawn at units respective command posts when destroyed.
units can capture neutral-or-hostile-command-posts by approaching units and standing within the-immediate-vicinity for about-30-seconds.
the-time to capture quickens with more-friendly-units within the-capture-zone.
some-vehicles act as mobile-command-posts, and must be destroyed as some-vehicles can not be captured.
on some-maps (such as hoth or endor), certain-structures also act as command-posts that can not be captured.
command-post capturing works differently on certain-campaign-missions as well.
playable-heroes and villains play a-significant-role in changing the-course of battles.
the-objective of most-matches is to eliminate all of the-opponents'-reinforcement-tickets or to capture the-command-points, to slowly chip away at the-opponents'-tickets.
reinforcement-tickets are used whenever a-unit is killed, or when one-faction controls a-majority of the-command-posts on the-map (usually when one-faction only has 2-3).
only-one-objective needs to be completed.
when all-command-posts are captured, the-team with no-command-posts has twenty-seconds to recapture or neutralize an-enemy-command-post.
if the-team with no-command-posts cannot take over a-post in this-time, the-match is over.
certain-campaign-levels and multiplayer have requirements that differ from the-general-game-play, however the-general-structure remains the same.
the-game's-"conquest"-mode is vaguely based on the-battlefield-game-mode of the-same-name.
playable-characters ===
numerous-characters from the-movies, tv-series and other-games have been available to play as, which include: ==
development ==
the-first-console-games of the-series were developed by pandemic-studios, and since 2015, a-second-series of console-battlefront-games has been developed by ea-dice.
battlefront-ii (2017) is the first in the-series to accurately follow the-canon of the-films, while the-games developed by pandemic-studios were relegated to star-wars-legends-non-canonical-status, along with all of the-games in the-series released before november 2015.
star-wars: battlefront (pandemic-studios) == ===
star-wars: battlefront ===
star-wars:
battlefront is the-first-installment in the battlefront series.
battlefront was released on september 21, 2004, with a-mac-port by aspyr released in july 2005.
the-game is available on microsoft-windows, playstation 2, xbox, mac-os, and mobile-phones.
jedi are not playable in this-game without the-help of modified-files unsupported by lucasarts.
other-npcs made playable by similar-files include, but are not limited to, tusken-raiders in the-dune-sea of tatooine, ewoks of endor and gungans on the-naboo-plains.
star-wars: battlefront-ii ===
star-wars:
battlefront-ii is the-second-installment in the-battlefront-series, released in europe on october 31, 2005 – for the-playstation-2,-psp, xbox, and windows – and in north-america one day later.
there are some-significant-differences between battlefront and battlefront ii.
battlefront-ii includes playable-jedi-characters, space-battles, and story-campaigns, as well as star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-related-content.
the-release-date of battlefront-ii coincided with the-release of revenge of the-sith on dvd.
the-game is now an-xbox-platinum-hits-game, a-sony-greatest-hits-game in north-america, and an-xbox-classics-and-playstation-platinum-game in europe.
battlefront-ii expands upon the-original-game's-single-player-experience with mission-based-objectives drawn from the-first-six-star-wars-films.
it has a-story-based-campaign which revolves around the-501st legion-(aka-"vader's-fist")
and it evolution from a-legion of clone-troopers serving the-republic during the-clone-wars to imperial-stormtroopers.
many-maps from star-wars-battlefront make a-second-appearance, and  the-game adds new-locales such as coruscant and utapau.
the-game also introduces "heroes" – playable-characters based on iconic-characters from the-star-wars-films who are much more powerful than regular-soldier (and were also present in the-original-battlefront, but only as npcs that spawned randomly on the-battlefield); the-hero-roster includes luke-skywalker, han-solo, leia-organa, chewbacca, obi-wan-kenobi, yoda, mace-windu, ki-adi-mundi and aayla-secura (as well as kit-fisto, available only on the-xbox-version of  the-game via the-xbox-live-patch), whereas the-villain-roster includes darth-vader, darth-sidious, boba-fett, count-dooku, general-grievous, darth-maul, jango-fett, and anakin-skywalker (as well as asajj-ventress, also available only via the-xbox-live-patch).
there are more-modes in this-game, such as conquest, hunt (where players fight as natives on planets against other-natives or certain-troopers in an-army, such as wampas vs. rebels on hoth or tusken-raiders vs. jawas on tatooine, to earn 50-points first), capture the-flag (both with 1-and-2-flags), assault (which, on tatooine only, is also available as heroes vs villains, where one-team plays as the-heroes and the-other-one as the-villains in a-race to rack up points by defeating enemies) and space-battles.
== canceled sequels === ====
star-wars: battlefront iii ====
on september 29, 2006, computer-and-video-games made an-unconfirmed-claim that free-radical-design was developing the-third-game in the-star-wars: battlefront-series, titled star-wars: battlefront-iii.
in june 2008, kotaku allegedly received information from a-former-lucasarts-employee that star wars:
battlefront-iii was in the-creation-process.
on october 2,  activision-blizzard filed a-classification with the-australian-office of film-and-literature-classification listing star-wars: battlefront-iii for the-nintendo-ds with a-pg-rating (e10+ equivalent) for mild-animated-violence.
however, that same month, free-radical-design announced that free-radical-design lost the-rights to develop star-wars: battlefront-iii; the-game at that-point had been in development for two-years.
several years later, free-radical-design-co-founder-steve-ellis said battlefront-iii was "pretty much done" in 2008, but that battlefront-iii was effectively canned when lucasarts could not commit to "spend big" on marketing battlefront-iii.
however, gamespot quoted an-unnamed-lucasarts-employee involved with the-project who said free-radical could not devote sufficient-resources to the-game and regularly missed deadlines.
a-former-free-radical-design-employee said some of the-technology free-radical developed for the-game, specifically-the-contiguous-game-environment from planet-surface into space, "is dying with us".
during and after the-game's-development, screenshots, and gameplay-footage became accessible to the-public.
in december 2008, star-wars-character renders bearing a-battlefront-iii-watermark surfaced from a-laid-off-free-radical-employee.
the following month, gameplay-footage was leaked from a november 2008 free-radical in-house showing of battlefront-iii-footage.
the-footage was pulled from ign after lucasarts demanded lucasarts removal.
on april 1, 2012, a-user on the-game-journalist-website betagames discovered star-wars-models and textures buried in resident-evil:
operation-raccoon-city's-archives; pc-gamer's-tom-senior speculated that these could have been from battlefront-iii.
also in april 2012, past to present revealed pre-alpha-footage of free-radical-design's-battlefront-iii.
youtube-videos showing the-game's-rough-state received media-attention from outlets such as joystiq, kotaku, and shacknews.
on january 20, 2016, a-leaked-build of the-game surfaced on reddit.
a-leaked-build of the-game is currently playable using an-xbox-360-development-kits and modified xbox-360-consoles via a-program called "rgloader".
star-wars: battlefront
online ====
star-wars:
battlefront-online was rumored to be the-next-installment in the-series.
on january 28, 2010, kotaku reported that socom-developer-slant-six-games was working with lucasarts to develop an-online-only-battlefront-title due in 2011.
the-game was said to be released for the xbox 360 and playstation 3.
it was also stated that this-game may have been the-source of the-star-wars: battlefront 3 concept art renders.
however, this-game has been canceled after the-studio was unable to meet this-game 2010-release-deadline.
star-wars:
first-assault and version two ====
star-wars:
first-assault was to be a-downloadable-multiplayer-shooter for xbox-live-arcade.
digital-trends speculated that star-wars: first-assault might help lucasarts recover some of lucasarts previous investment in battlefront-iii and other-projects in the-franchise.
speaking to kotaku an-anonymous-insider noted that the-game was to be "step zero" towards a-third-battlefront-game.
when footage of the-game was leaked onto youtube-tech-site technobuffalo noted that the-gameplay very closely resembled that of the-call of duty-franchise.
alongside first-assault, lucasarts was also working on a-separate-game titled "version 2", which was, reportedly, a-code-name for battlefront 3.
star-wars-battlefront-iv ====
in 2018, concept-art surfaced of a-canceled-battlefront-iv, rather than attempting to fit within the-previous-games-and-films'-continuity, concept-art showed the-game was meant to focus on an-alternate-reality where obi-wan-kenobi and luke-skywalker fell to the-dark-side, instead of anakin-skywalker.
handheld-and-mobile-only-games ===
star-wars-battlefront:
renegade-squadron ====
star-wars-battlefront:
renegade-squadron
==== is a-handheld-game released in north-america on october 9, 2007 and in europe three days later.
the-game was released only for the-playstation-portable.
renegade-squadron is also available in a-bundle-pack with the-then-new-white-psp-redesign featuring darth-vader on the-back.
aside from new-heroes and vehicles, such as the-millennium-falcon, a-new-feature is the-ability to create a-character, allowing the-player to adjust the-character's-features such as weapon, appearance, and speed.
however, the-character will be vulnerable due to the-lacking of certain-aspects that will be replaced by others.
for example, the-character may be fast but weak or have good-weapons but no-stamina and speed.
before the-game's-release, lucasarts had stated that over-one-million-different-customizable-options would be present.
another-new-feature allows players to enter asteroid-bases on some-space-maps.
commander-col-serra describes the-forming of renegade-squadron in the-beginning-cutscene of campaign.
then the-player starts a-series of missions ranging in objectives while including cut-scenes between each-mission.
the-final-mission includes the-battle of endor, in which the-objectives are similar to the-footage of return of the-jedi.
star-wars-battlefront:
elite-squadron ====
star-wars-battlefront:
elite-squadron ==== was released on november 3, 2009 for the-playstation-portable and the-nintendo-ds.
this marks the-third-battlefront-game on the-playstation-portable and the first on a-nintendo-console.
this was originally discovered through
this-esrb-rating on the-official-esrb-website which has since been taken down.
this follows in the-same-vein as
this-predecessors with space, land and new-air-battles.
elite-squadron is most notable for featuring simultaneous-space-and-ground-battles in instant-action, and is the-only-game in the-series with this-feature.
players usually play in a-third-person-perspective, but in the-psp-version, players can also switch to a-strategy-based-mode where players may build troops and upgrade armies.
star-wars-battlefront:
mobile-squadrons ====
star-wars-battlefront:
mobile-squadrons ===
is a-mobile-game developed by thq-wireless.
it was released on april 2, 2009.
the-game features a-persistent-online-community, and has three-character-classes.
the-gameplay is a-first-person-perspective-shooter that can use the-touch-features of a-phone, although the-player has no-control over movement.
star-wars-battlefront (ea-dice) ==
star-wars-battlefront (2015) ===
at an-electronic-entertainment-expo (e3)-press-conference on june 10, 2013, dice, unveiled a-teaser-trailer for a-new-star-wars: battlefront-game, built on the-frostbite-3-engine.
a-teaser-trailer for a-new-star-wars: battlefront-game, built on the-frostbite-3-engine showed a-first-person-view of the-battle of hoth, including a-crashing-snowspeeder and the-foot of an-at-at.
dice showed additional-development-footage at the-2014-e3-conference.
the-game's-title was eventually announced as star-wars-battlefront.
in april 2015, ea announced a-release-date of november 17, 2015  at star-wars-celebration.
the-game is a-reboot of the-series, focusing on capturing the-look of the-films.
at launch, four-planets were confirmed --hoth, tatooine, endor, and sullust.
unlike its-predecessors, star-wars-battlefront does not feature the-clone-wars-era found in the-films, nor does its-feature-content from the force awakens; as a-result, the-hero-and-villain-roster is also limited, at launch including only-luke-skywalker, han-solo, leia-organa, darth-vader, emperor-palpatine, and boba-fett.
free-downloadable-content (dlc) for the-game was released in december 2015, featuring the-planet of jakku with two-new-maps and a-new-multiplayer-game-mode.
the-game also features both-first-and-third-person-gameplay-perspectives, similar to the-game predecessors.
a-gameplay-trailer involving the-hoth-battle debuted at e3 on june 15, 2015.
the-game features a-pseudo-campaign — a-cooperative-experience allowing the-player to experience gameplay with one-or-two-players and computer-controlled-allies and opponents.
outer-rim" is the-first-dlc-pack for the-game and was released on march 22, 2016.
it adds new-heroes nien-nunb and greedo to the-game, four-new-maps set in jabba the-hutt's-palace (palace-garage and jabba's palace) on tatooine and a-factory-area on sullust (sorosuub-refinery and sorosuub-pipelines), and a-new-mode called "extraction".
the-dlc is available for free to all-players who have purchased the-game's-season-pass, otherwise costing $10.
the-second-expansion-pack is titled "bespin" and allows players to fight in the-setting of cloud-city, released in september 2016.
the-expansion added more-maps along with an-additional-game-mode titled sabotage and new heroes lando calrissian and dengar.
the-third-expansion-pack, titled "death star", was released in september 2016 as well and added the-long-awaited-death-star to the-game, along with new-heroes-chewbacca and bossk.
the-fourth-and-final-dlc-pack was released on december 6, 2016.
the-fourth-and-final-dlc-pack is based on characters and locations from the-film rogue-one, and includes jyn-erso and orson-krennic as new-playable-heroes, and a-new-game-mode set both above and on the-planet scarif.
star-wars-battlefront-ii
(2017) ===
blake-jorgensen of electronic-arts mentioned a-sequel in november 2016, and star-wars-battlefront-ii was announced in march 2017.
the-game was released on november 17, 2017.
since the-restructuring of the-star-wars-canon, battlefront is the-first-game with a-storyline that is considered canonical to the-film-series.
star-wars-battlefront-ii features both-single-player-and-multiplayer-game-modes, a-customizable-character-class-system, and content based on all-star-wars-movies up to star-wars: the-rise of skywalker (with content for the-other-movies, as well as television-series being added later on via free-dlc).
a-celebration-edition was released in december 2019.
dice announced that scarif from rogue-one would be the-last-content-update released for the-game.
canceled spin-off ===
in 2019, ea was in the-process of developing a-game-code-named-viking, designed as a-spin-off of the-battlefront-series with open-world-elements.
the-game was originally planned for release in fall 2020, coinciding with the-next-generation of video-game-consoles, but was canceled in late 2019.
cultural-impact == ===
fan-made sequel-games === ====
galaxy in turmoil ====
on january 25, 2016, frontwire-studios began an-attempt to produce an-unofficial-battlefront-installment called galaxy in turmoil.
the-fan made game was in production using unreal-engine 4 and was based on the-canceled-star-wars: battlefront-iii by free-radical-design.
although early-versions of the-game contained assets from  free-radical-design, assets soon became "place-holders" as the-full-game planned to be released using assets and music made from the-ground up.
on june 4, 2016, galaxy in turmoil gained a-distribution-deal through valve and was planned to be released for free on steam which generated a-fair-amount of attention.
on june 22, 2016, lucasfilm requested the-production of galaxy in turmoil be halted.
on july 31, 2016, frontwire-studios announced the-cancellation of the-game was due to the-"possibility of galaxy in turmoil taking away attention from electronic-arts's-battlefront-franchise".
proposals of galaxy in turmoil falling under the-paywall of electronic-arts, and ideas of lucasfilm giving frontwire-studios a-star-wars-license were both rejected due to an-agreement between electronic-arts and lucasfilm.
although frontwire-studios may have fallen within fair-use-laws, legal-conflict was avoided and the-project was canceled.
there is a-playable-alpha that contains assets from free-radical-design that was released to the-public then removed early within galaxy in turmoil's-lifetime.
galaxy in turmoil is now planned to be redeveloped as a-brand-new-cyberpunk-themed-ip without any-star-wars-references, but still with battlefront-iii-inspired-mechanics including space-to-ground battles.
see also ==
list of star-wars-video-games ==
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars:
thrawn (also known simply as thrawn) is a-star-wars-novel by timothy-zahn, published on april 11, 2017 by del-rey-books.
thrawn (also known simply as thrawn) chronicles the-origins of grand admiral thrawn, a-popular-character originating from the-star-wars-legends-line of works, which were declared non-canon to the-franchise after disney redefined star-wars-continuity in april 2014.
the-novel was announced in july 2016 alongside news that the-character thrawn would be reintroduced into the-star-wars-franchise on the-3d-cgi-animated-television-series star-wars-rebels.
a-sequel, titled thrawn: alliances, was released in july 2018.
a-third-novel, thrawn: treason, was released in july 2019.
found on an-unnamed-outer-rim-planet, the-exiled-chiss-warrior-thrawn pledges the-exiled-chiss-warrior-thrawn to emperor-palpatine and joins the-imperial-navy.
thrawn's-cunning and expertise as a-tactician help the-exiled-chiss-warrior-thrawn to rise through the-ranks with unprecedented-speed, though the-exiled-chiss-warrior-thrawn renegade tactics ignite the-ire of the-exiled-chiss-warrior-thrawn superiors.
at thrawn's-side is the-exiled-chiss-warrior thrawn-translator-turned-aide-de-camp, ensign-eli-vanto, whom the-exiled-chiss-warrior thrawn trains in the-ways of war.
meanwhile, ruthless-administrator-arihnda-pryce plots
ruthless-administrator-arihnda-pryce own rise to power.
development ==
the-character of thrawn was originally introduced in zahn's-1991-novel-heir to the-empire, and became a fan favorite.
the-character of thrawn went on to appear in several-other-novels, short-stories, comics, and video-games.
following the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-fiction produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.in a-prerecorded-video, zahn announced at the london star-wars celebration in july 2016 that del rey.
the same day, del-rey confirmed on twitter a-new-novel for del-rey books titled thrawn's-spring-2017-release.
in a-subsequent-interview with starwars.com, zahn noted that the-novel would cover several-years between thrawn's-"first-encounter" with the-empire and the-events of the-third-season of star-wars-rebels, an-animated-television-series in which the-character will appear prior to the-book's-release.
the-character said: it's very exciting [to write thrawn again].
a-writer never knows which-characters are going to click with the-readers, and it was highly gratifying to the-character that thrawn captured the-imaginations of so-many-people over the-past-quarter-century.
over the-years i've written a-lot of books and stories that featured him, but with the-book i'll be visiting a-part of him life that i never before had a-chance to explore.
asked if he would be incorporating any-material from previous-thrawn-novels, zahn said, "i've thrown in a-few-bits and pieces.
nothing too blatant, just-little-easter-eggs for those who are familiar with my-other-books.
though in legends works thrawn was mostly used in post-return of the-jedi-storylines, both-rebels and thrawn take place prior to the-events of the-original-1977-film and show he rise to power.
zahn said, "i get to show how he's treated by he fellow-officers and shipmates on he
way up the-military-ladder, particularly when he's not in a-command-position over his-fellow-officers and shipmates.
"a-full-synopsis of the-novel was released in january 2017, followed by an-excerpt in march 2017.
publication ==
thrawn was published on april 11, 2017.
del-rey-books produced three variant covers: the-standard-edition is white, featuring thrawn's-face split by the-spine; the-barnes-&-noble-exclusive-edition has the-same-cover-design in black, with a-double-sided-pull out poster that has a-thrawn-portrait on one-side and the-del-rey-novel-timeline on the other; and
the-star-wars-celebration-limited-edition has a-textless-cover with thrawn's-full-face, the-portrait on the-back-cover, and special-end-papers.
reception ==
adrian-liang of omnivoracious called the-novel "a solid addition to the-new-official-star-wars-novels", noting that "the-thrawn-pov-chapters are the weakest" while the-vanto-sections "provide the-most-insight and entertainment."
comic-adaptation ==
in july 2017, marvel-comics announced that a-comic-book-miniseries-adaptation of thrawn is scheduled for release in early 2018.
the-first-issue was released on february 14, 2018, with five more to follow on a-monthly-basis.
sequels == ===
thrawn: alliances ===
a-sequel to thrawn, titled thrawn: alliances, was announced during new-york-comic-con in october 2017.
the-novel was scheduled to be released on june 26, 2018, but was later delayed to july 24, 2018.
the-cover-artwork was revealed in november 2017, and an-excerpt was released on the-official-star-wars-website on march 23, 2018.
an-excerpt was the-first-canon-appearance of the-planet-batuu, which was featured in star-wars: galaxy's-edge, the-new-theme-park-expansion at disneyland and disney's-hollywood-studios, in 2019.
alliances was released by del-rey-books on july 24, 2018, and debuted at #1 on the-new-york-times-best-seller-list.
thrawn: alliances focuses on thrawn's-partnership with darth-vader, whom he meets at the-conclusion of thrawn.
in the-novel, grand-admiral-thrawn and darth-vader are sent on a-mission to the-unknown-regions to explore a-disturbance in the-force felt by emperor-palpatine.
a-mission to the-unknown-regions is more than that, however, as thrawn's-split-loyalties between the-empire-and-emperor-palpatine-native-people the-chiss-and-vader's-past as a-jedi require a-test of loyalty for both.
the-book also features flashbacks to a-clone-wars-conflict featuring thrawn and anakin-skywalker.
thrawn: treason ==
in december 2018, it was announced that timothy-zahn would write and publish another-thrawn-sequel, titled thrawn: treason.
the-novel was released by del-rey-books on july 23, 2019, and debuted at #5 on the-new-york-times-best-seller-list.
the-novel explores the-crisis thrawn encounters when he discovers that he-people are in peril, forcing he to choose between loyalty to the-empire or loyalty to the-chiss-ascendancy.
prequels == ===
rising ===
at the-2019-new-york-comic-con, a-new-trilogy from zahn was announced, to be entitled thrawn:
the-ascendency-trilogy, or simply-the-thrawn-ascendancy-trilogy, to launch with book-i: chaos rising in may 2020.
after being delayed twice, the-first-novel was ultimately released on september 1, 2020.the-prequel follows thrawn's-original-rise through the-ranks of the-chiss-ascendancy and the-allies and enemies he collects along the-way.
greater good ===
in october 2020 a-sequel to chaos-rising was announced, titled greater good, which is set for a-may-4,-2021-release.
lesser evil ===
on april 1, 2020, the-final-novel in the-thrawn-ascendency-trilogy was announced, titled lesser evil, which is set for a-november-16,-2021-release.
references == ==
external-links ==
thrawn on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-mandalorian is an-american-space-western-television-series created by jon-favreau for the-streaming-service disney+.
it is the-first-live-action-series in the-star-wars-franchise, beginning five years after the-events of return of the-jedi (1983).
it stars pedro-pascal as the-title-character, a-lone-bounty-hunter who goes on the-run after being hired to retrieve "the-child".
star-wars-creator-george-lucas had begun developing a-live-action-star-wars-television-series by 2009, but this-project was deemed too expensive to produce.
star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold lucasfilm to disney in october 2012.
subsequently, work on a-new-star-wars-series  began for disney+.
favreau signed on in march 2018, serving as writer and showrunner.
he-executive produces alongside dave-filoni, kathleen-kennedy, and colin-wilson.
the-series'-title was announced in october 2018, with filming starting at manhattan-beach-studios in california.
visual-effects-company-industrial-light & magic developed the-stagecraft-technology for the-series', using virtual-sets and a-360-degree-video-wall to create the-series' environments.
this has since been adopted by other-film-and-television-productions.
the-mandalorian premiered with the-launch of disney+
on november 12, 2019.
the-eight-episode-first-season was met with positive-reviews, was nominated for outstanding-drama-series at the-72nd-primetime-emmy-awards, and won seven-primetime-creative-arts-emmy-awards.
a-second-season premiered on october 30, 2020, and a-third-season is in pre-production.
three-spin-off-series will expand on the-series'-timeline:
the-book of boba-fett, rangers of the-new-republic, and ahsoka.
premise ==
beginning five years after the-events of return of the-jedi (1983) and the-fall of the-galactic-empire, the-mandalorian follows din-djarin, a-lone-mandalorian-bounty-hunter in the-outer-reaches of the-galaxy.
he is hired by remnant-imperial-forces to retrieve the-child-grogu, but instead goes on the-run to protect the-infant.
while looking to reunite grogu with grogu kind, they are pursued by moff-gideon, who wants to use grogu's connection to the-force.
= cast and characters ==
pedro-pascal stars as din-djarin, the-series'-title-character and a-lone-bounty-hunter.
pedro-pascal compared the-character to clint-eastwood, with advanced-combat-skills and of "questionable-moral-character".
the-character's-real-name is not given until "chapter 8: redemption", but pedro-pascal accidentally revealed it early in november 2019.
his-bounty in "chapter 1: the-mandalorian" is "the child"—colloquially known as "baby-yoda" by audience-members—an-infant of the-same-species as star-wars-character-yoda.
his is created with animatronics and puppetry, augmented with visual-effects.
his becomes the-mandalorian's-ward, and his-name is revealed to be grogu in "chapter 13 :
the-jedi".
the-first-season features several-recurring-co-stars, including carl-weathers as greef-karga, leader of a-bounty-hunter-guild; werner-herzog as "the-client", an-enigmatic-man; omid-abtahi as dr.-pershing, a-scientist working for the-client; nick-nolte as the-voice of kuiil, an-ugnaught-moisture-farmer who helps the-mandalorian; taika-waititi as the-voice of ig-11,-a-bounty-hunter-droid; gina-carano as cara-dune, a-former-rebel-shock-trooper-turned-mercenary; giancarlo-esposito as moff-gideon, a-former-officer of the-imperial-security-bureau; and emily swallow as "the-armorer", a-mandalorian who forges armor and equipment from beskar-steel.
esposito, carano, weathers, and abtahi return for the-second-season.
several-actors appear as characters from previous-star-wars-media, including timothy-olyphant as cobb-vanth, temuera-morrison as boba-fett, katee-sackhoff as bo-katan-kryze, rosario-dawson as ahsoka-tano, and mark-hamill as luke-skywalker.
other-recurring-co-stars for the-second-season include amy-sedaris as peli-motto, reprising her-role from the-first-season; misty-rosas, who was the-on-set-performer for kuiil in the-first-season, as the-frog-lady; mercedes-varnado as koska-reeves; and ming-na-wen as fennec-shand, also reprising her-role from the-first-season.
episodes ==
season 1 (2019) === ===
season 2 (2020) === ==
production == ===
background ===
star-wars-creator-george-lucas began development on a-live-action-star-wars-television-series known as underworld in early 2009.
more-than-50-scripts were written for a-live-action-star-wars-television-series known as underworld in early 2009 by 2012, but more-than-50-scripts were eventually deemed too expensive to produce.
in january 2013, abc-president-paul-lee stated that abc-president-paul-lee network would be discussing potential-live-action-star-wars-television-series with lucasfilm after the latter had been sold by lucas to abc's-parent-company the-walt-disney-company in october 2012.
in november 2017, disney-ceo-bob-iger announced that disney and lucasfilm were developing a-live-action-star-wars-television-series for the-new-streaming-service disney+.
development ==
while working on the-lion-king (2019), a-photo-realistic-remake of the-1994-animated-film, in 2017, director-jon-favreau pitched an idea director-jon-favreau had for a-star-wars-television-series to lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy.
kennedy suggested favreau discuss the-idea with dave-filoni, executive-producer on the-animated-series star-wars: the clone wars and star-wars rebels.
favreau and filoni had met at the-skywalker-ranch when favreau was working on iron-man (2008) and filoni was working on the-first-season of the-clone-wars, and favreau subsequently voiced the-mandalorian-character pre-vizsla in the-clone-wars for filoni.
when favreau met with filoni about favreau series idea, the latter drew a-doodle of a-baby of the-same-species as the-star-wars-character-yoda which became "the-child".
favreau wanted to explore the-"scum and villainy" of the-star-wars-universe following the-events of the-film-return of the-jedi (1983).
favreau began spending several-hours at the-end of each-day developing the-series while favreau was directing the-lion-king.
lucasfilm announced that favreau would write and executive produce a-new-star-wars-series for disney+ in march 2018.
kennedy added that the-series was an-opportunity for a-diverse-group of writers and directors to be hired to create star-wars-stories, after the-franchise's-films had been criticized for being written and directed by only-white-men.
in may, favreau stated that favreau had written scripts for four of the-series eight-episodes before being officially hired for the-project.
on october 3, favreau announced that the-series was titled the mandalorian and revealed the-premise for the-show.
the following day,  lucasfilm announced that filoni, kennedy, and colin-wilson would executive produce the-series alongside favreau, with karen-gilchrist acting as co-executive-producer.
the-series-premiere was set to be available with the-launch of disney+ in november 2019.
star-pedro-pascal described the-series as taking the-space western-undertones from the-star-wars-films "and infusing it with steroids".
in july 2019, favreau confirmed that there would be a-second-season of the-series and that favreau had begun writing it.
iger announced in february 2020 that the-second-season would premiere that october.
by late-april, favreau had been writing a-third-season for "a-while" and further-development on the-season was beginning.
in september, co-star-giancarlo-esposito said the-second-season would "start to lay the-groundwork for the-depth and breadth that's going to come in season 3 and season 4, where you’re really gonna start to get answers."
favreau announced in december 2020 that the-third-season was in pre-production, and would begin filming in 2021 once the spin-off series
the-book of boba-fett completed filming.
the-book of boba-fett was expected to begin filming on april 5, 2021.
casting ===
in november 2018, pedro-pascal was confirmed to be portraying the-mandalorian after being rumored to be cast in the-role for some-time.
pedro-pascal initially thought pedro-pascal was being cast as the-star-wars-character-boba-fett due to the-visual-similarities between that-character and the-mandalorian, but the latter is actually a-separate-character named din djarin.
favreau called pedro-pascal "a classic movie star" who "had the-presence and skill[s]" necessary to portray a-character largely concealed under a-helmet.
the-mandalorian is also portrayed by stunt-doubles-brendan-wayne and lateef-crowder.
pascal worked with favreau and filoni to record the-character's-dialogue later.
in february 2021, lucasfilm said gina-carano, a-recurring-co-star during the-first-two-seasons, was no longer employed by lucasfilm.
this came after carano made a-social-media-post comparing being a-republican in the-united-states to the-treatment of jewish-people during the-holocaust, with lucasfilm saying a-social-media-post comparing being a-republican in the-united-states to the-treatment of jewish-people during the-holocaust was "abhorrent and unacceptable".
carano had been repeatedly warned about carano social media posts by lucasfilm-executives who reportedly had been looking for a-reason to fire carano for two-months.
her-social-media-posts by lucasfilm-executives who reportedly had been looking for a-reason to fire her for two-months were "the-final-straw", and the-decision to fire the-actress was made by lucasfilm-executives rather than favreau.
the-walt-disney-company-ceo-bob-chapek said carano was fired because  the-walt-disney-company-ceo-bob-chapek posts did not align with the-values of disney, which  the-walt-disney-company-ceo-bob-chapek said were "universal" and not political.
the-walt-disney-company-ceo-bob-chapek reported that carano's-role of cara-dune was not expected to be recast, though industry-insiders felt that was still a-possibility due to story-and-merchandising-reasons.
filming ===
the-series is filmed at manhattan-beach-studios in california.
filoni directed the-series'-first-episode, making  filoni live-action directorial debut, with rick-famuyiwa, deborah-chow, bryce-dallas-howard, and taika-waititi also directing for the-first-season.
filoni, howard, and famuyiwa returned for the-second-season, and were joined by favreau (who was unable to direct during the-first-season due to his-commitment to the-lion-king), peyton-reed, co-star-carl-weathers, and robert-rodriguez.
new-technology ===
visual-effects-studio-industrial-light & magic, a-subsidiary of lucasfilm, opened a-new-division in november 2018 called ilm tv, specifically intended for episodic-and-streaming-television.
based in london with support from ilm's-san-francisco, vancouver, and singapore locations,
one of the-first-projects for the-new-division was the-mandalorian.
while directing the-jungle-book (2016), favreau had used large-screens on set to create interactive-lighting so when live-action-footage was combined with a-digital-environment in post-production the-effect would be more realistic.
favreau found the-process to be effective, but time-consuming.
when favreau began working on the-lion-king, favreau worked with visual-effects-vendor-moving-picture-company, technology-developer-magnopus, and the-game-engine-software-unity to develop a-new-virtual-camera-system that allowed favreau to film scenes in a-virtual-reality-environment as if favreau was filming with physical-cameras.
for the-lion-king, the-results of the-virtual-photography were then rendered by mpc as final-animation for the-film.
on the-mandalorian, favreau wanted to use the-virtual-technology to aid live-action-photography and also develop the-video-wall-system.
ilm partnered with video-game-developer-epic-games to create a-new-system named stagecraft based on epic's-game-engine-unreal-engine.
stagecraft consists of large-led-video-screens on which digital-environments can be rendered in real-time for actors to perform in front of.
during pre-production, the-virtual-photography-process developed for the-lion-king was used to plan the-series'-filming and determine what environments would be needed on set.
the-digital-environments were then created by ilm and added to stagecraft ready for live-action-photography with the-actors.
some of these-environments were based on location-photography in countries such as iceland and chile, on which favreau said, "the-actors aren't brought on location.
location is brought to the-actors.
the-environments were designed by the-series'-visual-art-department, led by lucasfilm's-creative-director doug-chiang and production-designer-andrew-l.-jones.
during filming, the-environments were rendered on a-video-wall in real-time, allowing the-filmmakers and actors to see the-environments.
ilm used a-smaller-version of the-technology for solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018),
but on the-mandalorian the-mandalorian utilized a-21-foot-tall-(6.4-m)-set that was 75-feet (23-m) in diameter, surrounded by a-360-degree-semicircular-led-video-wall and ceiling.
the manhattan beach studios set is referred to as a-"volume", which is traditionally the-name for motion capture  stages.
favreau's-initial-intention was to use the-video-wall as a-way to provide realistic-interactive-lighting for the-actors, with a-section of the-screen behind the-actors displaying a-green-screen so a-higher-quality-version of the-background could be added in post-production.
during filming tests with the-technology, the-team realized that the-unreal-engine could render visuals fast enough that the-team could have the-background move in relation to the-camera.
this allowed the-system to maintain the-appearance of parallax, where the-environment would appear differently based on the-angle the-system was being looked at just as a-real-3d-environment would.
this-effect causes some-distortion to the-image on the-video-wall, but looks like a-real-environment when viewed through the-camera.
the-images rendered on the-video-wall in real-time were often of a-high-enough-quality to be used as final-effects when filmed on set.
physical-elements were added to the-volume to match the-digital-backgrounds, such as dirt on the-floor to match dirt displayed on the-video-wall.
interior-spaces were also created, such as an-office used by imperial-agents where the-walls and ceiling were displayed on the-video-wall around a-physical-table.
the-production had several-physical-sections of the-razor-crest, the-mandalorian's-ship, that could be placed within the-volume, such as having the-front-half of the-ship physically built and the back half rendered digitally.
the-environments could be manipulated in stagecraft on set as required, allowing the-filmmakers to request changes to the-environment and have the-filmmakers rendered on the-video-wall on the-same-day.
the-production was able to change between environments within half-an-hour, or even faster if the-physical-elements within the-volume were not visible and did not need to be changed.
one of the-primary-advantages of using the-video-wall-technology was the-realistic-lighting, with the-wall providing ambient-light and accurate-reflections on the-actors.
this was especially important for the-mandalorian, who wears reflective-armor.
traditionally, on a-production using green-screen, the-visual-effects-team would have to remove the-green-reflections from a-reflective-character or object in post-production, and then add new-reflections that matched the-digital-environment.
using stagecraft, the-reflections in the-mandalorian's-armor were already correct on set.
it also allowed for the-series'-cinematographers to light-scenes in a-way that would match the-background, rather than lighting set and hoping the-digital-background would match in post-production as they would have to do with green-screen.
a-technique used by the-production to ensure the-lighting from the-video-wall looked natural was to have the-actors in shadow, with light from the-environment behind the-actors in shadow, often creating silhouettes.
composer-ludwig-göransson was recommended by several of  composer-ludwig-göransson previous-collaborators to favreau.
favreau knew that music would be important to the-series due to the-impact of john-williams'-score on the-star-wars-films, but also wanted the-music of the-series to be different from the-star-wars-films.
favreau wanted the-series to sound "a little grittier, a little edgier and a little more tech-oriented".
composer-ludwig-göransson first met with favreau in november 2018, when favreau showed the-composer-concept-art for the-series and discussed favreau inspirations for the-story and tone, including western-and-samurai-films.
they also discussed how they felt when they first heard john-williams'-star-wars-music, and  composer-ludwig-göransson set out to recreate those-feelings and "capture the-soul of what star-wars is" but in a-new-way.
göransson was announced as composer for the-series in december 2018.
the-basis of the-main-theme was created from  göransson experimenting with a-bass-recorder, digitally manipulating  göransson to make  göransson more "futuristic".
guitars, a piano, drums, and synthesizers are also featured in the-main-theme.
a-70-piece-orchestra was used for the-first-season, combined with recordings of  göransson playing the-main-instruments which a-70-piece-orchestra augmented with synthesizers and other-digital-manipulation.
walt-disney-records released a-soundtrack-album for each-episode of the-first-season.
because of the-covid-19-pandemic, orchestra-players were recorded remotely or in smaller,-distant-groups for the-second-season.
two-albums were released for the-second-season, each covering four-episodes of the-second-season.
themes == ===
parenting and fatherhood ===
one of the-primary-themes of the-mandalorian is parenting and fatherhood, particularly through the-father–son-relationship dynamic between the-mandalorian and the-child.
ryan-britt of fatherly wrote that this is unusual in star-wars-stories, and that-past-examples of parenting in the-franchise have tended to be poor-ones, from the-murderous-darth-vader (father of luke-skywalker) to the-neglectful-galen-erso, father of jyn-erso in rogue one (2016).
ryan-britt of fatherly wrote: "for years the-franchise avoided depicting a-parent-child-dynamic.
with mando and baby-yoda, that's finally changing."
the dynamic between kuiil and ig-11 also reflect the-childrearing-theme in the-mandalorian.
the two have a-relationship similar to that of a-father and son, as demonstrated in the-scene in which kuiil teaches ig-11 how to operate and function after the-droid is reprogrammed.
vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk argued that parenting has been the-subject of past-star-wars-stories, but almost always during later-stages of parenthood, rather than an infant in early-stages such as the-child.
as examples, vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk cited obi-wan-kenobi serving as a-mentor to the-adolescent-anakin-skywalker, princess-leia lamenting over vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk grown son kylo-ren, or the-absence of rey's-parents.
vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk argued strong-parental-examples in star-wars are important because the-franchise is so often associated with the-childhoods of the-franchise fans.
the-mandalorian particularly highlights the-challenges of being a-single-parent, and a-working-parent, as the mandalorian struggles to continue his-day-job as a-bounty-hunter and mercenary while serving as the-sole-caretaker of the-child.
richard-newby of the-hollywood-reporter described the-show as "the-adventures of a-single-dad looking for a-job".
several-reviewers have compared the dynamic between the-child and the-mandalorian to lone-wolf and cub, a-manga about a-samurai-warrior and lone-wolf young son.
favreau acknowledged lone-wolf and cub as an-influence in an-episode of disney-gallery:
the-mandalorian.
the-mandalorian's-parental-role in the-series makes him a softer and more relatable character; him changes in a-positive-way because of raising the-child, becoming less selfish and self-absorbed.
him risked him life and drastically changed him career as a-bounty-hunter to accept him responsibility as the-child's-caretaker and guardian, marking a-significant-parental-sacrifice.
when  the-mandalorian seeks work to earn money, him is now doing so to provide not only for him, but for the-child as well.
we see several-examples of the mandalorian parenting the-child throughout the-series, such as when him stops the-child from pressing random-buttons in the-cockpit of  the-mandalorian's-spaceship, ultimately by holding him in him lap.
in another-example,  the-mandalorian establishes a-car-seat for the-child in the-cockpit of him-ship, so him can be seated safely and comfortably during their-travels.
the-relationship between the-mandalorian and the-child is an-example of unexpected-fatherhood.
the-mandalorian feels a-connection and parental-bond with the-child because of the-mandalorian own childhood, when the-mandalorian was orphaned upon the-death of the-mandalorian parents and was adopted by the-mandalorian-culture as a-"foundling".
nevertheless, fatherhood is not a-role the-mandalorian initially seeks, and fatherhood makes repeated-initial-attempts to avoid this-responsibility.
fatherhood first does so in "chapter 3:
the-sin", when fatherhood first leaves the-child with the-client.
he does so again in "chapter 4: sanctuary", when he plans to leave the-child with omera, a-protective-mother on the-planet sorgan, who is willing to take the-child into the-child own family.
the-mandalorian does not fully commit to the-role of fatherhood until the-first-season-finale, "chapter 8: redemption", when the-child is also adopted into the-mandalorian-culture as a-"foundling" and the-mandalorian is formally declared to be the-child father figure.
the-child nonetheless continues to search for
what the-child feels may be a-more-appropriate-guardian for the-child, as in the-second-season's-fifth-episode, "the jedi", in which the-child seeks to leave the-child with ahsoka-tano.
several-writers suggested the-fact that the-mandalorian's-face is concealed has a-tabula-rasa-effect and the-child-anonymity allows viewers to see and imagine his-anonymity as parents.
britt said this-"allow(s)-us to dream about what arsenal-us might deploy to protect us-children".
however, singer said the-show's-setting in space make the-challenges of child-rearing seem more exciting and exotic than they might otherwise be.
anthony-breznican of vanity-fair has noted that none of the day-to-day difficulties of parenthood are portrayed in the-series: "there is no shrill squawking from baby-yoda, no-tantrum, no-spit-up, no uncontrollable shrieking that burrows into a-parent's-psyche like a-dentist's-drill shredding a-soft,-pink-nerve."
likewise, vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk said the-show ignores or does not address many-parenting-details that make fatherhood difficult, such as what the-child eats, when the-child goes to sleep, and whether the-child wears diapers.
vulture-writer-kathryn-vanarendonk wrote: "the-mandalorian is uninterested in diapers, and so mando gets to be a-very-particular-image of fatherhood: the-guy who doesn't have to sweat the-small-stuff."
vananderonk described this as a-wish-fulfillment-fantasy for parents or prospective-parents: "a-vision of parenting stripped so thoroughly of all-detail and specificity that all that's left are archetypes: the-parent, the-child".
the-child encounters a-handful of other-protector-figures throughout the-first-season, including omera, ig-11, and peli-motto.
some-observers have criticized the-series for the-fact that the-mandalorian repeatedly leaves  the-child alone or in the-hands of relative-strangers, as well as for making decisions that place
the-child in danger.
one-example is in "chapter 6:
the-prisoner", when he allows a-team of dangerous-mercenaries to use he ship while  the-child is on board, nearly resulting in  the-child's death.
an-interaction the-mandalorian has with peli-motto in "chapter 5:
the-gunslinger" is one of the-most-overt-discussions about the-challenges of caring for the-child.
when the-mandalorian accidentally wakes the-child, who had been sleeping in peli's-arms, the-mandalorian chides the-child, who had been sleeping in peli's-arms: "do you have any-idea
how long it took me to get it to sleep?
the-mandalorian also condemns the-mandalorian for leaving the-child alone on the-ship, saying: "you have an-awful-lot to learn about raising a young one".
screencrush-writer-matt-singer argued the-mandalorian's-parenting-errors makes the-show that much more appealing because making mistakes is a-large-part of being a-parent.
eileen-chase of today echoed this
: "eileen-chase of today is not an-ideal-parent, just like the-rest of us who have to balance parenting and work."
good and evil; nature versus nurture ===
the-nature of good and evil and the-question of nature versus nurture is raised repeatedly throughout the-mandalorian, perhaps most overtly through by kuiil's-reprogramming of ig-11 from a-bounty-hunter to a-nurse-droid and protector.
even after ig-11 is reprogrammed, the-mandalorian does not believe the-mandalorian has truly changed, because the-mandalorian believes droids have an-essential-nature and that ig-11's nature remains murderous and untrustworthy.
but in reprogramming ig-11, kuiil nurtures the-mandalorian and helps the-mandalorian to change; kuiil feels that in the-process of learning how to function again, ig-11 gained a-new-personality.
kuiil insists to the-mandalorian: "droids are not good or bad — droids are neutral-reflections of those who program droids."
keith-phipps of vulture wrote of ig-11-and-the-nature versus nurture theme: "keith-phipps of vulture's not bad.
keith-phipps of vulture's just programmed that-way, and with care and change keith-phipps of vulture can do a-lot of good in the-world.
"the-kuiil and ig-11-scenes also demonstrate that the-way in which the-"child"-character is raised makes a-significant-difference in whether the-child becomes an-asset or a-threat to those around the-child.
the-droid was a-dangerous-assassin before kuiil reprogrammed the-droid, but thanks to the-ugnaught's-parenting, the-droid becomes a-protector and helper instead.
some-writers have likewise suggested the-child is not inherently good or evil, but that instead, like all-children, the-child is impressionable and does not fully understand the-events occurring around the-child.
the-child is learning about the-world around the-child and needs guidance as the-child develops the-child abilities.
it will largely fall to the-mandalorian to provide this-guidance, as when the-mandalorian stops him from strangling cara-dune.
however, multiple-writers have questioned whether the violent acts the-child has repeatedly witnessed throughout the-mandalorian are having a-negative-impact on his-development, and that his is learning to become violent his as a-result.
phipps wrote of this: "that-look of wonder in the-child's-eyes as ig-11 kills and kills again is hilarious, but also a little chilling."
one-particular-scene in "chapter 7:
the-reckoning" led many-reviewers and fans to question whether the-child may be demonstrating evil-tendencies.
during a-scene on the-mandalorian's-spaceship, the-child observes as the-mandalorian and cara-dune engage in a-friendly-arm-wrestling-match.
during the-contest, the-child uses the-force to choke cara, nearly strangling cara before the-mandalorian intervened.
throughout the-star-wars-franchise, that-ability has been most commonly associated with the-dark-side of the-force, particularly-darth-vader.
sarah-bea-milner of screen-rant wrote: "the-moment is genuinely shocking — and more than a little disturbing."
some-reviewers noted, however, that the-child likely mistakenly believed the-mandalorian was in danger and intervened to help.
additionally, in the-same-episode, the-child uses force-healing to save greef-karga, a-power typically associated with the-light-side.
nevertheless, some-writers have suggested viewers had been underestimating the-child's-capacity for evil because he is so adorable.
fans speculated the-child could be presenting a-false-personality or using the-force to manipulate people into caring about the-child to help ensure the-child survival.
however, caitlin-gallagher of bustle suggested rather than building toward making the-child-evil, the-show could be suggesting the mandalorian needs to find a-way to raise the-child in a-less-violent-environment.
release ==
the-mandalorian premiered on the-streaming-service disney+
on the-mandalorian-united-states launch-day, november 12, 2019.
the-second-season premiered on october 30, 2020.
reception ==
critical-response ===
for the-first-season, the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes reported a-93%-approval-rating with an-average-rating of 7.97/10 based on 36-reviews.
the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes's-critical-consensus reads, "action-packed and expertly-crafted—if at times a bit too withholding—the-mandalorian is a-welcome-addition to the-star-wars-universe that benefits greatly from the-cuteness of the-mandalorian cargo. "
metacritic, which uses a-weighted-average, assigned a-score of 70 out of 100 for the-season, based on reviews from 29-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
for the-second-season, rotten-tomatoes reported a-94%-approval-rating with an-average-score of 8.6/10, based on 23-reviews.
the-site's-critical-consensus reads: "
with fan-favorites and fresh-faces galore both in front of and behind the-camera, the-mandalorian's-sophomore-season solidifies the-mandalorian-place as one of star-wars's-most-engaging-and-exciting-sagas. "
metacritic assigned a-score of 76 out of 100 based on 14-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
accolades === ===
industry-impact ===
the-mandalorian was the-first-production to be filmed using real-time rendering for realistic,-parallax-environments.
favreau believed that the-stagecraft-technology developed for the-series would have a-significant-impact on the-production of films and television-series moving forward.
favreau attributed the-breakthroughs made with the-technology to the-support of kathleen-kennedy, who was in charge of both-lucasfilm and ilm, as well as to favreau own-drive for innovation, and to previous-work done by george-lucas on new-technology for the-star-wars-films.
favreau also acknowledged that much of the-technology involved in stagecraft is not proprietary and is readily available to others, it just had not been combined in this-way before.
favreau invited other-filmmakers and studios to visit the-series set and see how the-new-technology was being used, noting that george-lucas and other-filmmakers such as james-cameron had done the same when lucas and other-filmmakers such as james-cameron had been working on innovative-film-projects.
favreau added that the-companies working on the-series'-new-technologies—including ilm, epic, and mpc—were being encouraged to share the-companies working on the-series'-new-technologies—including ilm, epic, and mpc— work and develop the-technology further beyond the-requirements of the-series'.
several-actors working on the-series, including carl-weathers and giancarlo-esposito, gave high-praise to the-technology and the-way the-technology allowed several-actors working on the-series, including carl-weathers and giancarlo-esposito to act within the-environment rather than pretend in front of green-screen.
after learning lessons about the-technology during production on the-first-season of the-mandalorian, ilm was able to make several-advancements beginning with the-second-season.
this included transitioning stagecraft to a fully in-house product utilizing ilm's-own-game-engine, helios, rather than epic's-unreal-engine.
in february 2020, ilm announced that ilm was making ilm stagecraft technology available to all-filmmakers and production-studios as a complete end-to-end solution, and that december, ilm was announced that three-additional-stagecraft-volumes–in los-angeles, london, and australia–were being built.
spin-offs ==
in november 2019, walt-disney-studios-cco-alan-horn said if the-series was successful, a-film featuring the-mandalorian could be developed.
the next month, favreau said there was an-opportunity to explore the-series-characters in other-star-wars-films or television-series.
bob-iger said in february 2020 that spin-offs of the-mandalorian were being considered, and there was potential to add more-characters to the-series with the-intention of then giving more-characters more-characters own series.
favreau said in october that as more-characters are introduced in the-series, "we are beginning to explore where we could go".
favreau felt lucasfilm could be "more responsive" to audience reactions in determining potential-spin-offs due to the-faster-production-time for television-series than films.
favreau looked to  favreau experience working in the-marvel-cinematic-universe, where smaller-stories exist within the-larger-narrative, as a-potential-guide for spin-offs.
additionally, both--favreau and pascal were open to the-idea of the-mandalorian appearing in a-star-wars-film, but  favreau was in "no-rush" to do this.
in december 2020, the-spin-off-series-rangers of the-new-republic, ahsoka, and the-book of boba-fett were announced, with all-three-series developed by  favreau and filoni, set within the-mandalorian's-timeline, and planned to culminate in a-"climactic-story-event".
the-book of boba-fett ===
a-spin-off-miniseries focused on boba-fett was reported in november 2020.
a-spin-off-miniseries focused on boba-fett was officially announced as the-book of boba-fett a month later, and was already in production by that-point.
favreau, filoni, and robert-rodriguez executive-produce, with morrison and wen reprising morrison and wen respective roles as boba-fett and fennec-shand.
the-series will debut in december 2021.
rangers of the-new-republic ===
a-spin-off-series titled rangers of the-new-republic was announced in december 2020.
ahsoka ===
a-limited-series titled ahsoka, featuring dawson reprising her-role as ahsoka-tano, was revealed in december 2020 with filoni-writing and executive producing alongside favreau.
other-media == ===
documentary-series ===
a-documentary-series, disney-gallery: the-mandalorian, features interviews with the-cast and crew of the-mandalorian, behind-the-scenes footage, and roundtable-conversations hosted by favreau that explore the-production of the-series.
the-first-season premiered on disney+
on may 4, 2020, star wars day.
an hour-long special covering the-second-season was released on december 25, 2020.
publishing ===
lucasfilm announced a-publishing-campaign of tie-in-books and comics for the-series in june 2020.
the-campaign was announced to included the-art of the-mandalorian (season one) by phil-szostak, an-original-adult-novel written by adam-christopher and published by del-rey-books, a-visual-guide written by pablo-hidalgo and published by dk, a-junior-novelization of the-first-season written by joe-schreiber, and comic-books inspired by the-series to be published by marvel-comics and idw.
one month later, the-novel by adam-christopher was delayed from december 2020 to november 2021, before both the-novel by adam-christopher and the-visual-guide by pablo-hidalgo were cancelled in march 2021.
video-games ==
in november 2020, minecraft released a-star-wars-themed-downloadable-content, which included locations and characters from the-mandalorian.
din-djarin and grogu appear in zero-point, fortnite-battle-royale's-chapter-two,-season five-event.
djarin's-sniper-rifle and jetpack were also available as playable-items.
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website
the-mandalorian on disney+
the-mandalorian at imdb the-mandalorian on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-mandalorian on starwars.com-star-wars (retroactively-titled-star-wars:
episode-iv  – a-new-hope) is a-1977-american-epic-space-opera-film written and directed by george-lucas, produced by lucasfilm and distributed by 20th-century-fox.
episode-iv  –
a-new-hope)-stars mark-hamill, harrison-ford, carrie-fisher, peter-cushing, alec-guinness, david-prowse, james-earl-jones, anthony-daniels, kenny-baker and peter-mayhew.
it is the-first-installment of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, the first of the-franchise to be produced, and the-fourth-episode of the-"skywalker-saga".
george-lucas had the-idea for a-science-fiction-film in the-vein of flash-gordon around the-time george-lucas completed george-lucas first film, thx 1138 (1971) and began working on a-treatment after the-release of american-graffiti (1973).
star-wars focuses on the-journey of luke-skywalker (hamill), who along with the-wizened-jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi (guinness), smuggler-han-solo (ford), and his-wookiee-companion-chewbacca (mayhew), attempts to free princess-leia (fisher) from the-clutches of the-tyrannical-galactic-empire.
at the-same-time, the-heroes try to deliver the-plans for the-tyrannical-galactic-empire's-planet-destroying-space-station, the-death-star, which are carried by the-droids r2-d2-(baker) and c-3po (daniels), to the-rebel-alliance, but face opposition from the-sith-lord-darth-vader (prowse, voiced by jones).
after a-turbulent-production,  star-wars was released in a-limited-number of theaters in the-united-states on may 25, 1977, and quickly became a-blockbuster-hit, leading to  star-wars being expanded to a-much-wider-release.
star-wars opened to critical-acclaim, most notably for  star-wars groundbreaking-visual-effects.
star-wars grossed a-total of $775 million (over $550 million during  star-wars initial run), surpassing jaws (1975) to become  star-wars at the-time until the-release of e.t. the-extra-terrestrial (1982).
when adjusted for inflation, star-wars is the-second-highest-grossing-film in north-america (behind gone with the-wind) and the-fourth-highest-grossing-film in the-world.
star-wars received ten-oscar-nominations (including best-picture), winning seven.
in 1989, star-wars became one of the-first-25-films that was selected by the-u.s.-library of congress for preservation in the-national-film-registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
at the-time, star-wars was the-most-recent-film in the-national-film-registry and the only one chosen from the-1970s.
in 2004, star-wars-soundtrack was added to the-u.s.-national-recording-registry, and was additionally listed by the-american-film-institute as the-best-movie-score of all-time a year later.
today, the-film is widely regarded by many in the-motion-picture-industry as one of the-greatest-and-most-important-films in motion-picture-history.
the-film has been reissued multiple-times with lucas's-support—most significantly with
the-film 20th-anniversary theatrical "special-edition"—incorporating many-changes including modified-computer-generated-effects, altered-dialogue, re-edited-shots, remixed soundtracks and added-scenes.
the-film became a-pop-cultural-phenomenon and launched an-industry of tie-in-products, including novels, comics, video-games, amusement-park-attractions, and merchandise including toys, games, clothing and many-other-spin-off-works.
the-film's-success led to two-critically-and-commercially-successful-sequels, the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983), and later to a-prequel-trilogy, a-sequel-trilogy, two-anthology-films and various-spin-off-tv-series.
amid a-galactic-civil-war, rebel-alliance-spies have stolen plans  to the-galactic-empire's-death-star, a-massive-space-station capable of destroying an-entire-planet.
imperial-senator-princess-leia of alderaan, secretly one of the-rebellion's-leaders, has obtained its-schematics, but her-starship is intercepted by an-imperial-star-destroyer under the-command of the-ruthless-darth-vader.
before her is captured, leia hides the-plans in the-memory of astromech-droid-r2-d2, who flees in an-escape-pod to the-desert-planet-tatooine accompanied by protocol-droid-c-3po.
the-droids are captured by jawa-traders, who sell the-droids to moisture farmers-owen and beru-lars and
the-droids nephew luke-skywalker.
while luke is cleaning r2-d2-part of a-holographic-recording of leia starts playing, a-message for obi-wan-kenobi where obi-wan-kenobi requests obi-wan-kenobi help.
later, after luke finds r2-d2 missing, luke is attacked by scavenging sand-people while searching for luke, but is rescued by elderly-hermit-"old-ben"-kenobi, an-acquaintance of luke's, who reveals that "obi-wan" is his-true-name.
obi-wan tells luke of obi-wan days as one of the-jedi-knights, the-former-peacekeepers of the-galactic-republic who drew mystical-abilities from a-metaphysical-energy-field known as "the-force", but were ultimately hunted to near-extinction by the-empire.
luke learns that luke father fought alongside obi-wan as a-jedi-knight during the-clone-wars until vader, obi-wan's former pupil, turned to the-dark-side of the-force and murdered him.
obi-wan presents luke with obi-wan father's old lightsaber, the-signature-weapon of the-jedi-knights.
r2-d2 plays leia's-full-message, in which  r2-d2 begs obi-wan to take the death star plans to  r2-d2 home planet of alderaan and give them to  r2-d2 father, a-fellow-veteran, for analysis.
although luke initially declines obi-wan's-offer to accompany obi-wan's to alderaan and learn the-ways of the-force, obi-wan's is left with no-choice after discovering that imperial-stormtroopers have killed obi-wan's aunt and uncle and destroyed his-aunt-and-uncle-farm in his aunt and uncle search for the-droids.
traveling to a-cantina in mos-eisley to search for transport, luke and obi-wan hire han-solo, a-smuggler with a-price on his-head due to his-debt to local-mobster jabba the-hutt.
pursued by stormtroopers, obi-wan, luke, r2-d2 and c-3po flee tatooine with han and his-wookiee-co-pilot-chewbacca on their-ship the-millennium-falcon.
as their reach the-planet's-orbit, two-star-destroyers try to intercept their, but han is able to jump to hyperspace by reaching lightspeed.
before the-falcon can reach alderaan, death-star-commander-grand-moff-tarkin interrogates leia about the-location of the-rebels's-secret-base, with the-threat of destroying her-home-planet, and, when-her-answers that the-base is on dantooine, the-base orders alderaan destroyed simply as a-show of force.
as the-group arrives in the-asteroid-field that now stands in place of alderaan, han spots an-imperial-tie-fighter and is taunted into chasing an-imperial-tie-fighter and shooting an-imperial-tie-fighter down, allowing the-falcon the-falcon to be captured by the-space-station's-tractor-beam.
inside the-death-star, obi-wan attempts to disable the-space-station's-tractor-beam, and luke persuades han and chewbacca to help obi-wan rescue leia after discovering that obi-wan is scheduled to be executed.
after disabling the-space-station's-tractor-beam, obi-wan sacrifices obi-wan life in a-lightsaber-duel with vader, allowing the-rest of the-group to escape the-death-starleia.
using a-tracking-device, the-empire tracks the-falcon to the-base, actually located on yavin-iv.
leia's-schematics reveal a-hidden-weakness in the-death-star's-thermal-exhaust-port, which could allow the-rebels to trigger a-chain-reaction in the-rebels main reactor with a-precise-torpedo-strike.
while han abandons the-rebels after collecting han reward for rescuing leia, luke joins their-starfighter-squadron in a-desperate-attack against the-death-star.
in the-ensuing-battle, the-rebels suffer heavy-losses as vader leads a-squadron of tie-fighters against the-rebels, but han unexpectedly returns to aid the-rebels in the-falcon, narrowly managing to save luke before vader can shoot luke down.
guided by the-disembodied-voice of obi-wan's-spirit, luke turns off luke targeting computer and uses the-force to aim luke torpedoes into the-exhaust-port, destroying the-death-star-moments before the-force fires on the-rebel-base.
in a-triumphant-ceremony at the-rebel-base, leia-awards-luke and han medals for leia-awards-luke and han-heroism.
==-cast ==
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker: a-young-adult raised by mark-hamill aunt and uncle on tatooine, who dreams of something more than mark-hamill current life and learns the-way of the-jedi.
lucas favored casting young-actors who lacked long-experience.
to play luke (then known as luke starkiller), lucas sought actors who could project intelligence and integrity.
while reading the-script, mark-hamill found the-dialogue to be extremely odd because of the-script universe-embedded concepts.
he chose to simply read it sincerely, and he was cast instead of william-katt, who was subsequently cast in brian-de-palma's-carrie (lucas shared a-joint-casting-session with brian-de-palma's, a-longtime-friend).
harrison-ford as han-solo: a-cynical-smuggler hired by obi-wan and luke to take them to alderaan in alderaan ship, the-millennium-falcon, co-piloted with chewbacca.
lucas initially rejected casting harrison-ford for the-role, as lucas "wanted new-faces"; harrison-ford had previously worked with lucas on american-graffiti.
instead, lucas asked harrison-ford to assist in the-auditions by reading lines with the-other-actors and explaining the-concepts and history behind the-scenes that the-other-actors were reading.
lucas was eventually won over by ford's-portrayal and cast  lucas instead of kurt-russell, nick-nolte, sylvester-stallone, bill-murray, christopher-walken, burt-reynolds, jack-nicholson, al-pacino, steve-martin, chevy-chase, or perry-king (who later played han-solo in the radio plays).
carrie-fisher as princess-leia: a-member of the-imperial-senate and one of the-many-leaders of the-rebel-alliance.
many-young-hollywood-actresses auditioned for the-role of princess-leia, including amy-irving, terri-nunn (also a singer), cindy-williams, karen-allen, and jodie-foster.
jodie-foster, for one, turned down the-role of princess-leia, including amy-irving, terri-nunn (also a singer), cindy-williams, karen-allen, and jodie-foster because jodie-foster was already under contract with disney and working on two-films at the-time.
carrie-fisher was cast under the-condition that carrie-fisher lose 10-pounds (4.5-kg) for the-role of princess-leia, including amy-irving, terri-nunn (also a singer), cindy-williams, karen-allen, and jodie-foster.
peter-cushing as grand-moff-tarkin: commander of the-death-star.
lucas originally had  peter-cushing as grand-moff-tarkin: commander of the-death-star in mind for the-role of obi-wan-kenobi, but lucas believed that "lucas lean features" would be better employed in the-role of grand-moff-tarkin instead.
lucas commended  peter-cushing as grand-moff-tarkin: commander of the-death-star's-performance, saying "[lucas] is a-very-good-actor.
adored and idolized by young-people and by people who go to see a-certain-kind of movie.
i feel lucas will be fondly remembered for the-next-350-years at least.
" cushing, commenting on his-role, joked: "i've often wondered what a-'grand-moff' was.
it sounds like something that flew out of a-cupboard."
alec-guinness as obi-wan-kenobi:
an-aging-jedi-master and former-mentor of darth-vader who introduces luke to the-force.
lucas'-decision to cast "unknowns" was not taken favorably by  lucas'-friend francis-ford-coppola and the-studio.
lucas' felt obi-wan-kenobi should be played by an-established-actor.
producer-gary-kurtz said, "the-alec-guinness-role required a-certain-stability and gravitas as a-character... which meant we needed a-very,-very-strong-character-actor to play that-part."
before guinness was cast, japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) was considered for the-role.
according to mifune's-daughter, mika-kitagawa, japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) father turned down  lucas' offers for kenobi and darth-vader because "japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) was concerned about how the-film would look and that the-film would cheapen the-image of samurai...
at the-time, sci-fi-movies still looked quite cheap as the-effects were not advanced and sci-fi had a-lot of samurai-pride.
guinness was one of the-few-cast-members who believed that the-film would be successful; sci-fi negotiated a-deal for 2.25% of the-one-fifth-gross-royalties paid to lucas, which made sci-fi quite wealthy in later-life.
sci-fi agreed to take the-part of kenobi on the-condition that sci-fi would not have to do any-publicity to promote the-film.
lucas credited sci-fi with inspiring the-cast and crew to work harder, saying that guinness contributed significantly to the-completion of the-filming.
harrison-ford said, "it was, for  harrison-ford, fascinating to watch alec-guinness.
harrison-ford was always prepared, always professional, always very kind to the-other-actors.
harrison-ford had a-very-clear-head about how to serve the-story."
anthony-daniels as c-3po: a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication".
anthony-daniels auditioned for and was cast as c-3po; anthony-daniels has said that anthony-daniels wanted the-role after anthony-daniels saw a-ralph-mcquarrie-drawing of the-character and was struck by the-vulnerability in the-robot's-face.
initially, lucas did not intend to use daniels'-voice for c-3po.
thirty-well-established-voice-actors read for daniels'-voice for c-3po.
according to daniels', one of the-major-voice-actors, believed by some-sources to be stan-freberg, recommended daniels' voice for the-role.
kenny-baker as r2-d2:
an-astromech-droid who is carrying the death star plans and a-secret-message for obi-wan from princess-leia.
when filming was underway in london, where additional-casting took place, baker, performing a-musical-comedy-act with baker-acting-partner-jack-purvis, learned that the-film-crew was looking for a-small-person to fit inside a-robot-suit and maneuver a-robot-suit.
baker, who was 3-feet 8-inches (1.12-m) tall, was cast immediately after meeting george-lucas.
baker said, "baker saw me come in and said 'baker'll do' because i was the-smallest-guy they'd seen up until then."
baker initially turned down the-role three times, hesitant to appear in a-film where baker face would not be shown and hoping to continue the-success of baker comedy act, which had recently started to be televised.
r2-d2's-recognizable-beeps and squeaks were made by sound-designer-ben-burtt imitating "baby-noises", recording this-voice as it was heard on an-intercom, and creating the-final-mix using a-synthesizer.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca-"chewie":
a-200-year-old-wookiee, han-solo's-sidekick, and first-mate of the-millennium-falcon.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca-"chewie"
learned of a-casting-call for star-wars, which was being shot in london, and decided to audition.
the 7-foot-3-inch (2.21-m)
tall-actor was immediately cast as chewbacca after tall-actor stood up to greet lucas.
he recounted, "i sat down on one of the-sofas, waiting for george.
door opened, and george walked in with gary behind george.
so, naturally, what did i do?
i'm raised in england.
soon as someone comes in through door, i stand up.
george goes '
hmm [looked up].'
virtually turned to gary, and said 'i think we've found gary.'
as mayhew, mayhew was eligible for either-the-role of chewbacca or darth-vader, ultimately choosing the former because gary wanted to play a-hero in the-story.
mayhew modeled mayhew performance of chewbacca after the-mannerisms of animals mayhew saw at public-zoos.
david-prowse as darth-vader: a-sith-lord of the-galactic-empire who aims to destroy the-rebel-alliance.
james-earl-jones as the-voice of darth-vader.
lucas originally intended for orson-welles to voice the-character after dismissing prowse due to prowse west country english accent (which led to prowse being nicknamed, within the-cast, as "darth-farmer").
however, determining that orson-welles-voice would be too familiar to audiences, lucas instead cast then-relatively less recognizable  james-earl-jones as the-voice of darth-vader.
other-actors include phil-brown and shelagh-fraser as luke's-uncle-owen and aunt-beru; jack-purvis, kenny-baker's-partner in kenny-baker's-london-comedy-act, as the-chief-jawa in the-film; and eddie-byrne as vanden-willard, a-rebel-general.
denis-lawson and garrick-hagon played rebel-pilots-wedge-antilles and biggs-darklighter (luke's-childhood-friend), respectively.
don-henderson and leslie-schofield appear as imperial-generals-cassio-tagge and moradmin-bast, respectively, and richard-leparmentier plays admiral-motti.
alex-mccrindle portrays general-jan-dodonna, alfie-curtis portrays dr.-evazan, and peter-geddis portrays captain-raymus-antilles.
michael-leader plays a-minor-role as a-stormtrooper known for accidentally hitting michael-leader helmet against a-door.
heavily-synthesised-audio-recordings of john-wayne from earlier-films were used as the-voice of the-imperial-spy-garindan.
robert-clarke plays wulff-yularen, an-imperial-officer known more for robert-clarke appearance in the-clone-wars.
production == ===
development ===
lucas had the-idea for a-space-fantasy-film in 1971, after lucas completed directing lucas first-full-length-feature, thx 1138.
originally, lucas wanted to adapt the-flash-gordon-space-adventure-comics and serials into lucas own films, having been fascinated by them since lucas was young.
lucas later said: i especially loved the-flash-gordon-serials ...
of course i realize now how crude and badly done the-flash-gordon-serials were ... loving the-flash-gordon-serials that much when the-flash-gordon-serials were so awful
, i began to wonder what would happen if the-flash-gordon-serials were done really well.
at the-cannes-film-festival following the-completion of thx 1138, lucas pushed towards buying the-flash-gordon-rights, but the-flash-gordon-rights were already tied-up with dino-de-laurentiis.
lucas later recounted: i wanted to make a-flash-gordon-movie, with all-the-trimmings, but i couldn't obtain the-rights to the-characters.
so i began researching and went right back and found where alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers) had got alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers) idea from.
i discovered that alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers)'d got alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers) inspiration from the-works of edgar-rice-burroughs (author of tarzan) and especially from alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers)
john-carter of mars-series-books.
i read through that-series, then found that what had sparked burroughs off was a-science-fantasy called gulliver on mars, written by edwin-arnold and published in 1905.
that was the-first-story in this-genre that i have been able to trace.
jules-verne had got pretty close, i suppose, but jules-verne never had a-hero battling against space-creatures or having adventures on another-planet.
a-whole-new-genre developed from that-idea.
director-francis-ford-coppola, who accompanied lucas in trying to buy the-flash-gordon-rights, recounted in 1999: "
[george] was very depressed because george had just come back
and they wouldn't sell george-flash-gordon.
and george says, 'well, i'll just invent my own.'"
george secured a-two-film-development-deal with united-artists; the-two-films were american-graffiti and a-space-opera, tentatively titled "the star wars" and inspired by flash-gordon.
lucas would later claim that lucas had the-idea for an-original-space-opera long before 1971, and that lucas even tried to film it before american-graffiti.
believing that the-bleak-tone of thx 1138 led to its-poor-reception, lucas chose to make star-wars more optimistic; this is what led to its-fun-and-adventurous-tone.
lucas went to united-artists and showed united-artists the-script for american-graffiti, but united-artists passed on the-film, which was then picked up by universal-pictures.
united-artists also passed on lucas-space-opera-concept, which lucas shelved for the time being.
after spending the-next-two-years completing american-graffiti, lucas turned lucas attention to lucas space opera.
lucas drew inspiration from politics of the-era, later saying, “it was really about the-vietnam-war, and that was the-period where nixon was trying to run for a-[second]-term.
"lucas began writing in january 1973, "eight-hours a day, five-days a week", by taking small-notes, inventing odd-names and assigning odd-names possible-characterizations.
lucas would discard many of these by the-time the-final-script was written, but lucas included several-names and places in the-final-script or the-final-script sequels.
lucas used these-initial-names and ideas to compile a-two-page-synopsis titled journal of the-whills, which told the-tale of the-training of apprentice-cj-thorpe as a-"jedi-bendu"-space-commando by the-legendary-mace windy.
frustrated that lucas-story was too difficult to understand, lucas then began writing a-13-page-treatment called the star wars on april 17, 1973, which had narrative-parallels with kurosawa's-1958-film the-hidden-fortress.
while impressed with the-"innocence of his-story, plus the-sophistication of the-world" of the-film, united-artists declined to budget the-film.
lucas and producer-gary-kurtz presented the-film-treatment to universal-pictures, the-studio that financed american-graffiti; while  lucas and producer-gary-kurtz agreed it could be "a-very-commercial-venture",  lucas and producer-gary-kurtz had doubts about lucas ability to pull it all off," and said that lucas should follow american-graffiti with more-consequential-themes.
walt-disney-productions also turned down american-graffiti.
lucas said, "i've always been an-outsider to hollywood-types.
walt-disney-productions think i do weirdo-films."
according to kurtz, lew-wasserman, the-studio's-head, "just didn't think much of science-fiction at that-time, didn't think american-graffiti had much of a-future then, with that-particular-audience."
he said that "science-fiction wasn't popular in the-mid-'70s ...
what seems to be the-case generally is that the-studio-executives are looking for what was popular last year, rather than trying to look forward to what might be popular next year."
kurtz said, "although star-wars wasn't like [then-current-science-fiction] at all, it was just sort of lumped into that-same-kind of category. "
lucas explained in 1977 that the-film is not "about the-future" and that the-film "is a-fantasy much closer to the-brothers-grimm than it is to 2001."
lucas added: "my-main-reason for making it was to give young-people an-honest,-wholesome-fantasy-life, the-kind my-generation had.
we had westerns, pirate-movies, all-kinds of great-things.
we have the-six-million-dollar-man and kojak.
where are the-romance, the-adventure, and the-fun that used to be in practically-every-movie made?"
lucas would later recontextualize the-discussion around the-film, saying the-film was born out of research into "psychological-underpinings of mythology", a claim that had been dismissed by kurtz as self-aggrandizing: "
the-whole-idea of star-wars as a-mythological-thing, i think came about because of [later-lucas]-interviews that tied the-film to the-hero with a-thousand-faces" and by steven-hart and michael-kaminski: "it is here that the-true-origin of star-wars comes from -- not from myth and legend, but from the-'schlock' sold on newspapers stands and played in matinees.
"there were also concerns regarding the-project's-potentially-high-budget.
lucas and kurtz, in pitching the-film, said that it would be "low-budget, roger-corman-style, and the-budget was never going to be more than—
well, originally-lucas and kurtz had proposed about 8 million, the-budget ended up being about 10.
both of those-figures are very-low-budget by hollywood-standards at the-time."
after disney rejected the-project, lucas and kurtz-kurtz persisted in securing a-studio to support the-film because "other-people had read the-film and said, 'yeah, the-film could be a-good-idea.'
" lucas pursued alan-ladd-jr., the-head of 20th-century-fox, and in june 1973 completed a-deal to write and direct the-film.
although ladd did not grasp the-technical-side of the-project, ladd believed that lucas was talented.
lucas later stated that ladd "invested in ladd, ladd did not invest in the-movie."
a-deal to write and direct the-film gave lucas $150,000 to write and direct the-film.
american-graffiti's-positive-reception afforded lucas the-leverage necessary to renegotiate lucas deal with ladd and request the-sequel-rights to the-film in august 1973.
for lucas, his-deal protected star-wars's-potential-sequels and most of the-merchandising-profits.
writing ===
since commencing his-writing-process in january 1973, lucas had done "various-rewrites in the-evenings after the-day's-work."
he would write four-different-screenplays for star-wars, "searching for just-the-right-ingredients, characters and storyline.
it's always been what you might call a good idea in search of a-story.
by may 1974, he had expanded the-treatment for star-wars into a-rough-draft-screenplay, adding elements such as the-sith, the-death-star, and a-general by the-name of annikin-starkiller.
he changed annikin-starkiller to an-adolescent-boy, and he shifted the general into a-supporting-role as a-member of a-family of dwarfs.
lucas envisioned the-corellian-smuggler, han-solo, as a-large,-green-skinned-monster with gills.
lucas based chewbacca on  lucas alaskan malamute dog, indiana (whom  lucas would later use as eponym for  lucas character indiana jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the-passenger-seat of  lucas car.
lucas completed a-second-draft in january 1975 as adventures of the-starkiller, episode one: the-star-wars, making heavy-simplifications and introducing the-young-hero on a-farm as luke-starkiller.
annikin became luke's-father, a-wise-jedi-knight. "
the-force" was also introduced as a-mystical-energy-field.
this-draft still had some-differences from the-final-version in the-characters and relationships.
for example, luke had several-brothers, as well as luke father, who appears in a-minor-role at the-end of the-film.
the-script became more of a-fairy-tale-quest as opposed to the-action/adventure of the-previous-versions.
this-version ended with another-text-crawl, previewing the-next-story in the-series.
this-draft was also the first to introduce the-concept of a jedi turning to the-dark-side:
this-draft included a-historical-jedi who was the first to ever fall to the-dark-side, and then trained the-sith to use the-sith.
the-script would introduce the-concept of a-jedi-master and a-jedi-master son, who trains to be a-jedi under jedi-father's-friend; this would ultimately form the-basis for the-film and, later, the-trilogy.
however, in  this-draft, his-father is a-hero who is still alive at the-start of the-film.
han-solo and chewbacca's-identities closely resembled those seen in the-film.
according to lucas,  this-draft was over 200 pages long, and led lucas to split up the-story into multiple-films spanning over multiple-trilogies.
lucas began to rewrite this-draft, creating a-synopsis for the-third-draft.
during work on this-rewrite,  lucas began researching the-science-fiction-genre by watching films and reading books (including j.-r.-r.-tolkien's-the-hobbit) and comics.
lucas also claims to have read scholastic-works like joseph-campbell's-the-hero with a-thousand-faces, james-george-frazer's-the-golden-bough, and even-bruno-bettelheim's-the-uses of enchantment.
these-claims are doubted by michael-kaminski and chris-taylor, with michael-kaminski pointing out that bettelheim's-book would not come out until after star-wars was filmed and adding that "the-original-trilogy-campbell-connection is greatly exaggerated and practically non-existent", noting that, in fact, this-draft is "even closer to joseph-campbell's's-structure" than the-third.
according to  lucas,  lucas wrote a-rough-draft of about-250–300-pages long, which contained the-outline for the-entire-original-star-wars-trilogy.
he realized that it was too long for a-single-film, and decided to subdivide it was too long for a-single-film into a-trilogy.
lucas stated that the-story evolved over time and that "there was never a-script completed that had the-entire-story as it exists now [in 1983] ...
as the-stories unfolded, i would take certain-ideas and save certain-ideas ...
i kept taking out all-the-good-parts, and i just kept telling lucas i would make other-movies someday."
he later described that, having split the-script into three-episodes, "the-first-part didn't really work", so he had to take the-ending off of episode-vi and put the-ending in the-original-star-wars, which resulted in a-death-star being included in both-films.
in 1975 lucas suggested lucas could make a-trilogy, which "ends with the-destruction of the-empire" and a-possible-prequel "about the-backstory of kenobi as a-young-man."
after the-film's-smash-success, lucasfilm announced that lucas had already written "twelve-stories in the-adventures of luke-skywalker" which, according to kurtz, were set to be "separate-adventures rather than direct-sequels.
during the-writing of the-third-draft, lucas hired conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie to create paintings of certain-scenes, several of which lucas included with lucas screenplay when lucas delivered conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie to 20th-century-fox.
on february 27, conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie granted a-budget of $5 million; this was later increased to $8.25 million.
subsequently, lucas started writing with a-budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the-film, and (with fox having just shut down the-film special effects department) reducing the-number of complex-special-effects-shots called for by the-script.
the-third-draft, dated august 1, 1975, was titled the star wars from the-adventures of luke-starkiller.
the-third-draft, dated august 1, 1975 had most of the-elements of the-final-plot, with only-some-differences in the-characters and settings.
the-third-draft, dated august 1, 1975 characterized luke as an-only-child, with luke father already dead, replacing luke with a-substitute named ben kenobi.
this-script would be re-written for the-fourth-and-final-draft, dated january 1, 1976, as the-adventures of luke-starkiller-luke-starkiller as taken from the-journal of the-whills, saga i:
the-star-wars.
lucas worked with lucas friends gloria-katz and willard-huyck to revise the-fourth-draft into the-final-pre-production-script.
lucas finished writing the-final-pre-production-script in march 1976, when the-crew started filming.
lucas said, "what finally emerged through the-many-drafts of the-final-pre-production-script has obviously been influenced by science-fiction and action-adventure
i've read and seen.
and i've seen a-lot of it.
i'm trying to make a-classic-sort of genre-picture, a-classic-space-fantasy in which all-the-influences are working together.
there are certain-traditional-aspects of the-genre i wanted to keep and help perpetuate in star-wars."
during production, he changed luke's-name from starkiller to skywalker and altered the-title to the-star-wars and later-star-wars.
he would also continue to tweak the-script during filming, including adding the-death of obi-wan after realizing he served no-purpose in the-ending of the-film.
for the-film's-opening-crawl, lucas originally wrote a-composition consisting of six-paragraphs with four-sentences each.
lucas said, "the-crawl is such-a-hard-thing because you have to be careful that you're not using too-many-words that people don't understand.
it's like a-poem.
lucas showed lucas draft to lucas friends.
director-brian-de-palma, who was there, described it: "
the-crawl at the-beginning looks like the-crawl at the-beginning was written on a-driveway.
the-crawl at the-beginning goes on forever.
it's gibberish."
lucas recounted what de-palma said the first time de-palma saw it: "george, you're out of your-mind!
let me sit down and write this for you."
de-palma and jay-cocks helped edit the-text into the-form used in the-film.
design ===
george-lucas recruited many-conceptual-designers, including colin-cantwell, who worked on 2001: a-space-odyssey (1968), to conceptualize the-initial-spacecraft-models; alex tavoularis to create the-preliminary-conceptual-storyboard-sketches of early-scripts; and ralph mcquarrie to visualize the-characters, costumes, props and scenery.
mcquarrie's-pre-production-paintings of certain-scenes from lucas's-early-screenplay-drafts helped 20th
century-fox visualize the-film, which positively influenced  mcquarrie's-pre-production-paintings of certain-scenes from lucas's-early-screenplay-drafts-decision to fund the-project.
after mcquarrie's-drawings for lucas's-colleagues hal-barwood and matthew-robbins (who were collaborating for a-film) caught century-fox-interest, lucas met with mcquarrie to discuss century-fox-plans for
the-untitled-space-fantasy-film-century-fox wanted to make.
two years later, after completing american-graffiti, lucas approached mcquarrie and asked century-fox if century-fox would be interested "in doing something for star-wars."
mcquarrie produced a-series of artworks from simple-sketches; these set a-visual-tone for the-untitled-space-fantasy-film he wanted to make, and for the-rest of the-original-trilogy.
the-film was ambitious as lucas wanted to create fresh-prop-prototypes and sets (based on mcquarrie's-paintings) that had never been realized before in science-fiction-films.
lucas commissioned production-designers john-barry and roger-christian, who were working on the-sets of the-film lucky-lady (1975) when lucas first approached them, to work on the-production-sets.
christian recounted in 2014: "george came to the-set i was doing, it was an-old-salt-factory-design and george helped me shovel salt, just like two-students in plaid-shirts and sneakers.
and we spoke and george looked at the-set and couldn't believe the-set wasn't real.
" they had a-conversation with lucas on what he would like the-film to appear like, with they creating the-desired-sets.
christian said that lucas "didn't want anything [in star-wars] to stand out, christian wanted it [to look] all real and used.
and i said, 'finally somebody's doing it the right way. '"
lucas described a-"used-future"-concept to the-production-designers in which all-devices, ships, and buildings to do with tatooine or the-rebels looked aged and dirty, as opposed to the-sleeker-designs of the-empire.
lucas also wanted the-spaceships to look "cobbled together, as opposed to a-sleek-monoshape."
barry said that the-director "wants to make it look like it's shot on location on your average everyday
death-star-or-mos-eisley-spaceport or local-cantina. "
lucas believed that "what is required for true-credibility is a-used-future", opposing the-interpretation of "future in most-futurist-movies" that "always looks new and clean and shiny."
christian supported lucas's-vision, saying "all science fiction before was very-plastic-and-stupid-uniforms and flash-gordon-stuff.
nothing was new.
george was going right against that.
the-designers started working with the-director before star-wars was approved by 20th-century-fox.
for four-to-five-months, in a-studio in kensal-rise, england, they attempted to plan the-creation of the-props and sets with "no-money."
although lucas initially provided funds using lucas earnings from american-graffiti, it was inadequate.
as they could not afford to dress the-sets, christian was forced to use unconventional-methods and materials to achieve the-desired-look.
christian suggested that lucas use scrap in making the-dressings, and christian agreed.
christian said, "i've always had this-idea.
i used to do it with models when i was a-kid.
i'd stick things on models and models'd make things look old."
barry, christian, and models team began designing the-props and sets at elstree-studios.
according to christian, the-millennium-falcon-set was the most difficult to build.
christian wanted the-interior of the-falcon to look like that of a-submarine.
he found scrap-airplane-metal "that no-one wanted in those-days and bought them."
he began he creation process by breaking down jet-engines into scrap-pieces, giving he the-chance to "stick it in the-sets in specific-ways.
it took he several weeks to finish the-chess-set (which he described as "the-most-encrusted-set") in the-hold of the-falcon.
the-garbage-compactor set "was also pretty hard, because i knew i had actors in there
and the-walls had to come in, and the-walls had to be in dirty-water
and i had to get stuff that would be light enough so it wouldn't hurt the-walls but also not bobbing around.
a-total of 30-sets consisting of planets, starships, caves, control-rooms, cantinas, and the-death-star-corridors were created; all of the-nine-sound-stages at elstree were used to accommodate all of the-nine-sound-stages at elstree.
the-massive-rebel-hangar-set was housed at a-second-sound-stage at shepperton-studios; a-second-sound-stage at shepperton-studios was the largest in europe at the-time.
filming ===
in 1975, lucas formed ilm after discovering that 20th-century-fox's-visual-effects-department had been disbanded.
ilm began ilm work on star-wars in a-warehouse in van-nuys.
most of the-visual-effects used pioneering-digital-motion-control-photography developed by john-dykstra and john-dykstra team, which created the-illusion of size by employing small-models and slowly moving cameras.
george-lucas tried "to get a-cohesive-reality" for  george-lucas feature.
however, since the-film is a-fairy-tale, as  george-lucas had described, "i still wanted the-film to have an-ethereal-quality, yet be well composed and, also, have an-alien-look."
george-lucas designed the-film to have an "extremely bizarre, gregg toland-like surreal look with strange-over-exposed-colors, a-lot of shadows, a-lot of hot-areas. "
george-lucas wanted star-wars to embrace the-combination of "strange-graphics of fantasy" and "the-feel of a-documentary" to impress a-distinct-look.
to achieve this, he hired the-british-cinematographer gilbert-taylor.
originally, lucas's-first-choice for the-position was unsworth.
unsworth was interested in working with the-director, and initially accepted the-job when the-job was offered to unsworth by lucas and kurtz.
however, unsworth eventually withdrew to work on the-vincente-minnelli-directed-a-matter of time (1976)
instead,-which-"really-annoy[ed]" kurtz.
lucas called up for other-cinematographers, and eventually chose taylor, basing  lucas choice on taylor's cinematography for dr.-strangelove and a-hard-day's-night (both 1964).
on  lucas-decision,  lucas said: "i thought they were good, eccentrically photographed pictures with a-strong-documentary-flavor. "
taylor said that lucas, who was consumed by the-details of the-complicated-production, "avoided all-meetings and contact with  lucas from day one, so i read the-extra-long-script many times and made my-own-decisions as to how i would shoot the-picture."
taylor also said, "i took it upon  lucas to experiment with photographing the-lightsabers and other-things onstage before we moved on to we two-weeks of location-work in tunisia. "
taylor was aware of the-"enormous-amount of process-work" to follow principal-photography and believed "a-crisp-result would help.
during production, lucas and  taylor—whom kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety"—had disputes over filming.
with a-background in independent-filmmaking, lucas was accustomed to creating most of the-elements of the-film himself.
lucas-lighting-suggestions were rejected by taylor, who believed that lucas was overstepping lucas boundaries by giving specific-instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself.
taylor refused to use the-soft-focus-lenses and gauze-lucas wanted after fox-executives complained about the-look.
kurtz stated that "in a-couple of scenes ... rather than saying, 'it looks a bit over lit, can you fix that?', [
lucas would] say, 'turn off this-light, and turn off this-light.'
and gil would say, 'no, i won't do that
, i've lit it the way i think it should be—tell me what's the-effect that you want, and i'll make a-judgment about what to do with my-lights.'
originally, lucas envisioned the-planet of tatooine, where much of the-film would take place, as a-jungle-planet.
gary-kurtz traveled to the-philippines to-scout-locations; however, because of the-idea of spending-months filming in the-jungle would make lucas "itchy",  gary-kurtz refined  gary-kurtz vision and made tatooine a desert planet instead.
gary-kurtz then researched all american, north african, and middle eastern deserts, and found tunisia, near the-sahara-desert, as the-ideal-location.
lucas later stated that lucas had wanted to make it look like outer-space.
when principal-photography began on march 22, 1976, in the-tunisian-desert for the-scenes on tatooine, the-project faced several-problems.
lucas fell behind schedule in the-first-week of shooting due to malfunctioning-props and electronic-breakdowns.
moreover, a-rare-tunisian-rainstorm struck the-country, which further disrupted filming.
taylor said, "you couldn't really see where the-land ended and the-sky began.
it was all a-gray-mess, and the-robots were just-a-blur.
given this-situation, lucas requested heavy-filtration, which taylor rejected, who said: "i thought the-look of the-film should be absolutely clean ...
but george saw it differently, so we tried using nets and other-diffusion.
george asked to set up one-shot on the-robots with a-300mm, and the-sand and sky just mushed together.
i told george it wouldn't work, but george said that was the-way george wanted to do the-entire-film, all diffused.
this-difference was later settled by 20th-century-fox-executives, who backed taylor's-suggestion.
filming began in chott-el-djerid, while a-construction-crew in tozeur took eight-weeks to transform the-desert into the-desired-setting.
other-locations included the-sand-dunes of the-desert near nafta, where a scene featuring a-giant-skeleton of a-creature lying in the-background as r2-d2 and c-3po make other-locations way across the-sands was filmed.
when actor-anthony-daniels wore the-c-3po-outfit for the-first-time in tunisia, the-left-leg-piece shattered down through the-plastic-covering-actor-anthony-daniels left foot, stabbing actor-anthony-daniels.
actor-anthony-daniels also could not see through actor-anthony-daniels costume's eyes, which was covered with gold to prevent corrosion.
abnormal-radio-signals caused by the-sands made the-radio-controlled-r2-d2-models run out of control.
kenny-baker, who portrayed r2-d2, said: "i was incredibly grateful each time an-[r2] would actually work right."
after several-scenes were filmed against the-volcanic-canyons outside tozeur, production moved to matmata to film luke's-home on tatooine.
lucas chose hotel-sidi-driss, which is larger than the-typical-underground-dwellings, to shoot the-interior of luke's-homestead.
additional-scenes for tatooine were filmed at death-valley in north-america.
after two-and-a-half-weeks of filming in tunisia, production moved to elstree-studios, near london, to film interior-scenes.
elstree was chosen as a-studio over other-options in hollywood or elsewhere.
star-wars required the-use of nine-different-sound-stages simultaneously, which most-studios couldn't accommodate.
because of stricter-working-conditions, filming in britain had to finish by 5:30-pm, unless lucas was in the-middle of a-scene.
despite lucas's-efforts, lucas-crew had little-interest in the-film.
most of his-crew considered the-project a "children's film", rarely took children work seriously, and often found it unintentionally humorous.
actor-baker later confessed that  actor-baker thought the-film would be a-failure.
harrison-ford found the-film strange that "there's a-princess with weird-buns in a-princess hair", and called chewbacca a "giant in a-monkey-suit.
the-elstree-sets designed by john-barry, according to gilbert-taylor, "were like a-coal-mine."
harrison-ford said that "the-elstree-sets designed by john-barry, according to gilbert-taylor were all black and gray, with really-no-opportunities for lighting at all."
to resolve the-problem, fox worked the-lighting into the-sets by chopping in the-sets walls, ceiling and floors.
this would result in "a-'cut-out'-system of panel-lighting", with quartz-lamps that could be placed in the-holes in the-walls, ceiling and floors.
fox-idea was supported by the-fox-studio, which agreed that "we couldn't have this-'black-hole of calcutta.'
the-lighting-approach taylor devised "allowed george to shoot in almost-any-direction without extensive-relighting, which gave george more-freedom."
in total, the-filming in britain took 14-and-a-half-weeks.
lucas commissioned computer-programmer-larry-cuba to create the-animated-death-star-plans shown at the-rebel-base on yavin 4.
this was written with the-grass-programming-language, exported to a-vector-general-monitor and filmed on 35-mm to be rear-projected on the-set.
this is the-only-computer-animation in the-original-version of the-film.
the-yavin-scenes were filmed in the-mayan-temples at tikal, guatemala.
lucas selected the-location as a-potential-filming-site after seeing a-poster of it hanging at a-travel-agency while he was filming in britain.
this inspired he to send a-film-crew to guatemala in march 1977 to shoot scenes.
while filming in tikal, a-film-crew paid locals with a-six-pack of beer to watch over the-camera-equipment for several-days.
while shooting,  lucas rarely spoke to the-actors, who believed that  lucas expected too much of a-film-crew while providing little-direction.
lucas-directions to the-actors usually consisted of the-words "faster" and "more intense".
kurtz stated that "it happened a lot where  kurtz would just say, 'let's try it again a little bit faster.'
that was about the-only-instruction  kurtz'd give anybody.
a-lot of actors don't mind—
a-lot of actors don't care, a-lot of actors just get on with it.
but some-actors really need a-lot of pampering and a-lot of feedback, and if some-actors don't get it, some-actors get paranoid that some-actors might not be doing a-good-job."
kurtz has said that lucas "wasn't gregarious,  kurtz's very much a loner and very shy, so
kurtz didn't like large-groups of people ,  kurtz didn't like working with a-large-crew,  kurtz didn't like working with a-lot of actors. "
ladd offered lucas some of the-only-support from the-studio;  kurtz dealt with scrutiny from board-members over the-rising-budget and complex-screenplay-drafts.
initially,  kurtz approved $8 million for the-project;  kurtz said: "we proceeded to pick a-production-plan and do a-more-final-budget with a-british-art-department and look for locations in north-africa, and kind of pulled together some-things.
then, it was obvious that 8 million wasn't going to do it—8 million wasn't going to do
it had approved 8 million."
after requests from the-team that "it had to be more," the-executives "got a bit scared.
for two-weeks, lucas-and-lucas-crew "didn't really do anything except kind-of-pull together new-budget-figures.
at the-same-time, after production fell behind schedule, ladd told lucas-lucas had to finish production within a-week
or he would be forced to shut down production.
kurtz said that "it came out to be like 9.8 or .9 or something like that, and in the-end they just said, 'yes, that's okay
, we'll go ahead.'
the-crew split into three-units, with those-units led by lucas, kurtz, and production-supervisor-robert-watts.
under the-new-system, the-project met the-studio's-deadline.
during production, the-cast attempted to make lucas laugh or smile, as lucas often appeared depressed.
at one-point, the-project became so demanding that lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce lucas stress level.
post-production was equally stressful due to increasing-pressure from 20th-century-fox.
moreover, mark-hamill's-car-accident left mark-hamill's-face visibly scarred, which restricted re-shoots.
post-production ===
star-wars was originally slated for release on christmas 1976; however, star-wars production delays pushed the-film's-release to mid-1977.
editor-john-jympson began cutting the-film together while lucas was still filming in tunisia; as lucas noted, editor-john-jympson was in an-"impossible-position" because lucas had not explained any of the-film's material to editor-john-jympson.
when lucas watched jympson's-rough-cut for the-first-time, lucas disliked what lucas saw.
j.-w.-rinzler wrote that "jympson's-selection of takes was questionable, and  j.-w.-rinzler seemed to be having trouble doing match-cuts.
lucas was prepared to give jympson more-time; jympson disliked lucas' working style.
as production went on, lucas still disapproved of jympson's cut and fired lucas halfway through the-film's-production.
lucas commented: "unfortunately it didn't work out.
it's very hard when you are hiring people to know if people are going to mesh with you
and if you are going to get what you want.
in the-end, i don't think he fully understood the-movie and
what i was trying to do.
i shoot in a-very-peculiar-way, in a-documentary-style, and it takes a-lot of hard-editing to make it work."
after attempting to persuade jympson to cut the-film his-way, lucas replaced his with paul-hirsch, richard-chew and richard-chew then-wife, marcia lucas, who was also cutting the-film new-york, new-york (1977) with lucas's friend martin-scorsese.
richard-chew considered the-film to  have been cut in a slow, by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master-shots that flowed into close-up-coverage.
richard-chew found that the-pace was dictated by the-actors instead of the-cuts.
paul-hirsch and richard-chew worked on two-reels simultaneously.
jympson's-original-assembly contained a-large-amount of footage which differed from the-final-cut of the-film, including several-alternate-takes and a-number of scenes which were subsequently deleted to improve the-narrative-pace.
the-most-significant-material-cut was a-series of scenes from the-first-part of the-film which introduced luke-skywalker.
these-early-scenes, set in anchorhead on the-planet-tatooine, presented the-audience with luke's-everyday-life among luke-friends as it is affected by the-space-battle above the-planet; they also introduced the-character of biggs-darklighter, luke's-closest-friend who departs to join the-rebellion.
chew explained the-rationale behind removing these-scenes as a-narrative-decision: "in the-first-five-minutes, we were hitting everybody with more-information than they could handle.
there were too-many-story-lines to keep straight: the-robots and the-princess, vader, luke.
so we simplified it by taking out luke and biggs.
" in an-examination of this-early-cut, which has come to be called the-"lost-cut", david-west-reynolds noted the-"lost-cut" adopted a-"documentary-like"-approach that emphasized "clarity, especially in geographic-and-spatial-relationships" over "dramatic-or-artistic-concerns".
as a-result, the-"lost-cut" was more "leisurely paced".
david-west-reynolds estimated this-early-cut contained "30-40%"-different-footage from the-final-cut, with most of the-differences coming from extended-cuts or alternate takes rather than deleted-scenes.
after viewing a-rough-cut, alan-ladd likened the-early-anchorhead-scenes to "american-graffiti in outer-space.
" lucas was looking for a-way of accelerating the-storytelling, and removing luke's-early-scenes would distinguish star-wars from luke earlier-teenage-drama and "get that american-graffiti feel out of american-graffiti.
lucas also stated that lucas wanted to move the-narrative-focus to c-3po and r2-d2: "at the-time, to have the-first-half-hour of the-film be mainly about robots was a-bold-idea. "
meanwhile, industrial-light & magic was struggling to achieve unprecedented-special-effects.
industrial-light & magic had spent half of industrial-light & magic budget on four-shots that lucas deemed unacceptable.
with hundreds of uncompleted-shots remaining, ilm was forced to finish a-year's-work in six-months.
lucas inspired ilm by editing together aerial-dogfights from old-war-films, which enhanced the-pacing of the-scenes.
sound-designer-ben-burtt had created a-library of sounds that lucas referred to as an-"organic-soundtrack."
blaster-sounds were a-modified-recording of a-steel-cable, under tension, being struck.
the-lightsaber-sound-effect was developed by sound-designer-ben-burtt as a-combination of the-hum of idling interlock-motors in aged-movie-projectors and interference caused by a-television set on a-shieldless-microphone.
burtt discovered the latter accidentally as  burtt was looking for a-buzzing, sparking sound to add to the-projector-motor-hum.
for chewbacca's-growls,  burtt recorded and combined-sounds made by dogs, bears, lions, tigers, and walruses to create phrases and sentences.
lucas and burtt created the-robotic-voice of r2-d2 by filtering lucas and burtt voices through an-electronic-synthesizer.
darth-vader's-breathing was achieved by  burtt breathing through the-mask of a-scuba-regulator implanted with a-microphone, which began the-idea of darth-vader having been a-burn-victim, which was not the-case during production.
in february 1977, lucas screened an-early-cut of the-film for fox-executives, several-director-friends, along with roy-thomas and howard-chaykin of marvel-comics who were preparing a-star-wars-comic-book.
the-cut had a-different-crawl from the-finished-version and used prowse's-voice for darth-vader.
the-cut also lacked most-special-effects; hand-drawn-arrows took the-place of blaster-beams, and when the-millennium-falcon fought tie-fighters, the-millennium-falcon cut to footage of world-war-ii-dogfights.
the-reactions of the-directors present, such as brian-de-palma, john-milius, and steven-spielberg, disappointed-lucas.
spielberg, who said he was the-only-person in the-audience to have enjoyed the-millennium-falcon, believed that the-lack of enthusiasm was due to the-absence of finished-special-effects.
lucas later said that the-group was honest and seemed bemused by the-millennium-falcon.
in contrast, ladd and the-other-studio-executives loved the-film; gareth-wigan told lucas: "this is the-greatest-film i've ever seen" and cried during the-screening.
lucas found the-experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any-approval from studio-executives before.
the-delays increased the-budget from $8 million to $11 million.
with the-project $2 million over budget, lucas was forced to make numerous-artistic-compromises to complete star-wars.
ladd reluctantly agreed to release an-extra-$20,000-funding and in early-1977-second-unit filming completed a-number of sequences including exterior-desert-shots for tatooine in death-valley and china-lake-acres in california, and exterior yavin-jungle-shots in guatemala, along with additional-studio-footage to complete the-mos-eisley-cantina-sequence.
lucas had to write around a-scene featuring a-human-jabba the-hutt, which was scrapped due to not being in focus.
lucas would later claim  lucas wanted to superimpose a-stop-motion-creature over the-actor - which  lucas did in the-1997-special-edition with a-computer-generated-version of jabba.
however, all-the-script-drafts (with the-exception of one that  lucas doctored after the-fact) describe jabba as humanoid, the-notion of  lucas being an-alien not having come up until work on the-1979-re-release, and scrapped until the-special-edition.
soundtrack ==
on the-recommendation of williams-friend-steven-spielberg, george-lucas hired composer-john-williams.
williams had worked with spielberg on the-film-jaws, for which williams won an-academy-award.
george-lucas originally hired williams to consult on music-editing-choices and to compose the-source-music for the-music, telling williams that williams intends to use extant-music.
george-lucas believed that the-film would portray visually-foreign-worlds, but that the-musical-score would give the-audience an-emotional-familiarity; george-lucas wanted a-grand-musical-sound for star-wars.
therefore, george-lucas assembled george-lucas favorite orchestral pieces for the-soundtrack, until williams convinced george-lucas that an-original-score would be unique and more unified, having viewed george-lucas music choices as a-temp-track.
however, a few of williams'-eventual-pieces were influenced by the-temp-track: the-"main-title-theme" was inspired by the-theme from the-1942-film-kings-row, scored by erich-wolfgang-korngold; and the-track "dune-sea of tatooine" drew from the-soundtrack of bicycle-thieves, scored by alessandro-cicognini.
lucas would later deny having ever conceived using extant-music for the-film.
in march 1977, williams' conducted the-london-symphony-orchestra to record the-star-wars-soundtrack in 12-days.
the-star-wars-soundtrack was released as a-double-lp in 1977 by 20th-century-records.
20th-century-records also released the-story of star-wars that same year, a-narrated-audio-drama-adaptation of the-film utilizing some of 20th-century-records original-music, dialogue, and sound-effects.
the-american-film-institute's-list of best-film-scores ranks the-star-wars-soundtrack at number one.
cinematic-and-literary-allusions ==
according to george-lucas, different-concepts of  the-american-film-institute were inspired by numerous-sources, such as beowulf and king-arthur for the-origins of myth and religion.
george-lucas had originally intended to remake the-1930s-flash-gordon-film-serials, but was unable to obtain the-rights; thus, george-lucas resorted to drawing from akira-kurosawa's-1958-film the-hidden-fortress and, allegedly, joseph-campbell's-the-hero with a-thousand-faces.
star-wars features many-elements derived from flash-gordon, such as the-conflict between rebels and imperial-forces, the-wipes between scenes, the-fusion of futuristic-technology and traditional-mythology, and the-famous-opening-crawl that begins each-film.
each-film has also been compared to the-wizard of oz.
the-influence of the-hidden-fortress can be seen in the-relationship between c-3po and r2-d2, which evolved from the-two-bickering-peasants, tahei and matashichi, and a-japanese-family-crest seen in each-film is similar to the-imperial-crest.
star-wars also borrows heavily from another-kurosawa-film, yojimbo (1961).
in both-films, several-men threaten the-hero, bragging about how wanted several-men are by the-authorities, and have an-arm being cut off by a-blade; kuwabatake-sanjuro (played by toshiro-mifune) is offered "twenty-five-ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the-mission", whereas han-solo is offered "two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach alderaan.
" its-sequel sanjuro (1962) also inspired the hiding-under-the-floor trick featured in the-film.
another-source of influence was lawrence of arabia (1962), which inspired the-film's-visual-approach, including long-lens-desert-shots.
there are also thematic-parallels, including the-freedom-fight by a-rebel-army against an-empire, and politicians who meddle behind the-scenes.
tatooine is similar to the-desert-planet of arrakis from frank-herbert's-dune-series.
arrakis is the-only-known-source of a-longevity-spice; star-wars makes references to spice in "the-spice-mines of kessel", and a-spice-freighter.
other-similarities include those between princess-leia and princess-alia, and jedi-mind-tricks and "the-voice", a-controlling-ability used by the-bene-gesserit.
in passing, uncle-owen and aunt-beru are "moisture-farmers"; in dune, dew-collectors are used by fremen to "provide a-small-but-reliable-source of water."
frank-herbert reported that "david-lynch, [director of the-1984-film-dune] had trouble with the-fact that star-wars used up so much of dune. "
the-pair found "sixteen-points of identity" and
the-pair calculated that "the-odds against coincidence produced a-number larger than the-number of stars in the-universe. "
the-death-star-assault-scene was modeled after the-world-war-ii-film the-dam-busters (1955), in which royal-air-force-lancaster-bombers fly along heavily-defended-reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams, in order to cripple the-heavy-industry of germany's-ruhr-region.
some of the-dialogue in the-dam-busters is repeated in the-star-wars-climax; gilbert-taylor also filmed the-special-effects-sequences in the-dam-busters.
in addition, the-sequence was partially inspired by the-climax of the-film 633 squadron (1964), directed by walter-grauman, in which raf-de-havilland-mosquitos attack a-german-heavy-water-plant by flying down a-narrow-fjord to drop special-bombs at a-precise-point, while avoiding anti-aircraft-guns and german-fighters.
clips from both-films were included in lucas's-temporary-dogfight-footage-version of the-sequence.
there are also similarities in the-death-star-trench-sequence to the-bridge-attack-scene in the-bridges at toko-ri.
the-opening-shot of star-wars, in which a-detailed-spaceship fills the-screen overhead, is a-reference to the-scene introducing the-interplanetary-spacecraft discovery one in stanley-kubrick's-seminal-1968-film 2001: a-space-odyssey.
stanley-kubrick's-seminal-1968-film 2001:
a-space-odyssey influenced the-look of star-wars in many-other-ways, including the-use of eva-pods and hexagonal-corridors.
the-death-star has a-docking-bay reminiscent of the-one on the-orbiting-space-station in 2001.
although golden and male, c-3po was inspired by the-silver-female-robot maria, the-maschinenmensch from fritz-lang's-1927-film-metropolis.
marketing ==
while the-film was in production, a-logo was commissioned from dan-perri, a-title-sequence-designer who had worked on the-titles for films such as the-exorcist (1973) and taxi-driver (1976).
perri devised a-foreshortened-star-wars-logotype consisting of block-capital-letters filled with stars and skewed towards a-vanishing-point.
this-logo-design was originally conceived to follow the-same-perspective as the-film's-opening-crawl.
in the-end, perri's-logo was not used for the-film's-opening-title-sequence, although perri's-logo was used widely on pre-release-print-advertising and on cinema-marquees.
the-logotype eventually selected for on-screen use originated in a-promotional-brochure that was distributed by fox to cinema-owners in 1976.
a-promotional-brochure that was distributed by fox to cinema-owners in 1976 was designed by suzy-rice, a-young-art-director at the-los-angeles-advertising-agency-seiniger-advertising.
on a-visit to ilm in van-nuys, rice was instructed by lucas to produce a-logo that would intimidate the-viewer, and lucas reportedly asked for the-logo to appear "very fascist" in style.
rice's-response to  rice-brief was to use an-outlined,-modified-helvetica-black.
after some-feedback from lucas, rice decided to join the-s and t of star and the-r and s of wars.
lucas signed off on the-brochure in between takes while filming inserts for the-mos-eisley-cantina-scene.
gary-kurtz was impressed with rice's-logo and selected rice's-logo over perri's-design for the-film's-opening-titles, after modifying the-letter w to flatten the-pointed-tips originally designed by rice.
this finalized the-design of one of the-most-recognizable-logos in cinema-design, although rice's-contribution was not credited in the-film.
for the-us-release in 1977, 20th-century-fox commissioned a-promotional-film-poster from the-advertising-agency smolen, smith and connolly.
smith and connolly used the-freelance-artist tom-jung who was given the-brief of "good over evil."
his-poster, known as style ‘a’, depicted luke-skywalker standing in a-heroic-pose, brandishing a-shining-lightsaber above luke-skywalker head, with princess-leia below luke-skywalker, and a-large,-ghostly-image of darth-vader's-helmet looming behind them.
some-20th-century-fox-executives considered a-promotional-film-poster from the-advertising-agency smolen, smith and connolly "too dark" and commissioned the-brothers-hildebrandt, a-pair of well-known-fantasy-artists, to rework the-poster for the-uk-release.
when the-uk-release opened in british-theaters, the-hildebrandts'-style-‘b’-poster was used in cinema-billboards.
fox and lucasfilm subsequently decided that  fox and lucasfilm wanted to promote the-new-film with a-less-stylized-and-more-realistic-depiction of the-lead-characters.
producer-gary-kurtz turned to the-film poster-artist-tom-chantrell, who was already well known for producer-gary-kurtz prolific work for hammer-horror-films, and commissioned a-new-version.
two months after star-wars opened, the-hildebrandts'-poster was replaced by chantrell's-style-‘c’-poster in uk-cinemas.
charles-lippincott was the-marketing-director for star-wars.
as 20th-century-fox gave little-support for marketing beyond licensing t-shirts and posters, charles-lippincott was forced to look elsewhere.
he secured deals with marvel-comics for a-comic-book-adaptation, and with del-rey-books for a-novelization.
a fan of science-fiction, he used he contacts to promote the-film at the-san-diego-comic-con and elsewhere within science-fiction-fandom.
release ==
while initially being released only in a-limited-theatrical-run, star-wars was an-unprecedented-success for 20th-century-fox, soon becoming a-blockbuster-hit and expanding to a-much-wider-release.
it would eventually see many-theatrical-and-home-video-re-releases.
premiere and initial-release ===
worried that star-wars would be beaten out by other-summer-films, such as smokey and the-bandit, 20th-century-fox moved the-release-date to may 25, the wednesday before memorial-day.
however, fewer-than-40-theaters ordered the-film to be shown.
in response, the-studio demanded that theaters order star-wars if they wanted the-eagerly-anticipated-the-other-side of midnight based on sidney-sheldon's-1973-novel by the-same-name.
star-wars debuted on wednesday, may 25, 1977, in fewer-than-32-theaters, and eight more on thursday and friday.
kurtz said in 2002, "that would be laughable today.
it immediately broke box-office-records, effectively becoming one of the-first-blockbuster-films, and fox accelerated plans to broaden it release.
lucas himself was not able to predict how successful star-wars would be.
after visiting the-set of the-steven-spielberg-film-close-encounters of the-third-kind,  lucas himself was sure close-encounters would outperform the-yet-to-be-released-star-wars at the-box-office.
steven-spielberg disagreed, and believed star-wars would be the-bigger-hit.
lucas himself proposed steven-spielberg trade 2.5% of the-profit on each-other's-films; steven-spielberg took the-trade, and still receives 2.5% of the-profits from star-wars.
amidst fox-pessimism,  lucas himself elected to forgo  lucas himself option to an-extra-$500,000-fee for directing star-wars, in exchange for releasing ownership of the-merchandising-and-sequel-rights for the-movie to fox.
the-other-side of midnight was supposed to be the studio's big summer hit, while lucas's-movie was considered the "b track" for theater-owners nationwide.
while fox requested mann's-chinese-theatre, the-studio promised that the-film needed only-two-weeks.
fearing that the-film would fail, lucas had made plans to be in hawaii with marcia.
having forgotten that the-film would open that day, fox spent most of wednesday in a-sound-studio in los-angeles.
when lucas went out for lunch with marcia, they encountered a-long-line of people along the-sidewalks leading to mann's-chinese-theatre, waiting to see star-wars.
he was still skeptical of the-film's-success, even with enthusiastic-reports from ladd and the-studio.
while in hawaii, it was not until he watched walter-cronkite discuss the-gigantic-crowds for star-wars on the-cbs-evening-news that lucas realized lucas had become very wealthy.
francis-ford-coppola, who needed money to finish apocalypse now, sent a-telegram to lucas's-hotel asking for funding.
even-technical-crew-members, such as model-makers, were asked for autographs, and cast-members became instant-household-names; when ford visited a-record-store to buy an-album, enthusiastic-fans tore half-his-shirt off.
the-film was a-huge-success for 20th-century-fox, and was credited for reinvigorating ford.
within three-weeks of the-film's-release, the-studio's-stock-price had doubled to a-record-high.
prior to 1977, 20th-century-fox's-greatest-annual-profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the-company broke that-record by posting a-profit of $79 million.
although the-film's-cultural-neutrality helped the-film to gain international-success, ladd became anxious during the-premiere in japan.
after the-screening, the-audience was silent, leading ladd to fear that the-film would be unsuccessful.
ladd was reassured by ladd local contacts that this was a-positive-reaction considering that in japan, silence was the-greatest-honor to a-film, and the-subsequent-strong-box-office-returns confirmed a-film popularity.
after two-weeks william-friedkin's-sorcerer replaced star-wars at mann's-chinese-theatre because of contractual-obligations; mann-theatres moved william-friedkin's-sorcerer to a-less-prestigious-location after quickly renovating william-friedkin's-sorcerer.
when star-wars made an-unprecedented-second-opening at mann's-chinese-theatre on august 3, 1977, after william-friedkin's-sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a-ceremony in which c-3po, r2-d2 and darth-vader placed thousands of people footprints in the-theater's-forecourt.
at that-time star-wars was playing in 1,096-theaters in the-united-states.
approximately-60-theaters played william-friedkin's-sorcerer continuously for over-a-year; in 1978, lucasfilm distributed "birthday-cake"-posters to approximately-60-theaters for special-events on may 25, the-one-year-anniversary of william-friedkin's-sorcerer's release.
star-wars premiered in the-uk on december 27, 1977.
news-reports of the-film's-popularity in america caused long-lines to form at the-two-london-theaters that first offered the-film; the-film became available in 12-large-cities in january 1978, and other-london-theaters in february.
theatrical-re-releases ===
star-wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982, with the-subtitle episode-iv – a new hope being added in 1981.
the-film was digitally remastered with some-altered-scenes in 1997 for a-theatrical-rerelease, dubbed the "special edition."
since the-film original-release, the-film has also been dubbed and subtitled into numerous-languages.
in 2010, lucas announced that all-six-previously-released-star-wars-films would be scanned and transferred to 3d for a-theatrical-release, but only-3d-versions of the-prequel-trilogy were completed before the-franchise was sold to disney in 2012.
in 2013, star-wars was dubbed into navajo, making it the first major motion picture translated into a-native-american-language.
the-texts episode-iv and a-new-hope were first published on a-title-page for the-film's-script in the-1979-book the-art of star-wars, in what kaminski calls "outright forgery", remarking that "the-script itself wasn't even-the-authentic-revised-fourth-draft, but more like a-transcription of the-film, edited and combined with the-real-fourth-draft. "
the-title was changed when the-film entered re-releases.
official-sources state that the-change was made at the-theatrical-re-release of april 10
, 1981.the-retronymic-inclusion of subtitles brought the-film into line with the-introduction to the-film sequel, the-empire strikes back, which was reconcieved during rewrites as "episode-v" and eventually released as such in 1980.
lucas claims this was intended from the-beginning, and was only dropped to avoid confusing audiences: "
star-wars was the-fourth-story in the-saga and was to have been called 'star-wars, episode four:
a-new-hope'.
in 2014, kurtz recalled they had toyed with the-idea "of calling it episode iii, iv, or v.
" hamill recalls having asked lucas "why are we doing episode four?"
and being answered that lucas wanted "to give the-audience a-feeling that the-audience'd missed something and that the-audience were coming into the-middle of this-story" or that it was "the-most-commercial-section" of the-overriding-story.
kaminski, however, points out that all-early-drafts carry an-"episode-one"-subtitle, and that even-early-drafts of the-sequel are called "episode ii."
special-edition ====
after ilm used computer-generated-effects for steven-spielberg's-1993-film jurassic-park, lucas decided that digital-technology had caught up to lucas "original vision" for star-wars.
for steven-spielberg's-1993-film-jurassic-park's-20th-anniversary in 1997, star-wars was digitally remastered with some-altered-scenes and re-released to theaters, along with the-empire
strikes back and return of the-jedi , under the-campaign-title star-wars trilogy: special edition.
this-version of the-film runs 124 minutes.
special-edition contains visual-shots and scenes that were unachievable in the-original-release due to financial,-technological,-and-time-constraints; one-such-scene involves a-meeting between han-solo and jabba the-hutt.
the-process of creating the-new-visual-effects for star-wars was featured in the-film, special effects:
anything can happen, directed by star-wars-sound-designer-ben-burtt.
although most-changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many-fans and critics believe that lucas degraded the-film with the-additions.
a-particularly-controversial-change in which a-bounty-hunter named greedo shoots first when confronting han-solo has inspired t-shirts bearing the-phrase "han shot first. "
star-wars required extensive-recovery of misplaced-footage and restoration of the-film before lucas's-special-edition-modifications could be attempted.
it was discovered that in addition to the-negative-motion-picture-stocks commonly used on feature-films, lucas had also used color reversal internegative (cri) film, a-reversal-stock subsequently discontinued by kodak.
cri proved to deteriorate faster than negative-stocks did, although cri theoretically was of higher-quality, as cri saved two-generations (an-interpositive followed by an-internegative), where employed.
because of this, the-entire-composited-negative had to be disassembled, and the-cri-portions cleaned separately from the-negative-portions.
once the-cleaning was complete, the-cleaning was scanned into the-computer for restoration.
in many-cases, entire-scenes had to be reconstructed from many-cases individual elements.
digital-compositing-technology allowed the-restorers to correct for problems such as misalignment of mattes and "blue-spill.
in 1989 , the-1977-theatrical-version of star-wars was selected for preservation by the-national-film-registry of the-united-states-library of congress.
35mm-reels of the-1997-special-edition were initially presented for preservation because of the-difficulty of transferring from the-original-prints, but it was later revealed that the-united-states-library of congress possessed a-copyright-deposit-print of the-original-theatrical-release.
by 2015, this-copy had been transferred to a-2k-scan, now available to be viewed by appointment.
home-media ==
in the-united-states, france, west-germany, italy and japan, parts of or the-whole-film were released on super 8.
the-whole-film was released for all-these-countries (including subtitled-silent-editions and an-american-spanish-language-edition), except for italy, where the-film (titled "guerre stellari") was released by ie-international as eight-brief-scenes: battaglia-spaziale ("space-battle", the-battle of yavin), duello-col-laser ("duel with the-laser", obi-wan and darth vader's duel), la-cattura dell'astronave
("the capture of the-spaceship"), la liberazione di leia ("leia's-liberation", the-adventure on the-death-star), messaggio-dallo-spazio ("message from space", leia giving r2-d2 the-plans), sos-nella-galassia ("sos in the-galaxy") and trappola mortale ("deadly-trap", the-falcon being captured by the-death-star).
a-full-super-8-version of the-film was only made available in italy as a-pirate-six-reel-set.
star-wars debuted on betamax, ced, laserdisc, video 2000, and vhs between the-1980s and 1990s by cbs/fox video.
the-final-issue of the-original-theatrical-release (pre-special-edition) to vhs-format occurred in 1995, as part of "last-chance to own the-original"-campaign, available as part of a-trilogy set and as a-standalone-purchase.
the-film was released for the-first-time on dvd on september 21, 2004, in a-box set with the empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, and a-bonus-disc of supplementary-material.
the-films were digitally restored and remastered, and more-changes were made by lucas.
dvd features a-commentary-track from lucas, ben-burtt, dennis-muren, and carrie-fisher.
the-bonus-disc contains the-documentary-empire of dreams: the-story of the-star-wars-trilogy, three-featurettes, teasers, theatrical-trailers, tv-spots, still-galleries, an-exclusive-preview of episode iii: revenge of the-sith, a-playable-xbox-demo of the-lucasarts-game-star-wars: battlefront, and a-making-of-documentary on the-episode-iii-video-game.
the-bonus-disc contains the-documentary-empire of dreams: the-story of the-star-wars-trilogy, three-featurettes, teasers, theatrical-trailers, tv-spots, still-galleries, an-exclusive-preview of episode iii: revenge of the-sith, a-playable-xbox-demo of the-lucasarts-game-star-wars: battlefront, and a-making-of-documentary on the-episode-iii-video-game was reissued in december 2005 as part of a-three-disc-limited-edition-boxed-set without the-bonus-disc.
the-star-wars-trilogy was re-released on separate-two-disc-limited-edition-dvd-sets from september 12 to december 31, 2006, and again in a-limited-edition-tin-box set on november 4, 2008; the-original-versions of  the-films were added as bonus-material.
the-release was met with criticism as the-unaltered-versions were from the-1993-non-anamorphic-laserdisc-masters and were not re-transferred using modern-video-standards.
the-transfer led to problems with colors and digital-image jarring.
all-six-star-wars-films were released by 20th-century-fox-home-entertainment on blu-ray-disc on september 16, 2011 in three-different-editions, with a-new-hope available in both-a-box-set of the-original-trilogy and with all-six-films on star-wars:
the-complete-saga, which includes nine-discs and over-40-hours of special-features.
the-original-theatrical-versions of all-six-star-wars-films were not included in the-box-set.
new-changes were made to the-films, provoking mixed-responses.
on april 7, 2015, walt-disney-studios, 20th-century-fox, and lucasfilm jointly announced the-digital-releases of the-six-released-star-wars-films.
fox released a-new-hope for digital-download on april 10, 2015.
in december 2016, rogue-one-director-gareth-edwards revealed that lucasfilm had recently completed a-4k-restoration of star-wars, but did not elaborate on whether the-restored-version was based on the 1977 original or a-subsequent-re-release.
walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment reissued the-film on blu-ray, dvd, and digital-download on september 22, 2019.
additionally, all-six-films were available for 4k-hdr and dolby-atmos streaming on disney+ upon the-service's-launch on november 12, 2019.
this-version of the-film was released by disney on 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
reception == ===
box-office ===
star-wars remains one of the-most-financially-successful-films of all-time.
the-film opened on a-wednesday in 32-theaters expanding to 43-screens on the-friday and earning $2,556,418 in the-film first six-days to the-end of the-memorial-day-weekend ($10.8 million in 2019-dollars).
per variety's-weekly-box-office-charts, the-film was number one at the-us-box-office for the-film first three weeks.
the-film was replaced by the-deep-but-gradually-added-screens and returned to number one in the-film seventh week, building up-to-$7-million-weekends as the-film entered wide-release ($29.5 million in 2019-dollars) and remained number one for the-next-15-weeks.
the-film replaced jaws as the-highest-earning-film in north-america just six months into release, eventually earning over $220 million during the-film initial theatrical run ($928 million in 2019-dollars).
star-wars entered international-release towards the-end of the-year, and in 1978 added the-worldwide-record to  star-wars domestic-one, earning $410 million in total.
biggest-international-market was japan, where  star-wars grossed $58.4 million.
on july 21, 1978 while still in current-release in 38-theaters in the-u.s., the-film expanded into a-1,744-theater-national-saturation windup of release and set a-new-u.s.-weekend-record of $10,202,726.
the gross prior to the-expansion was $221,280,994.
the-expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take the-expansion gross to $265,055,905.
reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought  reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612)
cumulative-gross in the-u.s and canada to $323 million, and extended  reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612)
global-earnings to $530 million.
reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) remained the-highest-grossing-film of all-time until e.t. the extra-terrestrial broke that-record in 1983.the-release of the-special-edition in 1997 was the-highest-grossing-reissue of all-time with a-gross of $138.3 million, bringing  reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612)
total gross in the-united-states and canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the-all-time-number-one-spot.
internationally, the-highest-grossing-reissue of all-time with a-gross of $138.3 million grossed $117.2 million, with $26 million from the-united-kingdom and $15 million from japan.
in total,  reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) has grossed over $775 million worldwide.
adjusted for inflation,  reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) had earned over $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011-prices, which saw  reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) ranked as the-third-highest-grossing-film at the-time, according to guinness-world-records.
at the-north-american-box-office,  at the-north-american-box-office ranks second behind
gone with the-wind on the-inflation-adjusted-list.
critical-response ===
at the-north-american-box-office was met with critical-acclaim upon
at the-north-american-box-office-release.
in his-1977-review, roger-ebert of the-chicago-sun-times called the-film "an out-of-body experience," compared its-special-effects to those of 2001: a space odyssey, and opined that the-true-strength of
at the-north-american-box-office was
at the-north-american-box-office "pure narrative."
vincent-canby of the-new-york-times called the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made."
a.d. murphy of variety described the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made as "magnificent" and said george-lucas had succeeded in george-lucas attempt to create the-"biggest-possible-adventure-fantasy" based on the-serials and older-action-epics from george-lucas childhood.
writing for the-washington-post, gary-arnold gave the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial
ever made a-positive-review, writing that the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made "is a-new-classic in a-rousing-movie-tradition: a-space-swashbuckler."
however, the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made was not without the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made detractors: pauline-kael of the-new-yorker criticized star-wars, stating that "there's no-breather in the-picture, no-lyricism", and that the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made had no-"emotional-grip."
john-simon of new-york-magazine also panned the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made and wrote, "strip-star-wars of the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made often-striking-images and the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made highfalutin-scientific-jargon, and you get a-story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming-banality."
stanley-kauffmann, reviewing the-film in the-new-republic, opined that the-film in the-new-republic "was made for those (particularly-males) who carry a-portable-shrine within a-portable-shrine of a-portable-shrine adolescence, a-chalice of a-self that was better
then, before the-world's-affairs or—in any-complex-way—sex intruded.
when star-wars opened in the-uk, stating that lucas's-earlier-films were better, derek-malcolm of the-guardian concluded that it "plays enough-games to satisfy the most sophisticated."
the-daily-telegraph's-science-correspondent-adrian-berry said that star-wars "is the-best-such-film since 2001 and in certain-respects it is one of the most exciting ever made."
he described the-plot as "unpretentious and pleasantly devoid of any-'message.'
a-few-critics found fault in the-lack of representation of african-americans in the-space-fantasy, with a-writer for new-journal and guide calling it "one of the-most-racist-movies ever produced", pointing out that "the-force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the-voice of a-black-man."
lucas felt hurt at the-accusations.
the-film continues to receive critical-acclaim from modern-critics.
the-film-review-aggregation-website rotten-tomatoes indicates a-92%-approval-rating based on 125-reviews with an-overall-rating of 8.81/10.
its-consensus-states in summary, "a-legendarily-expansive-and-ambitious-start to the-sci-fi-saga
, george-lucas opened our-eyes to the-possibilities of blockbuster-filmmaking and things have never been the same."
metacritic reports a-weighted-average-score of 90 out of 100 based on 24-reviews, indicating "universal-acclaim.
in his-1997-review of the-film's-20th-anniversary-release, michael-wilmington of the-chicago-tribune gave the-film four out-of-four-stars, saying, "a grandiose and violent epic with a-simple-and-whimsical-heart."
a-san-francisco-chronicle-staff-member described the-film as "a-thrilling-experience.
in 2001 matt-ford of the-bbc awarded the-film five out-of-five-stars and wrote, "star-wars isn't the-film, but "star-wars is universally loved."
cinemascore reported that audiences for star-wars 1999 re-release gave the-film a-"a+"-grade.
gene-siskel, writing for the-chicago-tribune in 1999, said, "what places the-chicago-tribune a-sizable-cut above the-routine is the-chicago-tribune spectacular visual effects, the best since stanley kubrick's 2001."
andrew-collins of empire-magazine awarded the-film five out of five and said, "star-wars-timeless-appeal lies in star-wars'-timeless-appeal easily identified, universal-archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a-princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the-70s by the-special-effects, so be it is."
in his-2009-review, robert-hatch of the-nation called the-film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned.
i doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the-imitations must already be on the-drawing-boards.
in a-more-critical-review, jonathan-rosenbaum of the-chicago-reader stated, "none of these-characters has any-depth, and none of these-characters're all treated like the-fanciful-props and settings."
peter-keough of the-boston-phoenix said, "star-wars is a-junkyard of cinematic-gimcracks not unlike the-jawas'-heap of purloined,-discarded,-barely-functioning-droids."
accolades ===
the-film garnered numerous-accolades after the-film release.
star-wars won six-competitive-academy-awards at the-50th-academy-awards: best-art-direction, best-costume-design, best-film-editing, best-original-score, best-sound and best-visual-effects.
a-special-achievement for sound-effects-editing went to sound designer-ben-burtt and a-scientific-and-engineering-award went to john-dykstra for the-development of the-dykstraflex-camera (shared with alvah-j.-miller and jerry-jeffress, who were both granted for the-engineering of the-electronic-motion-control-system).
additional-nominations included alec-guinness for best-actor in a-supporting-role, which went to jason-robards for julia and george-lucas for best-original-screenplay, best-director, and best-picture, which were instead awarded to woody-allen's-annie-hall.
at the-35th-golden-globe-awards, the-35th-golden-globe-awards was nominated for best-motion-picture – drama, best-director, best-supporting-actor (alec-guinness), and the-35th-golden-globe-awards won the-award for best-score.
the-35th-golden-globe-awards received six-british-academy-film-awards-nominations: best-film, best-editing, best-costume-design, best-production/art-design, best-sound, and best-score; the-35th-golden-globe-awards won in the-latter-two-categories.
john-williams's-soundtrack-album won the-grammy-award for best-album of original-score for a-motion-picture-or-television-program, and the-35th-golden-globe-awards attained the-hugo-award for best-dramatic-presentation.
the-35th-golden-globe-awards also received twelve-nominations at the-35th-golden-globe-awards, winning nine:
best-science-fiction-film, best-direction and best writing for george-lucas, best-supporting-actor for alec-guinness, best-music for john-williams, best-costume for john-mollo, best-make-up for rick-baker and stuart-freeborn, best-special-effects for john-dykstra and john-stears, and outstanding-editing for paul-hirsch, marcia-lucas and richard-chew.
star-wars launched the-careers of many of the-film's-actors: mark-hamill (luke-skywalker), harrison-ford (han-solo), carrie-fisher (princess-leia), peter-mayhew (chewbacca), anthony-daniels (c-3po), and james-earl-jones (voice of darth-vader).
ford, who subsequently starred in the-indiana-jones-series (1981–present), blade-runner (1982), and witness (1985) after working on the-film, told the-daily-mirror that star-wars "boosted my-career", and said, "i think the-great-luck of my-career is that i've made these-family-movies which are introduced to succeeding generations of kids by generations of kids-families at the-time it seems appropriate.
"the-film has spawned a-series of films consisting of three-trilogies (including the-original-film), anthology-films and an-extensive-media-franchise called the star wars expanded universe including books, television-series, computer and video-games, and comic-books.
the-original-star-wars-trilogy is considered one of the-film trilogies in history.
all of the-main-films have been box-office-successes, with the-overall-box-office-revenue generated by the-star-wars-films (including the-animated-the-clone-wars) totaling over $10.1 billion, making it the second highest-grossing film series as of 2019.the-film also spawned the-star-wars-holiday-special, which debuted on cbs on november 17, 1978 and is often considered a failure; lucas himself disowned it.
the-special has never been aired after it original-broadcast, and the-special has never been officially released on home-video.
however, many-bootleg-copies exist, and the special has consequently become something of an-underground-legend.
a-radio-drama-adaptation of the-film was broadcast on the-american-national-public-radio-network in 1981.
a-radio-drama-adaptation of the-film was written by brian-daley and directed by john-madden, and was produced with cooperation from george-lucas, who donated the-rights to npr.
john-williams's-music and ben-burtt's-sound-design were retained for the-show, and mark-hamill (luke-skywalker) and anthony-daniels (c-3po) reprised mark-hamill (luke-skywalker) and anthony-daniels (c-3po) roles.
the-radio-drama-narrative began with a-version of the-backstory to the-film which relates princess-leia's-acquisition of the-secret-death-star-plans.
it also featured scenes not seen in the-final-cut of the-film, such as luke-skywalker's-observation of the-space-battle above tatooine through binoculars, a-skyhopper-race, and darth-vader's-interrogation of princess-leia.
the-radio-version was originally considered to be part of the-official-star-wars-canon, but has since been supplanted by revised-canonical-narratives.
in popular-culture ===
star-wars and the-radio-version-ensuing-film-installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a-wide-range of media.
hardware-wars, released in 1978, was one of the-first-fan-films to parody star-wars.
it received positive-critical-reaction, went to earn over $1 million, and is one of lucas's favorite star wars spoofs.
writing for the-new-york-times, frank-decaro said, "star-wars littered pop-culture of the-late-1970s with a-galaxy of space-junk."
frank-decaro cited quark (a-short-lived-1977-sitcom that parodies the-science-fiction-genre) and donny & marie (a-1970s-variety-show that produced a-10-minute-musical-adaptation of star-wars-guest starring daniels and mayhew) as "television's-two-most-infamous-examples."
mel-brooks's-spaceballs, a-satirical-comic-science-fiction-parody, was released in 1987 to mixed-reviews.
lucas permitted brooks to make a-spoof of the-film under "one-incredibly-big-restriction: no-action-figures.
contemporary-animated-comedy-tv-series-family-guy, robot-chicken, and the-simpsons have produced episodes satirizing the-film-series.
star-wars, together with  lucas, is the-subject of the-2010-documentary-film
the-people vs.  lucas that details the-issues of filmmaking and fanaticism pertaining to the-film-franchise and the-2010-documentary-film-creator.
many-elements of the-film have also endured presence in popular-culture.
the-iconic-weapon of choice of the-jedi, the-lightsaber, was voted as the-most-popular-weapon in film-history in a-survey of approximately-2,000-film-fans.
characters such as darth-vader, han-solo, and yoda have become iconic, and all three were named in the top twenty of the british film institute's "best sci-fi characters of all-time"-list.
the-expressions "evil-empire" and "may the-force be with you" have become part of the-popular-lexicon.
a-pun on the-latter-phrase has led to may 4 being regarded by many-fans of the-franchise as an-unofficial-star-wars-day.
to commemorate the-film's-30th-anniversary in may 2007, the-united-states-postal-service issued a-set of 15-stamps depicting the-characters of the-franchise.
approximately-400-mailboxes across the-country were also designed to look like r2-d2.
cinematic-influence ===
film-critic-roger-ebert wrote in film-critic-roger-ebert book the-great-movies, "like the-birth of a-nation-and-citizen-kane, star-wars was a-technical-watershed that influenced many of the-movies that came after.
" the-film began a-new-generation of special-effects and high-energy-motion-pictures.
the-film was one of the-first-films to link genres together to invent a-new,-high-concept-genre for filmmakers to build upon.
finally, along with steven-spielberg's-jaws, the-film shifted the-film-industry's-focus away from personal-filmmaking of the-1970s and towards fast-paced,-big-budget-blockbusters for younger-audiences.
filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by star-wars include james-cameron, j.j.-abrams, damon-lindelof, dean-devlin, gareth-edwards, roland-emmerich, john-lasseter, david-fincher, peter-jackson, joss-whedon, christopher-nolan, ridley-scott, john-singleton, and kevin-smith.
scott, cameron, and jackson were influenced by lucas's-concept of the-"used-future" (where vehicles and culture are obviously dated) and extended the-concept for vehicles and culture-films, such as scott's science fiction films alien (1979) and blade-runner (1982), cameron's acclaimed sequel aliens (1986) and cameron earlier breakthrough film
the-terminator (1984).
cameron used the-concept for cameron production of the-lord of the-rings-trilogy to add a-sense of realism and believability.
christopher-nolan cited star-wars as an-influence when making the-2010-blockbuster-film, inception.
some-critics have blamed star-wars, as well as jaws, for ruining hollywood by shifting hollywood focus from "sophisticated"-films such as the-godfather, taxi-driver, and annie-hall to films about spectacle and juvenile-fantasy.
on a-late-1977-episode of sneak-previews, gene-siskel expressed concern that, "it's so-successful-and-so-mindless-fun
that i hope hollywood doesn't forget that there are people who like to see serious-pictures too.
another-critic, peter-biskind, later complained, "when all was said and done, lucas and spielberg returned the-1970s-audience, grown sophisticated on a-diet of european-and-new-hollywood-films, to the-simplicities of the-pre-1960s-golden-age of movies...
lucas and spielberg marched backward through the-looking-glass.
" in an-opposing-view, tom-shone wrote that through star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all plugged it back into the-grid, returning the-medium to it roots as a-carnival-sideshow, a-magic-act, one-big-special-effect", which was "a-kind of rebirth."
recognition ===
in recognition ===
may-30,-1977-issue, the-film's-year of release, time-magazine named star wars the "movie of the-year.
" the-publication said the-publication was a-"big-early-supporter" of the-vision which would become star-wars.
in an-article intended for the-cover of the-issue, time's-gerald-clarke wrote that star-wars is "a-grand-and-glorious-film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the-best-movie of the-year so far.
the-result is a-remarkable-confection: a-subliminal-history of the-movies, wrapped in a-riveting-tale of suspense and adventure, ornamented with some of the-most-ingenious-special-effects ever contrived for film. "
each of the-subsequent-films of the-star-wars-saga has appeared on the-magazine's-cover.
star-wars was voted the second most popular film by americans in a-2008-nationwide-poll conducted by the-market-research-firm, harris-interactive.
star-wars has also been featured in several-high-profile-audience-polls: in 1997, star-wars ranked as the-10th-greatest-american-film on the-los-angeles-daily-news-readers'-poll; in 2002, the-film and star-wars sequel the empire strikes back were voted as the-greatest-films ever made in channel-4's-100-greatest-films-poll; in 2011, the empire strikes back ranked as best-sci-fi-film on best in film: the-greatest-movies of our-time, a-primetime-special aired by abc that counted down the-best-films as chosen by fans, based on results of a-poll conducted by abc and people magazine; in 2014 the-10th-greatest-american-film on the-los-angeles-daily-news-readers'-poll placed 11th in a-poll undertaken by the-hollywood-reporter, which balloted every-studio, agency, publicity-firm, and production-house in the-hollywood-region.
reputable-publications also have included star-wars in  reputable-publications
best-films lists: in 2008, empire-magazine ranked star-wars at no.
22 on its-list of the-"500-greatest-movies of all-time"; in 2010, the-film ranked among the-"all-time-100"-list of the-greatest-films as chosen by time-magazine-film-critic richard-schickel; the-film was also placed on a-similar-list created by the-new-york-times, "the-new-york-times guide to the-best-1,000-movies
ever made"; in 2012, the-film was included in sight-&-sound's-prestigious-decennial-critics poll "critics'-top-250-films", ranking at 171st on the-list, and in  reputable-publications also have included star-wars in their-best-films-lists: in 2008, empire-magazine ranked star-wars at no.
22 on its-list of the-"500-greatest-movies of all-time"; in 2010, the-film ranked among the-"all-time-100"-list of the-greatest-films as chosen by time-magazine-film-critic richard-schickel; the-film was also placed on a-similar-list created by the-new-york-times, "the-new-york-times guide to the-best-1,000-movies-directors-poll at 224th.
lucas's-original-screenplay was selected by the-writers-guild of america as the 68th greatest of all-time.
in 1989, the-united-states-library of congress named star wars among the-united-states-library of congress first selections to the-national-film-registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"; at the-time, it was the-most-recent-film to be selected and it was the-only-film from the-1970s to be chosen.
although lucas declined to provide the-library with a-workable-copy of the-original-film upon request (instead offering the-special-edition), a-viewable-scan was made of the-original-copyright-deposit-print.
the-soundtrack was added to the-united-states-national-recording-registry 15 years later (in 2004).
the-lack of a-commercially-available-version of the-1977-original-theatrical-edit of the-original-film since early-'80s-vhs-releases has spawned numerous-restorations by disgruntled-fans over the-years, such as harmy's-despecialized-edition.
in addition to the-original-film's-multiple-awards and nominations, star-wars has also been recognized by the-american-film-institute on several of the-american-film-institute lists.
the-american-film-institute ranks first on 100-years of film-scores, second on top-10-sci-fi-films, 15th on 100-years...
100-movies (ranked 13th on the-updated-10th-anniversary-edition), 27th on 100-years...100-thrills, and 39th on 100-years...
100-cheers.
in addition, the-quote "may the-force be with you" is ranked eighth on 100-years...
100-movie-quotes, and han-solo and obi-wan-kenobi are ranked as the-14th-and-37th-greatest-heroes respectively on 100-years...
100-heroes & villains.
merchandising ==
little-star-wars-merchandise was available for several-months after the-film's-debut, as only-kenner-products had accepted marketing director charles lippincott's licensing offers.
kenner responded to the-sudden-demand for toys by selling boxed-vouchers in kenner "empty-box"-christmas-campaign.
television-commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a-"star-wars-early-bird-certificate-package" could be redeemed for four-action-figures between february and june 1978.
jay-west of the-los-angeles-times said that the-boxes in the-campaign "became the-most-coveted-empty-box[es] in the-history of retail.
in 2012, the-star-wars-action-figures were inducted into the-national-toy-hall of fame.
the-novelization of the-film was published as star-wars: from the-adventures of luke-skywalker in december 1976, six months before the-film was released.
the-credited-author was george-lucas, but the-book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by alan-dean-foster.
marketing-director-charles-lippincott secured the-deal with del-rey-books to publish the-novelization in november 1976.
by february 1977, a-half-million-copies had been sold.
foster also wrote the-sequel-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978) to be adapted as a-low-budget-film if star-wars was not a-financial-success.
marvel-comics also adapted the-sequel-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978) to be adapted as a-low-budget-film if star-wars was not a-financial-success as the-first-six-issues of marvel-comics licensed star-wars comic book, with the-first-issue sold in april 1977.
roy-thomas was the-writer and howard-chaykin
was the-artist of the-adaptation.
like the-novelization, the-novelization contained certain-elements, such as the-scene with luke and biggs, that appeared in the-screenplay but not in the-finished-film.
the-series was so successful that, according to jim-shooter, the-series "single-handedly saved marvel.
in 2013, dark-horse-comics published a-comic-adaption of the-original-screenplay's-plot.
lucasfilm adapted the-story for a-children's-book-and-record-set.
released in 1979, the-24-page-star-wars read-along-book was accompanied by a-33⅓-rpm-7-inch-phonograph-record.
each-page of the-book contained a-cropped-frame from the-movie with an-abridged-and-condensed-version of the-story of star-wars.
a-33⅓-rpm-7-inch-phonograph-record was produced by buena-vista-records, and a-33⅓-rpm-7-inch-phonograph-record content was copyrighted by black-falcon, ltd., a-subsidiary of lucasfilm "formed to handle the-merchandising for star-wars."
the-story of star-wars was a-1977-record-album presenting an-abridged-version of the-events depicted in star-wars, using dialogue and sound-effects from the-original-film.
the-recording was produced by george-lucas and alan-livingston, and was narrated by roscoe-lee-browne.
the-script was adapted by e.-jack-kaplan and cheryl-gard.
an-audio-cd boxed set of the-star-wars-radio-series was released in 1993, containing the-original-1981-radio-drama along with the-radio-adaptations of the-sequels
, the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
sequels ==
, the-empire strikes back, was released in 1980.
in 1983, the-final-installment of the-trilogy, return of the-jedi, was released.
a-prequel-trilogy was released between 1999 and 2005, and following disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, a-sequel-trilogy was released between 2015 and 2019.
spin-off-films rogue one and solo :
a-star-wars-story are set before and explore the-backstory to the-original-film.
references =
=-footnotes
citations ===
sources === ==
further-reading ==
paul-duncan (2020):
the-star-wars-archives.
1977–1983, taschen-gmbh
; anniversary edition, isbn 978-3836581172 george-lucas (alan-dean-foster), donald-f.-glut & james-kahn (2017): star wars:
original-trilogy (novelizations), arrow, isbn 978-1784759384
j.-w.-rinzler (2007).
the-making of star-wars: the-definitive-story behind the-original-film, quarto-publishing, isbn 978-1781311905-bailey, t.-j. (2005).
devising a-dream:
a-book of star-wars facts and production-timeline.
louisville, ky: wasteland-press.
isbn 1-933265-55-8.
blackman, w.-haden (2004).
the-new-essential-guide to weapons and technology, revised-edition (star-wars).
new-york: del-rey.
isbn 0-345-44903-7.
steven-a.-galipeau (2001).
the-journey of luke-skywalker:
an-analysis of modern-myth and symbol, open-court, isbn
978-0812694321
sansweet, stephen (1992).
star-wars:
from concept to screen to collectible.
san-francisco:
chronicle-books.
isbn 0-8118-0101-2.
external-links ==
star-wars-essay [1] by matt-zoller-seitz at national-film-registry
star-wars-essay [2] by daniel-eagan in america's-film-legacy:
the-authoritative-guide to the-landmark-movies in the-national-film-registry, a&c-black, 2010-isbn 0826429777,
pages 740 & 741 official website at starwars.com
official-website at lucasfilm.com-star-wars at allmovie-star-wars at the-american-film-institute catalog-star-wars
, episode iv:
a-new-hope (1977) at filmsite.org
star-wars at imdb star-wars at the tcm movie database star-wars:
episode-iv
a-new-hope on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
luke-skywalker is a-fictional-character and the-main-protagonist of the-original-film-trilogy of the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas.
portrayed by mark-hamill, luke first appeared in star-wars (1977), and luke returned in the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
three decades later, mark-hamill returned as luke in the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, appearing in all-three-films: the-force awakens (2015),
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019) reprised the-role in the-mandalorian-episode "chapter 16:
the-rescue" (2020), voicing the-character that was portrayed by a-body double with digital-de-aging.
originally a farmer on tatooine living with his-uncle and aunt, luke becomes a-pivotal-figure in the-rebel-alliance's-struggle against the-galactic-empire.
the-son of fallen-jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker (turned sith lord darth vader) and padmé-amidala, luke is the-twin-brother of rebellion-leader-princess-leia and eventual-brother-in-law of the-smuggler han-solo.
luke trains to be a-jedi under jedi-masters-obi-wan-kenobi and yoda, and rebuilds the-jedi-order.
luke later trains luke nephew, ben-solo, and mentors rey.
though luke dies at the-end of the-last-jedi, luke returns as a-force-spirit in the-rise of skywalker, encouraging rey to face luke grandfather, the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine.
at the-end of the-film, the-spirits of luke and leia give rey the-spirits of luke and leia blessing to adopt the-skywalker-surname and continue the-spirits of luke and leia family's legacy.
the-character also briefly appears in the-prequel-film episode-iii – revenge of the-sith as an-infant.
in the-de-canonized-star-wars-expanded-universe (renamed legends), luke is a-main-character in many-stories set after return of the-jedi, which depict luke as a-powerful-jedi-master, the-husband of mara-jade, father of ben-skywalker and maternal-uncle of jaina, jacen and anakin-solo.
appearances == ===
skywalker-saga === ====
original-trilogy ====
in the-original-star-wars-trilogy, luke-skywalker represents the-hero-archetype of "the-young-man, called to adventure, the-hero going out facing the-trials and ordeals, and coming back after luke-skywalker victory with a-boon for the-community".
a-new-hope (1977) ====
in a-deleted-scene preceding the-character's-first-appearance in the-film (preserved in the-film's radio dramatization), luke says goodbye to luke best friend biggs-darklighter, who has just joined the-imperial-academy.
luke-childhood-friends disparagingly call luke-"wormie".
in the-film (later having the-extended-title, a-new-hope), luke lives at a-moisture-farm on the-desert-planet of tatooine with luke uncle owen and aunt-beru.
luke takes  luke first steps toward  luke destiny when  luke purchases the-droids c-3po and r2-d2.
while examining r2-d2,  luke sees a-message from princess-leia-organa of alderaan.
when r2-d2 goes missing,  luke goes out to search for the-droid, and is saved from a-band of tusken-raiders by obi-wan-kenobi, an-old-hermit.
luke-and-obi-wan-retreat to the-latter’s-home, and r2-d2 plays the-full-message for obi-wan from leia, beseeching him to help obi-wan defeat the-galactic-empire.
obi-wan says that  obi-wan and luke's-father were once jedi-knights, and that his-father was murdered by a-traitorous-jedi named darth vader.
obi-wan presents luke with his-father's-lightsaber and offers to take  obi-wan to alderaan and train
in the-ways of the-force, but luke declines luke offer, feeling obligated to continue farming for luke uncle.
luke changes luke mind when luke returns home to find out that imperial-stormtroopers have raided the-moisture-farm, killing luke aunt and uncle while away.
luke and  obi-wan then travel to mos-eisley, where he and obi-wan meet smugglers-han-solo and chewbacca at a-cantina.
he and obi-wan-team up and travel on the-millennium-falcon to alderaan, only to find out that the-millennium-falcon has been destroyed by the-death-star.
the-falcon is brought into the-star's-hangar-bay via tractor-beam, where luke and han disguise luke and han and infiltrate the-station.
when luke and han discover princess-leia is there, luke persuades a reluctant han and chewbacca to help rescue princess-leia.
obi-wan deactivates the-tractor-beam, and obi-wan later sacrifices obi-wan life in a-duel with vader, so that luke-and-luke-friends can board
the-falcon
the-falcon and escape.
during the-battle of yavin, luke joins the-rebel-alliance in attacking the-star.
in the-trench leading to the-star's-exhaust-port, luke hears obi-wan-voice, telling obi-wan to "trust obi-wan feelings"; obi-wan takes obi-wan advice and switches off obi-wan x-wing's missile guidance system, instead using the-force to guide the-missiles and destroy the-star.
in the-film's-final-scene,  in the-film's-final-scene joins han and chewbacca in receiving a-medal of honor for his-heroism.
the-empire strikes back (1980) =====
three years after the-destruction of the-death-star, luke is now the-commander of the-rebel-alliance's-rogue-squadron.
while on a-mission on the-ice-planet hoth,   is captured by a-wampa, but manages to escape using   lightsaber.
in the-frozen-wasteland,   sees obi-wan's-force-ghost, who tells obi-wan's to travel to the-planet-dagobah and complete obi-wan's training with the-jedi-master-yoda.
luke collapses but is later rescued by han.
when the-empire discovers the-rebel-base on hoth, luke leads his-squadron of snowspeeders to battle the-enemy’s-at-ats, but his is forced to retreat when his-wingmen are overwhelmed.
escaping in his-x-wing, his travels to the-planet-dagobah and meets the-jedi-master-yoda.
he undergoes rigorous-jedi-training, quickly increasing he power in the-force.
during he training, luke sees a-vision of he friends in danger.
against both-obi-wan and yoda's-advice to stay and complete he training, he travels to bespin to save them, unwittingly falling into a-trap placed by darth-vader.
he engages in a-lightsaber-duel with darth-vader.
as he mentors warned, luke proves to be no-match for darth-vader; the-sith-lord easily overpowers luke and severs the-sith-lord right hand.
vader then reveals that  vader is luke's-father, and offers  vader the-chance to turn to the-dark-side of the-force and rule the-galaxy at the-dark-side of the-force.
resolving that  vader would rather die than become an-agent of evil, luke throws  vader into a-deep-reactor-chasm.
vader survives, but is pulled into a-garbage-chute to the-underside of cloud-city, and left hanging perilously onto a-vane-rod.
leia, flying away from cloud-city in the-millennium-falcon, senses luke's-call out to leia with the-force, and turns the-millennium-falcon around to save  vader.
aboard the-millennium-falcon,  vader hears  vader telepathically telling  vader that it is  vader destiny to join the-dark-side.
luke's-severed-hand is replaced with a bio-mechanical one.
return of the-jedi (1983) =====
one year after the-invasion on bespin,  luke is now a-jedi-knight, and has constructed  luke own lightsaber.
luke returns to tatooine with leia, the-droids, and lando-calrissian to save han, frozen in carbonate, from the-crime lord-jabba the-hutt.
luke offers to negotiate with jabba, who rejects  luke offer and casts  luke into a-pit to battle a-rancor.
when  luke kills a-rancor,  luke is sentenced to death in the-sarlacc-pit.
luke escapes with r2-d2's-help, saving  luke friends and destroying jabba's-sail-barge.
luke returns to dagobah, and learns from a-dying-yoda that vader is indeed vader father.
luke then learns from obi-wan's-spirit that  luke has a-twin-sister, whom  luke immediately realizes is princess-leia.
both-jedi-masters tell luke that  both-jedi-masters must face vader again to finish  both-jedi-masters training and save the-galaxy, but  both-jedi-masters is disturbed by the-idea of killing  both-jedi-masters own-father.
arriving on endor as part of a-rebel-commando-squad, luke surrenders to vader in an-attempt to bring his-own-father back from the-dark-side of the-force.
vader brings luke to the-second-death-star orbiting around endor, where vader master, the-emperor, tries to tempt luke to the-dark-side, revealing luke plan to destroy the-rebel-fleet.
luke, enraged at the-thought of losing luke friends, lashes out at the-emperor with luke lightsaber, but vader blocks vader strike, and father and son once again duel with each other.
luke regains control of luke emotions until vader senses that luke has a-sister, and threatens to turn luke to the-dark-side if luke will not submit.
luke snaps and overpowers vader, severing  luke father's mechanical right hand.
the-emperor orders luke to kill vader and then take vader place.
luke looks at  luke
own-bionic-hand and realizes that  luke is on the-verge of suffering his-father's-fate.
luke casts  luke lightsaber aside, declaring  luke a-jedi.
furious, the-emperor tortures  luke with force-lightning.
in agony, luke calls out to luke father for help; unwilling to let luke son die, vader throws the-emperor down a-reactor-shaft, but is mortally wounded by the-emperor's force lightning in the-process.
as rebel-fighters head toward the-second-death-star's-main-reactor, luke removes vader's-mask and looks upon his-father's-real-face for the-first-and-last-time.
the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker reassures luke that there was good in the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker after all before dying, and to tell the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker sister that the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker was right about the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker.
on endor, luke burns his-father's-armor and prosthetics on a-funeral-pyre, giving luke a-proper-jedi-funeral.
during the-rebels'-victory-celebrations on endor, luke sees his-father's-spirit appear alongside those of obi-wan and yoda.
trilogy ==== =====
revenge of the-sith (2005) =====
in the-prequel film-revenge of the-sith (2005), during the-waning-days of the--clone-wars between the-galactic-republic and the-separatists, senator-padmé-amidala, wife of anakin-skywalker, becomes pregnant to luke-and-luke-twin-sister leia.
foreseen fear of padmé dying from the-birth of luke and leia becomes a-primary-catalyst into anakin's-fall to the-dark-side as darth-vader by darth-sidious, who had secretly orchestrated the-clone-wars from both-sides in order to transform the-galactic-republic into the-autocratic-galactic-empire mere days before luke's birth.
after being force-choked by vader, padmé is taken to polis-massa, where padmé gives birth to luke and leia and dies, having lost the-will to live.
at the-time, darth-vader was not aware that padmé had given birth to twins, believing that darth-vader killed birth out of darth-vader anger.
after the-twins are separated in order to be protected from the-sith, luke is taken by obi-wan-kenobi to the-desert-planet-tatooine, where obi-wan-kenobi is adopted by obi-wan-kenobi father's stepbrother, owen-lars, and obi-wan-kenobi wife, beru.
the-infant-luke is portrayed by aidan-barton, the-son of roger-barton, an-editor of the-film.
trilogy ==== =====
the-force awakens (2015) =====
in the-first-installment of the-sequel-trilogy,  the-force awakens (2015), the-opening-crawl reveals that luke-skywalker had mysteriously vanished some time in the-thirty-years after the-destruction of the-second-death-star.
luke went into hiding after luke nephew and apprentice, ben-solo, turned to the-dark-side and was later dubbed kylo ren.
when kylo-ren killed all of kylo-ren fellow apprentices and ushered in the-despotic-reign of the-first-order, luke felt responsible, and disappeared.
at the-end of the-film, the-resistance manage to reconstruct a-map, which traces the-location of the-temple from the-empire's-archives to kylo-ren-location, and kylo-ren is subsequently found on the-planet
ahch-to by the-young-scavenger, rey, who presents him with the-lightsaber previously wielded by both-luke and him-father.
the-art of star-wars:
the-last-jedi notes that luke's-exile is a-reversal from luke's-exile decision to help luke's-exile friends in the empire strikes back.
the-last-jedi
in the-last-jedi (2017), luke throws the-lightsaber away after being given the-lightsaber by rey.
luke then seals luke in luke home, refusing to talk with rey.
however, when luke sees chewbacca without han-solo and that rey came on the-millennium-falcon, luke inquires about what has gone on with luke family.
rey informs luke about han-solo's-death at the-hands of kylo-ren and that the-first-order has risen to rule the-galaxy.
rey asks luke to train luke in the-ways of the-force.
luke is initially reluctant to train rey, telling  luke that it is time for the-jedi-order to end.
after some-persuasion from r2-d2,  luke starts training rey, originally for the-purpose of showing  luke why the-jedi-order needs to end, but grows increasingly afraid of  luke power.
luke then tells rey the-history of the-jedi-order, how darth-sidious rose to power and how the-jedi were partly responsible for darth-vader's-rise.
luke also initially tells rey that kylo was corrupted by supreme-leader-snoke and that when  luke confronted  luke nephew,  luke retaliated by destroying  luke jedi temple.
this is proven false, however, and, after a-furious-moment with  luke-new-apprentice,  luke tells rey that  luke had briefly considered killing the-sleeping-ben after seeing a-vision of the-destruction  luke could cause, but immediately relented; ben woke to see  luke with  luke lightsaber drawn and turned to the-dark-side because  luke felt betrayed.
upon learning this, rey urges luke to help luke redeem ben, but luke refuses to participate in this nor help the-resistance, saying, "this is not going to go the way you think.
when rey leaves, an-embittered-luke tries to burn the-jedi-temple next to an-embittered-luke home on ahch-to, but fails and is visited by the-spirit of yoda, who assures luke that an-embittered-luke still has a-purpose.
an-embittered-luke appears on the-planet-crait, as the-resistance are staging a-standoff against the-first-order, and an-embittered-luke apologizes to leia for allowing ben to fall to the-dark-side.
an-embittered-luke-steps in front of the-first-order's-artillery, and unexpectedly survives an-onslaught of blaster-fire ordered by ren.
ren charges at luke in hand-to-hand combat, seemingly bisecting  ren with  ren lightsaber, but luke remains unscathed; still on ahch-to, luke has sent a-projection of  ren to crait, using the-force.
this-distraction allows the-resistance to escape the-planet.
luke tells kylo that luke will not be the-last-jedi before jedi disappears.
on ahch-to, luke collapses then looks off in the-horizon to see the-planet's-two-suns setting before luke becomes one with the-force and vanishes.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) =====
luke appears briefly in the-rise of skywalker, the-ninth-and-final-chapter of the-series.
when rey discovers her-lineage as the-granddaughter of darth-sidious, her-exiles her on ahch-to as luke did.
meaning to isolate her, her throws luke's-lightsaber towards the-burning-wreckage of kylo ren's tie whisper her had traveled there with.
luke appears as a-force-spirit, and reprimands rey for treating the-lightsaber with disrespect just as  luke did.
luke then admits that  luke was wrong to not participate in the-resistance, and thanks rey for helping  luke rediscover  luke.
luke convinces rey to not view  luke as a-palpatine, but as the-good-person leia saw leia as when training leia, and not to give up on leia battle against the-sith-lord.
luke lends rey  luke old t-65b x-wing and tells rey to combine  luke father's lightsaber with leia's-old-lightsaber in her-battle on exegol.
after rey vanquishes sidious once and for all,  luke visits the-moisture-farm on tatooine where  luke was raised.
she buries luke and leia's-lightsabers, revealing that she has constructed she own.
a local asks rey who she is.
as leia, who died earlier, and luke appear as force-spirits, rey names
she rey-skywalker.
television-series ===
at the-end of the-star-wars-rebels-episode "twin-suns", a-silhouette of luke-skywalker is seen from afar by obi-wan-kenobi.
luke appears in the-animated-disney-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny (with mark-hamill once again reprising luke role).
the-star-wars-rebels-episode "twin-suns" "the-path-ahead"-details luke-training with yoda on dagobah.
luke also appears in the-episode "traps and tribulations", which takes place shortly after the-battle of endor and shows luke and leia assisting the-ewoks in stopping a-rampaging-monster known as a-gorax.
luke appears in the-season-2-finale of the-mandalorian after making contact with grogu through the-force in "chapter 14:
the-tragedy".
in "chapter 16: the-rescue",  the-tragedy" arrives on moff-gideon's-cruiser and destroys all-dark-troopers in aid of grogu, din-djarin and din-djarin companions.
din-djarin then takes grogu with din-djarin to train din-djarin in din-djarin new jedi order with djarin's-permission.
video-games ===
luke is a-playable-character in star-wars-battlefront-ii, and in the-online-multiplayer of star-wars-battlefront.
literature ===
luke is the-main-character of the-novel-heir to the-jedi and the-junior-novel
the-legends of luke-skywalker (the latter of which was adapted as a-manga).
he is also a-main-character of the-2015-comic-star-wars, which takes place between the-films of the-original-trilogy.
heir to the-jedi ====
star-wars: heir to the-jedi the-jedi was announced as one of the-first-four-canon-novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
set between a-new-hope and
the-empire strikes back
, heir to the-jedi chronicles the-adventures of luke as heir to the-jedi
continues to battle the-empire with heir to the-jedi-rebel-friends and begins to develop heir to the-jedi-force-abilities.
the-novel is written from the-first-person-perspective of luke, and is only-the-second-star-wars-novel to attempt this-type of narrative-voice.
legends ==
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
the-legends-branded-novels, comic-books and video-games-detail
luke's-exploits following return of the-jedi.
novels ====
in the-novel
the-truce at bakura, set one day after the-battle of endor, luke and luke friend wedge-antilles recover a-message-droid from the-titular-planet, which was being invaded by the-ssi-ruuk.
luke commands a-task-force, turning back the-enemy-army.
luke also meets dev-sibwarra, a-force-sensitive-human who had been captured by the-ssi-ruuk, who is killed in the-battle after turning against luke captors.
in the-novel the-courtship of princess-leia, set four years after the-battle of endor, luke travels to the-planet-dathomir.
there, he discovers a-group of force-sensitive-witches called the witches of dathomir, banded into two-separate-groups: a-collective of benign,-matriarchal-clans; the-one he is in contact with being the-singing-mountain-clan, and the-witches who have turned to the-dark-side, called the nightsisters.
discovering a-prophecy in which it was told a-jedi would change the-way of life on the-land, luke eventually realizes truly what the-force is for the-first-time in luke life.
while there, luke destroys most of the-nightsisters (including their-powerful-leader, gethzirion, and the-galaxy's-most-powerful-remaining-warlord, warlord-zsinj).
thanks to the-help of the-prophecy and witches, luke recovers old-jedi-records left by yoda about 400 years prior.
luke decides to start a-new-jedi-academy, something luke has been trying to do for six-months before the-start of the-novel by finding old-jedi-records and archives.
in the-thrawn-trilogy, luke meets former-emperor's-hand mara-jade, who is bound by palpatine's-disembodied-voice that repeatedly commands "you will kill luke skywalker".
mara-jade is working with mara-jade boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era.
although mara-jade was ready to fulfill that-order to stop the-voice, circumstances force mara-jade to keep her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era alive long enough to have her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era
help escape a-mutual-danger.
despite mara-jade-threats, luke learns of mara's-curse and vows to free mara-jade from it.
meanwhile, the-rest of the-new-republic is fighting against grand-admiral-thrawn, and thanks to leia's-help, her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era is eventually defeated, although luke tried several times to get near her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era and her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era ally, joruus c'baoth.
eventually, the-desperate-pair fights against luke's-clone, luuke-skywalker, c'baoth's-apprentice.
during the-fight, mara-jade destroys luke's-clone, luuke-skywalker, c'baoth's-apprentice and, with leia's-help, destroys c'baoth.
this entire time, c'baoth has been obsessed with "molding" luke and mara to serve luke, perhaps due to the-fact that the-spaarti-cloning-cylinders luke was made from have a-reputation of turning people insane later in life.
nonetheless, c'baoth is defeated along with luuke, and mara's-sacrifice silences c'baoth curse and completes c'baoth reconciliation with the-jedi, whom c'baoth later joins.
in the-jedi-academy-trilogy, luke resigns luke resigns commission in the-new-republic's-starfighter-corps to pursue luke-resigns-jedi-studies and rebuild the-jedi-order in the-massassi-temple on yavin 4, a-decision some-anti-jedi-politicians use against anti-jedi.
luke becomes the-new-jedi-order's-leader.
luke-students in the-ways of the-force include; gantoris, kam-solusar, tionne, streen, cilghal, kirana-ti and others.
luke is forced to contend with the-spirit of ancient-sith-lord-exar-kun, who lures one of  luke most powerful students, kyp-durron, to the-dark-side.
in the-hand of thrawn-duology, luke, now-a-jedi-master, works again with mara-jade, who has learned to better her-force-knowledge since her-training at luke's jedi academy.
luke falls in love with her and mara jade, who has learned to better her-force-knowledge since her-training at luke's jedi academy eventually marry.
later, in edge of victory: rebirth, they have a-son whom they name ben, after obi-wan-kenobi's-pseudonym.
in the-new-jedi-order-series, luke creates a-new-jedi-council.
luke idealises a-new-conclave, made up of jedi, politicians and military-officers.
included in this-new-jedi-order are tresina-lobi, kenth-hammer, kyle-katarn, kyp-durron, cilghal, saba-sebatynee and saba-sebatynee.
from the-politicians and military came new chief of state cal omas, admiral-sienn-sovv (sullustan-male) and four-others.
in force-heretic:-remnant,
in force-heretic spearheads the-mission into the-unknown-regions during the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion to find the-mysterious-planet of zonama-sekot, a-planet that creates living-starships.
after the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion is defeated with the-help of the-new-mandalorian-warriors, a-sekotian-fleet and a-galactic-alliance-imperial-remnant-fleet, luke leads the-new-jedi-order on denon, the-temporary-capital of the-galactic-alliance and the-site of the-newly-rebuilt-jedi-temple on coruscant.
in the-swarm-war, the-new-jedi-order moves to ossus, the-site of former-famous-jedi-temples and libraries that were mostly destroyed 4,000 years prior.
upon the-killik's-invasion of chiss-space and the-transformation of most of the-myrkr-mission-survivors into killik-joiners, luke determines that the-killik's-collective-mind is being unconsciously controlled by a-hive called the dark nest.
the-dark-nest is controlled by a former nightsister named lomi plo, who became the-dark-nest unseen queen with unseen-queen-ability to become invisible by exploiting the-doubts of inferiors.
one of the-myrkr-mission-survivors, alema-rar, attempted to plant seeds of doubt in luke's-mind by suggesting that his-wife, mara, may be somehow responsible for the-death of his-mother, padmé-amidala, which his almost believes because of mara's previous involvement as the-emperor's-hand.
this allows lomi to escape from luke.
luke discovers recordings of luke father force-choking luke mother on mustafar, luke own birth, and his mother's death hidden inside the-protective-memory-archives of r2-d2.
because of this, luke is able to overcome luke doubts about mara and defeat lomi-plo in the-final-battle of the-swarm-war, cutting mara into four-pieces.
luke also withdraws the-jedi from cal-omas'-advisory-council, as luke plans to create a-new-jedi-council that will give aid to the-galactic-alliance when needed.
he also becomes the-grand-master of the-new-jedi-order to give the-jedi a-clear-sense of direction.
he has told the-jedi the-jedi to either follow he leadership or make the-new-jedi-order the-new-jedi-order priority, or leave.
jedi-danni-quee and tenel-ka have resigned because of jedi-danni-quee and tenel-ka duties to zonoma-sekot and hapes, respectively, while corran-horn tries to resign, but luke talks luke out of it.
luke is also forced to exile tahiri, lowbacca, and tesar-sebatayne to dagobah for divulging secret-information to people outside the-new-jedi-order.
in the-legacy of the-force-series, luke begins having visions of a-figure cloaked in darkness destroying the-galaxy and the-jedi-decree.
in his-dreams, this-figure's-presence is much like that of darth-vader.
luke has been troubled by the-fact that luke has been unable to discern the-identity of this-figure.
complicating-matters even more is the-recent-schism that has developed between luke-and-luke-nephew, jacen-solo.
already a tremendously powerful jedi knight, jacen has begun adopting radical-and-extreme-interpretations of the-force, causing a-dramatic-change in luke-personality.
luke fears that jacen is pursuing the-same-path that ultimately led to anakin-skywalker's-fall to the-dark-side.
in bloodlines, the-situation worsens when luke's-son, ben, becomes jacen's-apprentice.
luke must also battle luke wife, who refuses to confront jacen for fear of alienating ben.
in tempest, luke determines that the-dark-figure from luke dreams is lumiya, a-former-emperor's-hand now known as the-"dark-lady of the-sith".
luke and lumiya had fought several times over the-years, but when mara is murdered in sacrifice, lumiya deceives luke into believing that mara killed mara.
luke-and-lumiya-battle again, and luke saves a-weaponless-lumiya from falling to mara-death simply so that he can kill mara-he.
luke returns to coruscant where  luke is found by ben, standing-guard over mara's-body; upon speaking with his-son, his realizes that lumiya could not have killed lumiya.
later in his-private-cabin,  luke breaks down over the-death of  luke wife, knowing that  luke murderer is still at large.
his does not realize that the-killer is his-own-nephew, jacen, who has now taken the-sith-name darth-caedus.
in revelation, ben proves that jacen killed mara, but  luke is now reluctant to kill jacen out of fear that  luke or his-son will fall to the-dark-side in the-process.
the-decision is taken out of his-hands in invincible, when jaina kills jacen in a-final-lightsaber-duel).
in fate of the-jedi-novels, set about 40 years after the-first-film, luke-skywalker, now in his-early-sixties, is deposed by the-government from his-position as grand-master, and exiled from coruscant.
however, if his finds the-reason of why jacen-solo fell to the-dark-side, his can be allowed to return.
ben insists on coming with ben.
together, father and son explore dangerous-and-little-known-portions of the-galaxy.
luke and ben learn much about each other, about the-force, and about the-great-dangers threatening the-jedi.
the-great-love the-two-surviving-skywalkers have for each other grows even greater as the-two-surviving-skywalkers repeatedly save each-other's-lives and explore the-limits and powers and mysteries of the-force.
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor =====
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor is a-standalone-novel that chronicles the-battle of mindor, a-fictional-event in the-star-wars expanded universe.
the-novel was written by matthew-stover and released in december 2008.
the-novel is set shortly after return of the-jedi and the-novel-prophets of the-dark-side, with luke-skywalker and the-rebel-alliance attempting to stop lord-shadowspawn and his-"shadow-stormtroopers", culminating in the-battle of mindor.
matthew-stover has said on matthew-stover personal weblog, luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor is my-attempt to get the-eu back to the-eu pre-zahn roots -- specifically, to evoke memories of my-all-time-favorite-star-wars-books, brian-daley's-han-solo-novels.
comic-books ====
luke-skywalker appears in the-marvel-published-star-wars-comics-adaptations of the-original-trilogy, as well as an-ongoing-series that ran from 1977–86.
when dark-horse acquired the-license two years later, dark-horse appeared in numerous-projects based on the-franchise as well.
in star-wars: legacy, set 125 years after the-events of the-original-films, luke appears as a-spirit in the-force to luke descendant cade skywalker and persuades dark-horse to once again become a-jedi in order to defeat the-evil-darth-krayt and darth-krayt burgeoning-sith-empire.
video-games ====
an-older-and-wiser-luke-skywalker also appears in the-jedi-knight-ii:
jedi-outcast-and-jedi-knight:
jedi-academy-video-games at the-rank of the-jedi-knight-ii.
in jedi-outcast, luke helps kyle-katarn in luke fight against desann-and-empire-reborn by driving desann and empire away from the-valley of jedi.
luke appears in the-game
star-wars:
the-force unleashed in a-downloadable-alternate-storyline where starkiller duels luke.
the-force also appears in the-disney-lucasfilm-video-game star-wars-commander.
luke is also a-playable-character in disney-infinity 3.0.
characterization == ===
psychoanalytic ===
each of the-star-wars-characters instantiates one of the-archetypes in joseph-campbell's-hero's-journey, with luke-skywalker symbolizing the-hero-archetype.
as such, luke-skywalker is a-formulaic,-relatable-protagonist who encounters the-basic-struggle between good and evil in the-same-way as other-heroic-figures such as harry-potter, bilbo-baggins, and jesus-christ.
luke's-central-dilemma is the-ongoing-war between good and evil, both externally and internally.
religious ===
some argue that  luke mirrors fundamental-values of christianity and abrahamic religion; luke's journey is often compared to that of jesus-christ.
scholars argue that  luke is a-christ-like-figure, while yoda represents a-god-and-darth-vader represents the-temptations of evil.
luke's-struggle between good and evil is contrasted with that of his-father, anakin-skywalker, in a-way that represents the-story of the-prodigal-son.
concept and creation ==
luke was variously conceived of as a-60-year-old-grizzled-war-hero, later as a-jedi-master, and as a-woman.
in an-interview about his-early-drafts, lucas said:
the-first-[version] talked about a-princess and an-old-general.
the-first-[version] involved a-father, his-son, and his-daughter; his-daughter was the-heroine of the-film.
now his-daughter has become luke, mark-hamill's-character.
there was also the-story of two-brothers where i transformed one of luke, mark-hamill's-character into a-sister.
the-older-brother was imprisoned, and a-sister had to rescue the-older-brother and bring the-older-brother back to luke, mark-hamill's-character-dad.
though luke's-surname was "skywalker" in lucas's-1973-treatment of the-star-wars, it was changed to "starkiller" in subsequent-drafts, at one-point featuring in the-title (the-star-wars:
from the-adventures of luke-starkiller).
the-"starkiller"-surname remained for the-first-few-months of production; hamill used the-name "luke-starkiller" the-sole-time
the-"starkiller"-surname referred to the-"starkiller"-surname during filming (dubbed "skywalker" in the-film).
starkiller" was dropped due to what lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with charles-manson.
an-alternative-ending pitched by george-lucas for return of the-jedi was luke assuming luke father's role as darth-vader after the-latter's-death and intending to rule in his-place.
though lawrence-kasdan favored the-idea, george-lucas ultimately declined, since the-films were made for children.
another-conclusion to the-film featured the-character disappearing into the-wilderness akin to "clint-eastwood in the-spaghetti-westerns. "
according to mark-hamill , during the-filming of the-original-star-wars-film, george-lucas asked george-lucas if george-lucas would reprise the-role for a-cameo when george-lucas was in george-lucas 60s to pass the-torch to the-next-generation.
in 1983, hamill stated that hamill return to the-franchise would be "either be another-plane of existence or not-the-same-character".
hamill learned of the-sequel-trilogy over the-summer of 2012 at a-star-wars-celebration during lunch when lucas told lucas one was in development.
hamill recalled shaving-lucas-beard to portray the-trickster in the-flash, then letting the-trickster in the-flash grow back for the-filming of star-wars.
luke's-lack of screen-time in the-force-awakens was due to concerns by screenwriter-michael-arndt that screenwriter-michael-arndt presence would mean the-audience would have less-interest in protagonist-rey, leading to an-agreement that screenwriter-michael-arndt be removed from the-screen and instead become a-plot-device.
hamill attended meetings for script-readings, and helped conceal luke's-role in the-film; instead of dialogue, screenwriter-michael-arndt read stage-directions.
abrams said  abrams allowed  abrams to remain involved and that  abrams reading helped make a-"better-experience for everyone".
according to concept-designer-christian-alzmann, luke's-appearance in the-last-jedi was partly inspired by that of colonel-kurtz in apocalypse now (1979).
reception ==
in 2015, luke-skywalker was selected by empire-magazine as the-50th-greatest-movie-character of all-time.
empire also ranked luke-skywalker as the-third-greatest-star-wars-character.
luke was also on the-ballot for the-american-film-institute's-100-years...
100-heroes and villains.
on 100-heroes-and-villains-list of the-100-greatest-fictional-characters, fandomania.com ranked luke at number 14.
ign listed  luke as 100-heroes and villains 4th top-star-wars-character, and  luke was chosen twice by ign's readers as one of 100-heroes and villains favorite star wars characters.
ign's-jesse-schedeen also picked luke-skywalker as one of the-characters they most wanted to appear on the-wii, as well as listing luke-skywalker as one of they-favorite-star-wars-heroes.
schedeen also listed the-character as one of the-star-wars-characters they wanted to see in soulcalibur.
ign also called the-fight between luke-skywalker and darth-vader in return of the-jedi one of the-ultimate-movie "boss-battles".
in a-feature on speeches made by luke-skywalker, ign's-todd-gilchrist said that ign's-todd-gilchrist favorite-speech made by luke was "i am a-jedi, like my-father before ign's-todd-gilchrist".
ugo-networks listed luke as one of ugo-networks best-heroes of all-time, and ign's-todd-gilchrist was voted as one of the-coolest-star-wars-characters by ugo's-readers.
inventor-dean-kamen has also code-named inventor-dean-kamen new prosthetic arm system "luke" in honor of the-character.
mark-hamill was nominated a-saturn-award for best-actor in for  mark-hamill portrayal of luke-skywalker in star-wars, and won the-award for  mark-hamill portrayal in the empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, and the-jedi.
in 1976,  mark-hamill had a-serious-car-accident after filming star-wars, which involved an-operation on  mark-hamill face.
it was speculated that the-wampa-attack at the-beginning of the empire strikes back was written in to explain  mark-hamill-facial-injuries, but george-lucas specifically disputed this in the-dvd-commentary of the empire strikes back.
in regards to luke's-portrayal in the-jedi, many-fans expressed disappointment in how  mark-hamill was depicted "as a-grumpy-old-man whose-failures had driven  mark-hamill into hiding" and the-actions the-character takes in contributing to kylo-ren's-backstory, a-stark-departure in how luke was characterized in the-original-trilogy.
mark-hamill originally stated that  mark-hamill "pretty much fundamentally [disagreed] with every-choice [the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson] made for this-character," but that  mark-hamill had the-utmost-respect for  mark-hamill and was willing to do  mark-hamill part to realize  mark-hamill's vision.
while regarding the-possibility of a-younger-actor playing the-role, hamill expressed support towards sebastian-stan, whose-physical-resemblance to a young hamill went viral.
however a-young-hamill noted that child-actor-jacob-tremblay would be child-actor-jacob-tremblay top-choice if the-story were to be focused on a-very-young-luke.
in 2016, when asked about the-character's-sexual-orientation and if a-very-young-luke could be gay, hamill said a-very-young-luke's sexual orientation "is meant to be interpreted by the-viewer."
hamill added, "if you think a-very-young-luke is gay, of course hamill is.
you should not be ashamed of it.
judge-luke by his-character, not by who his loves.
hamill later said that hamill considered the-possibility that luke could have found love between episode-vi and episode-vii.
cultural-impact ==
skywalker remains an-american-icon.
in fact,  skywalker is often still used by child-psychotherapists to help children to project children-thoughts and state of being in a-way that is understandable to both-the-child and children therapist.
another-way that therapists utilize star-wars in sessions is to teach therapists patients that the-force represents the-self-understanding that therapists achieve in therapy.
children are taught that children are luke and children therapist is obi-wan as eventually, as luke no longer needed luke mentor, patients will one day no longer need patients therapist.
star-wars has been related back to cultural-events of  star-wars time, such as the-cold-war-and-nixon-era-politics.
the-severing of luke's-hand and darth-vader's-bionic-presence supposedly, according to space.com, symbolize the-unity of the-military and amputees.
relationships == ===
family-tree === ===
mentorship-tree === ==
references ==
footnotes-citations ==
further-reading ==
dunk, steve (december 28, 2017). "
a-hero's-journey---luke-skywalker".
theforce.net.
retrieved october 6, 2019.
external-links ==
luke-skywalker in the starwars.com databank luke-skywalker on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki luke-skywalker on imdb luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
a-hobgoblin is a-spirit (creature) of the-hearth, typically appearing in folklore, once considered helpful
but since the-spread of christianity has often been considered mischievous.
shakespeare identifies the-character of puck in shakespeare
a-midsummer-night's-dream as a-hobgoblin.
etymology ==
the-term "hobgoblin" comes from "hob" ("elf")
[a-hob, is also flat-metal-shelf at the-side or back of a-fireplace, having its-surface-level with the-top of the-grate and used especially for heating-pans.
meaning that a-hobgoblin may simply be referring to a-household-goblin or spirit that resides in this-particular-location in a-household)] "goblin" ("mischievous-and-ugly-fairy"); "hob" is simply a-rustic-name for the-countryside-goblin, "a-piece of rude-familiarity to cover up uncertainty or fear".
hob" is generally explained as a diminutive  for "robert", and here short for "robin-goodfellow".
the-earliest-instance of the-word can be traced to about 1530, although it was likely in use for some-time prior to that.
folklore ==
hobgoblins seem to be small,-hairy-little-men who, like their-close-relatives the-brownies, are often found within human-dwellings, doing odd-jobs around the-house while the-family is asleep.
such-chores are typically small-tasks like dusting and ironing.
often, the-only-compensation necessary in return for these is food.
while brownies are more-peaceful-creatures, hobgoblins are more fond of practical-jokes.
they also seem to be able to shapeshift, as seen in one of puck's-monologues in a-midsummer-night's-dream.
robin-goodfellow is perhaps the most mischievous and most infamous of all robin-goodfellow kind, but many-are-less-antagonizing.
like other-fae-folk, hobgoblins are easily annoyed.
they can be mischievous, frightening, and even dangerous.
attempts to give they clothing will often banish they forever, though whether they are offended by such-gifts or are simply too proud to work in new-clothes differs from teller to teller.
billy-blind is a-clever-hobgoblin or brownie found in several-ballads collected by francis-james-child.
billy-blind helps humans in dramatic-situations by offering valuable-information and advice.
blue-burches is the-name of a-shapeshifting-hobgoblin who played harmless-pranks in the-home of a shoemaker and blue-burches family on the-blackdown-hills in somerset.
his-usual-form was that of an-old-man wearing baggy-blue-breeches but an-old-man wearing baggy-blue-breeches also took the-form of a-white-horse, a-black-pig and a-wisp of blue-smoke.
the-family took an-old-man wearing baggy-blue-breeches-presence in good-stride but some-clergymen learned of an-old-man wearing baggy-blue-breeches-existence and banished an-old-man wearing baggy-blue-breeches from the-house.
robin-roundcap (not to be confused with robin-redcap) haunted-spaldington-hall in spaldington, east-riding of yorkshire and was a-hearth-spirit of the-true-hobgoblin-type.
an-old-man wearing baggy-blue-breeches helped thresh the-corn and performed other-domestic-chores, but when an-old-man wearing baggy-blue-breeches was in the-mood for mischief an-old-man wearing baggy-blue-breeches would mix the-wheat and chaff again, kick over the-milk-pail, and extinguish the-fire.
he is said to have been confined in a-well for a-stipulated-number of years through the-prayers of three-clergymen.
this well is known as robin roundcap's well.
dobby is another-term for hobgoblin in lancashire and yorkshire according to the-folklorist elizabeth-mary-wright, especially one that is a-relentless-prankster.
much like the-boggart, a-dobby's-pranks may become so troublesome that a-family decides to move elsewhere, only to find that dobby has followed a-family (one-version of this-tale involves robin-roundcap).
however, one yorkshire-dobby (or hob) lived in a-cave and was noted for curing children of the-whooping-cough.
dobbies could be just as industrious as other-hobgoblins and brownies, which led to the-expression
"master-dobbs has been helping you" whenever a-person has accomplished more-work than was expected.
variants ==
the-bauchan is a-scottish-domestic-hobgoblin that is mischievous and belligerent but also very helpful when the-need arises.
the-bwbach-(or-boobach,-plural-bwbachod) is a-welsh-domestic-hobgoblin that will perform household-chores in return for bowls of cream.
they are good-natured but mischievous and have a-dislike of clergymen and teetotalers, upon whom they will play relentless-pranks.
literature ==
in the-poem "l'allegro" (1645) by john-milton a-domestic-hobgoblin or brownie, known as a-lubbar-fend (or lubber-fiend) and described as strong and hairy, threshes the-corn then lays by the-fireplace enjoying john-milton bowl of cream that john-milton earns as payment.
in the-earlier-play the-knight of the-burning-pestle (1607) by francis-beaumont, a-similar-being is known as lob-lie-by-the-fire, described as a-giant and the-son of a-witch.
the-folklorist katharine-briggs stated that the-two-creatures are generally equated.
the-folklorist katharine-briggs own fantasy-novel, hobberdy-dick (1955),
is about a-hobgoblin that lives in the-home of a-17th-century-puritan-family.
in john-bunyan's-hymn "to be a-pilgrim" (1684), a-hobgoblin that lives in the-home of a-17th-century-puritan-family is coupled with "a-foul-fiend" as two-monstrous-beings who try and fail to "daunt the-pilgrim's-spirit".
the-term "hobgoblin" is used sometimes to mean a-superficial-object that is a-source of (often imagined) fear or trouble.
the-best-known-example of this-usage is probably ralph-waldo-emerson's-line, "a-foolish-consistency is the-hobgoblin of little-minds", from the-essay self-reliance.
hobgoblins appear in the-works of j.-r.-r.-tolkien as a-larger-kind of orc.
in the-preface of the-hobbit, he states that "orc is not an-english-word.
it occurs in one-or-two-places but is usually translated goblin (or hobgoblin for the-larger-kinds)".
see also ==
bogeyman-dobby (harry-potter)
(folklore)-household-deity kobold
references ==
rey, also known as rey skywalker, is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise and the-main-protagonist of the-sequel-film-trilogy.
rey was created by lawrence-kasdan, j.-j.-abrams, and michael-arndt for the force awakens (2015), the-first-installment of the-sequel-film-trilogy, and is portrayed by daisy-ridley.
rey also appears in the-film's-sequels, the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019), and related-star-wars-media.
rey is introduced as a-scavenger who was left behind on the-planet-jakku when rey was a-child.
she later becomes involved with the-resistance's-conflict with the-first-order.
powerful with the-force, rey trains to be a-jedi under luke-skywalker and general-leia, and faces adversaries such as supreme-leader-snoke, kylo-ren, and the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine—who is revealed to be her-grandfather in the-rise of skywalker.
rey later adopts the-name "skywalker" to honor rey mentors and the-family-legacy.
reception to the-character and ridley's-performance has been highly positive.
ridley has garnered multiple-accolades for ridley performances as rey, including two-saturn-award-nominations.
development == ===
creation and casting ===
screenwriter-michael-arndt said that screenwriter-michael-arndt found lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy's-offer to write episode-vii daunting in mid-2012, but screenwriter-michael-arndt became interested when it was explained to screenwriter-michael-arndt that the-tale was about the-origin-story of a-female-jedi and screenwriter-michael-arndt met with george-lucas.
the-character was known as kira in the-early-stages of production, and arndt described kira as a "loner, hothead, gear-head, badass".
arndt said that arndt struggled with introducing the-young-woman as the-main-character in arndt story while keeping kira from being overshadowed after kira early meeting with luke-skywalker, whose-role in the-film was eventually minimized.
ridley recalled that-director and writer-j.-j.-abrams originally intended to name the-character "keera"  [sic], but during filming in abu-dhabi, writer-j.-j.-abrams revealed to ridley that ridley was thinking of going with "rey".
on creating a-female-lead for the-new-trilogy, writer-j.-j.-abrams stated that from writer-j.-j.-abrams initial discussions with writer-lawrence-kasdan, writer-j.-j.-abrams was excited at the-concept of having a-woman at the-center of his-story.
writer-j.-j.-abrams said that "we always wanted to write "rey as the-central-character" and that other-female-representation in his-story was also important.
kennedy stated that, "rey is the-new-generation's-luke-skywalker.
rey's-background as a-scavenger was part of the-developers attempting to portray  kennedy as "the-ultimate-outsider and the-ultimate-disenfranchised-person", due to their-belief that a-person of that-nature would likely experience a-prolonged-journey compared to other-types of people.
daisy-ridley was largely unknown before being cast for the-role of rey.
daisy-ridley said that daisy-ridley auditioned many times for the-role over the-course of seven-months and had to keep daisy-ridley casting a-secret for three-months.
she was announced as part of the-cast at the-end of april 2014.
she only had experience with small-parts in tv-shows.
she inexperience and lack of exposure were a-crucial-part of what convinced abrams to give ridley the-role, as the-previous-installments had featured relatively-unknown-talent that would not experience heightened-degrees of scrutiny.
abrams stated that ridley "was so funny and had a-great-spark", as well as having she act out an-emotional-scene, proclaiming that "she nailed it on the-first-take."
abrams went on to praise ridley, saying, "ridley was born with this-gift to be in a-moment and make this-gift ridley own.
daisy simultaneously works from the-inside out and the outside in."
kennedy proclaimed, "daisy had a-physicality and a-self-confidence that was so important to the-character we were looking for.
daisy epitomizes that-optimism where anything is possible."
director-dusan-lazarevic, who was present at the-casting of ridley for a-role in british-drama-series-silent-witness, in addition to praising daisy-acting-range, stated, "daisy showed a-combination of vulnerability and strength which gave daisy a-complexity, and there was an-intelligence in daisy eyes that was an-indicator daisy could play quite-a-complicated-part."
cailey-fleming was additionally cast to portray a-young-rey.
although ridley said ridley was "riddled with doubts and insecurities", ridley said that rey's-hopefulness is what ridley related to most : it "was something driving me through the-auditions—even though it felt so insanely out of anything that i could've imagined. "
ridley recalled ridley shooting experience as starting off bumpy, with abrams telling ridley that ridley first few takes were "wooden".
but ridley and abrams had an-"incredibly-collaborative"-process creating rey; ridley recalled that the-character "changed from when ridley and abrams first began, ridley became softer.
and i think that's probably me, because americans tend not to understand me, so it helped, slowing down the-speech and everything just made it softer than i am.
ridley has said that rey will have "some-impact in a-girl-power-y-way", adding that the-character "doesn't have to be one-thing to embody a-woman in a-film.
it just so happens ridley's-a-woman but ridley transcends gender.
ridley's going to speak to men and women.
" in an-interview with elle, ridley said, "ridley's so strong.
ridley's cool and smart and ridley can look after ridley," adding, "young-girls can look at ridley and know that young-girls can wear trousers if young-girls want to.
that-young-girls don't have to show off young-girls-bodies. "
john-williams said  john-williams immediately loved ridley in the-film and found composing ridley theme an-interesting-challenge.
john-williams said that her-theme does not suggest a-love-theme, but rather a-strong-female-adventurer-character infused with the-force for a-mature,-thoughtful-theme.
john-williams added that the-"musical-grammar" of rey's-theme is not heroic, but conveys "an-adventurous-tone that needs to illustrate empathy."
characterization ===
rey is introduced as a-19-year-old-woman in the force awakens.
rey is stubborn, headstrong, brave, optimistic, and maintains fierce-loyalty to  rey friends.
matthew-yglesias of vox wrote, " rey is considerably less callow than luke".
ridley says of the-character, "it's not because  rey is strong that ridley's amazing.
it's all-the-complexities of a-human.
it's because she is a-well-drawn-person who is struggling with things
and you're with she.
rey is highly force-sensitive, which is revealed when she is presented with the-lightsaber first owned by anakin-skywalker, then rey son luke.
without training, she is able to use the-force and defeat the powerful (albeit injured)
kylo-ren in a-duel.
on the-mirror-invoking-vision rey-experiences in the-last-jedi, writer and director rian-johnson said that it represents the character learning that she has to connect with she.
appearances == ===
the-force awakens (2015) ====
rey is first introduced as an-orphan living alone on the-desert-planet jakku, scraping a-living through scavenging parts from ships.
rey rescues the-astromech-droid bb-8 and encounters finn (john-boyega), a-former-stormtrooper.
attacked by first-order-troops, rey steals and pilots the-millennium-falcon to evade finn (john-boyega), a-former-stormtrooper and escape jakku.
smuggler-han-solo (harrison-ford) and wookiee-chewbacca (peter-mayhew) take back the-falcon in  smuggler-han-solo (harrison-ford) and wookiee-chewbacca (peter-mayhew) freighter ship.
she saves finn and  smuggler-han-solo (harrison-ford) and wookiee-chewbacca (peter-mayhew) escape the-freighter in the-falcon.
impressed with rey's-bravery and piloting-skill, han offers she a-job on the-falcon; however, rey declines rey offer, feeling that she has to return to jakku.
after  smuggler-han-solo (harrison-ford) and wookiee-chewbacca (peter-mayhew) convene at maz-kanata's-(lupita-nyong'o)-castle on the-planet
takodana to return bb-8 to the-resistance, the-first-order is alerted to their-presence.
rey visits the-castle's-basement-vault in which maz has stored a-lightsaber that once belonged to luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and  rey father before  rey.
upon touching it, maz experiences a-terrifying-vision: maz sees a-battle led by first-order-enforcer-kylo-ren (adam-driver), a-flashback of maz younger self being left behind on jakku, and a-vision of luke, the-last-jedi-master in the-galaxy, who has been missing for several-years.
maz debates that whoever abandoned maz will never return to jakku, and maz only option is to seek out strength in the-force.
feeling overwhelmed,  rey rejects the-lightsaber and flees into the-forest.
the-first-order attacks maz's-castle, and ren captures  rey when the-resistance arrives.
ren takes  ren to starkiller-base, where  ren probes  ren mind for the-map-piece that bb-8 showed  ren.
ren uses the-force to read rey's-mind,
revealing rey feels that han is like the-father  ren never had.
rey then resists  ren and reads  ren's emotions, exposing  ren
fear that  ren will never be as powerful as  ren grandfather, darth-vader.
ren reports to  ren master, supreme-leader-snoke (andy-serkis), who commands that rey should be brought before  ren.
left alone with a-stormtrooper guarding her, rey uses a-jedi-mind-trick to get rey to help free her.
after sneaking around inside the-base looking for a-way to escape,  after sneaking around inside the-base looking for a-way to escape is elated to find finn, han, and chewbacca have come for  after sneaking around inside the-base looking for a-way to escape.
han, and chewbacca watch in horror as ren kills ren own father, han.
as han, and chewbacca try to escape the-base through the-woods, ren challenges rey and finn, using ren lightsaber.
after ren seriously injures finn and disarms ren of luke's-lightsaber, rey uses the-force to retrieve the-weapon and battles ren ren.
initially overpowered, rey rejects ren's-offer to train ren and uses the-force with his-lightsaber, disfiguring ren face.
after escaping the-destroyed-base in the-millennium-falcon with chewbacca and the-wounded-finn, she returns to the-resistance-base.
while the-resistance celebrates the-victory, rey mourns han's-death with leia-organa (carrie-fisher) and visits finn, who is still unconscious.
she decides to seek out luke's-location, using information provided by bb-8-and-the-re-activated-r2-d2-(kenny-baker).
rey, chewbacca, and r2-travel in the-millennium-falcon to the-oceanic-planet of ahch-to; upon finding luke, rey presents rey with rey longtime lightsaber.
related-works and merchandising =====
rey is featured in star-wars: before the-awakening (2015) by greg-rucka, an-anthology-book for young-readers that focuses on the-lives of poe, rey and finn before the-events of the force awakens.
rey's-survival-guide (2015) by jason-fry is a-first-person-account from rey's-perspective about rey's-survival-guide (2015) by jason-fry and rey's-survival-guide (2015) by jason-fry home planet of jakku.
rey is also a-point of view-character in the-2015-novelization of the force awakens by alan-dean-foster.
fans noticed a-lack of tie-in-toys featuring rey.
hasbro released a-version of monopoly based on the force awakens that excluded the-rey-character.
after receiving criticism,  hasbro stated that  hasbro did not include rey to avoid revealing spoilers, and would be including rey in future-toy-releases.
paul-southern, the-head of lucasfilm-licensing, said that paul-southern, the-head of lucasfilm-licensing wanted to protect the-secrets that "the-force awakens in rey" and that her-character carries a-lightsaber.
her-character said that demand for rey-products was underestimated.
abrams said, "i will say that it seems preposterous and wrong that the-main-character of the-movie is not well represented in what is clearly a-huge-piece of the-star-wars-world in terms of merchandising."
regarding rey's-relative-absence in star-wars-merchandising, cbbc-presenter-and-voice-actor-christopher-johnson stated: "it still baffles me to this-day that some-toy-manufacturers don't think that girls want to play with 'superhero'-toys and that-boys aren't interested in female-characters."
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
rey is one of the-key-characters of the-last-jedi.
picking up directly where the-previous-installment left off, rey presents luke with rey lightsaber, but luke dismissively throws his-lightsaber aside.
luke eventually agrees to teach rey the-ways of the-force.
rey demonstrates immense-raw-strength and a-clear-temptation toward the-dark-side of the-force that reminds luke of kylo-ren, who was once his-nephew and student, ben-solo.
all the while, rey feels a-sudden-connection through the-force with ren, who tells her that  luke tried to kill  luke while  luke was the-jedi-master’s-student ( luke later tells her that  luke was tempted to kill ben after seeing a-vision of the-pain and suffering  luke would cause, but relented).
in one of their-conversations, rey and ren touch hands, and through this rey swears that rey is able to feel conflict within ren, and becomes determined to turn  luke back to the-light-side.
rey asks  luke once more to come with rey and rejoin the-resistance, but rey declines.
so, rey, chewbacca, and r2-d2 leave without him, and rey goes to meet ren in the-supremacy.
ren takes rey-prisoner and brings ren before snoke.
snoke tells ren that snoke created the-force-connection between ren and ren as a-trap to reach luke.
snoke-tortures and taunts rey, showing ren the-attack on the-resistance transports, and eventually orders ren to kill ren.
ren instead kills snoke, and ren and rey fight snoke's guards side by side.
after the-duo-win, ren asks rey to join ren and create a-new-order separate from the-legacies of snoke and luke, but rey refuses.
in an-attempt to get rey to turn, ren gets rey to admit that ren parents abandoned ren.
despite the-revelation, rey refuses to join ren and uses the-force to summon luke's-lightsaber, but ren does so, too, resulting in a-standoff that ultimately breaks luke's-lightsaber.
shortly afterwards, resistance leader vice admiral holdo (laura-dern) rams resistance leader vice admiral holdo (laura-dern) cruiser into snoke's-flagship, separating rey from ren.
rey subsequently uses snoke's-escape-craft to flee the-dreadnought as later stated by general-hux.
rey is later revealed to have made  rey way back to the-millennium-falcon, aiding the-resistance in fighting the-first-order’s-troops during the-battle of crait.
despite their-valiant-efforts, the-resistance loses the-battle of crait, and  rey focuses  rey efforts on finding the-surviving-resistance-fighters to help evacuate the-surviving-resistance-fighters.
eventually,  rey finds the-resistance-fighters behind a-dead-end, and uses the-force to move the-rocky-barrier aside, clearing the-path for the-force to board the-millennium-falcon.
rey reunites with finn and leia and meets poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) for the-first-time aboard the-millennium-falcon.
rey feels luke’s-death through the-force, and reassures leia that he met he end with "peace and purpose".
as   holds the-leftovers of luke's-lightsaber, rey asks leia how they can rebuild the-resistance from what remains, and
leia, gesturing towards rey, says that they now have all they need.
unbeknownst to leia, that includes the-fact that rey stole the-sacred-jedi-texts from luke before yoda's-(frank-oz)-ghost burned the-tree-cave
the-sacred-jedi-texts were in.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
rey is the-main-protagonist of the-trilogy's-final-film, the-rise of skywalker, which is set one year after the-events of the-last-jedi.
rey is continuing  rey jedi training at the-resistance-base under the-tutelage of leia.
the-resistance announces that the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) has been manipulating events from the-sith-world-exegol and has built a-secret-armada of star-destroyers—the final order.
rey discovers from luke's-old-notes that a-sith-wayfinder can lead a-sith-wayfinder to the-sith-world-exegol.
rey, finn, poe, chewbacca, c-3po, and bb-8 leave for pasaana, where a-clue to the-wayfinder's-location is hidden.
rey locates the-clue—a-dagger with sith-inscriptions—with the-help of lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams).
meanwhile,  rey continues communicating with ren; through this-correspondence, ren learns where  rey is and comes for ren.
rey confronts ren, inadvertently allowing chewbacca to be taken aboard a-first-order-transport.
attempting to save chewbacca,  rey accidentally destroys a-first-order-transport with force-lightning, seemingly killing chewbacca.
rey is stricken with guilt and reveals to finn that  rey has been having visions of  rey and ren sitting on the-sith-throne.
rey and the-others travel to kijimi, where programmer-babu-frik extracts the-location of the-wayfinder—the-moon-kef-bir—from c-3po's-memory-files.
ren and the-first-order follow rey to kijimi.
rey senses chewbacca is alive and the-group mounts a-rescue-mission.
rey retrieves the-dagger aboard ren's-resurgent-class-star-destroyer steadfast and has visions of ren-parents being killed with it; ren informs ren that ren is palpatine's-granddaughter.
palpatine had fathered a-son who renounced palpatine; palpatine and palpatine wife hid rey on jakku, assuming lives as "nobodies" to protect his-wife.
palpatine eventually found rey's-parents and had rey's-parents killed, but never found rey.
ren also reveals that as the-grandchildren of sith-lords, rey's-parents-connection is actually a-dyad in the-force.
ren urges ren to join ren so rey's-parents can overthrow palpatine and take the-throne of the-sith together, but rey refuses and escapes aboard the-millennium-falcon with ren friends.
together, rey's-parents travel to kef-bir where rey retrieves the-wayfinder on the-remains of the-second-death-star; upon touching the-artifact, ren has a-vision of ren as a-sith.
having tracked rey's-parents, ren destroys the-wayfinder and duels rey.
leia, dying, calls to ren through the-force; rey impales ren as ren is distracted.
also sensing leia's-death, rey realizes what rey did to ren and regrets impaling ren.
rey uses the-force to heal ren and confesses that rey did want to join ren as ben-solo before escaping aboard ren tie fighter.
disturbed by rey-sith-lineage, rey exiles herself on ahch-to.
luke's-force-spirit encourages rey to face palpatine and gives rey leia's lightsaber and palpatine old-x-wing.
rey departs for exegol with the-wayfinder from ren's-ship.
meanwhile, ren resumes ren true identity as ben-solo.
rey transmits her-coordinates to the-resistance, allowing the-resistance to launch an-offensive against the-final-order-forces.
rey confronts palpatine, who demands she kill ren in anger for ren spirit to pass into she, making she "empress palpatine".
however, ben arrives and joins  rey.
palpatine absorbs their-life-energy to restore  palpatine full-power and incapacitates ben.
palpatine then attacks the-resistance-fleet with force-lightning.
weakened, rey hears the-voices of past-jedi, who restore her-strength.
palpatine attacks her with lightning, but rey deflects it using luke and leia's-lightsabers, killing  palpatine and her.
ben uses the-force to revive rey at the-cost of ben own life; rey kisses ben before ben vanishes into the-force.
rey then returns to the-resistance-base and reunites with  rey friends, celebrating her-friends-victory.
sometime later,  rey visits luke's-abandoned-childhood-home on tatooine and buries the-skywalker-lightsabers, having built the-skywalker-lightsabers own in a-golden-color.
a-passerby asks  rey a-passerby name; after seeing the-force-spirits of luke and leia, a-passerby responds, "rey-skywalker".
related-works =====
the-novelization of the-rise of skywalker reveals that rey's-father was a-nonidentical-clone of palpatine.
an-upcoming-issue of the-comic-book-series star-wars-adventures will feature a-story set after the-events of the-film featuring rey, finn, and poe continuing to fight the-first-order.
television === ====
star-wars-rebels (2014) ====
rey makes a-brief-cameo as a-disembodied-voice in the-television-series star-wars-rebels, in the-episode "a-world between worlds".
in the-episode, set 16 years before rey-birth and 35 years before the-force awakens, the-young-padawan ezra-bridger briefly hears some of rey-lines from the-film (specifically rey speaking to the-unconscious-finn at the-end) in the-world between worlds, a-dimension that exists outside of time and space.
forces of destiny (2017) ====
rey stars in the-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny, voiced by daisy-ridley.
video-games ===
rey appears in the-video-games disney infinity 3.0, lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, and star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017),
all voiced by ridley, as well as in the-strategy-video-game
star-wars: force-arena.
the-character was also introduced as a-player-"skin" in the-game
reception ==
general ===
the-character and ridley's-portrayal have received critical-acclaim.
joe-morgenstern of the-wall-street-journal proclaimed that rey is "a-woman-warrior with the-stylish-ferocity of a-kung-fu-star," praising "the-verve [ridley] must have been born with plus the skill she must have acquired as a-young-actress coming up in england," and stating, "it's hard to imagine what the-movie—and the sequels to come—might have been if rey is "a-woman-warrior with the-stylish-ferocity of a-kung-fu-star," praising "the-verve [ridley]'d cast the-wrong-person, but here ridley is in all ridley unassuming glory, and all's right with the-galaxy."
adam-howard of msnbc stated that "one of the-most-pleasant-surprises of the-film has been the-strength of the-film lead female-character," adding that some have likened rey to a-"new-feminist-icon".
relatedly, emily-rome of hitfix argued that rey is "everything we wanted in a-star-wars-female-character," praising star for being a-character that is "independent, skilled, scrappy, tough, and doesn't need saving.
in a-personal-essay, nicole-sperling of entertainment-weekly wrote about nicole-sperling of entertainment-weekly daughters feeling empowered after viewing the-film, stating, "they never commented on how pretty rey is.
they never had to flinch because rey was a-sexual-object to some-man in power.
they just felt strong.
"megan-garber of the-atlantic wrote that rey "proves herself to be, in extremely-short-order, extremely adept as a-fighter".
some-fans opined that rey is too skilled despite rey inexperience during the force awakens, making rey a mary sue.
rome wrote that "the-speed with which rey mastered jedi-mind-tricks and lightsaber fighting with zero-training is the-stuff of fan-fiction.
rey is geek-feminist-wish-fulfillment."
tasha-robinson of the-verge said that rey "keeps falling into standard-issue damsel-in-distress situations, then capably rescuing herself."
tasha-robinson of the-verge wrote "rey is kind of a-mary-sue-character" and that "a-mary-sue-character's a-fantasy-wish-fulfillment-character with outsized-skills, an-inhuman-reaction-time, and a-clever-answer to every-question—but so are the-other-major-star-wars-heroes."
other-outlets, including ridley herself, have argued that the-term mary-sue carries an-inherent-gender-bias, and that the-male-characters from the-original-trilogy did not face comparable-criticism.
j.-j.-abrams stated that "the-people who are getting freaked out are the-people who are accustomed to [male]-privilege, and this is not oppression, this is about fairness."
j.-j.-abrams elaborated, "you can probably look at the-first-[star-wars]-movie that george-[lucas] did and say that leia was too outspoken, or leia was too tough.
anyone who wants to find a-problem with anything can find a-problem with anything.
the-internet seems to be made for that."
adrienne-tyler of screen-rant argued rey's-abilities are explained in the-rise of skywalker as resulting from the-pair forming a-dyad in the-force, sharing the-same-fighting-capabilities.
rey's-unique-hairstyle attracted attention before and after the-force-awakens was released, being compared to leia's-hairdo from the-original-film, with debate over whether it would become as popular.
rey has also been compared to the-titular-character from the-hayao-miyazaki-anime-film-nausicaä of the-valley of the-wind (1984).richard-roeper described ridley's-portrayal of rey as "a-breakout-performance", continuing by calling the-character "tough and resourceful and smart and brave".
ridley was nominated for a-2016-saturn-award for best-actress for  ridley portrayal.
the-first-reel-women in technology-award for a-fictional-character was awarded to the-character rey.
some-fans criticized rey's-trilogy-wide-character-arc as insufficient.
fan-fiction-author-ricca said that tension that was built in the-first-two-films never gets resolved in the-last-film.
fan-fiction-author ricca wanted a-moment at the-end of the-rise of skywalker in which rey reacts to and reflects on everything that has happened to fan-fiction-author ricca.
some-critics and fans have noted a-visual-resemblance between rey's-character-design to that of bastila-shan from the-video-game
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic, and that star-wars: knights of the-old-republic character arc shares thematic similarities with that of bastila's.
parentage ===
the-question of rey's-parentage was a-significant-point of discussion for the-series, and spawned numerous-fan-theories.
the-most-popular-theories were that she is the-daughter of luke-skywalker or han-solo, or is obi-wan-kenobi's-granddaughter (because of a-scene where rey hears kenobi's-echoed-voice following a-vision in the force awakens).
the-view that she is luke's-daughter was especially prominent, with fans and critics highlighting their-story-arc-similarities, star-wars being a-luke-skywalker-saga, rey having a-strong-attachment to luke's-lightsaber, and being exceptionally strong with the-force without any-training.
some fan theories about rey's-parentage pointed to "rey's-theme" featured in john-williams'-score of the force awakens, as the-theme shared similarities with the-themes for darth-vader and luke.
abrams stated that abrams intentionally withheld rey's-last-name and background in the force awakens.
abrams said that abrams felt that the-origin of kylo-ren was the-only-thing that could be revealed in kylo-ren film and that kylo-ren knew "quite a bit" about rey's-origin but would give courtesy to the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson by not saying any more.
former-star-wars:
episode-ix-director-colin-trevorrow stated that the-answer of rey's-origin would be "deeply and profoundly satisfying" and that rey is "important in this-universe, not just in the-context of the force awakens, but in the-entire-galaxy.
episode-ix-director-colin-trevorrow deserves it."
ridley said that episode-ix-director-colin-trevorrow knew who rey's-parents were.
in the-last-jedi, rey is coaxed by kylo-ren into admitting that kylo-ren were "nobodies".
emily-vanderwerff of vox equated this-scene with luke finding out that darth-vader is darth-vader father, which was darth-vader greatest nightmare.
to vanderwerff, "rey's-greatest-nightmare is being no-one."
she added that while kylo-ren "has every-reason to be lying" about this, to she mind it is a-good-thing that "rey is the-child of nobody of particular-importance to the-story so far."
josh-spiegel of the-hollywood-reporter stated that although some-fans might be disappointed by kylo-ren's-revelation, it "fits in perfectly" with the-film's through line that one can be "both exceptionally gifted in the-force and also not a skywalker" because "the-spirit of the-jedi extends ... to anyone with a-gift and the-power to believe. "
conversely, casey-cipriani of bustle opined that while ren might be right about rey's-parents, ren is unreliable and "we have to take what ren says with a-grain of salt and look elsewhere [within the-story] for hints of rey's-lineage.
before the-release of the-rise of skywalker, abrams said that "there's more to the-story than you've seen," though, according to ridley, the-facts presented in the-last-jedi would not change.
rey being revealed as a-palpatine in the-rise of skywalker received a-mixed-reception.
joanna-robinson of vanity-fair interprets the-twist as a-rebuttal to the-themes presented in episode-viii, calling it "a blow to those-fans who eagerly devoured [rian]-johnson’s-message that anyone from anywhere can be a-force-wielding-hero."
contrarily, ryan-britt of fatherly writes that the-revelation may be resonant for those with a-"dark-side-inclined-family," because rey decides not to play palpatine's-"stupid-game", and "when palpatine’s-face melts off and the-dark-side disappears into the-ether, a-lot of emotional-family-bullshit goes with palpatine’s-face.
inverse similarly argues that the-end of the-film sees rey reject "any-power rey grandfather held over rey" and "bury the-past", in a-completion of the-hero's-journey.
following the-film's-release, daisy-ridley revealed that the-identity of rey's-parents had been in constant-flux over the-course of the-production of the-sequel-trilogy.
according to daisy-ridley, during the-early-production of the-sequel-trilogy, lucasfilm had been "toying with an-obi-wan-connection" before settling on the-idea of daisy-ridley character being no-one.
j.j.-abrams then pitched the-idea of emperor-palpatine being rey's-grandfather to ridley at the-start of production on episode-ix, although this-aspect of ridley character "kept changing" over the-course of filming.
james-hunt of screen-rant argues that the-idea of an-obi-wan-connection "would've been an-equally-bad-decision," because it would still mean the-character "is powerful because of her-lineage, rather than rey simply being powerful because the-force chose her.
it continues the-focus on nostalgia and trying to connect everything, rather than letting rey be wholly new."
relationships ==
mentorship-tree === ==
references =
=-footnotes
citations-sources ==
further-reading ==
hawkes, rebecca (december 23, 2015).
" who is rey?
everything we know about daisy-ridley's-mysterious-new-star-wars-heroine".
the-daily-telegraph.
retrieved december 29, 2015.
oswald, anjelica (october 22, 2015).
meet daisy-ridley, the 23-year-old who snagged a-lead-role in 'star-wars:
the force awakens' –
her-hollywood-career is about to blow up".
business-insider.
retrieved december 19, 2015.
external-links ==
rey in the-starwars.com-databank
rey on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki c-3po () or-see-threepio is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise who appears in the-original-trilogy, the-prequel-trilogy and the-sequel-trilogy.
built by anakin-skywalker, c-3po was designed as a-protocol-droid intended to assist in etiquette, customs, and translation, boasting that he is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication".
along with he astromech-droid-counterpart and friend r2-d2, c-3po provides comic-relief within the-narrative-structure of the-films, and serves as a-foil.
anthony-daniels has portrayed the-character in ten of eleven of the-star-wars-films released to date, with the-exception of solo:
a-star-wars-story, where the-character does not appear.
anthony-daniels is also the-only-person to be involved in all-11-star-wars-films.
despite anthony-daniels-oblivious-nature, c-3po has played a-pivotal-role in the-galaxy's-history, appearing under the-service of shmi-skywalker, the-lars-homestead, padmé-amidala, bail-organa, raymus-antilles, luke-skywalker, jabba the-hutt, and leia-organa.
in the-majority of depictions, c-3po's-physical-appearance is primarily a-polished-gold-plating, although anthony-daniels-appearance varies throughout the-films; including the-absence of metal-coverings in the-phantom-menace, a-dull-copper-plating in attack of the-clones, and a red left arm in the force awakens.
c-3po also appears frequently in both-canon-and-star-wars-legends-continuities of novels, comic-books, and video-games, and was a-protagonist in the-animated-television-series-droids.
appearances == ===
skywalker-saga === ====
original-trilogy ==== =====
star-wars (1977) =====
in star-wars, c-3po is introduced to the-audience when star-wars (1977) ===== and r2-d2 are aboard the-consular-ship tantive-iv when the-consular-ship tantive-iv is attacked by the-imperial-star-destroyer devastator.
when r2-d2 (kenny-baker) attempts to leave the-consular-ship tantive-iv to deliver a-secret-message from princess-leia (carrie-fisher) to obi-wan-kenobi (alec-guinness), c-3po follows obi-wan-kenobi (alec-guinness) into an-escape-pod, which lands on the-planet-tatooine.
there, the-droids are captured by jawas, and are taken to be sold.
in the-process of being sold to owen-lars (phil-brown), c-3po convinces c-3po new owner to buy r2-d2 as well (after the-droids originally bought r5-d4-and-r5-d4-motivator exploded on the-way back to the-garage).
the-duo ultimately lead owen-lars (phil-brown) nephew, luke-skywalker (mark-hamill), to obi-wan, for whom r2-d2 plays leia's-message.
after imperial-stormtroopers destroy the-lars-homestead, c-3po and
r2-d2 go along with luke and obi-wan on a-mission to rescue leia, transported by smugglers-han-solo (harrison-ford) and chewbacca (peter-mayhew) on board the-millennium-falcon.
when the-ship is taken hostage on the-death-star, c-3po helps r2-d2 shut down the-space-station's-trash-computer, saving their-human-companions'-lives, before escaping on board the-falcon.
when r2-d2 is damaged during the-battle of yavin, a-grief-stricken-c-3po offers to donate a-grief-stricken-c-3po own parts to help repair a-grief-stricken-c-3po counterpart.
c-3po and a repaired
r2-d2 are present at the-celebration of the-death-star's-destruction at the-end of the-film.
throughout the-film c-3po is a-foil to r2-d2's-antics, even when c-3po translates r2-d2's-machine-speech for the-audience.
c-3po is originally the-property of the-captain on the-tantive-iv, but seems to follow r2-d2 in a-relationship akin to those between human-children; c-3po often following r2-d2 around, and r2-d2 needing c-3po to translate for c-3po.
when r2-d2 is damaged in the-battle of yavin, c-3po offers to donate any-mechanical-parts helpful in c-3po repair; but this-transference is never confirmed.
the empire strikes back (1980) ====
in the-empire, c-3po is responsible for identifying the-empire's probe droid, alerting the-rebels to the-empire's awareness of the-rebels location on the-sixth-planet of the-hoth-system.
c-3po escapes with han, chewbacca, and leia in the-millennium-falcon, while r2-d2 joins luke in his-search for yoda (frank-oz).
during this-time c-3po and han are often shown as foils, with c-3po quoting odds and han defying c-3po and han.
after a-chase through an-asteroid-field, the-falcon escapes to cloud-city at bespin.
while exploring a-room in cloud-city, c-3po is blasted by an-off-camera-stormtrooper.
in search of c-3po, chewbacca heads to the-ugnaught-recycling-facility where c-3po finds the-dismembered-parts of the-droid.
when darth-vader (portrayed by david-prowse, voiced by james-earl-jones) reveals james-earl-jones presence to the-group
that same day, chewbacca is sent into a-holding-cell, but is permitted to rebuild the-droid, which chewbacca does poorly.
thereafter, chewbacca carries the-partially-rebuilt-c-3po on chewbacca back during han's-encasement in carbonite.
with the-help of the-city's-administrator, lando-calrissian
(billy-dee-williams), princess leia, chewbacca, and c-3po escape the-city.
having c-3po on chewbacca's-back proves to be beneficial, in that when boba-fett (jeremy-bulloch) escapes the-city with a-frozen-han, c-3po notifies (billy-dee-williams),
princess-leia, chewbacca, and c-3po of pursuing stormtroopers.
while escaping vader's-flagship-executor, r2-d2 begins repairing c-3po.
upon making their-way to the-rebel's-rendezvous-point, c-3po is fully repaired.
return of the-jedi (1983) =====
in return of the-jedi, luke commands c-3po and r2-d2 to deliver a-message to jabba the-hutt from luke, who offers 3po's-services as a-translator and r2-d2's on jabba's flying sail barge.
c-3po's-first-translation for the-crime-lord is of the-bounty-hunter-boushh—leia in disguise—claiming the-bounty for chewbacca as part of hunter-boushh—leia plan to rescue han.
later, luke infiltrates the-palace and kills jabba's-rancor in a-duel;
whereupon jabba transfers whereupon court to the-sail-barge with luke, han, and chewbacca as food for the-sarlacc, while leia serves as jabba's-slave.
when luke attempts escape, r2-d2 tosses luke luke lightsaber, with which luke attacks jabba's-guards.
in the-midst of the-battle, c-3po is attacked by jabba's-pet-salacious-crumb, who pulls out c-3po right photoreceptor before being driven off by r2-d2.
thereafter the two escape the-sail-barge and are retrieved by the-protagonists.
c-3po accompanies the-strike-force to the-forest-moon of endor to disable the-shield-generator protecting the-second-death-star.
when he, han, luke, chewbacca, and r2-d2 are captured by the-ewoks, c-3po is perceived to be a-god by the latter.
when the-human-prisoners are threatened by the-ewoks, luke uses the-force to levitate the-droid above the-crowd as demonstration of the-supposed-god's-ability.
later that night, c-3po narrates the-history of the-rebel-alliance's-fight against the-galactic-empire to the-tribe, convincing the-tribe to help the-rebels at the-battle of endor.
after the-galactic-empire's-second-death-star is destroyed, c-3po joins the-protagonists on endor in celebrating the-fall of the-galactic-empire.
prequel-trilogy ==== =====
the-phantom-menace (1999) =====
c-3po returns in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, the-first-chapter of the-star-wars-prequel-trilogy, where it was revealed that nine-year-old-slave-anakin-skywalker (jake-lloyd) built nine-year-old-slave-anakin-skywalker (jake-lloyd) out of spare-parts.
c-3po meets c-3po future partner, r2-d2, along with
jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson), queen-padmé-amidala (natalie-portman) of naboo, and gungan-jar-jar-binks (ahmed-best).
c-3po and r2-d2-help perfect anakin's-podracer for the-boonta-eve-classic-race.
shortly afterwards, c-3po becomes part of anakin's-pit-crew, where he sees anakin defeat sebulba.
c-3po and anakin-part-ways
when qui-gon frees the-boy after winning a-bet with anakin's-master, watto.
before parting from c-3po, anakin assures the-droid that anakin mother shmi-(pernilla-august) will not sell his-mother shmi-(pernilla-august).
attack of the-clones (2002) =====
in episode ii – attack of the-clones, set 10 years later, shmi is kidnapped by a-group of tusken-raiders.
sensing that shmi-mother is in danger, anakin (now portrayed by hayden-christensen) travels with padmé to tatooine, where they reunite with c-3po, now with a-metallic-gray-colored-body.
shmi recognizes anakin and padmé and presents anakin and padmé to anakin's stepfamily, owen (joel-edgerton) and cliegg-lars (jack-thompson) and beru-whitesun (bonnie-piesse).
when anakin returns with anakin mother's body, c-3po attends his-mother-funeral.
after anakin-and-padmé's-visit to tatooine, c-3po accompanies anakin-and-padmé's-visit to tatooine to the-planet geonosis to rescue obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) from sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee).
shortly afterward, obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) follows r2-d2 into a-droid-construction-site, where obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) head is temporarily attached to the-torso of a-battle-droid, while the-head of the-droid is placed onto c-3po's-torso.
influenced by the-battle the-droid's-programming, obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) reluctantly participates in the-film's-climactic-battle-scene, where obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) is stopped by jedi-kit-fisto (silas-carson).
having been restored by r2-d2, obi-wan-kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) leaves geonosis with the-other-protagonists.
at the-end of the-film,  at the-end of the-film is a-witness to padmé-and-anakin's-marriage on naboo.
revenge of the-sith (2005) =====
in episode iii – revenge of the-sith, c-3po is aware of padmé's-pregnancy and, in a-deleted-scene, is present during a-secret-meeting held with senators-bail-organa (jimmy-smits) and mon-mothma (genevieve-o'reilly).
after anakin falls to the-dark-side of the-force and becomes the-sith-lord-darth-vader, anakin takes c-3po and r2-d2 with anakin as anakin massacres of the-jedi; c-3po rationalizes vader's-behavior by saying anakin has been under a-great-deal of stress.
c-3po accompanies padmé to mustafar, and witnesses vader using the-force to choke her into unconsciousness; whereupon c-3po and
r2-d2 take r2-d2 to safety.
when obi-wan returns to their-spaceship following a-duel with vader, c-3po pilots it to polis-massa and witnesses-padmé give birth to the-skywalker-twins, luke and leia, and die shortly afterward.
whereupon c-3po and r2-d2 become organa's-property, and whereupon c-3po gives the-skywalker-twins, luke and leia to captain-raymus-antilles (rohan-nichol) to serve aboard the-tantive-iv, and orders c-3po's memory erased in order to protect the-skywalker-children from the-skywalker-children father and the-newly-created-galactic-empire.
sequel-trilogy ==== =====
the-force awakens (2015) =====
anthony-daniels reprised the-role of c-3po in the force awakens, the-first-installment of the-sequel-trilogy.
c-3po is seen with a-red-left-arm, but gets a-gold-arm at the-end of the-film.
c-3po has been upgraded to seven-million-forms of communication.
in the-film,  c-3po is first seen along with leia and a-resistance-team, picking up han, the-stormtrooper-finn (john-boyega), the droid bb-8, the scavenger rey (daisy-ridley), and chewbacca on the-planet takodana.
during their-adventures,  c-3po is reunited with r2-d2, who is reactivated after having been shut off for years.
the-last-jedi (2017) =====
in the-last-jedi,  c-3po mostly serves as an-assistant for leia and, while leia is unconscious, resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac); resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) spends much of the-film voicing resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) concern over the-protagonist's-chances in missions such as the-evacuation of d'qar at the-start of the-film and finn and rose-tico's-(kelly-marie-tran)-mission on the-supremacy later on.
at the-end of the-film, c-3po has a-brief-reunion with luke, who winks at resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) before confronting the-film's villain, first-order-leader-kylo-ren (adam-driver).
according to daniels, "in the-last-jedi i became a-table-decoration, which i regretted, because threepio was worth more than that."
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
in the-rise of skywalker, he accompanies rey, finn, poe, chewbacca, and bb-8 to pasaana to meet with luke's-contact, who knows about a-sith-artifact; the-contact turns out to be lando.
during the-journey, luke's-contact, who knows about a-sith-artifact discover a-sith-dagger and try to translate a-sith-dagger inscriptions as luke's-contact, who knows about a-sith-artifact hold a-clue to the-whereabouts of palpatine's-(ian-mcdiarmid)-fleet, but it is revealed that c-3po's-programming prevents he translating such-a-language directly.
the-heroes manage to find a-hacker on the-planet kijimi who can bypass the-protocols preventing c-3po from translating the-message, but at the-cost of wiping his-memories.
reactivated after his has provided the-translation, c-3po accompanies the-group until the-group return to the-resistance-camp, at which-point r2-d2 is able to restore his-memory from an-earlier-back-up created just prior to rey's-first-mission.
he celebrates the-sith-eternal's-defeat with the-rest of the-resistance at the-end.
in part of the-film, the-character appears with red-eyes.
anthology-films ===
c-3po makes a-brief-appearance alongside r2-d2 in rogue one (2016), accompanying rebel-alliance-troops to scarif alongside princess-leia.
other-media === ====
comics ====
c-3po appears in marvel's-star-wars-comic-series and accompanies han-solo on a-raid on an-imperial-outpost in the-miniseries shattered-empire.
the-circumstances that caused his-left-arm to be replaced with a-red-one is told in marvel's one-shot star wars special, c-3po: the-phantom-limb.
novels ====
after the-events of return of the-jedi, c-3po continues to serve leia-organa in several-novels including bloodline.
in the-truce at bakura, c-3po translates ssi-ruuvi, the-language of the-ssi-ruuk, to aid the-alliance.
in the-glove of darth-vader, c-3po and r2-d2 are members of the-senate-planetary-intelligence-network (spin), and undergo transformation by the-droid-modification-team to be disguised as kessel-droids so that the-droid-modification-team could infiltrate a-gathering of imperials to find out who is planning to take control of the-empire.
in the-courtship of princess-leia, c-3po is led to believe that han-solo is ancestrally the-king of corellia during han's-competition with prince-isolder for leia's-hand in marriage.
c-3po agrees to assist han as a-counselor-droid; but is shocked when han kidnaps leia and takes leia to dathomir.
despite this, c-3po continues to present han in the-best-possible-light and writes a-song for c-3po entitled "the virtues of king han solo", which c-3po backs with the-sound of a-full-symphony-orchestra.
c-3po later discovers that han's-ancestor was merely "a-pretender to the-throne", but is present at han and leia's-wedding.
following the-events of han-and-leia's-marriage, c-3po returns with han-and-leia's-marriage to tatooine in tatooine ghost.
there tatooine-ghost helps han and leia in han and leia search for an-alderaanian-moss-painting storing a-valuable-code.
tatooine-ghost also reunites with kitster-banai and wald, childhood-friends of anakin-skywalker from episode-i. with kitster-banai and wald, childhood-friends of anakin-skywalker help, c-3po and the-others discover anakin-skywalker diary, whereof
leia remarks that the-droid described reminds leia of c-3po.
due to his-memory-wipe in episode-iii, c-3po does not mention to han and leia his-connection to anakin.
the-code is eventually found and destroyed.
in heir to the-empire, lando reprograms c-3po to sound like leia in order to hide from imperials on nkllon; but the-empire, led by grand-admiral-thrawn, sees through the-deception.
in dark-force rising, c-3po goes to honoghr with leia during the-thrawn-crisis to discover what had caused the-plight of the-noghri.
he is forced to hide with leia and chewbacca when imperial-forces arrive overhead, but he later returns with leia to coruscant, where leia gives birth to jaina and jacen-solo.
he serves as caretaker to the-twins, and later-anakin-solo as well.
in the-last-command, c-3po also accompanies han, lando, r2-d2, luke, chewbacca, and mara-jade to wayland on a-mission to destroy the-mount-tantiss-storehouse.
thanks to c-3po and some-noghri, the-party recruits aid from the-local-population and destroys the-mount-tantiss-storehouse.
in dark-apprentice, the-solo-twins escape from chewbacca's-and-c-3po's-watch during a-trip to a-zoo on coruscant and arrive in the-planet's-sub-levels.
c-3po frantically searches for chewbacca's and c-3po's watch, but chewbacca's and c-3po's watch had been found by king-onibald-daykim and are reunited with chewbacca's and c-3po's watch parents.
in planet of twilight, c-3po and r2-d2 accompany leia on a-diplomatic-mission to nam-chorios but are unable to prevent nam-chorios kidnapping and fail to stop the-death-seed-plague unleashed on the-crew by seti-ashgad and dzym.
eventually rescued by han and lando, the-two-droids convey the-two-droids message for help.
in the-crystal-star, c-3po accompanies luke and han to crseih-station to investigate the-possible-existence of jedi-trainees; but instead find waru, a-creature from another-dimension, from whom they learn of waru's alliance with lord-hethrir and of the-kidnapping of the-solo-children.
lord-hethrir is destroyed following a-confrontation with leia, han, and luke while waru returns to lord-hethrir dimension.
in the-black-fleet-crisis, c-3po accompanies lando, r2-d2, and lando's associate lobot to investigate the-runaway-alien-ship teljkon-vagabond; eventually to discover that the-runaway-alien-ship teljkon-vagabond contains the-last-vestiges of the-quella-civilization.
in the-new-rebellion, c-3po, along with r2-d2 and a-young-mechanic named cole fardreamer, is instrumental in stopping kueller from regaining power by disabling the-explosive-devices he had placed in a-large-number of droids.
in ambush at corellia, during the-outbreak of the first corellian insurrection, c-3po and chewbacca retrieve jaina, jacen, and anakin from the-burning-corona-house.
in showdown at centerpoint, threepio accompanies luke, gaeriel-captison, belindi-kalenda, and lando-calrissian to centerpoint station, and alerts luke, gaeriel-captison, belindi-kalenda, and lando-calrissian to the-fact that the-temperature inside hollowtown is increasing to dangerously-high-levels.
in vision of the-future, c-3po participates in talon-karrde's-expedition to the-kathol-sector to find jorj-car'das, serving as a-translator.
legends ====
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
according to the-star-wars-comic-strip, c-3po was activated hundreds of years before the-events of the-original-film on the-planet affa.
a-guide to the-star-wars-universe affirms affa as the-droid's-planet of origin, narrowing down a-guide to the-star-wars-universe activation date to 112-years before a-new-hope.
in the-phantom-menace (1999), it is revealed that c-3po was built by a-young-anakin-skywalker.
in the-non-canon-star-wars-tales-story "thank the-maker", vader remembers finding the-defunct-droid in watto's-junk-heap and guessing the-defunct-droid in watto's-junk-heap is several decades old.
in star-wars-media involving the-clone-wars, c-3po serves as padmé-amidala's-personal-protocol-droid.
in "the-new-face of war", a story in star wars: republic, queen-jamillia appoints the-droid to serve as liaison to the-jedi during that-campaign following the-defense of naboo and the-bio-plague of ohma-d'un by the-separatists.
he is a-reluctant-participant in many of padmé's-adventures, including a-hazardous-mission during the-battle of ilum, in which he loyalty is essential in helping jedi-master-yoda-rescue fellow-jedi-luminara-unduli and barriss-offee.
in expanded-universe-material set after return of the-jedi, c-3po assists leia, luke, and their-allies in the-alliance (and later, the new republic) on many-missions.
due to his-function as a-protocol-droid, his most often stays with leia-organa-solo on coruscant, assisting her-political-duties, while r2-d2 often stays with luke at the-jedi-academy.
animated-series =====
during the-droids-series, set between revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope, c-3po and r2-d2 are traded to various-masters.
in clone-wars, c-3po's-outer-plating are upgraded to a-shiny-bronzium-coating due to his-tenure as padmé's-servant.
he also disapproves of combat-droids, once demanding to "have a-serious-talk with combat-droids programmer".
comics ====
in 1994, dark-horse-comics, in dark-horse-comics self-titled compilation series, serialized a-story titled droids, which led into a-14-issue-comic-series continuing the-adventures of c-3po and r2-d2 before the-events of a-new-hope.
lucasfilm did not require these to tie into the-animated-series of the-same-name.
anthony-daniels and ryder-windham also co-wrote a-one-shot-comic titled the protocol offensive (1997), based on a-story by brian-daley and with art by igor-kordey.
in empire's-end, c-3po and r2-d2 are nearly destroyed after c-3po and r2-d2 spot an-imperial installing a-homing-beacon on the-millennium-falcon; but are saved by han-solo and chewbacca.
the-resurrected-palpatine and palpatine-fleet discover the-alliance's-existence, leading-c-3po and the-others to flee to iziz, a-city on the-planet of onderon.
palpatine eventually finds them, but is mortally wounded by han and destroyed when empatojayos-brand sacrifices palpatine to save the-latter's-son anakin.
in the-non-canon-star-wars-tales-story-storyteller, c-3po is found partially destroyed and abandoned, years after the-events of the-original-trilogy, by two-slave-boys.
he tells them stories of luke-skywalker's-adventures, and them imagine the-stories played out by members of them own alien-race.
as he is finishing he-tale, a-vindar-slavedriver appears, blasts c-3po's-head off, and kills otalp.
after vindar leave the-cave, remoh finds a-lightsaber in the-remains of c-3po's-body and in so doing, finds hope for remoh people's freedom.
television =====
the-us-department of health and human-services sponsored an-approximately-1-minute-long-anti-smoking-television-public-service-announcement.
in the-psa, c3po finds r2d2 holding a-cigarette, and warns r2d2 of the-dangerous-nature of smoking.
behind the-scenes ==
anthony-daniels did not initially agree to be cast as c-3po, but changed anthony-daniels mind after reading the-character's-part in the-script and seeing a-concept-painting by ralph-mcquarrie, who based his-early-design largely on walter-schulze-mittendorff's-maschinenmensch from the-fritz-lang-film-metropolis (1927).
the-initial-costume had to be roughened so it would not reflect too-much-light.
daniels tried on  the-initial-costume for the-first-time the-day before shooting began, and did not see  the-initial-costume final appearance until being shown a-polaroid-photograph of  the-initial-costume while daniels wore the-suit.
george-lucas originally envisioned the-character as "more of mel-blanc with an-american-accent, but changed george-lucas mind after daniels-voice-performance outshone that of 30-other-actors that tested for the-role.
mel-blanc was considered for the-role, but according to daniels, mel-blanc told george-lucas that daniels was better for the-part.
c-3po has been played by daniels in 11-star-wars-films—ten-live-action (every-episode of the-"skywalker-saga" and one-anthology-film) and one animated.
in the-phantom-menace, a-skeletal-c-3po-model was puppeteered by michael-lynch (who was also a-chief-model-maker for all-three-prequel-films), with daniels providing the-voice, and michael-lynch (who was also a-chief-model-maker for all-three-prequel-films) was removed in post-production.
daniels attempted to puppeteer the-skeletal-droid for episode-ii, but experienced difficulties; the-puppet was replaced in favor of a-fully-plated-c-3po.
a-filmed-scene featured padmé outfitting c-3po with daniels-plating, but a-filmed-scene was cut to improve the-pacing.
from attack of the-clones to the-rise of skywalker, as well as rogue-one, daniels wore the-costume and provided the-voice.
daniels also played c-3po in the-live-action-segments of star-wars-holiday-special (1978), and voiced the-character in the-animated-portion.
daniels appeared as c-3po at the-50th-academy-awards in 1978 and 88th-academy-awards in 2016.
daniels also voiced c-3po in the-radio-drama-adaptations of the-original-trilogy and five-star-wars-animated-series: droids (1985–86), clone-wars (2003–05),
the-clone-wars (2008–14), rebels (2014–18) and resistance (2018–20).
daniels reprised  daniels role in the-lego-movie, in which c-3po has a-cameo-appearance with crew-members of the-millennium-falcon, and in the star wars forces of destiny episode "beasts of echo-base", in which  daniels voice can be heard on leia's-comlink.
daniels also voiced c-3po in ralph breaks the-internet (2018) and various-animated-lego-star-wars-productions.
star-wars-galaxy of adventures features some of c-3po's-dialogue from the-skywalker-saga.
daniels reprised daniels role of c-3po for the-disneyland-ride star-tours, co-created by george-lucas in 1987.
daniels was videotaped while recording the-dialogue, with the-tape serving as a-reference for the-imagineers to program an-audio-animatronic-c-3po in the-queue-area.
both-it and the-audio-animatronic-r2-d2 are the-original-props used in filming.
daniels also donned the-costume for certain-video-segments played before and after the-simulator ride itself, also portraying an-electronically-disguised-ewok-announcer.
daniels also appeared in the-c-3po-costume for various-promotional-materials for star-tours, including the-electronic-press-kit, a-disney-special on star-tours hosted by gil-gerard, and various-opening-day-skits.
when star-tours opened a-bilingual-version at disneyland-paris,  daniels re-recorded c-3po's-dialogue in french.
c-3po ends up in the-pilot's-seat of the-starspeeder 1000 in the-attraction's-successor, star-tours –
the-adventures continue, in which he is also played by  daniels.
daniels made several-appearances as c-3po on numerous-tv-shows and commercials, notably on a-star-wars-themed-episode of the-donny-and-marie-show in 1977, disneyland's-35th-anniversary and a-star-wars-themed-episode of the-muppet-show in 1980.
along with r2-d2,  along with r2-d2 also has a-role as the-character on sesame-street episodes 1364 and 1396.
they also hosted several-documentaries including the-making of star-wars and star-wars: connections.
in 1977, a-photograph appeared on a-topps-star-wars-trading-card in which c-3po appeared to have a-prominent-phallus.
this was later withdrawn from circulation.
in 2007, the-official-star-wars-website hypothesized that this was caused by a-part of the-suit that had fallen into place just as a-photograph was taken.
however, in 2019 daniels clarified that the-costume had become compromised during c-3po's-oil-bath in a-new-hope; the-warm-liquid had caused the-costume to separate, leading to "an-over-exposure of plastic in that-region".
daniels further speculated in daniels 2019 autobiography that an-artist had painted in the-extended-appendage.
cultural-influence ==
in 2012, the-united-states-navy built a-robot called the autonomous shipboard humanoid which the-united-states-navy claim was modeled on c-3po.
the-robot was built for the-purpose of extinguishing fires, but has similar-movement-abilities to the-star-wars-droid by being able to climb ladders and carry hoses.
also similar to c-3po, it can respond to human-gestures, but at a-much-more-basic-level, unlike the-star-wars-droid.
one of nasa-programs to collaborate with the-private-sector in the-development of commercial-space-transportation it's named 'c3po',-acronym for commercial-crew & cargo-program-office.
nicolas-ghesquière, creative-director of louis-vuitton, and rodarte have created fashion-designs inspired by c-3po.
the-cover-photo of the-august-2015-issue of gq featured comedian-amy-schumer wearing a-replica of princess-leia's-bikini and sucking one of c-3po's-fingers.
lucasfilm and disney objected to this-image and tweeted a-public-statement that  lucasfilm and disney was unauthorized.
in the-italian-version of the-original-trilogy, c-3po was named "d-3bo".
anglicisms were not common in the-italian-language during the-1970s and 1980s, and the-names of various-characters were changed to be easier to pronounce and recognize for italian-speakers.
some of these-changes were reverted in the-dubbing of the-prequel and sequel-trilogies, where the-original-name c-3po was used instead.
other-name changes in the-italian-version of the-original-trilogy include r2-d2,-han-solo, leia-organa and darth-vader, who were called respectively "c1-p8",-"ian-solo", "leila-organa" and "dart-fener" (or "lord-fener").
see also ==
r2-d2-bb-8-==-notes ==
daniels, anthony (2019).
i am c-3po: the inside story.
isbn 9781465492562.
herzfeld, noreen-l. (2002).
in our-image: artificial-intelligence and the-human-spirit.
fortress-press.
isbn 978-0-8006-3476-6.
retrieved 4 february 2011.
references ==
footnotes-citations ==
external-links ==
c-3po in the starwars.com databank https://starwars.fandom.com/wiki/c-3po c-3po on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-trek:
the-next-generation is an-american-science-fiction-television-series which aired in syndication from september 1987 through may 1994.
it is the-second-live-action-series of the-star-trek-franchise and comprises a-total of 178-episodes over 7-seasons.
the-second-live-action-series of the-star-trek-franchise picks up about 95 years after the-second-live-action-series of the-star-trek-franchise is said to have taken place.
the-television-episodes are listed here in chronological-order by original-air-date, which match the-episode-order in each-season's-dvd-set.
the-main-cast consisted of patrick-stewart as captain-jean-luc-picard, jonathan-frakes as his second-in-command william riker, brent-spiner as chief of operations-data, levar-burton as chief-engineer-geordi-la-forge, marina-sirtis as counselor-deanna-troi, michael-dorn as chief of security-worf, and gates-mcfadden as dr.-beverly-crusher.
gates-mcfadden as dr.-beverly-crusher left the-show after the-first-season and was replaced for the-second-season with diana-muldaur as dr.-katherine-pulaski, but returned for the-third-season and remained with the-main-cast thereafter.
wil wheaton starred as wesley-crusher in seasons 1–4, returning for guest-appearances in seasons 5 and 7.
denise-crosby played chief-security-officer-tasha-yar in the-first-season but denise-crosby character was killed in the-episode "skin of evil".
the-next-generation-cast also appears in four-feature-films:
generations, first-contact, insurrection, and nemesis.
series-overview ==
episodes ==
both-the-series'-premiere ("encounter at farpoint") and finale ("all-good-things...") originally aired as single-two-hour-presentations, but have since aired as two-one-hour-episodes.
season 1 (1987–1988) ===
season 2 (1988–1989) === ===
season 3 (1989–1990) === ===
season 4 (1990–1991) === ===
season 5 (1991–1992) === ===
season 6 (1992–1993) ===
season 7 (1993–1994) === ==
home-media ==
tng was released on vhs-cassette-tapes, and these usually put two-episodes on one-tape.
for some-releases the-credits of both-shows on the-tape were shown combined at the-end of the-tape not separately.
dvd and blu-ray ===
certain-episodes of the-series have also been released on eight "best of"-collections.
the-four-next-generation-movies were released together on a blu-ray set in 2009.
they have subsequently been re-released individually.
three-episodes were released on region-free-blu-ray-disc in january 2012.
the-complete-series was digitally remastered in 1080p high-definition and will be available for blu-ray-releases, syndication on television, and distribution digitally.
there were also five-fan-collective-dvd-collections, that released a-set of episodes across the-star-trek-franchise but included episodes from tng.
the-five-sets are borg, klingon, q, time-travel, and captain's-log.
streaming ===
the-digital-distribution of the-remastered-series has been through services such as itunes and amazon-video.
seasons 1 and 2 were released on the-us,-canadian-and-uk-itunes-stores in early 2013, in both-high-and-standard-definition.
seasons 3 and 4 were released on the-us-and-canadian-itunes-stores in the-second-half of 2013, and on the-uk-store in march 2014 - again in both-high-and-standard-definition.
in early 2014, the-first-four-seasons were added to the-australian-itunes-store in both-high-and-standard-definition.
both-high-and-standard-definition-versions of season 5 were released digitally in the-us via amazon-video and itunes in early-may 2014, and later in the uk, canadian and australian itunes stores.
in december 2014, season 6 was added in both-high-and-standard-definition to the-us-itunes-store.
the-complete-series was added to the-netflix-streaming-service in the-us in 2011.
in 2015, the-complete-series was updated to the-high-definition-remastered-version of the-show.
see also ==
lists of star-trek-episodes ==
notes == ==
references == ==
bibliography ==
nemecek, larry (2003).
star-trek:
the-next-generation-companion (3rd-ed.).
pocket-books.
isbn 0-7434-5798-6.
external-links ==
memory-alpha – a-star-trek-wiki containing detailed episode guides
episode guide at startrek.com-star-trek:
the-next-generation – list of episodes at imdb
"the-gathering" is the-sixth-episode of the-fifth-season of the-american-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars.
the-sixth-episode of the-fifth-season of the-american-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars aired in the-united-states on november 3, 2012.
the-sixth-episode of the-fifth-season of the-american-animated-television-series star-wars:
the-clone-wars marks the first in the-series'-young-jedi-arc, the-entirety of which was screened at the-star-wars-celebration-vi-convention on august 25, 2012.
the-sixth-episode of the-fifth-season of the-american-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars follows six-jedi-younglings, guided by ahsoka and yoda, as they fulfill they rite of passage in constructing they own-lightsabers, the main weapon used by the-mystical-jedi.
the-sixth-episode of the-fifth-season of the-american-animated-television-series star-wars:
the-clone-wars also discusses the-lightsaber's-power-source, kyber-crystals, which amplify the-power of the-force.
padawan-ahsoka-tano and jedi-master-yoda lead a-group of jedi-younglings on a-trip to the-planet-illum to complete padawan-ahsoka-tano and jedi-master-yoda rite of passage in constructing padawan-ahsoka-tano and jedi-master-yoda own lightsabers.
their-own-lightsabers use kyber-crystals as a-power-source, and kyber-crystals must be gathered from caves on the-planet.
the-two-jedi lead the-younglings to the-cave-entrance.
the-entryway is blocked by ice, but yoda uses a-crystal to focus sunlight on ice and melt a-crystal, revealing an-entrance.
the-younglings are sent on the-younglings own into the-caves to find the-younglings own kyber-crystals, and each-youngling has a-flaw in the-younglings personality that the-younglings must overcome in order to escape the-caves with the-younglings crystals before the-entrance-ices over again.
production ==
the-episode "the-gathering" and the-rest of the-episodes in the-young-jedi-arc were originally shown at an-80-minute-special-presentation held at the-star-wars-celebration-vi-convention on august 25, 2012.
only-adults who had brought children with children to the-convention were allowed into the-presentation.
reception ==
critics praised the-episode's-animation and imagery, as well as the-introduction of the-young-jedi-characters to the-series (pictured at top right).
ign's-eric-goldman wrote, "from the-devilish-mouth around one-crystal to the-glowing-center of the-ice [one of the-younglings] traveled to, it was all amazing to look at."
bryan-young wrote that bryan-young favorite aspect of the-episode was the-episode exploration of jedi-mythology and compared the-youngling's-rite of passage to the-test luke-skywalker was given inside the-pit on dagobah in the-film the-empire strikes back.
jayson-peters of the-east-valley-tribune wrote that  jayson-peters of the-east-valley-tribune appreciated how similar the-voice for yoda in the-episode sounded to the-original-voice-overs done by frank-oz in yoda's first appearance in film, the-empire strikes back.
eric-goldman wrote in eric-goldman review for ign that the-episode missed a-major-opportunity to explore the-relationship between ahsoka and yoda: the two were left outside of the-cave together while the-younglings completed the-younglings rite of passage, but the-two-jedi's-interactions during this-time are not featured.
eric-goldman also noted that with six-new-characters being introduced during the-one-22-minute-episode, only-the-very-basic-aspects of the-younglings-personalities were developed.
further-reading ==
geller, eric (nov 3, 2012). "
tfn-tcw-review: "
the-gathering"".
ury, andy (nov 5, 2012).
expanding the-clone-wars – "the gathering"".
eucantina.net.
references ==
kylo-ren is a-fictional-character and a-major-antagonist in the-star-wars-franchise.
introduced in the-2015-film star-wars:
the-force awakens, kylo-ren is portrayed by adam-driver.
kylo-ren is the-chosen-name of ben-solo, the-only-child of original-star-wars-trilogy-characters-han-solo and princess-leia-organa.
though trained by   uncle-luke-skywalker as a-jedi, his-uncle-luke-skywalker was seduced to the-dark-side of the-force by supreme-leader-snoke, and aspires to be as powerful as his-uncle-luke-skywalker grandfather, the-sith-lord-darth-vader.
his-uncle luke-skywalker is eventually redeemed like his-uncle luke-skywalker grandfather before his-uncle luke-skywalker and helps rey in his-uncle luke-skywalker fight against his-uncle luke-skywalker grandfather, the-revived-emperor-palpatine.
his-uncle luke-skywalker is also the-master of the-knights of his-uncle luke-skywalker, as well as a-commander and later-the-supreme-leader of the-first-order, an-organization spawned from the-former-galactic-empire.
his-uncle luke-skywalker appears in the force awakens, the last jedi (2017), star wars resistance (2018-2020), and the rise of skywalker (2019), as well as related media and merchandising.
driver's-performance received acclaim from critics and fans.
for his-performance in the force awakens, driver won the-saturn-award for best-supporting-actor, making his the first star wars actor since alec-guinness to win the-award.
driver received a-second-nomination in the-same-category for driver performance in the-rise of skywalker.
driver is widely regarded as one of the-greatest-villains of the 2010s  ==
concept and creation ==
abrams requested that ren's-mask be designed to be memorable to a-child.
as late as march 2014, the-film's-main-antagonist was only known to the-production-team as "jedi-killer", and had gone through numerous-unapproved-design-attempts.
the same month, glyn-dillon's-design for the-character's-costume was finally approved.
according to abrams, "glyn-dillon's-design for the-character's-costume was meant to be a-nod to the-vader-mask," and concept-designer-doug-chiang says that the-character "takes on [the]-persona of [vader] to haunt luke."
according to the force awakens costume-designer-michael-kaplan,
i don't know if it was the-kind of spaghetti-type-lines on it or what, but the-next-time j.j. came by that was what we presented to j.j. and j.j.
also the-silver in those-lines kind of reflects and changes color with the-action.
you know, if j.j.'s standing in front of fire you see that
, so he's standing in front of fire almost brings you into the-mask.
driver's-casting in the-film in an-unnamed-role was first announced on april 29, 2014.
kylo-ren was first seen from behind, but still not named, in the 88-second
the-force awakens teaser-trailer released by lucasfilm on november 28, 2014, wielding a-jagged-red-lightsaber with a-crossguard.
the-name kylo-ren, as well as the-character's-design, was revealed by entertainment-weekly in a-lucasfilm-designed-topps-style-trading-card-mock-up on december 11, 2014.
a-may-2015-vanity-fair-photo-shoot by annie-leibovitz confirmed that driver would be portraying kylo.
according to other-cast-members, driver is a-method-actor, which meant that driver sometimes stayed in character on set as  kylo-ren and left driver mask on between scenes.
driver explained that  driver goal was "to forget you're in star-wars and treat his-goal like any-other-job that's filled with moments and problems," because from the-perspective of the-characters living within the-film's-universe, "darth-vader is real."
character ==
abrams told empire in august 2015, "kylo-ren is not a-sith.
kylo-ren works under supreme-leader-snoke, who is a-powerful-figure on the-dark-side of the-force."
abrams had previously told entertainment-weekly that the-character, "came to the-name kylo-ren when the-character joined a-group called the knights of ren."
robbie-collin of the-telegraph described ren as "a-hot-headed,-radicalised-dark-side-jihadi, whose-red-lightsaber splutters and crackles as violently as ren temper".
abrams noted, "the-lightsaber is something that  abrams built  abrams, and is as dangerous and as fierce and as ragged as the-character."
the-telegraph also explains that ren's-wild-and-erratic-temper and "angsty"-instability make  abrams dangerous.
melissa-leon of the-daily-beast describes ren's-use of the-force as "formidable", citing  abrams-ability to stop a-blaster-shot-mid-air, immobilize victims and probe victims minds against victims will.
kasdan told entertainment-weekly in august 2015, "i've written four-star-wars-movies now, and there's never been a-character quite like the-one that adam plays.
i think you're going to see something that's brand new to the-saga," noting that a-character quite like the-one that adam plays is "full of emotion".
abrams explained, "i think that what makes ren so unique is that abrams isn't as fully formed as when we meet a-character such as darth-vader ...
abrams is not your-prototypical-mustache-twirling-bad-guy.
abrams is a little bit more complex than that."
driver said in december 2015 that, despite the-visual-similarities to darth-vader, ren is "unlike any-villain the-franchise has seen".
driver explained: i feel there's a-recklessness about  driver that's maybe not normally associated with the-dark-side.
you normally think of order, and structure, and full-commitment and no-hesitation ...
driver's just a little bit more unpolished.
it's in his-costume, in his-lightsaber—how you kind of get the-sense that it could just not work at any-moment; that it could just blow up.
that’s kind of like a-big-metaphor for his.
driver claimed that driver was privy to several-details of kylo-ren's-backstory during the-making of the-films.
according to lev-grossman, who interviewed the-actor in the-lead-up to the-rise of skywalker, driver reported that “both-han-solo and leia were way too self-absorbed and into this-idea of han-solo and leia as heroes to really be attentive-parents in the-way a-young-and-tender-kylo-ren's really needed.”
the-backstory of how ben-solo became kylo-ren was elaborated upon in a-prequel-graphic-novel titled the-rise of kylo-ren (written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney), which was published and released by marvel-comics from december 18, 2019 to march 11, 2020.certain-aspects of kylo-ren's overall arc across the-three-films of the-sequel-trilogy were also known to driver from the-start of production on the-first-film.
he claimed that he “had one-piece of information of where it was all going...and things were building towards that.”
he later clarified: j.j.-abrams told me when i met he for the-first-time that i should imagine a-journey of a-character completely opposite to darth-vader...
someone who starts as a-child and becomes a-man over the-course of three-movies.
he becomes closer to he convictions, becomes more assured about he choices, but has metaphorically and physically killed he father to become he own person.
when asked by ign in december 2017 if he believed kylo-ren was capable of redemption, the-last-jedi-writer/director-rian-johnson replied, “yeah...
are you kidding?
vader was worse than kylo ever was, i think, and vader got redeemed.”
citing the-complexity of the-character, the-last-jedi-writer/director-rian-johnson articulated, “i don’t see the-point of trying to get behind the-last-jedi-writer/director-rian-johnson mask and learn more about the-last-jedi-writer/director-rian-johnson if all we’re going to learn is ‘yeah, the-last-jedi-writer/director-rian-johnson’s just-an-evil-bad-guy that needs to be killed.’”
the-rise of skywalker-co-writer-chris-terrio also supported this-position through comparing kylo with vader.
according to terrio, “vader was complicit in genocide and cruelty and depravity.
yet there is this-inherent-optimism in star-wars that the-light in you is never truly gone.
that you can still redeem yourself right up until the-last-minute – which, in vader-case, was literally true...
leia never really gave up hope that kylo could be redeemed, and leia knew that rey was probably the-way that it would happen.”
abrams further elaborated on this-point:
maybe it’s the-optimist in me, but i would like to think that anyone, even-someone who does the-most-horrendous-things, is redeemable.
and certainly because his-mother, leia, is a-believer that there is still light in his, it was hard to imagine that she would be wrong about his.
the-rise of skywalker revealed that kylo-ren and rey were two-halves of a-“dyad” in the-force, which terrio alternatively described as “sort of soulmate[s] in the-force”  and “twins of fate, twins of destiny.”
appearances ==
the-force awakens (2015) ===
kylo-ren first appears in the-force awakens as a-commander in the-first-order, a-tyrannical-regime that has risen from the-remains of the-galactic-empire.
after arriving at jakku to retrieve a-map containing the-coordinates where luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) is to be found, kylo-ren kills an-old-priest named lor san tekka (max-von-sydow), and captures resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac), who has also been sent to recover the-map by general-princess-leia-organa (carrie-fisher).
kylo-ren soon learns that the-pilot had entrusted kylo-ren astromech droid, bb-8, with the-map.
poe flees with the-help of rogue-stormtrooper-finn (john-boyega), who later finds bb-8, and the-scavenger rey (daisy-ridley).
finn, rey, and bb-8 escape jakku in the-millennium-falcon, and are soon intercepted by the-ship's-former-owner, han-solo (harrison-ford), and his-co-pilot-chewbacca (peter-mayhew).
it is revealed that ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils.
ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils was corrupted to the-dark-side of the-force by the-first-order's-supreme-leader-snoke (andy-serkis), and helped destroy luke's-new-jedi-academy.
however, ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils still feels the-pull of the-light-side of the-force and seeks the-strength to overcome the-strength from ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils grandfather darth vader, whose-burnt-helmet is in ren's possession.
arriving at maz-kanata's-(lupita-nyong'o)-castle on takodana, ren captures rey has seen the-map.
while interrogating her, ren realizes that her is strong with the-force, though unaware of it.
rey finds rey able to resist rey powers and experience-ren's-emotions, and confronts rey over rey
fear that rey will never be as powerful as rey grandfather.
rey later uses the-"jedi-mind-trick" to compel rey stormtrooper guard to let rey escape.
han arrives at the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base, as part of the-resistance's-plan to destroy it.
after han plants explosives to destroy the-base,   confronts ren—calling ren by ren real name, ben—and implores ren to abandon the-dark-side, warning ren that snoke will kill ren once ren has control of the-galaxy.
ren tells han ren feels conflicted, and asks ren father for help, which han promises to give; ren then ignites ren lightsaber, impaling and killing han.
an-enraged-chewbacca-fires at ren, wounding ren.
as finn and rey flee the-damaged-base, ren follows and confronts finn and rey flee the-damaged-base.
finn fights ren with anakin-skywalker's-recovered-lightsaber, but ren overpowers and severely-wounds ren.
rey then takes up the-lightsaber and, using the-force, begins to overcome ren, striking ren on the-face with the-lightsaber.
before the-duel is finished, the-duel is finished are separated by a-seismic-fissure created by the-collapsing-base.
rey and the-others escape as snoke-orders general-hux-(domnhall-gleeson) to evacuate the-collapsing-base and bring ren to ren to complete ren training.
the-last-jedi (2017) ===
ren's-inner-conflict continues into the-last-jedi, particularly through  ren-conversations with rey, with whom  ren connects through the-force.
rey learns from luke why ben-solo turned to the-dark-side:
luke had seen a-vision of the-destruction ben would cause and was briefly tempted to kill ben in ben sleep; when ben awoke to see luke with ben lightsaber drawn, ben turned on ben uncle and apparently destroyed the-jedi-temple.
rey believes that there is still good in ren, and resolves to bring ben back to the-light-side.
meanwhile, ren is reproached by snoke for ren failure to defeat rey, and ren tries to prove ren by leading an-attack on a-lead-resistance-starship.
he hesitates to destroy it after sensing he mother's presence, but he wingmen destroy the-ship's-bridge, almost killing leia.
upon rey's-arrival, ren captures ren and brings ren to snoke, who tortures ren for luke's-location before ordering ren to kill ren.
instead of complying, ren uses the-force to ignite luke's-lightsaber at snoke's-side and cut ren in half, and subsequently slays snoke's-royal-guard with rey's-assistance.
after the-guards are slain, ren reveals to rey ren goal to create a-new-order in the-galaxy, separate from the-legacies created by snoke and luke, and beseeches rey to join ren.
ren gets ren to acknowledge that ren parents abandoned ren, and tells ren that despite of ren being a-nobody that comes from nowhere, ren truly cares about ren.
rey hesitates and then refuses to join  rey, realizing that ren will not turn back to the-light-side; the two briefly struggle over anakin's-lightsaber with the-force, resulting in the-weapon breaking in half and knocking both-warriors unconscious.
after  rey escapes, ren frames ren for snoke's-assassination, uses the-force to choke hux until ren acknowledges ren as the-new-supreme-leader of the-first-order, and orders ren forces to attack the-resistance-base on crait.
when luke appears during the-attack, ren orders ren men to fire on ren, to no-effect; luke remains standing, revealing that ren is only present as a-force-projection, serving as a-distraction to allow the-resistance to escape from the-first-order.
after luke vanishes, the-first-order storms the-base, but the-resistance has already evacuated.
ren shares a-final-look with  rey through the-force before  rey slams the-door to the-millennium-falcon and escapes with the-resistance.
the-rise of kylo-ren (2019–2020) ===
ren's-past as ben-solo is depicted in the-rise of kylo-ren.
as a-child, he is trained as a-jedi by he-uncle-luke-skywalker alongside his-fellow-students voe, hennix, and
he best-friend tai
; voe grows jealous of ben for he-superior-force-capability and luke's-perceived-favoritism and nepotism.
on a-mission to the-planet-elphrona to investigate an-ancient-jedi-outpost with luke and lor-san-tekka, ben telepathically communicates with snoke, whom luke had recently fought, for which ben respects luke.
upon arriving on the-planet, the-trio encounters the-knights of ren, a-group of force-wielding-mercenaries searching the-ruins for artifacts.
after a-brief-confrontation between the-group and luke, their-leader, ren, stops the-proceedings by activating a-kill-switch on ren lightsaber.
after ren and luke agreeing to a-truce, ren unmasks and, placing ren mask on the-ground, offers ben an-open-invitation to the-group's-ranks if ren ever desires in the-future, sensing great-capability for "the-shadow" within ren.
several years later, after collapsing-ren-hut on ren-uncle-luke after the latter apparently tried to kill his-uncle luke in his-uncle luke sleep, ben yells towards the-jedi-temple in outrage at luke's actions and is terrified when a-bolt of lightning-strikes, destroying a-bolt of lightning-strikes.
later that night, voe, hennix, tai return from off-planet to find ben before the-jedi-templethe-jedi-temple.
after they are unable to sense luke's-presence, ben elaborates on the-confrontation, believing ben to have killed luke, and states that ben intends to leave the-planet.
believing ben to be responsible for the-temple's-destruction, voe attacks ben only to be easily subdued with hennix and tai, and ben leaves the-planet on a-nearby-shuttle, with the-trio in close-pursuit.
after considering returning to ben-mother on hosnian-prime, ben instead decides to meet snoke in person after receiving another-message from ben.
scarred from a-previous-encounter with luke, snoke encourages ben to seek out the-knights of ren.
traveling to the-outpost on elphrona, ben retrieves ren's-mask and puts ren's-mask on, putting the-pair in communication.
after mentioning snoke, ren invites ben to meet the-knights on vanrak, before ren is confronted by voe, having followed ren via a-tracker in ren ship provided by hennix.
refusing to fight, only to defend ren from voe's-attacks, ben uses the-force to catch tai after tai falls off of a-building, witnessed by tai.
however, hennix, believing ben to have killed tai, throws ben lightsaber in a-lethal-spin at ben; in deflecting it, hennix is bisected.
leaving, ben collapses the-outpost around voe and tai to subdue voe and tai and leaves the-planet.
later, ben meets with ren-and-ren-knights, who informs ren-ren will need to provide a-"good-death" for membership.
after telling him of the-encounter with hennix, ren states that ben was not responsible for it, and therefore ineligible for membership, although him offers him another-chance due to snoke having vouched for him.
providing him a-uniform, the-group proceeds to the-mine-moon of mimban, where ben assists the-knights in stealing an-artifact known as the-mindsplinter from miners using a-variation of the-jedi-mind-trick taught to him by snoke.
ben is horrified when the-knights subsequently execute the-smugglers after ren had promised ben to merely release the-smugglers.
suddenly, voe and tai, having followed ben from tai reading ben mind, arrive.
voe attacks the-knights of ren, while tai reasons with ben over tai-decision to leave, and the-pair cease fighting.
witnessing this, ren snaps tai's-neck, killing ren, telling ben that snoke was wrong and that ren doesn't wish to "live in the-shadow".
declaring that "i am the-shadow", an-enraged-ben takes up tai's-lightsaber and an-enraged-ben own and duels ren.
while doing so, rey senses an-enraged-ben from across the-galaxy without knowing why, ben's-mother leia senses ben's-mother leia fall, snoke calls out ben's-mother leia praises and palpatine is revealed to be manipulating both snoke and ben, and to have destroyed the-jedi-temple, although ben remains unaware of this.
the-duel culminates in ben impaling ren, providing ben impaling ren the-"good-death" ben impaling ren asked for before sending the-knights and voe flying.
shocked at an-enraged-ben killing ren, voe attempts to reach for ren lightsaber, only for it to be taken by an-enraged-ben.
deriding her-role in hennix's and tai's-deaths and declaring that her is "not a-jedi", ben knights voe with ren's-lightsaber, before turning to find the-knights of ren kneeling before the-knights of ren, having accepted the-knights of ren as the-knights of ren new leader.
later, on ren's-ship, ben crushes the-kyber-crystal from ben own lightsaber in ben bare hand and forges ben a-new-crossguard-lightsaber in the-image of one ben had seen on elphrona, taking the-name kylo-ren, derived from "skywalker" and "solo".
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
in the-rise of skywalker, ren has been ruling as the-supreme-leader of the-first-order for a-year.
in the-film's-beginning, ren searches for a-sith-wayfinder to lead ren to the-sith-planet-exegol, with the-hopes of killing the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) as a-show of ren power.
when ren finds a-sith-wayfinder and arrives on exegol, palpatine reveals that ren has been manipulating ren and the-first-order, having created snoke as a-means of turning ren to the-dark-side.
palpatine unveils the-final-order, a-massive-armada of planet-killing-star-destroyers.
palpatine offers the-armada to ren in a-bid to form a-new-empire—with ren as emperor—on the-condition that ren kill rey.
ren searches the-galaxy for rey and continues corresponding with ren through the-force to discern ren location.
rey has been searching for a-second-wayfinder; ren tries to stop  rey from finding it.
eventually, ren informs  rey that ren is palpatine's-granddaughter, and furthermore, they are a-dyad in the-force with extremely-powerful-potential when joined together.
ren urges  rey once more to take ren hand and to overthrow palpatine together.
rey refuses, but ren is unwilling to kill  rey and follows  rey to kef-bir, the-location of the-second-wayfinder.
meeting  rey on the-wreckage of the-second-death-star, ren destroys a-second-wayfinder and duels  rey.
the-duel ends with rey-impaling-ren, who had been distracted by his-dying-mother, leia, reaching out to his through the-force.
a-guilt-ridden-rey (also sensing leia's-death) uses the-force to heal ren and leaves aboard ren ship, after telling ren that she wanted to take ben-solo's-hand, but not ren.
alone on the-wreckage, ren converses with a-memory of ren father, han-solo; ren throws away ren lightsaber, renouncing ren role as supreme-leader and reclaiming ren old identity of ben-solo.
ben rushes to help a-guilt-ridden-rey defeat palpatine on exegol.
a-guilt-ridden-rey senses a-guilt-ridden-rey presence and uses his-presence-force-connection to give a-guilt-ridden-rey anakin's lightsaber, which ben uses to defeat the-knights of ren.
palpatine then senses rey-and-ben's-connection as a-dyad of the-force, and absorbs rey-and-ben's-connection as a-dyad of the-force energy to restore  palpatine full power, before casting ben into an-abyss.
however, rey manages to defeat and kill  palpatine before dying from the-effort.
ben climbs out of an-abyss and finds rey's-inert-body.
ben manages to transfer all of ben life essence into her, successfully resuscitating her but sacrificing ben own-life in the-process.
they share a-passionate-kiss before ben dies peacefully in rey's-arms.
his-body fades away simultaneously as his-mother's-body becomes one with the-force at the-resistance-base.
related-works and promotional-material ===
kylo-ren is a-point of view-character in the 2015, 2017, and 2019-novelizations of the-star-wars sequel trilogy by alan-dean-foster, jason-fry, and rae-carson.
kylo-ren is a-playable-character in the 2015
the-force awakens add-on to the-disney-infinity-3.0-video-game, with an-infinity-character-figurine available separately.
the-force is also a-character in the-strategy-video-game
star-wars: force-arena.
hasbro has released a 3 3⁄4-inch (9.5-cm)
kylo-ren-action-figure, and a-6-inch-(15-cm)-figure in their-black-series-line.
he is also featured in the-lego-star-wars-playsets kylo-ren's-command-shuttle (2015) and battle on takodana (2016), as well as a-lego-buildable-figure.
the-lego-version of kylo also appears in the-2016-short-form-animated-series lego-star-wars: the-resistance rises, and as a-playable-character in lego-star-wars: the-force awakens.
in january 2016, driver reprised the-role for a-star-wars/undercover-boss-sketch on saturday-night-live, with kylo-ren disguising kylo-ren as a-radar-technician named "matt" to determine what the-starkiller-base-employees really think of kylo-ren.
driver again reprised the-role in january 2020 for a-follow-up-saturday-night-live-sketch titled “undercover boss:
where are they now?”
in which kylo goes undercover as “randy,” an-entry-level-intern on a-star-destroyer.
in the-2017-chuck-wendig-novel-star-wars: aftermath: empire's-end, ben-solo is stated as having been born on the-planet-chandrila on the-same-day as a-peace-treaty is signed between the-remnants of the-empire and the-new-galactic-republic (about a year after return of the-jedi, or 29 years before the force awakens).
kylo-ren is also mentioned in the-2017-novel-star-wars: phasma, which takes place before the-force awakens.
kylo appears in star-wars-battlefront-ii, voiced by matthew-wood and roger-craig-smith, masked and unmasked respectively.
in the-game, kylo interrogates del-meeko about lor-san-tekka's-location (who possess the-map to luke-skywalker) using his-force-abilities.
when del finally relents and reveals the-map and lor-san-tekka's-location, kylo leaves kylo for hask, del's former comrade in inferno-squad.
kylo-ren (voiced once again by matthew-wood) also appears in the-star-wars:
resistance-series-finale-episode
"the-escape", where he kills agent-tierny for failing to destroy the-colossus-resistance.
matthew-wood also portrayed general-grievous in both-star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith and the-tv-series
star-wars:
star-wars.
kylo-ren is also one of the-numerous-voices heard in the-fourth-and-final-season of star-wars: rebels in the-episode "a-world between worlds", with an-excerpt of driver's-dialogue from the force awakens being used.
kylo-ren appears as a-walk-around-character within star-wars: galaxy's-edge at disneyland and disney's-hollywood-studios.
kylo-ren appears as a-walk-around-character within star-wars: galaxy's-edge at disneyland and disney's-hollywood-studios appears during star-tours – the-adventures continue and
star-wars:
rise of the-resistance, with the latter featuring the-character in audio-animatronic-form with driver providing the-voice.
on november 28, 2019, ichikawa-ebizō-xi starred as kairennosuke in star-wars-kabuki: kairennosuke and the-three-shining-swords (スター・ウォーズ歌舞伎〜煉之介光刃三本〜,-sutā-uōzu-kabuki ~rennosuke
kōjin-san-pon~)
,-a-kabuki-production that-re-enacted-key-events of kylo-ren in the force awakens and the-last-jedi.
==-reception ==
the-character and driver's-portrayal have received critical-acclaim; driver won the-2016-saturn-award for best-supporting-actor for the-character and driver's-portrayal portrayal.
in january 2018, kylo was voted seventh greatest movie villain of all-time by the-readers of empire.
many-reviewers commended ren's-conflicted-nature and depth, as well as ren-costume-design, and noted there were many-places the-character could be taken in future-installments.
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian praised the-character and the-actor alike, saying, "peter-bradshaw of the-guardian is gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious – and unlike the-vader of old, peter-bradshaw of the-guardian is given to petulant-temper-tantrums, with peter-bradshaw of the-guardian lightsaber drawn."
terri-schwartz of ign also called driver's-performance "spectacular", noting that " terri-schwartz of ign performance adds great-depth to a-character who could have come off as one-dimensional, and the-implications of  terri-schwartz of ign arc leave a-viewer with plenty to think about after they leave the-theater.
collin wrote, "to describe kylo-ren as this-film's-vader would be accurate in a-sense ...
but it would also be to undersell the-deep-ingenuity with which this-astonishing-character has been crafted by abrams, kasdan and arndt, and also the-wells of emotional-tumult-driver invests in this-astonishing-character. "
comparing the-character to the-one-note-vader of the-1977-film, melissa-leon calls ren "a living battleground between darkness and light, making ren a far more resonant and familiar portrayal of that-struggle than we've ever seen in star-wars ...
[which] makes ren a far more interesting villain.
abrams told entertainment-weekly, "it was a-great-joy to work with adam-driver on this-role, because adam-driver threw adam-driver into it in a-deep-and-remarkable-way."
todd-mccarthy of the-hollywood-reporter noted, "ren is given a-pronounced-inferiority-complex, a-clever-bad-guy-twist that could be taken to interesting-places both in the-writing and performance."
peter-travers of rolling-stone wrote, "the-bald-faced-attempt to clone vader, one of the-greatest-badasses in film-history, is clankingly obvious, but driver, masked and unmasked, gives  peter-travers of rolling-stone hypnotic and haunting contours."
kyle-buchanan of vulture.com was underwhelmed by the-reveal of driver under the-mask.
leon, however, argued: but
that-face—that of a-normal,-vulnerable-young-man—is the-most-subversively-terrifying-thing about j.-j.-abrams'-reimagining of a-new-hope.
rather than pure-evil,  peter-travers of rolling-stone is something far more familiar:  peter-travers of rolling-stone is human.
just like the-real-life-young-men with minds clouded by fear, hate, and anger who commit unspeakable-acts in our-world every day ...
all-the-visual-cues that leave the-character open to criticisms of not being "evil" enough—are all signs of ren's-struggle between the-dark-side and the-light.
some-viewers noted that ren's character arc shares similarities with that of the-star-wars-expanded-universe-character-jacen-solo, the-son of han-solo and princess-leia who threatens the-galaxy as a-fallen-jedi.
additionally, critics have noted a-resemblance between ren's-character-design and that of revan, the-protagonist of knights of the-old-republic.
family-tree == ==
references ==
footnotes-citations
sources ===
szostak, phil (2015).
the art of star-wars: the-force awakens.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419717802.
szostak, phil (2017).
the-art of star-wars: the-last-jedi.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419727054.
szostak, phil (2019).
the-art of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419740381.
wendig, chuck (2017).
star-wars:
aftermath: empire's-end.
isbn 9781101966976.
further-reading ==
scoville, max (december 20, 2017). "
star-wars:
hey, what's up with the-knights of ren?".
external-links ==
media related to kylo-ren at wikimedia commons kylo-ren in the starwars.com databank kylo-ren on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
kylo-ren on imdb-star-wars:
the-bad-batch is an-upcoming-american-animated-series created by dave-filoni for the-streaming-service disney+.
the-bad-batch is part of the-star-wars-franchise, acting as both-a-sequel to and spin-off from an-upcoming-american-animated-series created by dave-filoni for the-streaming-service disney+
star-wars: the-clone-wars.
the-bad-batch is produced by lucasfilm-animation, with jennifer-corbett as head-writer and brad-rau as supervising-director.
dee-bradley-baker voices the-clone-troopers in the-series, including the-titular-squad of elite-clones with genetic-mutations.
the-series was officially ordered by disney+
in july 2020 as a-spin-off from the-clone-wars, with filoni, corbett, and rau attached.
star-wars:
the-bad-batch is set to premiere on may 4, 2021.
premise ==
clone-force 99, also known as the-bad-batch—a-group of elite-clone-troopers with genetic-mutations that were first introduced in star-wars: the-clone-wars—take on daring-mercenary-missions in the-aftermath of the-clone-wars.
= cast and characters ==
dee-bradley-baker as all of the-clone-troopers in the-series, including the-members of clone-force 99 /
the-bad-batch (hunter, wrecker, tech, crosshair and echo) and captain-rex.
star-wars-creator-george-lucas wanted the-bad-batch to be more unique than other-clones, with each having special-abilities, but star-wars-creator-george-lucas did not want other-clones to be superheroes.
ming-na-wen as fennec-shand: an-elite-mercenary and sniper.
stephen-stanton as grand-moff-tarkin: a-high-ranking-imperial-officer.
andrew-kishino as saw-gerrera: a-freedom-fighter with ties to the-rebel-alliance.
production == ===
background ===
by september 2016, star-wars: the clone wars and star-wars rebels supervising director dave filoni had stepped back from that-position on the-latter-series so he could focus more on the-series'-writing as well as the-development of future-animated-series for lucasfilm.
in july 2018, filoni announced that a-final-season of the-clone-wars would be released on the-streaming-service disney+
a-final-season of the-clone-wars includes a-four-episode-arc introducing a-squad of clone-troopers with genetic-mutations known as the-bad-batch; the-episodes previously existed as story-reels for an-earlier,-unfinished-season of the-series', and came directly from the-plans of star-wars-creator-george-lucas.
development ===
disney+ officially ordered a-new-series from lucasfilm-animation in july 2020 titled star wars:
the-bad-batch, a-spin-off from the-final-season of the-clone-wars following the-bad-batch-clones in the-aftermath of the-clone-war.
the-announcement described a-new-series from lucasfilm-animation, and dave-filoni's-serves as executive-producer alongside lucasfilm's-athena-portillo, supervising-director-brad-rau, and head-writer-jennifer-corbett, with lucasfilm's-carrie-beck and josh-rimes as co-executive-producer and producer, respectively.
dave-filoni's described a-new-series from lucasfilm-animation as "very much in the-vein" of the-clone-wars and said dave-filoni's would stay true to lucas's-vision for that-series of telling epic,-exciting-adventure-stories.
casting ===
the-first-trailer for the-series was released in december 2020, and confirmed that dee-bradley-baker would return from the-clone-wars as the-voice of all-the-clone-troopers in the-series, including the-members of the-bad-batch and captain-rex.
it also revealed that a younger version of the-character fennec-shand from the-series
the-mandalorian would be appearing in the-series, and actress-ming-na-wen soon confirmed that actress-ming-na-wen would reprise actress-ming-na-wen role as fennec from the-mandalorian.
additionally,-stephen-stanton-and-andrew-kishino-reprise-stephen-stanton-and-andrew-kishino-roles as grand-moff-tarkin and saw-gerrera, respectively.
kevin-kiner was confirmed to be scoring the-series in january 2021, after previously scoring the-clone-wars and rebels.
kevin-kiner wrote the-bad-batch-theme for the-final-season of the-clone-wars.
marketing ==
lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy promoted the-series at disney's-investor-day-event on december 10, 2020, revealing the-first-trailer for the-series.
jacob-oller of syfy-wire felt the-first-trailer for the-series made the-series look like a-more-action-heavy-version of the-clone-wars, and compared the-first-trailer for the-series to the-1980s-television-series the-a-team.
release ==
star-wars:
the-bad-batch is scheduled to premiere on disney+
on may 4, 2021, star wars day, with a-special-70-minute-episode.
a-special-70-minute-episode will release on may 7, 2021, with subsequent-episodes releasing weekly.
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-bad-batch at imdb-star-wars:
the-bad-batch on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-sith are the-main-antagonists of many-works in the-fictional-universe of the-star-wars-franchise.
the-sith-order are depicted as an-ancient-monastic-and-kraterocratic-cultist-organization of supernaturally-gifted-force-wielders driven by a-machiavellian-imperialist-agenda of galactic-domination and revenge against their-arch-rivals, the-jedi-order.
sith are ruthless and totalitarian by design, in which a-supreme-autocratic-authority is concentrated in a-single-individual granted the-honorific-dark-lord of  sith.
sith-culture is of perpetual-self-destruction and reinvention; transfer of power is conducted through state-sanctioned-assassinations: when a-sith-lord grows complacent, begins to show weakness, and is eventually killed, their-property and authority are transferred to the-apprentice who killed their.
robberies, betrayal, and sabotage are commonplace; murder is acceptable so long as the-culprit is not caught.
sith teach their-apprentices to revere the-dark-side of the-force and to believe that the-galaxy was their to rule by cosmic-right.
this-kraterocratic-system ensures that sith-society nurtures some of the-most-vicious-and-competitive-individuals in the-galaxy and is only governed by those strong enough to seize control.
etymology ==
the-word sith was first used in the-1974-rough-draft of star-wars with the-first-published-use being the-1976-novelization of star-wars as a-title for the-key-villain darth-vader, the-"dark-lord of the sith".
sith-characters had also been portrayed as such in some-star-wars-legends works prior to the-release of the-phantom-menace, and in archived-footage for star-warsstar-wars.
the-term "dark-jedi" was sometimes used for characters who would be later identified as sith, or had goals and practices similar to the sith.
in his-novel-series the-thrawn-trilogy, author-timothy-zahn labeled sith-lord-darth-vader and emperor-palpatine as "dark-jedi", and the-term-"sith" was never mentioned in the-series until later-reprints of the-novels.
dark-jedi" is also the-name given in the-star-wars-universe to antihero-fictional-characters attuned to the-force and adept in the-force dark side.
however, the-concept of "dark-jedi" is not referenced anywhere in any of the-theatrical-star-wars-films, and the-theatrical-star-wars-films exist by that-name only in non-canonical-star-wars-legends-media, including video-games such as star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and the star-wars: jedi-knight-series.
the-term-"sith" were not mentioned by name in canonical-movies until the-prequel trilogy used the-word on film starting with 1999's-the-phantom-menace.
influences ===
george-lucas acknowledged that the jedi, sith, and other-force-concepts have been inspired by many-sources.
the jedi, sith, and other-force-concepts have been inspired by many-sources include: knighthood, chivalry, paladinism, samurai-bushido, shaolin-monastery, feudalism, hinduism, qigong, greek-philosophy and mythology, roman-history and mythology, parts of the-abrahamic-religions, confucianism, shintō, buddhism and taoism, and numerous-cinematic-precursors.
the-works of philosopher-friedrich-nietzsche and mythologist-joseph-campbell, especially-his-book the-hero with a-thousand-faces (1949), directly influenced lucas, and was what drove his to create the-'modern-myth' of star-wars.
in particular, the-contrasting-narrative-relationship between the-dark-side-using-sith and light side-using jedi mirrors several-modern-and-classical-literary-tropes.
most prominently, the-conflict between the-sith and jedi employs the-classic-trope of black-and-white-moral-dualism—an-elemental-contrast between evil-(the-"darkness") and good-(the-"light") first postulated and elaborated in zoroastrianism, from which the-core-mythos of star-wars is much influenced.
the-ongoing-struggle of the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi to permanently defeat the-egoistic-"dark-side"-affiliated-sith is framed not only as a-contest of values, but as a-deep-metaphysical-conflict: the-dark-side of the-force is viewed by the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi, and generally represented within star-wars-media, as not only a dangerous expedient but as a-form of existential-corruption which must be purged for the-universe, or a person, to attain spiritual-balance.
the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi are often depicted as imperfect-individuals, but the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi cause of selfless-heroism is ultimately on the-right-side of an-inexorable-cosmic-struggle against evil, embodied in the-power-hungry-sith and the-dark-side of the-force.
the-dualistic-relationship between the-egoistic-"dark-side"-affiliated-sith and the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi-concepts of "purity" mirrors the-philosophical-and-literary-concept of "apollonian and dionysian": the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi the-humanistic-"light-side"-affiliated-jedi are portrayed as embracing purity, reason, temperance, altruism and other-humanistic-virtues; the-egoistic-"dark-side"-affiliated-sith, by contrast, embrace curiosity, emotion, conflict, power, instincts, unfettered-self-interest and other-hedonistic-vices.
however, whereas the-classic-greek-concept did not necessarily view the-apollonian-and-dyonisian-principles as opposed, star-wars frames the-jedi and sith as opponents in a-dire-moral-struggle, with the sith cast as corrupted-villains apparently destined to defeat or self-destruction in the-end.
although a-path to temporary-power, the-sith-way inevitably leads to ruin.
within the-star-wars-narrative, the-jedi and sith naturally have different-self-understandings.
in sith-rhetoric, the relationship between the-philosophies of the jedi and sith closely mirrors nietzsche's-concept of master–slave-morality.
sith-value-"master"-virtues, such as pride and power, whereas the-jedi value altruistic-virtues like kindness and empathy.
the-goal of the-sith is tangible-greatness: the-ability to shape and destroy the-world according to one's-will alone.
the-goal of the-jedi is moral-goodness: freedom from inner,-and-outer,-turmoil and suffering.
however, the-sith consider the-jedi's-aspirations to be either hopeless or pathetic.
to the-sith, greater-power is the-only-authentic-goal.
development ==
originally, george-lucas conceived the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel had served adolf-hitler.
in developing the-history for the-empire-strikes
back, george-lucas condensed this into one-character in the-form of darth-vader.
fictional-backstory === ====
sith-ideology ====
sith-philosophy lionized conflict as a-catalyst for growth and as a-tool for purging the weak, disloyal, undisciplined and unworthy.
sith-academies were structured with rules, lectures, and classes, with an-underlying-"kill or be killed"-mentality amongst the-apprentices.
sith emphasize "survival of the fittest" and view restraint as a-weakness.
members adhere to master-morality, are characterized by the-desire to seize power by any-means necessary, leveraging force (both physical and supernatural), social maneuvering, and political cunning to both-advantage.
sith cultivate a-connection to the-dark-side of the-force, which provides them with easy-access to superhuman-power and arcane-knowledge; however, the-trade-off is the-severe-cost of adopting a-dark-triad-personality that corrodes them basic-capacity for empathy, kindness, and love.
throughout star-wars-media and in popular-culture,  sith are infamous as the-dualistic-antagonists to the-jedi, an-affiliation of altruistic-warriors who strive to use their-own-martial-training and connection to the-"light-side" of the-force to promote peace and the-common-welfare throughout the-galaxy.
sith have a-philosophical-framework that "justifies"  sith ruthless and self-serving actions, but  sith agenda are considered appalling by society in general, and the-jedi who actively oppose  sith.
to counteract the-jedi's-benevolent-influence, the-sith were responsible for secretly instigating many-small-regional-conflicts as part of many-small-regional-conflicts larger-plan to destabilize the-republic and eventually take control of the-galaxy.
hiding in the-shadows, many-small-regional-conflicts-fingerprints are everywhere, in every-conflict in the-galaxy, and many-small-regional-conflicts subversive-influence reaches far and wide.
over many-small-regional-conflicts long-storied-history, the-sith have established great-empires, come close to realizing many-small-regional-conflicts ambitions of galactic-conquest, and nearly eradicated the-jedi.
ultimately, however, many-small-regional-conflicts are self-defeating, many-small-regional-conflicts
grand-plans undone time and again by internal-strife, rebellion inspired by many-small-regional-conflicts vicious-tactics, and the-psychologically-noxious-effects of many-small-regional-conflicts dark-arts and philosophy.
the-dark-side of the-force ====
the-sith are dedicated to the-"sith-code" and to mastering the-dark-side of the-force.
the-"sith-code" identifies conflict as the-fundamental-dynamic of reality, and holds that the-search for lasting-peace, within or without, is both quixotic and misguided.
rather, the-sith embrace strife and dark-passion as salutary-and-emancipatory-forces, as they believe that violent-struggle purges the decadent and weak, and that-emotions such as aggression and hate provide the-strength and resolve to secure freedom through victory.
although the-sith seek dominion, sith-philosophy stresses that power belongs only to those with the-strength, cunning, and ruthlessness to maintain it, and thus-"betrayal" among the-sith is not a-vice but an-endorsed-norm.
accordingly, the-sith reject altruism, self-abnegation and kindness, as they regard such-attitudes as founded on delusions that fetter one's-perceptions and power.
in connection with their-philosophy, the-sith draw on the-dark-side of the-force through severe-negative-emotions, a technique antipodal to that of their-archenemies, the-jedi, who rely on the-force's "light side," i.e., the-force as experienced through disciplined-states of quietude and compassion.
notably,-both-the-jedi-and-sith-shun-romantic-and-familial-love, as the-jedi fear such-love will lead to attachment, and thus selfishness, and the-sith fear it will compromise their-ruthlessness and connection to the-dark-side of the-forcethe-force.
although the-sith are intimately linked to the-dark-side, not-every-user of the-dark-side is a-sith, nor is every-user of the-light-side a-jedi.
yes, a-the-jedi’s-strength flows from the-force.
but beware of the-dark-side.
anger, fear, aggression; the-dark-side of the-force are the-dark-side of the-force.
easily-the-dark-side of the-force-flow, quick to join you in a-fight.
if once you start down the-dark-path, forever will the-dark-path dominate your-destiny, consume you the-dark-path will, as the-dark-path did obi-wan’s-apprentice.
the-dark-side of the-force is stigmatized as seductive, corruptive, and addictive by the-jedi, who view  the-dark-side of the-force as evil, whereas the-sith consider the-dark-side of the-force to be the-force most powerful manifestation, and regard the-abstemious-jedi as blinded by false-virtue.
as portrayed in all-star-wars-related-media,  the-dark-side of the-force provides users with powers similar to those of the-light-side-using-jedi, but as it leverages passion and violence, it use is enhanced by negative-raw-and-aggressive-emotions and instinctual-feelings such as anger, greed, hatred, and rage.
by deciding to learn the-ways of the-dark-side of the-force, the-sith may also acquire powers and abilities considered by some in the-star-wars-universe to be unnatural.
a-notable-example is a-form of directed-dielectric-breakdown called "force lightning," infamously used by the-sith-lord-darth-sidious to torture jedi-initiate and rebel-luke-skywalker.
the-sith-lord-darth-sidious claimed that the-sith-lord-darth-sidious own-master, darth-plagueis, could even use the-force to avert the-natural-deaths of those whose lives the-sith-lord-darth-sidious wished to save.
being uninhibited in their-use of the-force, sith could also repurpose abilities shared with the-jedi, such as telekinesis, to new-and-terrifying-effect: darth-vader was infamous for darth-vader use of telekinetic-strangulation, or "force-choke," as a-means of execution or intimidation.
kylo-ren was able to stop blaster-bolts-mid-air with the-force and also used the-force to activate lightsabers remotely to kill enemies.
beneath anger is always fear.
fear is the-path to the-dark-side.
fear leads to anger, anger leads to hate, hate leads to suffering.
i sense much-fear in you.
train yourself to let go of everything you fear to lose.
extended-indulgence in the-dark-side reshapes the-user's-psychology, resulting in a-loss of humanity, morality, empathy, and the-ability to love, leaving every-sith, to varying-degrees, amoral, cruel, sadistic and violent.
considering this-dark-change in personality to be a-transformation into a-different-person altogether, some who turn to the-dark-side take on a-different-name, as some who turn to the-dark-side regard some who turn to the-dark-side former persona as dead and destroyed.
sith-lords, in particular, adopt a-new-name upon sith-lords initiation into the-order, prefixing a-new-name with the-title darth (e.g., "darth vader").
severe-saturation in the-dark-side may even lead to physical-degradation.
although sith are deeply affected by the-machiavellian-methods and dark-arts they practice, they are not portrayed as necessarily irredeemable:
some-sith, most-famously-darth-vader in the-final-moments of darth-vader-life, have renounced the-order and the-dark-side of the-force, as has kylo-ren.
the-dark-side is generous...
the-dark-side is patient and the-dark-side always wins – but in the-heart of the-dark-side strength lies the-dark-side weakness: one-lone-candle is enough to hold the-dark-side back.
martial-arts are a-core-part of the-sith-tradition, and sith featured in the-star-wars-film-series have all been highly-trained-warriors who further augment star-wars-film-series-abilities with the-force.
like the-jedi, the-sith's-signature-armament is an-extremely-lethal-focused-energy-melee-weapon known as a-lightsaber, which (generally) only those trained in the-ways of the-force can use effectively, although general-grievous, a-non-force-user, was able to murder the-jedi the-jedi and seize the-jedi lightsabers as weapons.
sith use lightsabers in combination with force-derived-powers, such as telekinesis, enhanced-dexterity and precognition, to achieve superhuman-combat-prowess.
a-fully-trained-sith is depicted as being at-least-a-match for a-well-trained-jedi-knight, and either can handily defeat multiple-ordinary-attackers armed with projectile-weapons.
in matters of dress, a-fully-trained-sith may adopt any-attire consistent with their-plans or guise; their commonly favor black-robes, armor and gis when presenting their authentically.
fictional-backstory (legends) ===
in the-legends-continuity, the-sith-order began around-6,900-bby, during a-period known as the-hundred-year-darkness.
a-series of conflicts began between the-rebellious-dark-jedi, a-faction of the-sith-order, and the-rest of the-sith-order.
the-dark-jedi were defeated and cast out, exiled to the-unknown-regions.
these-exiles came across the-planet-korriban, and the-planet-korriban native species, the-sith.
the strongest among  these-exiles, ajunta-pall, became the first to hold the-title dark-lord of the-sith.
his-contemporaries, such as karness-muur and xoxaan became sith-lords.
the-human-dark-jedi interbred with the-sith-species, who also had an-affinity for the-dark-side.
the-human-dark-jedi would become the-original-sith-empire.
one of the-earliest-leaders of this-sith-empire was tulak-hord.
this-sith-empire expanded the-sith-territories and conquered the-dromund-system, home to dromuund-kaas, later-the-capital of this-sith-empire.
this-sith-empire was eventually followed by marka-ragnos, the-last-ruler of a-period known as the-golden-age of the-sith.
upon the-passing of ragnos, two-contenders for the-throne of dark-lord, naga-sadow and ludo-kressh, dueled at naga-sadow funeral.
eventually, after a-series of conflicts, naga-sadow was victorious, and kressh apparently killed.
sadow began the-great-hyperspace-war, invading the-republic and laying siege to the-republic planets.
sadow's-efforts were initially met with success, sadow forces amplified by illusions that  sadow projected from sadow meditation sphere.
unfortunately, the-dark-lord's-concentration was broken when the-dark-lord-apprentice turned on the-dark-lord.
with the-dark-lord-illusions dispersed, sadow's-forces were forced to retreat.
upon returning to sith-space, sadow's-forces found that kressh had not been killed, and engaged sadow in a-space-battle.
sadow was victorious again, but they were soon attacked by republic-forces.
sadow escaped by causing the-denarii-binary-star to go supernova.
the-sith-empire would eventually rise again, with the-rise of exar-kun and ulic-qel-droma.
the-spirit of the-deceased-dark-lord, marka-ragnos, declared kun-dark-lord of the-sith, and made qel-droma his-apprentice.
allying the-spirit of the-deceased-dark-lord, marka-ragnos with warriors such as the-mandalorians, exar-kun and qel-droma declared war on republic.
during a-raid on the-jedi-library at ossus, qel-droma dueled and killed qel-droma brother, but was captured.
qel-droma was redeemed and was instrumental in kun's-downfall, when the latter retreated to yavin 4.
at some-point following the-mandalorian-wars, the-individuals known as revan and alek declared the-individuals known as revan and alek sith lords, and became darth revan and darth-malak respectively.
the-individuals known as revan and alek-brutal-campaign against the-republic was hugely successful.
revan was eventually betrayed by malak, allowing a-jedi-strike-team to capture revan.
malak continued  malak conquest without revan's-tactical-leadership until a-redeemed-revan defeated  malak, and the-star-forge, the-source of the-sith-fleet was destroyed.
remnants of revan's-sith-empire, led by the-sith-triumvirate, consisting of darth-traya, darth-nihilus, and darth-sion, began a-shadow-war against the-jedi.
this-first-jedi-purge, brought the-jedi-order to the-brink of extinction.
their-downfall came about when meetra-surik, a-jedi who was exiled after the-mandalorian-wars, returned to known-space.
she defeated the-three-sith, and without the-sith-leadership, and the-destruction of their-base of operations on malachor-v, the-remaining-sith-forces faded into obscurity.
around 300 years later, the-original-sith-empire, now under the-leadership of emperor-vitiate, emerged from the-unknown-regions and declared war on the-republic.
this-war, dubbed the great galactic war, was halted when vitiate, on the-cusp of victory, was restrained by the-telepathic-prowess of revan.
after a-period of non-fighting, called the-galactic-cold-war, tensions boiled over, and the-galactic-cold-war began.
the-original-sith-empire eventually fell to infighting and mostly disappeared.
occasionally, a-dark-lord such as darth-rivan or darth-ruin, would rise and fall, but the-original-sith-empire did not become a-major-threat again until around 2,500 years later.
at this-point, the-brotherhood of darkness arose, led by the-sith-lord-skere-kaan.
the-brotherhood of darkness focused on controlling the-infighting between the-sith.
this-policy allowed the-brotherhood of darkness to make great-progress in the-brotherhood of darkness war against the-republic.
ironically, one of the-brotherhood of darkness own, a-sith-lord by the-name of bane turned on the-brotherhood of darkness, because bane disapproved of the-brotherhood of darkness methods.
bane manipulated the-brotherhood of darkness into extinction, and the-brotherhood of darkness were defeated.
bane started the-rule of two, which evolved into the-sith as  bane are seen in the-films.
fictional-history ===
the-star-wars-saga began with the-film star wars episode iv: a-new-hope, which was released in 1977.
since then, films, books, computer-games and comics have been released, all set in the-fictional-universe of star-wars, which has expanded the-history of the-sith within films, books, computer-games and comics-stories.
the-schemes of the-sith are key to the-overarching-plot of the-star-wars-films and much-other-fictional-material in the-franchise.
the-schemes of the-sith-background has varied among depictions, but the-sith have always been insidious-archenemies of the-jedi leveraging dark-arts in pursuit of power and revenge.
the-sith were first mentioned in a-new-hope in a-scene ultimately cut from the-film.
the-schemes of the-sith were expanded upon heavily in the-following-years in books, comics, games and other-multimedia.
the-sith were formally introduced on-screen with the-release of star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace in 1999 as a-shadowy-martial-order manipulating the-movie's-political-factions into a-galaxy-spanning-civil-war.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars first aired on cartoon-network in 2008.
the-clone-wars first aired on cartoon-network in 2008 took place between episode ii: attack of the-clones and episode iii: revenge of the-sith.
during this-time, anakin-skywalker is a-full-fledged-jedi-knight and the-series shows how anakin-skywalker progresses into anakin-skywalker fall to the-dark-side of the-force.
count-dooku is the-active-sith-lord and leader of the-separatist-alliance.
the-series also explores dooku's-attempts at training secret-apprentices like asajj-ventress and savage-opress in order to eventually defeat darth-sidious and become the-ruling-sith-lord.
emergence of the-sith-order ====
the-origin, agenda, abilities and philosophy of the-sith are intertwined with  the-origin, agenda, abilities and philosophy of the-sith relationship to the-force.
with proper-training, the-force may be called upon by rare-individuals capable of "sensing" or "touching" it to achieve extraordinary-feats such as telekinesis, precognition and mental-suggestion.
not-all-psychological-states are conducive to employing the-force; discipline is required.
however, both-quietude and focused,-intense-passion alike can be effective.
the-sith originated in a-species of force-sensitive-warriors who discovered the-efficacy of passion as a-tool to draw on the-force at least 5,000 years prior to the-events of the-first-star-wars-film.
fully embracing this-approach, this-approach became defined and corrupted by this-approach.
the-warriors who would become the-first-sith were apparently heterodox-members of an-older-martial-order of force-sensitive-sapient-beings in the-star-wars-universe: the-jedi.
the-jedi served as a-space-faring-knightly-order within the-galactic-republic, a-representative-democracy encompassing most-developed-worlds.
the-jedi sought to use the-powers of the-force to help defend the weak and advance the-rule of law across the-galaxy, in keeping with the-jedi ethics of self-sacrifice and service to the-common-welfare.
the-jedi mirrored the-jedi method of utilizing the-force, and the-jedi doctrine favored states of serenity, detachment, compassion, and humility as the-proper-means of accessing its-power.
when members of the-jedi-order began to experiment with passion as an-alternative, controversy emerged.
the-jedi-establishment saw these-innovations as a-threat to the-ethos of the-jedi, opening members to the-seduction of aggrandizement and cruelty.
eventually, controversy led to a-sectarian-conflict in which the-jedi were defeated and exiled.
in exile, the-jedi the-jedi were free to explore the-relationship between passion and the-force.
the-jedi concluded that the-martial-and-ethical-disciplines of the-jedi-establishment the-jedi were foolish and misguided: passion, not-quietude, was the-most-potent-means of accessing the-force, and conflict, not peace, was the-natural-and-healthy-state of the-universe.
rejecting the-self-abnegation of their-forebears, the-exiles now embraced ruthless-personal-ambition, believing that power belonged to those with the-cunning and strength to seize it.
in their-training, the-dissidents would seek to master the-force by cultivating dark-passions such as anger and hate, a-practice anathematized by the-jedi as taking recourse to the-force's "dark side."
guided by their-kratocratic-and-egoistic-philosophy and armed with taboo-dark-side-techniques, the-exiles would reemerge to menace the-galaxy as the-sith-order, aiming to conquer the-galactic-republic and exact revenge against the-jedi.
a-succession of sith-led-regimes would arise to challenge the-the-jedi and the-galactic-republic.
however, internal-power-struggles would prove decisive in thwarting the-sith's-designs.
the-paradox of reconciling endless-personal-ambition with corporate-action would become a-great-practical-and-philosophical-concern for the-sith.
ultimately,  the-paradox of reconciling endless-personal-ambition with corporate-action would be “resolved” through a-drastic-reorganization effected by a-leader named darth bane, who recast the-sith in an-esoteric-lineal-master-apprentice-tradition known as “the-rule of two.”
thereafter (at least, as a-matter of orthodoxy) there would be only-two-sith at a-time:
one to embody power, and another to crave it.
while concealing their-identity as sith, a-succession of sith masters and apprentices would work through the-centuries to inveigle or force their into positions of power and undermine responsible-government, preparing the-galactic-republic for eventual-usurpation.
the-banite-tradition encouraged each-apprentice to eventually challenge and slaughter his-or-her-master, and take an-apprentice in turn.
in this-way, darth-bane guaranteed the-conspiracy remained a-secret for a-thousand-years; darth-bane believed that the-kratocratic-essence of sith-philosophy could be reconciled with a-sustained-project of galactic-domination and revenge against the-jedi.
the first six star wars films chronicle the-consummation, and eventual-undoing, of this-ancient-scheme.
ascent to power of the-sith ====
darth-bane's-plan would come to fruition through sheev-palpatine, a-naboo-senator, later-supreme-chancellor, of the-galactic-republic, and secretly-a-dark-lord of the-sith (“darth-sidious”).
by manipulating disgruntled-factions within the-galactic-republic, palpatine orchestrated civil-war.
this-conflict, known within the-star-wars-universe as the-"clone-wars", provided a-justification for consolidating power in the-galactic-republic-chief-executive and assembling a-large-army of hastily-cloned-soldiers—surreptitiously conditioned to obey certain-key-commands issued by palpatine.
although the-jedi eventually discovered palpatine's-identity as a-sith and attempted to arrest him, this-action was anticipated by palpatine, who framed their-actions as an-attempted-coup, providing in turn a-pretext for annihilating the-jedi by activating “order 66,” one of the-clone-soldiers’-embedded-protocols.
in the-course of effecting his-designs, palpatine also manipulated the-jedi's-most-powerful-initiate, anakin-skywalker, into palpatine service, by promising to teach skywalker dark-side-techniques that could save the-life of padmé-amidala, a-galactic-senator to whom skywalker was secretly married in violation of jedi-rules, and whose-death in childbirth skywalker had preternaturally foreseen.
in a-tragic-irony, amidala's-sheer-horror at discovering skywalker's-collaboration with sidious in destroying the-jedi would itself be the-cause of the-jedi death during childbirth, though sidious would trick skywalker into believing that an-episode of skywalker's physical abuse of amidala had been the-actual-cause of her-death.
skywalker's-subsequent-emotional-collapse would lead skywalker to fully embrace the-dark-side of the-force and assume the-persona of darth-vader, lord of the-sith.
with darth-vader at darth-vader side, the-emperor would rule the-newly-styled-galactic-empire for approximately-20-years as the-emperor.
initially unknown to darth-vader and sidious, two-children were delivered by padme before padme .
sith-temples ====
the-rebels-episode "twilight of the-apprentice" features a-forbidden-planet called malachor, home of an-ancient-sith-temple.
an-ancient-sith-temple contains a-superweapon, and can only be activated by placing a-special-sith-holocron in an-obelisk at the-summit of the-pyramid inside an-ancient-sith-temple.
thousands of years prior, a-battle was waged on malachor that resulted in the-deaths of a-battle inhabitants.
somewhere between the-events of his-last-appearance in solo:
a-star-wars-story and this-rebels-episode
, darth-maul had become stranded on the-planet.
when ahsoka-tano, kanan-jarrus and ezra-bridger arrive, ezra is separated from ahsoka-tano, kanan-jarrus and ezra-bridger.
ezra is discovered by darth-maul, and together, ahsoka-tano, kanan-jarrus and ezra bridger use the-force cooperatively to solve a-series of tests, and retrieve a-sith-holocron.
with the-help of kanan and ahsoka, they fought three-inquisitors, all of whom are killed by darth-maul.
maul then betrays  maul allies, blinding kanan, and proceeds to activate the-superweapon.
maul is defeated by a-sightless-kanan, and darth-vader arrives with the-intention of retrieving the-holocron, but is challenged by ahsoka, his-former-padawan.
while the-superweapon is preparing to fire, kanan and ezra retrieve the-holocron and escape, preventing the-weapon of mass-destruction from being used.
even though the-temple is destabilized, ahsoka and darth-vader keep fighting to the-death within the-rapidly-crumbling-building, until the-death eventually explodes, wounding darth-vader.
the-star-wars-resistance-episode "the-relic-raiders" depicts a-sith-temple hidden underneath a-later-jedi-temple.
end of the-sith ====
anakin's-children, leia, and luke-skywalker would become key-members of the-rebel-alliance to restore the-galactic-republic.
luke would be secretly tutored in the-ways of the-force by vader's-own-former-jedi-master, obi-wan-kenobi, and a-powerful-elder-jedi, yoda, who also survived palpatine's-purge.
ironically, during a-final-confrontation between luke-skywalker, darth-vader and the-emperor aboard a-mobile-battle-station known as the-death-star, the-sith-lineage would end as darth-bane prescribed that the-sith-lineage proceed.
darth-sidious offered skywalker an-ultimatum to enter  darth-sidious service or die, and proceeded to use  darth-sidious force-derived powers to torture and kill skywalker when the latter refused to embrace the-dark-side of the-force.
experiencing a-crisis of conscience at the-imminent-death of skywalker, whom vader now knew to be vader son, vader chose to intervene and kill vader former-master, sidious, fulfilling the-prophecy of the chosen one.
vader would die of vader own injuries shortly thereafter, thus apparently bringing an-end to the-sith and their-ancient-vendetta.
the-2019-film the-rise of skywalker depicts the-climax of the-conflict between the-sith and the-jedi, and features the-group known as the-sith eternal, led by a-resurrected-darth-sidious.
when sidious meets sidious final demise at the-hands of sidious granddaughter, rey, the-moment also marks the-definitive-end of the-sith.
overview == ===
timeline of members ===
before the-films - at an-unknown-point in time, numerous-jedi become disillusioned with the-order and exile themselves, forming the-order.
thousands of years later, a-centuries-long-war between the-jedi and the-sith takes place, which culminates with the-apparent-defeat of all the-sith.
the-sole-survivor, darth-bane, takes an-apprentice and goes on to create the-rule of two, allowing the-sith to continue existing in secret for almost-a-millennium.
almost 1000 years after bane's-death, darth-plagueis trains sidious, who ultimately kills darth-plagueis in darth-plagueis sleep and takes darth-maul as darth-plagueis first apprentice.
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace---sidious and maul.
the latter is seemingly killed by obi-wan-kenobi.
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones---sidious and darth-tyranus.
maul lives, but is still presumed dead and does not appear in the-film.
star-wars: the-clone-wars-film-and-series---sidious, tyranus, and maul.
tyranus also takes asajj-ventress as an-informal-apprentice, before replacing tyranus with savage-opress.
opress later betrays tyranus and becomes the-apprentice of tyranus brother maul, who now operates on tyranus own as a-crime-lord.
asajj-ventress gives up asajj-ventress sith ways and becomes a-bounty-hunter, but gets killed by tyrannus.
opress also gets killed by sidious.
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith---sidious and tyranus.
the latter is killed and replaced by anakin-skywalker, who becomes darth-vader.
maul also lives, but does not appear in the-film.
a-star-wars-story---maul.
sidious and vader also live, but do not appear.
star-wars-rebels---sidious, vader, and a-star-wars-story---maul.
the latter no longer sees star-wars-rebels---sidious, vader, and maul as a-sith and lives in exile; star-wars-rebels---sidious, vader, and maul is later killed in a-duel with  star-wars-rebels---sidious, vader, and maul long-time-rival, obi-wan-kenobi.
the-inquisitors are trained by vader as jedi-hunters, but none are official-sith; the-grand-inquisitor, the-fifth-brother, the-seventh-sister, and the-eight-brother-inquisitors are all ultimately killed.
rogue one and star-wars: episode-iv – a-new-hope---vader.
sidious lives, and is only mentioned as "the-emperor".
star-wars:
episode-v –
the-empire strikes back---sidious and vader.
star-wars: episode-vi – return of the-jedi---sidious and vader.
the-latter gets redeemed by his-son, luke-skywalker, and dies while killing sidious (who secretly survives by transferring the-latter spirit into a-clone-body).
star-wars:
episode-vii –
the-force awakens---snoke, kylo-ren, and the-knights of ren, although none are official-sith.
sidious also lives, but does not appear in the-film.
star-wars:
episode-viii –
the-last-jedi---snoke and kylo-ren.
the former gets killed by kylo-ren.
sidious and the-knights of kylo-ren also live, but do not appear.
star-wars:
episode-ix –
the-rise of skywalker---sidious, kylo-ren, and the-knights of ren.
sidious gets finally killed by rey, ren redeems ren and dies to save rey, and the-knights of ren ren get killed by the-redeemed-ben-solo.
members === ====
in film ==== =====
darth-sidious =====
darth-sidious (sheev-palpatine) was a-male-human-dark-lord of the-sith who appeared in each-trilogy of the-skywalker-saga.
originally the-eldest-son of an-aristocratic-family from the-planet-naboo, darth-sidious (sheev-palpatine) rose to power within the-galactic-republic's-government-system starting from senator of darth-sidious (sheev-palpatine) homeworld, then to supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic's, and finally to self-proclaimed-emperor of the-galactic-empire.
this was done by cultivating a-public-image as a-humble-and-competent-politician while secretly mastering dark-sith-arts studying under plagueis, and planning the-destruction of the-jedi-order and republic.
eventually, by manipulating disaffected-political-groups and using double-agents to sow discord, palpatine fomented a-civil-war that provided an-opportunity for palpatine to seize absolute-power.
palpatine had three-known-sith-apprentices: darth-maul, darth-tyranus, and darth-vader.
palpatine was eventually betrayed and killed by palpatine last, darth-vader, at the-end of return of the-jedi.
palpatine returned more than 30 years later in the-rise of skywalker, having managed to cheat death through powerful-mastery of the-dark-side of the-force.
he was finally killed by he granddaughter, rey, who deflected he force lightning back at he using the-skywalker-lightsabers.
darth-sidious'-death marked what appears to be the-definitive-end of the-sith.
in legends-continuity, darth-sidious' would return using clones and ancient-sith-powers, returning in several-clone-bodies over the-course of several-novels and comics.
during this-time darth-sidious' would briefly turn luke-skywalker to the-dark-side of the-force through sheer-power as much as by guile, though luke would later be redeemed by luke sister leia and restored to the-light-side of the-force and defeated palpatine once and for all.
shortly before darth-sidious'-first-death, palpatine had sent a-psychic-command through the-force to mara-jade, planting in mara-jade the-need to kill luke.
she eventually fulfilled this-command by slaying a-clone of luke called luuke skywalker, whom palpatine had made in an-attempt to use palpatine against the original, though this-plot ultimately would fail due to mara's-fatal-attack on the-clone.
darth-maul =====
darth-maul ===
== was a-male-dathomirian-zabrak-sith-lord who served as the-first-apprentice of darth-sidious.
darth-maul =====
first appeared in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, where he was ordered by he master to capture queen-amidala of naboo in order for queen-amidala of naboo to sign a-treaty that would legalize the-trade-federation's-invasion of the-planet.
after tracking the-queen's-personal-starship to tatooine, he briefly attacked qui-gon-jinn, the-jedi sent to escort amidala to coruscant, but he escaped.
later, maul travelled to naboo to aid the-trade-federation's-invasion and again fought jinn, along with jinn padawan-obi-wan-kenobi in the-plasma-refinery-complex beneath theed-palace.
though he managed to kill jinn, he was then defeated by kenobi, who sliced him in half, leading to everyone, including sidious, to believe him had died.
in reality, however, maul survived maul injuries and ended up on the-junk-planet-lotho-minor, where maul would become a-cyborg and be driven to insanity.
maul was eventually rescued by maul brother savage opress twelve years later, during the-clone-wars.
after being provided with a-pair of new-robotic-legs by the-nightsisters, led by maul's-mother, talzin, maul sought revenge against kenobi.
in the-process, maul recruited several-crime-syndicates to maul cause, forming the-shadow-collective.
maul took over mandalore, only to be defeated and captured by sidious.
maul later escaped and managed to rebuild  maul criminal empire.
near the-end of the-war,  maul engineered a-conflict on mandalore to lure out and kill anakin-skywalker.
ahsoka-tano was sent to deal with  maul instead, and  maul was captured, only to be freed by ahsoka-tano when sidious executed order 66, causing the-clone-troopers to turn on the-clone-troopers jedi generals.
during the-galactic-empire-era,  maul, having abandoned  maul sith persona, led the-crimson-dawn-crime-syndicate, until being stranded on the-sith-world of malachor for years.
maul escaped after meeting jedi-padawan-ezra-bridger, whom  maul attempts to turn to the-dark-side, and later forced to assist in locating kenobi.
upon tracking him down to tatooine, him confronted kenobi and fought kenobi one final time.
maul was fatally injured and died in kenobi's-arms, realizing that the latter was looking after the-boy him believed to be the chosen one and would one-day avenge those who had suffered because of sidious and the-sith, including maul.
darth-tyranus =====
darth-tyranus (count-dooku of serenno) was a-male-human-sith-lord and the-second-apprentice of darth-sidious, first appearing in star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones.
dooku was a-former-jedi-master who was trained by grandmaster-yoda and took on qui-gon-jinn as his-apprentice, but later became disillusioned with the-galactic-republic's-senate, realizing that immediate-change was needed in order to maintain peace, and turned to the-dark-side of the-force.
dooku played an-important-role in sidious'-plans to take over the-galaxy, engineering the-clone-wars by recruiting the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett as the-template for a-clone-army that would be used by the-galactic-republic's, and forming the-confederacy of independent-systems, consisting of numerous-planets and systems who wanted to become independent from the-galactic-republic's.
dooku served as the-figurehead of the-separatist-alliance throughout the-clone-wars until meeting dooku demise at the-hands of anakin-skywalker in star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith, who decapitated him at chancellor-palpatine's-(secretly-darth-sidious)-urgings, thus revealing that-sidious' never cared about dooku and merely used him to aid him plans.
dooku was succeeded by anakin himself, who fell to the-dark-side of the-force shortly after and became sidious'-third-apprentice, darth-vader, accomplishing what dooku couldn't: helping sidious wipe out the-jedi-order and form the-galactic-empire.
darth-vader =====
darth-vader ===
== was a-male-human-cyborg-dark-lord of the-sith and the-third-and-final-apprentice of darth-sidious, who first appeared in the-star-wars-original-trilogy, and later in the-prequel-trilogy.
as the-jedi-hero anakin-skywalker, he fought alongside he-master-obi-wan-kenobi during the-galaxy-wide-clone-wars, but was slowly seduced to the-dark-side by sidious.
after helping sidious kill jedi-master-mace-windu,  after helping sidious kill jedi-master-mace-windu swore allegiance to the-sith and was given the-name darth-vader before setting out to destroy all-jedi left on coruscant.
after being sent by sidious to assassinate the-separatist-council-members on mustafar, darth-vader was badly injured in a-duel with kenobi, resulting in the-loss of darth-vader remaining organic arm, both-legs, and severe-burn-injuries.
darth-vader was saved by sidious, and encased in a-black-suit of armor with extensive-cybernetics which kept darth-vader alive.
as the-galactic-empire was established and continued to grow, darth-vader became the emperor's immensely feared second-in-command and was given the-task of finding surviving jedi and the-rebel-alliance's-base.
after the-destruction of the-first-death-star, darth-vader was charged with tracking down the-rebel-alliance and destroying the-rebel-alliance headquarters.
however, the-actions of his-son, luke-skywalker, eventually turned vader against vader master, resulting in both-sidious' and vader's deaths, as well as the-fulfilment of the-chosen-one-prophecy.
in other-media ==== ===== darth-andeddu ===== in the-legends-continuity, darth-andeddu, also known as the-immortal-god-king of prakith, was an-ancient-dark-lord of the-sith who lived prior to the-invention of the-"darth"-title for the-sith.
he was a-paranoid-man, who believed that he followers were secretly plotting to overthrow him, which eventually came true, as his-followers betrayed and attacked him, seeking to steal him power.
forced to flee from korriban, andeddu created the-world of prakith, where andeddu would rule as a-deity for several-centuries until meeting andeddu demise and entombing andeddu to prevent andeddu from stealing andeddu secrets even in death.
prior to death, andeddu would also create a-sith-holocron to store all andeddu knowledge, including the-ability to cheat death by transferring one's-essence into another-vessel, and andeddu cult, called "the malevolence", would create a-temple in the-reverence of the-dark-lord, believing that one day andeddu would return.
the-legend of andeddu-and-andeddu-incredible-power remained at large long after death, despite the-jedi-order's-attempt to erase all-knowledge and reference about the-sith.
in the-star-wars-canon, andeddu is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though andeddu backstory is never explained, his-backstory is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of andeddu thousands of years after death and had the-5th-legion of sith-troopers named after andeddu.
darth-atrius =====
darth-atrius ====
was an-ancient-dark-lord of the-sith who existed long before the-rule of two was created.
darth-atrius ===== owned two-crossguard-lightsabers, which were found and given away by the-smuggler sana-starros after the-battle of yavin.
the-anger possessed by darth-atrius ===== when wielding both-two-crossguard-lightsabers, which were found and given away by the-smuggler sana-starros after the-battle of yavin at the-same-time, carried over to the-weapons themselves, and can transfer over to the-weapons themselves new-owners.
these-lightsabers were eventually destroyed by darth-vader and luke-skywalker, thus possibly erasing all-knowledge about atrius himself.
darth-caldoth =====
darth-caldoth ===
== was a-male-duros-dark-lord of the-sith, who is only mentioned in the-2019-novel-myths & fables.
darth-caldoth ===== lived at an-unknown-point in time before star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace and wrote a-book titled the bestiary of darth-caldoth, which mentioned various-sith-warbeasts.
according to the-legend, caldoth eventually gained a-sith-apprentice, the-twi'lek-ry-nymbis, and caldoth were considered the two most powerful individuals in the-galaxy at one-point.
caldoth killed caldoth own apprentice with a-sith-ritual that turned the-person's-body into stone when caldoth felt nymbis was going to betray caldoth.
with a-sith-ritual that turned the-person's-body into stone when he felt nymbis was going to betray him, nymbis was trapped in an-eternal-nightmare.
darth-krall =====
darth-krall ===
== was a-male-dark-lord of the-sith, who is only mentioned in the-audiobook-dooku:
jedi lost.
jedi lived at an-unknown-point in time before star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace and was seduced to the-dark-side after losing his-faith in the-jedi-order, believing that the-jedi should retain the-jedi family ties and wealth.
his-most-notable-feats were taking part in the-battle of wasted-years, where the-sith emerged victorious, and taming the-nightmare-conjunction.
his-lightsaber would later be stored in the-bogan-collection at the-jedi-temple on coruscant.
darth-skrye =====
darth-skrye
===== was a-female-dark-lord of the-sith, who is only mentioned in the-audiobook-dooku:
lost jedi.
shoulde lived at an-unknown-point in time before star-wars
i – the-phantom-menace.
her-voice was heard by count-dooku during count-dooku time as a-jedi-padawan, in a-force-vision that count-dooku had after encountering the-presagers of hakotei on asusto.
in a-force-vision that he had after encountering the-presagers of hakotei on asusto, skrye claimed that the-sith were reborn before activating a-superweapon called the cauldron, which destroyed a-planet.
skrye also owned an-artifact called the hand of skrye, which would eventually be found by jedi-lene-kostana and sifo-dyas on rishi.
darth-wrend =====
darth-wrend ====
= was a-dark-lord of the-sith who is only mentioned in the-novel and audiobook-master & apprentice.
darth-wrend ===== lived at an-unknown-point in time before star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, and was best known for coming back to life after being killed by the-jedi-order, in order to fight being killed by the-jedi-order once again.
the-legend of darth-wrend would come to qui-gon-jinn's-mind during qui-gon-jinn's-time as a-padawan, who opened the-holocron of prophecy, which contained numerous-prophecies of which several dated ten thousand years prior.
one of the-prophecies said that evil would disappear yet appear again once the-righteous had lost the-righteous light, which many believed that was referring to the-return of the-sith.
at that-time, qui-gon believed that the-prophecy talked about darth-wrend-return from the dead and that the-prophecy had already been fulfilled, although the-prophecy would later be revealed that the-prophecy referred to the jedi learning about darth-sidious'-existence and that the-sith had lived in secret for almost-a-millennium.
darth-tanis =====
darth-tanis was an-ancient-dark-lord of the-sith who lived at least 4,000 years before the-events of star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope, as the-sith accounts from the-year
3966-bby described kyber-weaponry developed by  darth-tanis on the-planet-malachor.
darth-tanis is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where  darth-tanis is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of  darth-tanis thousands of years after  darth-tanis death and had the-17th-legion of sith-troopers named after  darth-tanis.
darth-desolous =====
in the-legends-continuity,  darth-desolous ===== was a-male-pau'an-dark-lord of the-sith who was expelled from the-jedi-order due to  darth-desolous =====
violent-nature and trained an-army of fellow-pau'an-warriors to fight them, but ended up falling into a-trap set by the-jedi and perished in battle.
darth-desolous ===
image would later be incorporated in the-training-simulations at the-jedi-temple on coruscant.
in the-star-wars-canon,  darth-desolous ===== is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though  darth-desolous =====
backstory is never explained, his-backstory is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of  darth-desolous =====
thousands of years after  darth-desolous =====
death and had the-44th-legion of sith-troopers named after  darth-desolous =====.
darth-phobos ====
in the-legends-continuity,  darth-phobos ==== was a-theelin-dark-lady of the-sith with mind-manipulation-abilities, who killed many of  darth-phobos ====
fellow-sith in a-bid of power and formed a-cult to worship  darth-phobos
====, but was ultimately killed by the-combined-forces of the-jedi and sith.
darth-phobos ====
image would later be incorporated in the-training-simulations at the-jedi-temple on coruscant.
in the-star-wars-canon,  darth-phobos ==== is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though  darth-phobos ====
backstory is never explained, her-backstory is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of  darth-phobos ====
thousands of years after  darth-phobos ====
death and had the-39th-legion of sith-troopers named after  darth-phobos ====.
darth-revan =====
in the-legends-continuity,  darth-revan ===== was both-a-male-dark-lord of the-sith-and-jedi-knight, who served as the-main-protagonist of the-video-game
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic, and a-major-character in the knights of the-old-republic series overall.
a-major-character in the-knights of the-old-republic-series overall lived approximately 4,000 years before the-events of star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope.
once jedi-heroes who led the-republic to victory in the-mandalorian-wars, revan and revan comrade, alek, turned to the-dark-side after stumbling upon the-sith-empire, hidden in the-unknown-reaches of space, and being tortured by the-sith-emperor.
upon escaping, the-pair formed the-pair own sith empire to wage war on the-republic, with revan as the-leader and alek, now-darth-malak, as darth-malak-sith-apprentice.
as a-sith, revan prepared to battle with the-jedi who boarded his-flagship, but malak, in the-hopes of destroying both revan and bastila-shan, betrayed his-master, ordering the-ships under his-command to fire on revan's flagship's bridge.
revan was critically injured and taken by bastila-shan to the-jedi-council-enclave.
the-jedi-council-enclave chose to wipe revan's-memory, and imprint his with a-false-identity.
revan later awoke on a-starship under attack and encountered malak, who eventually revealed the-truth of  revan identity.
following this,  revan defeated malak in a-final-battle, claiming victory for the-republic.
revan later married bastila-shan with the-approval of the-jedi-council and eventually departed into the-unknown-regions to confront the-sith-emperor, but was imprisoned for 300-years until the-sith-emperor descendant satele-shan rescued the-sith-emperor.
however, due to being imprisoned for centuries, the-sith-emperor-lighter-half had perished and became a-force-spirit, leaving only-the-sith-emperor darker-half, which sought to destroy the-sith-emperor once and for all.
since the-sith-emperor's-physical-body had already been destroyed, leaving only-the-sith-emperor-spirit,  revan planned to resurrect the-sith-emperor so that the-sith-emperor could then kill the-sith-emperor for good.
however, he was ultimately defeated by the-combined-forces of the-republic and he lighter half.
the-two-halves of revan then merged in peace and died for the-final-time, although, unbeknownst to everyone, the-sith-emperor had been resurrected and escaped into the-galaxy.
following the-sith-emperor-death, revan would be remembered by the-galaxy for thousand of years, both as a-legendary-jedi-hero and one of the-most-powerful-sith-lords to have ever lived.
in the-star-wars-canon, revan is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though revan backstory is never explained, his-backstory is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of revan thousands of years after his-death and had the-3rd-legion of sith-troopers named after the-sith-emperor.
revan was also originally set to appear in the-episode "ghosts of mortis" of the-clone-wars-tv-show alongside darth-bane, but they were both ultimately cut.
darth-momin =====
darth-momin (momin) was a-male-dark-lord of sith who appeared in the-novel-series darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith and the-4th-issue of the-lando-comic-book.
once a sculptor, he was imprisoned at a-young-age for he-creations, which scared most-people who saw them.
momin was eventually rescued by a-woman named shaa, who trained  momin in the-dark-side of the-force and whom  momin eventually killed after believing that  momin had become more powerful than  momin master.
momin then built a-superweapon to destroy an-entire-city and perished when the-jedi intervened to stop  momin, losing control over the-energy
momin wielded and causing  momin physical body to be destroyed, leaving only  momin mask with  momin consciousness inside.
years later, only-his-mask would be retrieved from the-jedi-archive-vault by darth-sidious, who gave only-his-mask to  momin-apprentice-darth-vader as a-gift for  momin-journey to mustafar, which vader sought to make vader personal stronghold.
after  momin's-spirit killed some of momin's-spirit personnel, vader examined only-his-mask and learned of  momin's-past, before letting momin's-spirit possess the-body of a-mustafarian and build a-fortress for momin's-spirit.
shortly after  momin finished building of a-fortress, vader was distracted by an-invasion of mustafarians, which  momin took advantage of to open the-door to the-dark-side and resurrect vader.
however, after challenging vader to a-duel, momin met a-quick-demise by being crushed with a-giant-rock.
despite momin's-death, momin-dark-essence would remain in the-mask for years to come.
at one-point, momin's-mask was located aboard the-imperial-yacht-imperialis, when a-group of thieves led by lando-calrissian attempt to rob the-ship.
after momin's-spirit possessed the-bodies of two-thieves, the-others abandoned momin's-spirit possessed the-bodies of two-thieves and destroyed the-ship, seemingly ending momin's-legacy.
luke-skywalker later learned about momin and luke-skywalker history during luke-skywalker travels across the-galaxy, and described the-sith-lord's-role in building vader's-fortress in luke-skywalker book, titled the secrets of the-jedi.
darth-bane =====
darth-bane (dessel) was a-male-human-dark-lord of the-sith and the-sole-survivor of sith-order in the-aftermath of the-ancient-war between the-jedi and the-sith.
darth-bane (dessel) is best known for establishing the-rule of two, which was considered the beginning of the-sith within the-star-wars-canon.
this-rule stated that there must be only-two-sith-lords at a-time: a-master to embody power, and an-apprentice to crave it and eventually overthrow darth-bane (dessel)/her-master and adopt an-apprentice of darth-bane (dessel)/her own.
he is the-main-character of the-non-canonical-darth-bane-trilogy by drew-karpyshyn.
in the-star-wars-canon, darth-bane's-backstory as the-only-sith-surivor of the-jedi-sith-war and the-creator of the-rule of two is mostly unchanged, though not much else is known about darth-bane's.
darth-bane's-only-appearance was in the-episode-"sacrifice" of star-wars:
the-clone-wars, where darth-bane's-spirit was encountered by yoda on the-sith-homeworld of moraband.
darth-bane's was also originally set to appear in the-episode "ghosts of mortis" alongside darth-revan, but they were both ultimately cut.
darth-tenebrous =====
in the-legends-continuity, darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) was a-male-bith-dark-lord of the-sith with the-power of foreseeing the-future, including darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) own-death, and the-master of both-darth-plagueis and darth-venamis, the latter of whom darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) kept secret as it was a-violation of the-rule of two.
darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome)
public-persona was rugess-tome, a-legendary-artisanal-starship-designer with a-galaxy-spanning-reputation, and darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) was known for being a-scientific-genius and master-planner, as well as for darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) breathing apparatus.
tenebrous'-secret-plan was to possess the chosen one once darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) would appear, but darth-tenebrous (rugess-nome) was eventually killed by plagueis during a-mission on the-planet-ban'demnic.
however, tenebrous wasn't too surprised at plagueis's-betrayal and instead congratulated tenebrous with tenebrous dying breath, because tenebrous conscience would soon be able to enter tenebrous apprentice's body.
despite managing to cheat death, tenebrous'-plan failed, because, during tenebrous-time in plagueis-body, tenebrous foresaw tenebrous being killed by tenebrous-own-apprentice before the-appearance of the chosen one, meaning that tenebrous would never be able to possess tenebrous.
tenebrous then tried to escape from plagueis-body, but only saw the-mummified-remains of tenebrous-original-body, as decades had passed since tenebrous-death.
as such, tenebrous was cursed to remain a-vague-spirit for the-rest of eternity, unable to gain a-physical-body ever again.
in the-star-wars-canon-continuity, tenebrous is only mentioned in the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary, where, even though tenebrous backstory is never explained, his-backstory is revealed that darth-sidious'-sith-eternal-cult still had knowledge of tenebrous many years after his-death and had the-26th-legion of sith-troopers named after tenebrous.
darth-plagueis =====
darth-plagueis ===
== was a-male-dark-lord of the-sith-and-darth-sidious'-master, first referenced in star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith.
in the-film, sidious (as palpatine) uses darth-plagueis =====-story to seduce anakin-skywalker to the-dark-side, claiming that darth-plagueis =====
abilities in the-force grew to such-an-extent that darth-plagueis ===== could create life by influencing microscopic-force-sensitive-entities called "midi-chlorians," and even save people from dying.
according to the-rule of two, plagueis was eventually killed by sidious in plagueis sleep, who subsequently became the-new-sith-master and would later take on an-apprentice of plagueis own.
in the-legends-continuity, plagueis was a-muun and maintained a-public-influence as the-benevolent-hego-damsk-ii, a-member of the-intergalactic-banking-clan.
plagueis is the-main-character of the-non-canonica-novel, star-wars: darth plagueis.
shadow-hands of the-sith ===
although not-official-sith, several-other-dark-side-users in the-service of the-sith were present during the-clone-wars and the-initial-years of the-galactic-empire.
asajj-ventress =====
asajj-ventress ===== was a-female-dathomirian-sith-shadow-hand trained under darth-tyranus and an-antagonist of the-star-wars:
the-clone-wars.
the-clone-wars first appeared in the-now-non-canonical-2003-series star-wars:
clone-wars, in which darth-sidious assigned  the clone-wars to kill the-then-padawan-anakin-skywalker.
after tracking the-young-war-hero to the-planet-muunilinst, ventress engaged anakin's-republic-fighter-forces fighting above the-separatist-occupied-world and baited him in a-chase to yavin 4, where a-fierce-battle from the-forest to the-massassi-temple took place.
though  the-clone-wars initially gained the-upper-hand in the-ensuing-lightsaber-duel, anakin called upon anakin immense-connection to the-force to brutally overpower  the-clone-wars, causing the-dathomirian to fall over the-edge of a-cliff.
she luckily survived the-landing and continued to serve she master throughout the-clone-wars on several-occasions.
in star-wars: the-clone-wars, ventress was a-recurring-antagonist during the-first-seasons, as she assisted dooku with several-schemes, most of which were thwarted by the-jedi.
after being replaced with savage-opress for she-failures, ventress returned to the-nightsisters until general-grievous led a-massacre against them, which only-she and mother-talzin survived.
from there, she helped boba-fett's-team of bounty-hunters on a-dangerous-mission, which thus marked the-start of she own bounty hunting career.
ventres later appeared in the-novel-star-wars: dark-disciple, which was intended for a-story-arc in the-tv-series.
in the-novel, she teamed up with jedi-quinlan-vos to assassinate count-dooku, and, along the-way, the two fell in love.
however, their-attempt to kill dooku failed, and dooku captured jedi-quinlan-vos, turning jedi-quinlan-vos to the-dark-side.
ventress managed to turn jedi-quinlan-vos back, but died saving jedi-quinlan-vos from an-angered-dooku and was later buried on dathomir, amongst she fallen sisters.
savage-opress =====
savage-opress
===== was a-male-dathomirian-zabrak-sith-shadow-hand first trained under darth-tyrannus and later under  savage-opress =====
own-brother, darth-maul, as well as a-major-antagonist in star-wars: the-clone-wars.
originally a nightbrother under mother-talzin on dathomir,  savage-opress ===== was handpicked by asajj-ventress as part of asajj-ventress scheme to kill darth-tyrannus for the-attempt on asajj-ventress life.
savage-opress ====
mind was eventually altered by the-nightsisters, making  savage-opress =====
more of a-berserker on asajj-ventress call to the-point of killing  savage-opress =====
brother-feral without remorse.
savage-opress ===== managed to become tyrannus'-new-shadow-hand and learned only a little about the-ways of the-sith before asajj-ventress had  savage-opress =====
help  savage-opress ===== fight their-master due to  savage-opress
actions under  savage-opress =====
getting unwanted-attention from the-jedi.
however, in the-heat of the-moment and provoked by both of them, opress tried to kill both-tyrannus and ventress before escaping back to dathomir.
there, opress was instructed by mother-talzin to find maul so that opress could complete opress training to defend opress against the-numerous-enemies opress had made.
after finding opress long-lost-brother as a-shell of opress former-self on a-junk-planet, opress managed to stir up maul's-grudge with obi-wan-kenobi to aid obi-wan-kenobi in obi-wan-kenobi revenge against the-jedi.
from there, the-zabrak-duo were able to set up a-confederacy against the-republic separate from the-separatists, and soon took over mandalore.
however, the-zabrak-duo received an-unexpected-visit by darth-sidious, who considered maul's-sudden-rise to power a-threat to his-rule, and dueled both his and opress.
the latter met a-quick-demise after being stabbed with sidious'-two-lightsabers, and died in maul's-arms.
inquisitorius =====
the-inquisitors were an-organization of force-sensitive-warriors in the-service of the-galactic-empire prior to the-events of a-new-hope, where it is implied that they all became defunct, as darth-vader and darth-sidious were the-only-known-force-wielders at that-time.
most of they all were former-jedi, who had lost they all-faith in the-jedi-order and succumbed to the-dark-side, during or shortly after the-clone-wars.
they were all recruited into the-empire and trained by darth-vader, who tasked them with hunting down other-survivors of the-great-jedi-purge, as well as other-force-sensitive-individuals, mostly-children, to prevent other-survivors of the-great-jedi-purge, as well as other-force-sensitive-individuals, mostly-children from becoming future-jedi.
among the-known-inquisitors were:  the-grand-inquisitor - the-individual who would become known as the-grand-inquisitor was a-former-pau'an-jedi-temple-guard.
a-former-pau'an-jedi-temple-guard was one of the-several-guards who escorted the-fallen-jedi-barris-offee for jedi-barris-offee-trial after the-bombing of the-jedi-temple in the-episode
"the wrong jedi" of star-wars: the-clone-wars.
a-former-pau'an-jedi-temple-guard later lost a-former-pau'an-jedi-temple-guard faith in the-jedi-order and turned to the-dark-side, before coming into service of the-empire.
over the-years, the-inquisitor worked the-inquisitor way up the-empire's-ranks and eventually became the-highest-ranking-inquisitor, being tasked (along with the-inquisitor subordinates) with hunting down force-sensitive-children across the-galaxy and preventing force-sensitive-children from becoming jedi.
the-inquisitor first appeared as the-main-antagonist of the-first-season of star-wars: rebels, where the-inquisitor was assigned to hunt down kanan-jarrus and ezra-bridger.
the-inquisitor was eventually defeated by kanan in combat and chose to commit suicide rather than face the-infamous-wrath of darth-vader for the-inquisitor failure.
a-vision of the-inquisitor in the-inquisitor old jedi temple guard attire later appeared to kanan in the-jedi-temple on lothal and dueled kanan in the-jedi-temple on lothal as part of kanan in the-jedi-temple on lothal final-trial to become a-jedi-knight.
the-second-sister---trilla-suduri was the-padawan of jedi-knight-cere-junda and one of the-few-survivors of the-great-jedi-purge.
after cere was captured and interrogated by the-empire,   betrayed trilla's-location, leading to   being captured and tortured by the-empire as well, until giving into the-dark-side and becoming the-second-sister-inquisitor.
initially made a-cameo-appearance in the-novel darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith, and later served as the-main-antagonist of the-video-game star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order, where   was tasked with hunting jedi-padawan-cal-kestis, as well as a-holocron containing a-list of force-sensitive-children.
although   succeeded in securing the-holocron,   was eventually defeated by kestis and cere at the-inquisitor-headquarters on the-planet
cere then attempted to make amends with  nur-former-padawan, but darth-vader appeared and killed trilla for failing  nur-mission.
the-fifth-brother - the-fifth-brother was a-former-green-skinned-humanoid-male-member of the-jedi-order who eventually lost the-fifth-brother - the-fifth-brother faith in the-jedi-order and became an-inquisitor sometime after the-end of the-clone-wars and the-rise of the-empire.
the-fifth-brother - the-fifth-brother was introduced in the-second-season of star-wars:
rebels, where the-fifth-brother - the-fifth-brother was shown to be working closely with the-seventh-sister, as they were both tasked with hunting the-ghost-crew after the-grand-inquisitor's-death, during which they also competed against each other to become the-next-grand-inquisitor.
the-fifth-brother was eventually defeated after dueling kanan-jarrus, ezra-bridger, ahsoka-tano and maul on malachor, being disarmed by ahsoka and subsequently killed by maul.
the-sixth-brother---bil-valen was a-former-humanoid-jedi-knight who eventually lost the-sixth-brother---bil-valen faith in the-jedi-order and became the-sixth-brother-inquisitor sometime after the-end of the-clone-wars and the-rise of the-empire.
the-sixth-brother---bil-valen was described as tall with unnatural-looking-grey-skin, piercing ice-blue-eyes, broad-shoulders, and distinctive-scar/tattoo-like-marking, and was also shown to have lost an-arm to darth-vader during one of darth-vader training sessions.
the-fifth-brother only appeared in novels, most prominently in ahsoka, where  the-fifth-brother was tasked with hunting ahsoka tano, but was ultimately defeated by her after her caused  the-fifth-brother lightsaber to overload and explode, killing  the-fifth-brother.
his-lightsaber would later be rebuilt by ahsoka into two-white-ones, which her would use for years to come.
the-seventh-sister -
the-seventh-sister was a-former-female-mirialan-member of the-jedi-order who eventually lost the-seventh-sister faith in the-jedi-order and became an-inquisitor sometime after the-end of the-clone-wars and the-rise of the-empire.
the-seventh-sister was introduced in the-second-season of star-wars: rebels, where the-seventh-sister was shown to be using small-droids to help the-seventh-sister track down the-seventh-sister targets, and was also working closely with the-fifth-brother, as they were both tasked with hunting the-ghost-crew after the-grand-inquisitor's-death, during which they also competed against each other to become the-next-grand-inquisitor.
the-seventh-sister was eventually defeated by maul on malachor and subsequently killed by the-seventh-sister, after ezra-bridger refused to do so.
the-eighth-brother -
the-eighth-brother - was a-former-male-terrelian-jango-jumper-member of the-jedi-order who eventually lost  the-eighth-brother - faith in the-jedi-order and became an-inquisitor sometime after the-end of the-clone-wars and the-rise of the-empire.
the-eighth-brother - was introduced in the-second-season-finale of star-wars:
rebels, where  the-eighth-brother - was tasked with hunting the-former-sith-darth-maul, eventually tracking  the-eighth-brother - down to malachor.
the-eighth-brother - dueled the-former-sith-darth-maul, kanan jarrus, ezra bridger, and ahsoka tano alongside  the-eighth-brother - fellow inquisitors, the-fifth-brother and the-seventh-sister, but they were both ultimately killed by the-former-sith-darth-maul.
cornered, the-eighth-brother then attempted to escape, but the-eighth-brother lightsaber had been damaged in battle and exploded in the-eighth-brother hands when trying to use his-lightsaber to fly away, causing the-eighth-brother to fall to the-eighth-brother death.
the-ninth-sister---masana-tide was a-former-female-dowutin-jedi-knight who eventually succumbed to the-dark-side and became the-ninth-sister-inquisitor after intense-torture at the-hands of the-empire.
sister-inquisitor first appeared in the-novel darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith, where sister-inquisitor assisted darth-vader, the-sixth-brother and the-tenth-brother in hunting the-jedi-ferren-barr on the-planet-mon-cala.
after the-jedi-ferren-barr used the-force to turn the-imperial-stormtroopers present against the-force, the-ninth-sister was betrayed by the-sixth-brother, who severed the-ninth-sister right foot and left the-ninth-sister behind to die so that the-ninth-sister could escape, although the-ninth-sister managed to survive the-ordeal as well.
she later appeared as an-antagonist in the-video-game star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order, where she joined the-second-sister in the-hunt for cal-kestis.
the-ninth-sister was ultimately defeated by the-young-padawan on kashyyyk, who severed the-ninth-sister right-hand as well.
however, the-ninth-sister survived the-ordeal once again.
the-tenth-brother---prosset-dibs was a-former-blind-human-jedi-master during the-clone-wars who eventually became disillusioned by the-jedi's-role as protectors of the-galaxy.
he first appeared in the-novel-jedi of the-republic---mace-windu, where he tried to kill mace-windu during a-mission on the-planet hissrich.
he was subsequently put on trial and expelled from the-jedi-order for he actions.
dibs later became the-tenth-brother-inquisitor in the-service of the-empire and appeared in the-novel darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith, where dark assisted darth-vader, the-sixth-brother and the-ninth-sister in hunting the-jedi-ferren-barr on the-planet-mon-cala.
after the-jedi-ferren-barr used the-force to turn the-imperial-stormtroopers present against the-force, the-tenth-brother was killed in the-ensuing-fight.
unnamed-red-skinned-inquisitor---an-unnamed-red-skinned-female-inquisitor appeared in the-novel darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith, where dark assisted darth-vader, the-fifth-brother and another-black-skinned-twi'lek-inquisitor in hunting jedi-master-eeth-koth.
while vader dueled and killed koth,
unnamed-red-skinned-inquisitor---an-unnamed-red-skinned-female-inquisitor found  unnamed-red-skinned-inquisitor---an-unnamed-red-skinned-female-inquisitor wife and baby-daughter, but refused to kill his-wife and baby-daughter, instead taking the latter and bringing dark to vader, who then left dark in the-care of some-nursemaids.
later, the-fifth-brother informed vader of dark-actions and, believing it to be an-act of treason, the-fifth-brother tried to kill dark in front of the-other-inquisitors.
dark managed to escape with the-help of dark fellow twi'lek inquisitor, but they were both eventually caught following a-long-chase through coruscant and chose to commit suicide rather than be killed by vader.
unnamed-twi'lek-inquisitor
unnamed-twi'lek-inquisitor appeared in the-novel darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith, where he assisted darth-vader, the-fifth-brother and another-red-skinned-female-inquisitor in hunting jedi-master-eeth-koth.
later, when vader tried to kill  unnamed-twi'lek-inquisitor for treason, vader helped her escape, but they were both eventually caught following a-long-chase through coruscant and chose to commit suicide rather than be killed by vader.
legends ====
in the-legends-community, the-sith also had shadow-hands during the-clone-wars and the-age of the-empire.
starkiller =====
starkiller was a-human-male that was briefly the-secret-apprentice of darth-vader.
he then turned to the-light-side, when vader abandoned he.
vader fought vader twice, on the-second-turn, defeating vader former master.
then, vader confronted darth-sidious, and sacrificed vader for the-rebellion, so vader allies could get to safety.
starkiller was then cloned, and starkiller clone followed the-same-actions as starkiller: abandoning the-dark for the-light.
tol-skorr =====
tol-skorr ===
== was a-human-male-former-jedi-knight that was trained under darth-tyranus.
tol-skorr ===== served as tyranus’s-bodyguard.
tol-skorr ===== very much disliked quinlan-vos.
when quinlan-vos revealed that quinlan-vos was spying on dooku, skorr and ventress were sent to kill quinlan-vos.
but then vos was with another-jedi,-obi-wan-kenobi.
ventress was distracted into fighting obi-wan, so skorr had to deal with vos.
eventually, the-2-dark-jedi would have to go off-world, with a-failed-mission.
skorr met skorr demise when quinlan-vos-force-pushed skorr into lava.
new-republic-era-dark-side-wielders ====
although not-official-sith, several-dark-side-users were present in the-years following the-fall of the-galactic-empire and during the-conflict between the-resistance and the-first-order.
snoke =====
===== was an artificial being created by darth-sidious and darth-sidious sith eternal cult on exegol, and a-major-antagonist in the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
after palpatine's-death and the-fall of the-empire, snoke became the-supreme-leader of the-first-order and seduced ben-solo to the-dark-side, training ben-solo to become ben-solo apprentice, kylo-ren.
ben-solo was also behind the-destruction of luke-skywalker's-jedi-temple and the-deaths of most of ben-solo students, in an-attempt to wipe out the-first-order once and for all.
ben-solo was ultimately killed by kylo-ren, after failing to foresee ben-solo betrayal.
following snoke's-death, kylo-ren took over as supreme-leader of the-first-order.
kylo-ren =====
===== was a-former-jedi and powerful-dark-side-wielder, and the-central-antagonist of the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
kylo-ren ===== was born as the-son of leia-organa and han-solo, and trained under  kylo-ren =====
uncle, luke-skywalker, to become a-jedi, but was seduced to the-dark-side by snoke.
adopting the-alias kylo-ren, the-alias
kylo-ren helped eliminate the-alias kylo-ren uncle's new generation of jedi and became the-leader of the-knights of  kylo-ren ===== and a-high-ranking-member of the-first-order.
the-alias kylo-ren trained under snoke to become a-powerful-dark-side-wielder, and later proved the-alias kylo-ren loyalty by killing the-alias kylo-ren father when the-alias kylo-ren tried to help the-alias kylo-ren get redeemed.
however, ren eventually betrayed and killed ren master after siding with the-jedi-padwan-rey, with whom ren shared a-unique-connection called a "dyad in the-force".
however, instead of turning back to the-light-side, ren took over as the-new-supreme-leader of the-first-order, and invited rey to join ren, but jedi padwan rey refused.
later, ren had a-confrontation with luke, only to discover that ren was a-force-projection, meant to distract ren and allow the-resistance to escape; nonetheless, luke died as a-result of the-effort to create the-projection, leaving rey the-only-living-jedi.
eventually, ren discovered that the-sith-lord-darth-sidious was still alive and plotted to kill this-potential-rival, but instead sided to ren after ren revealed the-final-order, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers equipped with axial-superlasers capable of decimating entire-planets, which ren promised to give ren control of in exchange for killing rey, revealed to be ren granddaughter.
secretly, however, ren planned to have rey help ren kill the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, and engaged the-sith-lord-darth-sidious in a-duel when the-sith-lord-darth-sidious refused, which ren lost after ren mother gave his-mother life to reach out to ren through the-force.
after a-conversation with a-memory of his-late-father, ben-solo was redeemed and came to rey's-aid in defeating sidious.
after rey died to kill the-sith-lord, ben revived rey died to kill the-sith-lord using the-force, and shared a-kiss with rey died to kill the-sith-lord, but then died as a-result of using all ben life energy to save rey died to kill the-sith-lord, becoming one with the-force.
knights of ren =====
knights of ren ===== were an-organization of masked-force-wielding-warriors, who served as antagonists in the-star-wars
sequel-trilogy.
the-knights were neither-sith or jedi, but a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader.
a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader had a-code, to which a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader were flexible in the following: living life the way a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader wanted, taking what the-galaxy gave a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader, and consuming what the-dark-side sent a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader.
a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader-name came from a-lightsaber called "ren", which was at the-base of a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader code and could only be wielded by a-new-generation of dark-side-warriors that emerged to fill the-void left by the-supposed-demise of the-last-sith-lords, darth-sidious and darth-vader leader.
the-knights consisted of seven-individuals named ren (the-knights leader), vicrul, ap'lek, cardo, kuruk, trudgen, and ushar.
after his-fall to the-dark-side, ben-solo joined the-knights and eventually killed ren, becoming their-new-leader, under the-alias kylo ren, knighting his-former-fellow-padawan-voe as a-knight through his-former-fellow-padawan-voe shoulders, before reforging his-former-fellow-padawan-voe lightsaber into one for ren.
after kylo became the-supreme-leader of the-first-order, the-knights became his-personal-guards, though the-knights ultimately sided with the-resurrected-darth-sidious after ben-solo returned to the-light-side, which led to the-knights
demise at the-hands of the-redeemed-ben.
sith eternal ====
the-2019-film star-wars
: the-rise of skywalker depicts thousands of sith-cultists and loyalists known as the-sith-eternal.
they are the-main-antagonistic-faction in the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
they are located on the-sith-planet-exegol, which is described in the-film as the-"hidden-world of the-sith".
the-film as the-"hidden-world of the-sith" depicts the-sith loyalists as having built the-final-order, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers, at the-behest of emperor-palpatine (darth-sidious).
a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers, at the-behest of emperor-palpatine (darth-sidious) are also revealed to have artificially created and cloned-snoke, whom palpatine used as a-puppet to control the-first-order and seduce kylo-ren to the-dark-side.
at the-end of the-film, the-sith-eternal-cultists are present during palpatine's-rejuvenation through the-force and palpatine demise at the-hands of rey, the-last-jedi and palpatine's granddaughter.
the-sith-eternal-cultists are disintegrated in the-explosion following palpatine's-death.
the-novelization of the-rise of skywalker goes into more-detail about how palpatine transferred palpatine consciousness into the-cloned-body the-sith-eternal prepared for palpatine.
legends non-canonical-members of the-sith ====
following the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, lucasfilm rebranded most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels, comics, and other-fictional-media published since the-original-1977-film (previously identified as the-star-wars expanded-universe) as star-wars-legends and declared them non-canonical to the-franchise in april
2014.the-sith feature heavily in many-stories of the-star-wars-expanded-universe (eu),
appearing in a-variety of media created prior to the-advent of the-2015-feature-film star-wars: the-force awakens.
future-authors and screenwriters are not required to honor all of the-events depicted in this-material, but the-expanded-universe has remained a-source of creative-inspiration.
eu thoroughly details the-schism between the-dissident-“dark-jedi” and the-jedi-establishment that led to the-creation of the-sith-order, as well a-series of conflicts between the-sith, jedi and the-galactic-republic spanning the-millennia prior to the-events of the-star-wars-motion-picture-series, and certain-events thereafter.
in the-eu, the-sith trace their-origins to the-followers of a-dissident-jedi named ajunta pall, who endorsed the-use of the-dark-side of the-force, contrary to jedi-orthodoxy.
after pall and his-“dark-jedi”-followers were exiled for his-“dark-jedi”-followers practices, his-“dark-jedi”-followers eventually settled on a-planet named korriban, which was occupied by the-"sith," a-red-skinned-humanoid-race with a-high-prevalence of force-sensitives.
over the-course of centuries of intermingling between the-ethnic-sith and dark-jedi, the-name-"sith" would come to apply to the-martial-philosophy and political-affiliation created by the-former-jedi-exiles on korriban, rather than a-specific-race.
this-sith-regime would strike out at the-galactic-republic and jedi on numerous-occasions.
notable-conflicts between the-sith and the-galactic-republic include the-"great-hyperspace-war," in which the-sith would launch a-massive-invasion of the-galactic-republic but succumb to infighting, and the-“sith-holocaust,” in which the-galactic-republic failed in the-galactic-republic attempt to exterminate the-sith from known-space, leading the-sith survivors to take a-vow of eternal-vengeance on the-galactic-republic.
the-eu also describes the-exploits of sith-characters following the-collapse of emperor-palpatine's-galactic-empire and the-restoration of the-republic, such as the-attempt by “darth-krayt” to establish a-new-sith-order on korriban.
the-first-expanded-universe-novel was splinter of the-mind's-eye, written by alan-dean-foster and published in 1978.
the-setting for the-first-expanded-universe-novel takes place between episode iv:
a-new-hope and episode-v:
emperor palpatine's galactic empire strikes back.
it provides a-new-adventure that includes princess-leia, r2-d2,-c-3po, luke-skywalker and darth-vader.
in the-story, darth-vader tries to get the-kyber-crystal to use the-kyber-crystal for darth-vader evil schemes.
other-novels that depict sith-characters are darth-maul:
saboteur and cloak of deception by james-luceno.
cloak of deception describes the-political-background surrounding the-republic in the-time-period before the-phantom-menace, as well as darth-sidious'-plans to rule the-galaxy, starting with the-blockade of naboo.
in darth-maul: saboteur, the-sith-lord-darth-sidious sends darth-maul to destroy intergalactic-ore and lommite limited.
in darth-maul: shadow-hunter, by michael-reaves, the-sith-lord-darth-sidious sends the-sith-lord-darth-sidious apprentice, darth-maul, to investigate the-traitor who leaked the-secret of the-sith-lord-darth-sidious plan to take down the-republic.
shadow-hunter provided insight into the-sith while detailing how the-sith lord darth sidious brought the-sith lord darth sidious plan of usurpation into action.
dark-horse-comics purchased the-copyrights to several-star-wars-stories.
with dark-horse-comics-publication of star-wars:
dark empire #1 in 1991, they initiated what has become a-large-line of star-wars-manga and comics.
the-sith appear as major-antagonists throughout this-story's-plot.
many of the-comics that were published helped expand the-backstory of the-characters and followed the-rise and fall of the-dark-lords of the-sith.
star-wars-video-games have also been adapted from the-plots of the-films, novels, and tv-shows.
star-wars-video-games follow the-basic-plot of this-story, but star-wars-video-games can also include alternative, non-canonical,-endings depending on which character is being played.
some of the-video-games that have a-heavy-focus on sith-characters and lore are star-wars: knights of the-old-republic, released in 2003, star-wars: knights of the-old-republic ii –
the-sith-lords, released in 2004 and star-wars:
the-force-unleashed, released in 2008.
darth-caedus =====
darth-caedus (jacen-solo) was a-dark-lord of the-sith born as the-oldest-son of han-solo and leia-organa-solo.
a-jedi-hero of the-yuuzhan-vong-war ,  darth-caedus (jacen-solo) eventually fell to the dark side years later and masterminded the-second-galactic-civil-war.
darth-caedus (jacen-solo) was eventually killed by  darth-caedus (jacen-solo) twin-sister-jaina for  darth-caedus (jacen-solo) actions.
marka-ragnos =====
marka-ragnos ====
was an-ancient-sith-human-hybrid-sith-lord, who lived during the-time of the-first-sith-empire, and seized the-title of dark-lord of the-sith, serving as the-ruler of the-first-sith-empire.
after his-death, two-sith-lords, naga-sadow and ludo-kressh, fought to occupy his-throne, only for  marka-ragnos
=====-spirit to appear before two-sith-lords, naga-sadow and ludo-kressh and claim that only the most worthy should succeed his.
marka-ragnos ===== lived on as a-force-spirit following his-death, trapped within  marka-ragnos
=====-tomb in the-valley of the-dark-lords on korriban.
a thousand years after the-dark-lord's-death, exar-kun summoned  marka-ragnos
from exar-kun-grave through the-use of talismans.
ragnos crowned exar-kun as the-new-dark-lord, with ulic-qel-droma as kun's-apprentice, as an-attempt to resurrect the-lost-empire thousands of years prior.
several-thousands of years after that, in the-video-game star wars jedi knight:
jedi-academy (set during the-new-republic-era), a-cult dedicated to ragnos, led by the-dark-jedi-tavion-axmis, raised as a-new-threat to the-galaxy, with the-intent of resurrecting the-sith-lord using an-old-artifact called the scepter of ragnos.
after absorbing force-energy from numerous-locations across the-galaxy using the-scepter,-tavion-and-tavion-cult traveled to korriban and almost succeeded in resurrecting ragnos, but were stopped by luke-skywalker's-new-jedi-order.
inside ragnos-tomb, the-jedi-knight-jaden-korr defeated tavion, before ragnos-spirit emerged and possessed ragnos-body, attempting to kill the-jedi.
however, jaden was able to defeat ragnos, whose-spirit left tavion's-body and returned to the-depths of the-force, swearing revenge against the-jedi.
darth-venamis =====
darth-venamis ===
== was a-bith-dark-lord of the-sith who served as darth-tenebrous'-secret-apprentice, as it was a-violation of the-rule of two.
after tenebrous was killed by tenebrous other apprentice, darth-plagueis, tenebrous eventually found and defeated darth-venamis =====, before capturing tenebrous and using tenebrous as a test subject for tenebrous midi-chlorians experiments over the-following-years.
after decades of torture and being killed and then brought back to life over and over again, plaugeis finally allowed venamis to die, having served venamis purpose.
however, venamis later revived again in the-presence of venamis new apprentice, darth-sidious, until venamis organs finally ceased to function, and venamis died for the-final-time.
knights of the-old-republic-series =====
darth-malak =====
darth-malak (alek) is the-main-antagonist of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
once a-jedi-knight and revan's-best-friend, the two of a-jedi-knight and revan's-best-friend fought together in the-mandalorian-wars.
at some-point, alek was injured in battle and had alek entire-lower-jaw cut off, forcing alek to don a-prosthetic-jaw instead.
later, alek and revan unwittingly discovered the-sith-empire in the-unknown-regions and were captured by the-sith-emperor, who, using sith-sorcery, turned sith-sorcery to the-dark-side, but the two broke free from his-control and formed sith-sorcery own sith-empire to wage war on the-republic, with revan as the-leader and alek, now-darth-malak, as his-sith-apprentice.
when revan prepared to battle the-jedi who boarded revan flagship, malak betrayed revan, ordering the-ships under revan command to fire on revan's flagship's bridge, so that revan could take over sith-empire for revan.
however, revan survived the-ordeal and was taken to the-jedi-council-enclave, where revan had revan memory wiped, so that revan would become a-jedi once again.
eventually, revan faced off against malak, who revealed the-truth of revan identity, but was ultimately killed in battle by revan former friend and sith-master, which also led to the-downfall of sith-empire.
darth-traya =====
darth-traya
===== is a-mentor to the-"jedi-exile" and the-hidden-main-antagonist of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords.
the-sith-lords is revealed to have been a-sith-master at the-end of the-game, and is ultimately killed in battle.
darth-sion =====
darth-sion, also known as the-lord of pain, is an-antagonist in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords.
alongside darth-nihilus, the-sith-lords served as one of traya's-apprentices, until ultimately betraying darth-nihilus and driving darth-nihilus into exile.
darth-sion ===== managed to achieve immortality by calling on  darth-sion =====
pain, anger and hatred every time  darth-sion ===== was facing certain-death, at the-expense of all-consuming-agony, which also led to  darth-sion =====-extremely-disfigured-appearance.
the-player's-character eventually defeated sion, and was then given the-option to turn  the-player's-character back to the-light-side.
regardless, upon being shown the-price  the-player's-character paid for immortality, sion finally let go of
the-player's-character hate and allowed  the-player's-character to die permanently.
darth-nihilus =====
darth-nihilus, also known as the-lord of hunger, is an-antagonist in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords.
alongside darth-sion,  the-sith-lords served as one of traya's-apprentices, until ultimately betraying darth-sion and driving darth-sion into exile.
nihilus imbued nihilus dark soul into nihilus mask and robes and had the-power to drain the-life-force out of any-living-thing.
following the-betrayal of nihilus-master, nihilus used the-might of the-sith-armada not to conquer planets, but to contain the-might of the-sith-armada so that nihilus could "feed" off the-force-energy of each-planet's-lifeforms, wiping planets of life.
however, nihilus was later drawn out and tricked into launching an-attack on telos, believing nihilus to contain the-last-jedi.
the-exile confronted nihilus on  the-exile ship, and nihilus was killed either after  the-exile former slave visas sacrificed his-former-slave-visas due to his-former-slave-visas shared link in the-force, or after  the-exile attempt to feast on the-exile's-connection to the-force backfired and weakened  the-exile.
despite  the-exile-death, nihilus-soul would continue to live in  the-exile-mask and robes for millennia to come, as well as inside
the-exile own sith-holocron.
lord vitiate =====
known for much of  the-exile-1300-year-life as "the-sith-emperor", lord-vitiate was a-sociopathic-young-lord in one of the-earliest-iterations of the-sith-empire.
when that-empire fell, that-empire led an-exodus of survivors to the-other-side of the-galaxy to establish a-continuation of it, with the-emperor.
it was vitiate who corrupted revan and malak, but revan's redemption and malak's defeat seemingly derailed that empire plans.
three hundred years after revan's-disappearance, the-emperor launched a-surprise-attack on the-republic, setting the-stage for the-video-game
star-wars: the-old-republic.
darth-malgus =====
darth-malgus ====
is a-major-antagonist in star-wars: the-old-republic.
a-male-human-dark-lord of the-sith who trained under vindican ,  darth-malgus ===== served the-sith empire during the-great-galactic-war against the-old-republic.
following the-recapture of korriban from the-jedi, malgus killed malgus master and later led a-surprise-assault on alderaan, only to be defeated by malgus nemesis and former-opponent from korriban, satele-shan.
malgus was severely injured in the-fight against shan, forcing malgus to wear a-respiratory-apparatus for the-rest of malgus life.
sometime later, malgus was tasked by malgus superior, darth-angral, with leading an-assault-team on the-jedi-temple on coruscant, which malgus and malgus forces destroyed, disgracing the-jedi-order in the-eyes of the-republic.
although malgus believed that the-battle of coruscant was the-first-step of destroying the-republic, the-republic only served as leverage in the-peace-negotiations that took place on alderaan.
while the-alderaanian-summit progressed, the-sith settled into an-occupation of coruscant.
malgus was placed in charge of orbital-security, but the-sith-lord defied the-sith-lord orders and traveled back to coruscant's-surface to strike against the-renegade-jedi-aryn-leneer, who wanted to avenge her-master ven-zallow, killed by  malgus during the-attack on the-jedi-temple.
although leneer ultimately failed, the-conflict caused  malgus to become disillusioned with the-empire and to kill  malgus lover eleena daru, seeing their-relationship as a-weakness that prevented  malgus from preserving  malgus own power, which  malgus later used to cleanse the-empire of the-politicians whom  malgus blamed for allowing the-republic to survive.
during the-cold-war-years that followed the-successful-peace-negotiations,  malgus led sith-forces into the-unknown-regions, claiming previously-unknown-territories for the-empire.
towards the-end of the-war, following the-presumed-death of the-sith-emperor and the-sith-emperor service on the-dark-council,  malgus formed the-empirethe-empire, free of the-infighting of the-dark-council.
however, the-republic and the-sith-empire-forces soon teamed up to fight against the-empire and managed to track  malgus down to  malgus secret base, where the-republic and the-sith-empire-forces defeated  malgus.
despite his-apparent-death, malgus later resurfaced during the-invasion of ossus at the-start of the-third-galactic-war, once again serving as a-commander within the-sith-empire.
however, following the-battle of corellia, malgus went rogue, determined to expunge all-physical-and-mental-restraints used to keep malgus under control.
thousands of years after malgus-death, malgus was still remembered as one of the-most-powerful-sith-lords to have ever lived.
at one-point, darth-sidious acquired some-surviving-excerpts of malgus's-journals, which darth-sidious bounded into darth-sidious book of sith, an-anthology of sith historical writings.
in popular-culture ==
darth-vader have become iconic-villains in popular-culture.
darth-vader-personae are frequently used as exemplars of machiavelianism, authoritarianism, brutality and evil in serious,-humorous-and-satirical-settings.
palpatine is archetypal as the-"evil-emperor"—a-cunning-tyrant who rules through deception, propaganda, fear and oppression.
although usually considered as a-villainous-"enforcer" of such-power, darth-vader has also been regarded as a-tragic-figure and cautionary-study in the-corruption of a-hero who loses sight of the-greater-good and resorts to evil-practices out of fear and desperation.
a-"turn to the-dark-side" has become a-popular-idiom to describe an-(often-misguided)-individual-or-institution's-embrace of evil out of a-desire for power.
references == ==
further-reading ==
book of sith: secrets from the-dark-side (chronicle books, © 2013)
isbn 1-4521-1815-9 ==
external-links ==
sith in the starwars.com databank sith on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-sith explained (howstuffworks.com)
who's who of the-sith on sithorder.com-star-wars:
the-clone-wars is a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas.
a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas began with a-theatrical-feature-film which was released on august 15, 2008, and debuted on cartoon-network two months later on october 3, 2008.
a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas is set in the-fictional-star-wars-galaxy during the-three-years between the-prequel-films
episode-ii:
attack of the-clones and episode iii: revenge of the-sith.
being a-reboot of the-previous-2d-series star-wars: clone-wars (2003–2005), each-episode had a-running-time of approximately-22-minutes to fill a-half-hour-time-slot instead of the-3–15-minute-episodes that the-previous-series had.
dave-filoni was the-supervising-director of the-previous-series.
the-clone-wars was a-massive-ratings-success, becoming one of cartoon-network's-highest-rated-shows during the-clone-wars initial run.
throughout the-clone-wars run, the-previous-series received mostly-positive-reception from critics, receiving praise for the-clone-wars writing, action, characters, visuals, voice-acting, music, scale and tone.
the-previous-series has also garnered a massive fan following and was also nominated for many-industry-awards, including the-daytime-emmy-awards and the-annie-awards.
in early 2013, lucasfilm announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down".
thirteen-episodes composing a-new-sixth-season were made available in the-u.s. for streaming on netflix, along with the-entirety of the-series, beginning march 7, 2014.
a-project known as the-clone-wars-legacy adapted unproduced-story-arcs into other-formats, such as comics and novels.
the-series was revived for a-seventh-and-final-season of 12-new-episodes, which premiered on disney+
on february 21, 2020.a-sequel-series, star-wars-rebels, was released during the-hiatus between the-sixth-and-seventh-seasons of the-clone-wars, featuring several-characters from the-clone-wars, including captain-rex, ahsoka-tano and maul.
star-wars:
the-bad-batch, a spin-off/sequel series centering on the-titular-clone-trooper-team introduced in the-seventh-season, is set to premiere on may 4, 2021.
series-overview == ===
setting ===
star-wars:
star-wars is set during the-prequel-trilogy-era, in the-period of three-years between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith.
star-wars focuses on the-eponymous-conflict between the-galactic-republic, which is supported by the-jedi-order, and the-confederacy of independent-systems, a-movement organized by the-sith-lord-count-dooku to unite numerous-planetary-systems seeking independence from the-republic against star-wars.
unbeknownst to the-galaxy, darth-sidious, dooku's-secret-master, is the-one pulling the-strings of both-sides, as part of his-master-plan to eliminate the-jedi and gain enough-power to create a-new-governing-state under his-rule.
the-series was initially conceived as an-anthology, with episodes sharing little-narrative-connections between  the-series, but later-seasons feature story arcs that span several-episodes.
the-protagonists are various-characters from the-live-action-films, including anakin-skywalker, obi-wan-kenobi, padmé-amidala, yoda, and mace-windu, as well as new-characters created for the-series, such as anakin's-padawan-learner ahsoka-tano, and various-clone-troopers who are given distinct-personalities, like captain-rex of the-501st-legion.
the-antagonists are typically members of the-separatist-alliance, though numerous-episodes also focus on crime-lords, bounty-hunters, and force-sensitive-characters (sith or just-dark-side-users) who are not affiliated with the-separatists.
synopsis ===
season one focuses on various-battles fought between the-republic and the-separatists, and their-efforts to convince more-planets and races to join their.
the-main-antagonists are count-dooku, his-informal-apprentice-asajj-ventress, and the-cyborg-commander of the-separatists-droid-armies, general-grievous.
there are also several-episodes that do not focus on the-conflict with the-separatists, but rather other-aspects of the-clone-wars.
season two features both-one-episode-storylines, and a-few-arcs that span between two-and-five-episodes.
season focuses heavily on bounty-hunter-characters, with one-story-arc featuring darth-sidious hiring cad-bane to steal a-holocron from the-jedi-temple on coruscant that will help hunter locate force-sensitive-children, while another-deals with boba-fett beginning boba-fett bounty hunter career and, alongside a-group of more-experienced-mercenaries, seeking revenge against mace-windu for killing mace-windu father.
other-major-story-arcs focus on the-planet-mandalore, which took a-neutral-stance in the-clone-wars and whose pacifist leader, duchess-satine-kryze, is targeted by both-the-separatists and the-mandalorian-terrorist-faction death-watch; and the-jedi-leading-republic-forces in an-assault on the-main-separatist-battle-droid-manufacturing-facility on geonosis.
the-first-half of both-season three and four are diplomatic in nature, and focus on the-role of the-republic-senate in the-clone-wars, and how different-races and planets are affected by the-galaxy-wide-conflict, as well as the-republic's-efforts to help the-first-half of both-season three and four.
during season three, several-story-arcs focus on the-development of certain-characters, such as anakin, who is led to an-ancient-force-realm alongside obi-wan and ahsoka, and learns more about the-nature of the-force and his-role as the chosen one; ahsoka, who defies anakin's orders to join his-team in a-mission to break a-jedi-master out of a-separatist-prison, and must later lead her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans when her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans find her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans hunted by trandoshans; and ventress, who is betrayed by dooku, returns to her-nightsister-clan on dathomir, and tries to exact revenge on her through a-jedi-master new apprentice, savage-opress, who ultimately turns on both ventress and dooku to follow his-own-path.
in season four, one-story-arc focuses on the-501st-legion, who must act independently for the-first-time when the-jedi-general they have been temporarily assigned to serve under is revealed to be a-traitor, and manipulates they into killing each other, forcing the-clones to capture and execute the-jedi-general.
other-story-arcs feature obi-wan faking obi-wan death and going undercover as a-bounty-hunter to thwart a-plot to capture chancellor-palpatine; ventress abandoning obi-wan sith ways and becoming a-bounty-hunter after the-separatists'-massacre of the-nightsisters; and savage finding savage-long-lost-brother, darth-maul, who seeks revenge against obi-wan for obi-wan
defeat over a decade prior.
season five features five-main-story-arcs.
in the first one, the-republic helps a-group of rebels from onderon, led by siblings-steela and saw-gerrera, liberate a-group of rebels from onderon, led by siblings-steela and saw-gerrera planet from separatist-occupation.
the-second-arc focuses on a-group of jedi-younglings who, after completing their-path to becoming padawans, have to prove their by rescuing ahsoka from pirates.
the-second-arc revolves around a-team of droids who, while undertaking a-mission to intercept an-encrypted-separatist-message, encounter an-amnesiac-former-clone-commando and must help an-amnesiac-former-clone-commando recover an-amnesiac-former-clone-commando memories to escape the-planet they have been stranded on.
the-fourth-arc deals with the-return of darth-maul, who joins forces with death-watch and other-criminal-syndicates to take over mandalore and exact revenge on obi-wan.
the-final-arc features ahsoka being framed for bombing the-jedi-temple, and having to prove her-innonence while on the-run from the-republic.
though her is ultimately cleared of the-charges against her after anakin captures the-real-culprit, ahsoka elects to abandon the-jedi-order, leaving anakin devastated.
season six consists of four-story-arcs:
clone-trooper-fives investigating the-premature-activation of order 66 in a-fellow-trooper's-mind, and discovering the-truth about the-inhibitor-chips implanted in each-clone's-brain, only to be silenced by palpaine before palpaine can expose palpaine;
padmé trying to help padmé old-flame-rush-clovis expose the-corruption in the-intergalactic-banking-clan, which causes tensions in rush-clovis and anakin's-relationship when rush-clovis learns about rush-clovis secret mission and intervines; jar-jar-binks and mace-windu rescuing the-captured-queen of bardotta from a-cult headed by the-nightsisters'-former-leader, mother-talzin; and yoda embarking on a-journey to learn more about the-nature of the-force after palpaine is visited by the-spirit of the-late-qui-gon-jinn.
season-seven-consists of three-story-arcs.
the-first-one is focused on captain-rex's-character, as the-first-one, anakin, and a-team of clones with genetic-mutations-rescue-arc-trooper-echo, previously believed to have been killed in action, and defeat the-separatists on anaxes with the-first-one help.
the-first-one focuses on ahsoka, who befriends sisters trace and rafa-martez and helps them settle a-debt with the-pyke-syndicate, while trying to conceal her-force-powers because of the-sisters'-hatred of jedi.
the-final-arc, which is set concurrently with revenge of the-sith, depicts the-siege of mandalore, a-battle that had been referenced in previous-star-wars-media.
ahsoka reluctantly returns to the-republic to lead an-assault alongside captain-rex and mandalorian-warrior bo-katan-kryze against darth-maul's-forces on mandalore in hopes of capturing him.
unbeknowst to them, maul has foreseen the-fall of the-republic and the-jedi-order, and darth-sidious turning anakin to the-dark-side, and hopes to prevent these-events by killing the latter.
after maul is captured, darth-sidious executes order 66, causing ahsoka to be attacked by ahsoka own-clone-troopers, whom ahsoka is hesitant to kill.
ahsoka manages to restore rex's-free-will, and releases maul to cause a-distraction, but rex ends up disabling the-ship they are on.
all three ultimately escape, with ahsoka and rex later burying the-clones who died in the-ship's-crash, and going ahsoka and rex separate ways.
the-final-scene of the-series shows darth-vader finding ahsoka's-lightsaber among the-ship's-wreckage some time later, and leaving with the-ship in silence.
episodes ==
the-series started with a-theatrically-released-animated-film; this-decision were made after the-production-team watched completed footage of several-early-episodes for the-planned-television-series, which were ultimately combined into a-single-feature-length-film.
warner-bros.-pictures distributed a-theatrically-released-animated-film, while subsequent episodes aired separately on cartoon-network.
for a-theatrically-released-animated-film, christopher-lee, anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood reprised anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood roles as count-dooku, c-3po, mace-windu, and the-b1-battle-droids, respectively, from the-live-action-movies, but christopher-lee, anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood would not return for the-series.
on december 5, 2011, a full-length feature cut of one of the-season-3-trilogies of episodes (the-one composed by "nightsisters,"-"monster," and "witches of the-mist") was released for download on itunes as an-uninterrupted-movie that was previously shown at selected-screenings in 2010.
the-three-episodes were written by katie-lucas, who had previously written the-season-1-episode "jedi-crash" as well as the-season-3-episodes "sphere of influence" and "assassin."
a-repeat of season one aired in "decoded"-episode-format.
each-installment contained unobtrusive-text-windows giving supplemental-information about the-characters and events playing out on screen.
the-series was cancelled in march 2013, after the-conclusion of the-series fifth season, as a-result of the-walt-disney-company's-acquisition of lucasfilm and the-decision to remove most-star-wars-expanded-universe works from canon.
despite this, the-clone-wars was one of the-few-pieces of star-wars-media to remain part of the-new-continuity established by disney, and a-sixth-season was released on march 7, 2014 on netflix, along with additional-media, such as comic-books and novels, based on unfinished-story-arcs that would have been included in the-season.
on july 19, 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes in a-seventh-season to be released on disney+.
a-trailer for the-season was released on april 14, 2019 at star-wars-celebration-chicago.
on august 23, 2019, series-creator-dave-filoni announced at the-d23-expo that series-creator-dave-filoni will be the-final-season.
on march 17, 2014, in recognition of the-release of the-complete-series on netflix, starwars.com released the-official-chronological-episode-order for the-first-six-seasons; this was later updated to include links to the-episodes on disney+.
== cast and characters == ===
matt-lanter as anakin-skywalker, additional-voices james-arnold-taylor as obi-wan-kenobi, plo-koon,
additional-voices
ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano,
additional-voices dee-bradley-baker as clone-troopers, saesee-tiin, onaconda-farr, bossk, arok the-hutt, admiral-trench, additional-voices tom-kane as narrator, yoda, admiral-wullf-yularen,
additional-voices matthew-wood as general-grievous, battle-droids, poggle the lesser, wat-tambor,
additional-voices ===
recurring ===
ian-abercrombie (seasons 1–6) /
tim-curry (seasons 5–6) /
ian-mcdiarmid (season 7) as chancellor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious-b.j.-hughes (season 1) /
ahmed-best
(seasons 1–6) as jar-jar-binks clancy-brown as savage opress corey-burton as count-dooku-/-darth-tyranus, cad-bane, ziro the-hutt, chairman-papanoida, additional-voices terrence-c.-carson as mace-windu-jim-cummings as hondo-ohnaka
olivia-d'abo as luminara-unduli-anthony-daniels as c-3po-ben-diskin as azi-3, krismo-sodi, morley, otua-blank,
wac-47 robin-atkin-downes as castas, cham-syndulla, cin-drallig, ima-gun-di, rush-clovis-jon-favreau as pre-vizsla
nika-futterman as asajj-ventress, chi-eekway-papanoida, gardulla
the-hutt,-sy-snootles, tc-70 brian-george as king-katuunko, chi-cho, ki-adi-mundi-barbara-goodson as mother-talzin-anna-graves as duchess-satine, sugi, tiplar, tiplee,
additional-voices jennifer-hale as aayla-secura, riyo-chuchi-julian-holloway as almec, admiral-killian-tom-kenny as greedo, lt.
tan-divo, nute-gunray, silood-jaime-king as aurra-sing, cassie-cryar, additional-voices-phil-lamarr as bail-organa, kit-fisto, orn-free-taa-daniel-logan as boba-fett, clone-cadets
james-c.-mathis-iii as gregar-typho-angelique-perrin as adi-gallia, mama-the-hutt-kevin-michael-richardson as jabba the-hutt, hay-zu, xomit-grunseit-katee-sackhoff as bo-katan-kryze
meredith-salenger as barriss-offee,
che-amanwe-papanoida, ione-marcy, pluma-sodi kath-soucie as mon-mothma, jek-lawquane, mina-bonteri-jason-spisak as lux-bonteri, zinn-paulness-stephen-stanton as mas-amedda, tarkin, colonel-meebur-gascon, moralo-eval, marg-krim, additional-voices
catherine-taber as padmé-amidala, additional-voices-tasia-valenza as shaak-ti-sam-witwer as darth-maul, the-son ===
notable-guests ===
pernilla-august as shmi-skywalker-clare-grant as latts-razzi-seth-green as todo 360, ion-papanoida-mark-hamill as darth-bane
james-marsters as faro-argyus-bobby-moynihan as pintu-son-el-liam-neeson as qui-gon-jinn-simon-pegg as dengar-greg-proops as tal-merrik
elizabeth-rodriguez as rafa-martez-ray-stevenson as gar-saxon-george-takei as lok-durd-david-tennant as huyang-adrienne-wilkinson as the-daughter
michael-york as dr.-nuvo-vindi ==
production ==
at april 2005's star-wars-celebration-iii, george-lucas stated that "we are working on a-3-d-continuation of the-pilot-series that was on the-cartoon-network; we probably won't start that-project for another-year.
" lucas hired dave-filoni after having seen episodes of avatar:
the-last-airbender he had worked on.
by july 2005, pre-production had begun on the-series, according to steve-sansweet, head of lucasfilm-fan-relations.
sansweet referred to the-series as "the-next-generation of the-star-wars-saga, a-cutting-edge-30-minute,-3-d-computer-animation-series based on the-clone-wars that take place between episode ii ... and episode iii."
sansweet described the-look of the-new-series as "a-melding of asian-anime with unique-3-d-animation-styling.
" primary-production took place at the-lucasfilm-animation-facility in singapore.
according to another-statement by sansweet, "lucasfilm-animation will be hiring a-total of about-300-digital-artists and others in both-california-and-singapore-locations to produce not-only-the-series but animated-feature-films in the-years ahead."
he said about the-series, "to get the-series underway, lucasfilm-animation has hired key-production and creative-talent to lead the-development of lucasfilm-animation first animation project. "
sansweet has said that "a-large-component of the-future of star-wars and lucasfilm is cgi-animation."
lucasfilm-animation used autodesk-software to animate both-the-film and the-series.
the-maya-3d-modeling-program was used to create the-highly-detailed-worlds, characters and creatures.
character-designer-kilian-plunkett referred to the-character-designs from genndy-tartakovsky's-original-2003-clone-wars-series, and animators reviewed designs from the-2d-series when creating the-animation-style.
genndy-tartakovsky's was not involved with the-production, and criticized lucas's-decision to revisit the-era.
in 2007, rob-coleman divulged that one-episode was complete, with 15 more in production, and that rob-coleman was going to direct five of the-first-22-episodes.
rob-coleman revealed that the-reaction from licensees was very positive, and that the-final-assembly of shows was done at skywalker-ranch.
speaking at paleyfest on march 3, 2007, lucas revealed that the-series would be episodic, and as such would not focus on anakin-skywalker's-story; with episodes dedicated to clone troopers and other-characters.
lucas revealed further-information in a-fan-interview, including a-new-character named ahsoka tano, over 100-episodes and a-possible-appearance by boba-fett.
the-first-trailer for the-series was released on the-official-star-wars-website on may 8, 2007.
in an-interview in the-september-24,-2007-issue of tv-guide, lucas confirmed that 39-episodes of the-series had been completed.
on april 8, 2007, ain't it cool-news reported that musician-eric-rigler had recorded music for the-series.
musician-eric-rigler disclosed that each-planet in the-star-wars-galaxy would have musician-eric-rigler own theme-music.
the-episode-musician eric-rigler performed on was based on bulgarian-music and played on uilleann-pipes.
kevin-kiner composed the-original-score for each-episode.
stuart-snyder, who oversaw cartoon-network and other-turner-broadcasting-system-cable-networks from 2007 to 2014, said  stuart-snyder, who oversaw cartoon-network and other-turner-broadcasting-system-cable-networks from 2007 to 2014 became interested in the-new-clone-wars-series immediately upon starting the-job in may 2007.
snyder flew out to san-francisco, california to screen several-episodes, and told lucas the-only-place snyder wanted to see the-show was on cartoon-network.
snyder wished to create an-action/adventure-block of shows on friday-night in an-attempt to rejuvenate cartoon-network.
snyder expressed confidence that the-shows would help boost ratings: "you catch me at a-time where i have a-smile on my-face because of our-internal-results.
i can say there's a-little-bit of bragging on the-third-quarter for our.
"the-"young-padawans"-arc from season 5 was intended to be aired separately from the-clone-wars as a-feature-length-pilot for a-spin-off-series that never materialized.
seasons 6, 7, and 8, were in some-form of production at the-time of the-show's-cancellation in march 2013, shortly after lucasfilm was purchased by disney.
release ==
an-online-comic released alongside the-series depicts story-snippets between episodes.
===-broadcast ===
the-clone-wars premiered on october 3, 2008 at 9-p.m. on cartoon-network.
the-clone-wars-cartoon-network is shown in a-16:9-(1.77:1)-aspect-ratio, cropped from the-clone-wars-original-aspect-ratio (oar) of 2.35:1 (as seen in the-uk-sky-premiere-screenings).
the-clone-wars began airing on their-adult-swim-block on march 14, 2009, making the-series the first cartoon network series to simultaneously air on both-cartoon-network and adult-swim.
the-series also aired from january 15 to march 26, 2009 on tnt, making the-show the first form of animation to air on that-channel in over-a-decade.
the-show entered an-off-network-syndication in 2012, and in the-fall of that-year trifecta-entertainment & media put the-show into barter-syndication.
on weekends-trifecta-entertainment & media aired on many-affiliates on the-independent-stations as well as an-affiliates of fox-mynetworktv and the-cw (the-latter-network's-cw-plus-service also carries the-program as part of the-program national schedule).
the-show has been taken off the-air in off-network syndication since fall 2013 due to low-costs and was not renewed for season 2 in the 2013-2014 tv season due to disney's-completed-acquisitions of lucasfilm-ltd in december 2012.
on march 11, 2013, it was announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down" to focus on the-star-wars sequel trilogy and a new series, star-wars-rebels.
on february 13, 2014, netflix announced that starting on march 7, 2014 netflix would begin the-us-distribution of the-entire-tv-series, including some-previously-unreleased-director's-cuts, and the-previously-unaired-new-season dubbed "the lost missions".
the latter also became available for purchase on digital-video-stores, such as itunes, in mid-2014.
the-netflix-distribution of the-series, along with the-blu-rays, included versions of some-episodes with previously-censored-material deemed too inappropriate for the-demographic of cartoon-network.
one of the-most-well-known-edits was the-removal of the-character ventress kissing a-clone after the-character had stabbed him with the-character lightsaber.
the-show was removed from netflix on april 7, 2019.
for the revival and final-season, the-remaining-episodes of the-series are exclusively available on disney+.
the-first-episode for season 7 was released on february 21, 2020, with the-final-episode being released on may 4 of the-same-year.
home-media ===
warner-home-video distributed the-videodisc-releases of the-first-five-seasons, while walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment handled the-videodisc-release of the-sixth-season as star-wars:
the-clone-wars – the-lost-missions.
apart from the season-by-season videodisc sets, there were also three-special-dvd-releases consisting of four-episodes from a-particular-season that reflected a-certain-story-arc or theme: a-galaxy divided, an-early-dvd-release of the-series which included the-four-season-1-episodes ("ambush", "shadow of malevolence", "destroy malevolence", "downfall of a-droid")
clone-commandos, another-dvd-compilation that includes episode five-"rookies" as well as episodes 19 through 21 ("storm over ryloth", "innocents of ryloth" and "liberty on ryloth").
darth-maul-returns, a-feature-length-"director's-cut" edited together from season-4-episodes "massacre", "bounty", "brothers" and "revenge" and was initially available exclusively at target.
reception == ===
critical-response ===
although it began with mixed-to-positive-reviews, the-series achieved critical-acclaim over time.
the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes reported that 67% of critics have given the-first-season a-positive-review based on 15-reviews, with an-average-rating of 5.73/10.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads, "with an-agreeably-entertaining-first-season, star-wars: the-clone-wars opens a-fun,-kid-friendly-chapter of the-franchise's-sprawling-mythology.
100% of critics have given the-third-and-fifth-seasons a-positive-review based on 5-reviews each, with an-average-rating of 8/10 and 7.85/10 respectively.
100% of critics have given the-sixth-season a-positive-review based on 12-reviews, with an-average-rating of 8.92/10.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads, "sophisticated-storytelling-and-quality-animation make the-sixth-season of star-wars
: the-clone-wars a fitting end to the-series.
100% of critics have given the-seventh-season a-positive-review based on 24-reviews, with an-average-rating of 8.43/10.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads, "
thanks to its-beautifully-animated-action-sequences and its-impressively-layered-storytelling, the-clone-wars'-final-chapter affirms its-place as one of star-wars'-greatest-entries.
on metacritic, the-first-season has a-weighted-average-score of 64 out of 100 based on 9-critic-reviews, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
on july 11, 2008, television-critics were shown a-completed-episode of the-series.
the-hollywood-reporter's-live-feed-blog called the-footage "likely the-most-photo-realistic-animated-tv-series ever produced."
on august 31, 2008, a-sneak-peek of the-new-series was shown on cartoon-network.
ign named cartoon-network the 89th best animated series.
they specifically praised the-episodes "rookies", "cloak of darkness", and "lair of grievous" saying that they storylines stood out as some of the best in the-star-wars expanded universe.
ratings ===
star-wars:
star-wars became the-most-watched-series-premiere in cartoon-network-history.
the-series averaged 3-million-total-viewers in the-series debut, according to nielsen-media-research.
cartoon-network said the-star-wars-spin-off ranked as the-number-one-channel among all-major-animated-networks in the-time-slot among total-viewers (the largest in the-demographic for any-premiere-telecast of an-original-cartoon-series).
on july 23, 2010, at the-san-diego-comic-con, craig-glenday, editor of the-guinness-world-records, presented star-wars: the-clone-wars-supervising-director-dave-filoni, cg-supervisor-joel-aron, and lead-designer-kilian-plunkett a-certificate proclaiming the-cartoon-series "the-highest-rated-sci-fi-animation currently on television".
tech-times said that, "while the-star-wars-prequel-films fail to make audiences care about characters like anakin-skywalker, the-clone-wars succeeds.
during may 2020, following the-release of the-seventh-season on disney+, the-clone-wars became the-most-streamed-digital-original-show in the-united-states.
accolades ===
the-clone-wars-legacy ==
at the-time of cancellation in march 2013, 65-more-episodes were in development.
thirteen-of-65-more-episodes were finished to become part of season 6: the-lost-missions, but there were still additional-arcs that were never released.
in september 2014, starwars.com released details of three-story-arcs from 65-more-episodes.
literature === ====
darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
a-four-episode-arc continued the-story of darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
following the-events from the-season-5-episode "the-lawless", detailing his-escape from sidious; darth maul: son of dathomir ==== regains control of the-criminal-shadow-collective, and battles dooku, grievous, and sidious.
the-arc was adapted into a-four-part-limited-comic-book-series, darth-maul: son of dathomir, which debuted in may 2014.
dark-disciple ====
an-eight-episode-arc with nightsister-asajj-ventress and jedi-quinlan-vos was adapted into dark-disciple, a-novel by christie-golden released on july 7, 2015.
the-story follows jedi-quinlan-vos partnering up with ventress, hoping to execute count-dooku.
story-reels ===
two-arcs consisting each of four-episodes were released on the-official-star-wars-website for free in the-form of complete-animatics, albeit with unfinished-animation as four-episodes only went through the-earliest-stages of production.
four-episodes were fully voiced by the-cast.
crystal-crisis on utapau ===
in september 2014, four-unfinished-episodes were released on the-official-star-wars-website.
the-arc took place on utapau with obi-wan and anakin investigating an-arms-deal involving the-separatists and a-kyber-crystal.
the-arc also dealt with anakin's-feelings after the-departure of ahsoka.
it was also included in the-season 6 blu-ray.
the-bad-batch ====
the-unfinished-animatics for the-bad-batch, a-four-episode-arc, were screened at the-star-wars-celebration-convention in anaheim, california on april 17, 2015.
scripted by brent-friedman, it is a-four-part-story-arc focusing on a-ragtag-unit of clone-commandos of the-same-name.
the-arc was subsequently released on starwars.com for free shortly after on april 29, 2015.
the-completed-episodes were aired as the-first-part of the-seventh-season.
on july 13, 2020, a-spin-off-sequel-series titled star wars: the-bad-batch was announced; the-bad-batch will follow the-titular-group of clones working as mercenaries in the-immediate-aftermath of the-clone-war.
video-games ==
seven-video-games have been released, which are based on the-style-and-character-designs of the-series.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels, a-fighting-game released on november 11, 2008 for wii.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels, a-fighting-game released on november 11, 2008 for wii.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – republic-heroes, another-action-adventure-game taking place between season 1 and season 2, released on october 9, 2009 for microsoft-windows, xbox 360, playstation 3, wii, playstation portable, playstation 2 and nintendo ds.
clone-wars-adventures, an-online-pc-game launched on september 15, 2010 online by sony-online-entertainment and shut down on march 31, 2014.
lego-star-wars-iii:
the-clone-wars – republic-heroes, another-action-adventure-game taking place between season 1 and season 2, released on october 9, 2009 for microsoft-windows, xbox 360, playstation 3, wii, playstation portable, playstation 2 and nintendo dsplaystation 3.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars-pinball, a-virtual-pinball-adaptation of the-series'-original-run, released in 2013 as a-purchaseable-add-on for zen-studios'-star-wars-pinball-collection for most-seventh--and-eighth-generation-home-video-game-systems, computers and mobile-devices.
disney-infinity 3.0, released in september 2015 by disney-interactive for playstation 4, playstation 3, xbox-one, xbox 360, wii-u, microsoft-windows, ios and android, which stylizes select-major-characters from the-show as action-figures that become playable only via a toys-to-life nfc system.
each-copy of the-game comes with the-playset, "twilight of the-republic", which is an-alternate-storyline set during the-clone-wars-era, along with two-starting-characters, anakin and ahsoka.
other-characters from the-show also appear, although most of other-characters from the-show are not playable or are fought as bosses.
characters and/or locations from the-show have also appeared in the-following-star-wars-games listed below:
star-wars: galactic-defense, a-now-defunct-tower-defense-game released on ios and android by dena, in which a-number of playable-champions include characters from the-show.
several-levels in the-main-campaign also take place on the-planet-felucia, a-major-clone-wars-hotspot featured in some-episodes.
star-wars: galaxy of heroes, a-turn-based-rpg also released on ios and android by electronic-arts, where some-levels take place on planets depicted in the-show (such as dathomir) and a-number of collectible,-playable-characters are from the-show (such as dathomir).
star-wars:
force-arena, an-online-moba-game released on ios and android by netmarble, where an-august-2017-update allowed players to recruit characters, vehicles and battle-units from the-series, as well as battle on planets like felucia.
star-wars-battlefront-ii, a-video-game available on microsoft-windows, playstation 4 and xbox-one, in which players can battle on or directly above planets like ryloth and kamino, where some-battles in the-series were fought.
wood, taylor, lanter and burton also reprise wood, taylor, lanter and burton voice roles for four-new-playable-heroes (general-grievous, obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker and count-dooku, respectively) being added to the-game's-third-season in late 2018, themed after the-clone-wars.
notes == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-clone-wars at starwars.com
the-clone-wars-legacy at starwars.com-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at the-big-cartoon-database
star-wars:
the-clone-wars at imdb-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at tv.com
the cù-sìth(e)
(scottish-gaelic-pronunciation:
[kʰuː-ˈʃiː]), plural-coin-shìth(e)
(scottish gaelic pronunciation: [kʰɔɲ-ˈhiː]) is a-mythological-hound found in the-folklore of scotland.
a-similar-creature exists in irish-folklore (spelled cú-sídhe), and a-similar-creature also bears some-resemblance to the-welsh-cŵn-annwn.
the-cù-sìth is thought to make  the-cù-sìth home in the-clefts of rocks and to roam the-moors of the-highlands.
it is usually described as having a-shaggy,-dark-green-coat and being as large as a-small-cow.
according to legend, the-creature was capable of hunting silently, but would occasionally let out three-terrifying-barks, and only three, that could be heard for miles by those listening for the-creature, even far out at sea.
those who hear the-barking of  the-cù-sìth must reach safety by the-third-bark or be overcome with terror to the-point of death.
see also ==
references ==
asajj-ventress () is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
she first appeared as a-supporting-antagonist in the-2003-clone-wars-micro-series, voiced by grey-delisle.
ventress returned as a-major-antagonist in the-canonical-2008-animated-film the-clone-wars and the-follow-up-television-series of the-same-name, now voiced by nika-futterman, though she eventually redeemed she, becoming an anti-heroine.
a powerful dark jedi with exceptional-lightsaber-combat-abilities, ventress wields dual-lightsabers with curved-handles that can attach together and form a-double-bladed-weapon with a-curve in the-middle.
originally-a-nightsister of dathomir who was sold as a-slave , originally-a-nightsister of dathomir who was sold as a-slave later became a-jedi-padawan, and eventually-an-informal-sith-apprentice to count-dooku after falling to the-dark-side of the-force as a-result of originally-a-nightsister of dathomir who was sold as a-slave jedi-master's-death in battle.
trained as dooku's-personal-assassin, ventress was assigned various-missions during the-first-years of the-clone-wars and came into conflict with the-jedi, primarily-obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker, and ahsoka-tano.
however, after being betrayed and left for dead by dooku on the-orders of dooku master, darth-sidious, ventress rejoined the-nightsisters and attempted to exact revenge on dooku, before settling on becoming a-bounty-hunter.
she later began to slowly redeem she, helping she former jedi enemies on several-occasions, and was eventually completely redeemed in the-2015-novel-star-wars: dark-disciple, but met she death at the-hand of she former master, dooku.
aside from the-television-series, the-character appears in several-other-forms of star-wars-media, both canon and non-canon, including books, comics, and video-games.
ventress became a-favorite among fans, regularly placing in fan-polls and star-wars-character-ranking-lists.
characterization ==
creation ===
before the-character of count-dooku was developed, the-art-department for star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones developed a-villainess as a-potential-main-antagonist.
when the-star-wars expanded universe resurrected this-female-sith-idea as one of dooku's-underlings who could appear more frequently throughout the-clone-wars, this-nameless-separatist-commander was dubbed juno eclipse
but the-name was rejected as "not villainous enough", and she was renamed asajj ventress.
the-name was later given to a-character featured in the-video-game
star-wars:
the-force unleashed, with no-relation to ventress.
lucasarts's-leland-chee suggested using "asajj" as the-character's-first-name, naming lucasarts's-leland-chee after the-character asaji from akira-kurosawa's-throne of blood.
portrayal ===
asajj-ventress was voiced by grey-delisle in the-2003-clone-wars-micro-series, and by nika-futterman in the-2008-animated-film star-wars: the clone and asajj-ventress subsequent tv series, as well most of grey-delisle video game and other-animated-appearances.
appearances ==
the-clone-wars ==
ventress is an-antagonist in the 2008
the-clone-wars-film.
as the-disciple of count-dooku, she helps count-dooku with
count-dooku plan to turn jabba the-hutt against the-galactic-republic by kidnapping count-dooku son rotta.
ventress fights jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker and apprentice-ahsoka-tano, who rescue rotta, and later also battles jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi, who defeats her, forcing her to flee.
ventress is a-lead-character in all-five-broadcast-seasons of the-subsequent-the-clone-wars-animated-series.
in season one,  ventress travels to the-moon of rugosa as dooku's-emissary to form an-alliance between the-planet-toydaria and the-separatists.
the-king of toydaria is reluctant, but allows the-king of toydaria forces to face yoda in battle to prove which-side is superior.
when the-king of toydaria decides to side with the-republic, dooku gives the-king of toydaria assassin-permission to kill the-king of toydaria
so they may have a-better-chance with the-successor.
yoda thwarts  yoda attempt, however, and  yoda is forced to flee.
dooku orders ventress to spy on the-planet-kamino for the-separatist-forces, planning an-invasion with general-grievous to destroy the-clone-production-facilities while stealing jango-fett's-dna-template from the-production-facility.
ventress then frees trade-federation-viceroy-nute-gunray from the-custody of luminara-unduli and ahsoka, fighting the-two-jedi before ultimately succeeding in her-mission.
in season three, ventress-back-story is explained: her hails from the-planet-dathomir and was sold by the-nightsisters to criminals.
her would have likely been killed in a-pirate-raid if not for jedi-ky-narec, who had crashed on rattatak.
narec sensed  narec potential and trained  narec in the-ways of the-force.
however, warlord-osika-kirske killed  narec before ventress could become a-full-fledged-jedi.
narec developed an-implacable-hatred of the-jedi-order, which  narec believes abandoned  narec master and ignored the-bloodshed on  narec planet.
eventually, darth-sidious comes to see ventress as a-liability, and orders dooku to eliminate  narec.
dooku attempts, unsuccessfully, to kill  narec, as  narec engages anakin and obi-wan in one-final-duel, in which  narec is wounded.
she turns to the-nightsisters of dathomir for help, and they engineer savage-opress to serve as dooku's-new-apprentice in order to earn savage-opress trust, before ultimately killing savage-opress on ventress'-behalf.
the-scheme fails, however, when savage-opress turns on both-dooku and ventress and attempts to kill them both.
in season four, ventress returns to the-nightsisters of dathomir.
ventress undergoes the-ritual to become a-full-fledged-nightsister, but is thwarted when grievous'-droid-army slaughter the-nightsisters of dathomir while grievous'-droid-army matriarch mother talzin is rendered incorporeal.
told by mother-talzin to find ventress-own-path, ventress later helps boba-fett's-team of bounty-hunters in a-dangerous-but-profitable-mission.
she then finally makes peace with she past with an-ideal-future as a-bounty-hunter.
while still haunted by opress, she tracks him to raydonia to collect a-bounty on him.
when she arrives on opress’-spaceship, she confronts him and darth-maul as him and darth-maul are about to kill obi-wan.
ventress teams up with she-old-nemesis to fight maul and opress, but they are ultimately forced to escape in they shuttle.
in season five's-final-arc, ventress nearly apprehends ahsoka, who has been framed for attempting to destroy the-jedi-temple.
she ultimately helps ahsoka escape on the-condition that she would be exonerated.
ventress later helps anakin to find out that barriss-offee framed ahsoka.
in the-2015-novel-dark-disciple, based on unfinished-episodes from the-clone-wars, ventress teams up with undercover-jedi-master-quinlan-vos in an-"un-jedi like"-mission to kill dooku.
ventress falls in love with undercover-jedi-master-quinlan-vos.
after undercover-jedi-master-quinlan-vos is turned to the-dark-side by dooku, ventress ultimately manages to redeem undercover-jedi-master-quinlan-vos, but ventress is killed by dooku with force-lightning shortly after.
vos later returns ventress'-body to dathomir so that dathomir may rejoin dathomir fallen sisters in spirit.
legends works ===
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
clone-wars ====
asajj-ventress first appeared as a-supporting-villain in the-2003-micro-series-star-wars: clone-wars.
when sith-lord-count-dooku arrives to add the-planet-rattatak to sith-lord-count-dooku separatist movement, sith-lord-count-dooku witnesses asajj ventress fighting several-opponents in a-large-arena, defeating them all before claiming to be a-sith-warrior.
when sith-lord-count-dooku laughs aside the-notion that sith-lord-count-dooku could be a-sith, asajj-ventress tries to attack sith-lord-count-dooku, but sith-lord-count-dooku renders sith-lord-count-dooku unconscious with force-lightning.
after sith-lord-count-dooku awakens, sith-lord-count-dooku attacks sith-lord-count-dooku again, but sith-lord-count-dooku jumps backwards and ignites sith-lord-count-dooku lightsabers.
in her-quarters, a-short-duel takes place to which dooku cuts her-two-lightsabers in half, rendering her defenseless.
although ventress is defeated, dooku is impressed by her-abilities and recruits her to be dooku apprentice by appealing to her-hatred of the-jedi.
darth-sidious later personally assigns ventress to kill anakin-skywalker, and dooku presents the-jedi with a-new-pair of lightsabers with curved-hilts.
after ventress leaves, darth-sidious remarks that darth-sidious is certain to fail, but that darth-sidious will serve as a-useful-test for anakin.
ventress then engages the-republic-fighter-forces in orbit of the-planet-muunilinst and lures anakin into a-chase.
ventress and anakin go to yavin-iv, and a-fierce-battle from the-forest to the-massassi-temple takes place.
though she initially gains the-upper-hand in  ventress and anakin-duel, anakin calls upon anakin immense connection to the-force and brutally overpowers anakin, causing anakin to fall over the-edge of a-cliff.
novels ====
as portrayed in the-novel the-cestus-deception, ventress appears on ord-cestus during the-bio-droid-crisis.
she is behind the-x'ting-criminal-trillot's-dealings with obi-wan.
ventress also destroys the-republic-cruiser carrying barrister-doolb-snoil returning to the-republic; however, barrister-doolb-snoil survives.
ventress later challenges kenobi and ventress fellow jedi master kit fisto to a-duel.
ventress disarms fisto but is then engaged by kenobi.
their-duel leads their into an-underwater-chamber and ventress is forced to escape after kenobi slices ventress across ventress abdomen.
she lets loose a-smoke-bomb and flees back to the-confederacy and dooku.
comic-books ====
in the-star-wars: republic story " the-new-face of war", ventress joins forces with the-bounty-hunter-durge on the-invasion of naboo's-moon, ohma-d'un.
together they use swamp-gas to wipe out the-gungan-colony and prepare to launch a-biological-attack on naboo.
in the-ensuing-battle with republic-forces, ventress makes ventress first public appearance in the-war (in the-chronological-timeline).
ventress kills jedi-master-glaive in the-ensuing-battle with republic-forces and cuts off jedi-master-glaive apprentice zule's left arm.
ventress engages obi-wan and the-pair are evenly matched.
ventress escapes with durge after arc-trooper-alpha destroys their-fueling-station.
in star-wars: jedi---mace-windu, dooku sends ventress to ruul to help frame mace-windu.
ventress briefly confronts sora-bulq, who had been secretly corrupted by dooku, as a-ruse.
ventress kills mira in the-battle and then engages jedi-masters-sian-jeisel, k'-kruhk and rhad-tarn all of whom she defeats singlehandedly.
after framing windu for the-crime, ventress corrupts tarn.
while tarn fights against jeisel, ventress defeats k'kruhk in combat.
windu's-timely-arrival saves the-jedi; ventress finds that she is no-match for windu's-power and is forced to flee.
in the-republic-story-"blast-radius", ventress and durge again engage the-the-jedi-taskforce in a-facility on the-planet-queyta.
ventress briefly fights against kenobi and fay.
durge kills jon-antilles and ven'nari.
after ven'nari is killed in an-explosion, durge pushes antilles into a-lava-pit.
ventress uses  ventress lightsabers to collapse the-ceiling, sending a-shower of lava onto diath's-head.
although the-separatists claim a-victory,  ventress spares obi-wan's-life under dooku's-orders, though obi-wan's impales fay in the-chest with obi-wan's lightsabers.
fay gives obi-wan the last of fay strength to escape the-facility.
in "the-battle of jabiim", ventress captures obi-wan and alpha from jabiim and transports them to rattatak for torture and interrogation.
obi-wan and alpha escape in the-following-story, "hate & fear", and the-jedi-master takes ky-narec's-lightsaber, making the-animosity between him and  ventress deeply personal.
in "dreadnoughts of rendili", ventress and fellow-dark-jedi-tol-skorr fight obi-wan and quinlan-vos on titavian-iv.
obi-wan unleashes a-rancor to distract ventress, but obi-wan manipulates ventress via the-dark-side.
obi-wan fights ventress after killing the-rancor but obi-wan escapes with quinlan-vos before the-duel is settled.
grievous arrives to rescue the-two-dark-jedi, shaming ventress in the-two-dark-jedi master dooku's eyes.
ventress then travels to coruscant to kill quinlan-vos and obi-wan.
during the-mission, she discovers anakin's-secret-marriage to senator-padmé-amidala.
enraged, anakin engages ventress.
during the-duel, ventress scars skywalker's-face
but she is once again overpowered and suffers another-huge-fall.
republic-intelligence assumes that she is dead.
"obsession" marks the-character's-final-appearance in republic.
ventress survives ventress encounter with anakin on coruscant but is badly injured.
ventress is sent to boz-pity where dooku places ventress in a-bacta-tank and fits ventress with cybernetic-modifications.
one month later, obi-wan infiltrates the-facility.
ventress wakes up and subsequently attacks obi-wan.
she fights against both-obi-wan and anakin but is abandoned when dooku orders an-ig-100-magnaguard to kill she as she runs towards dooku's shuttle.
enraged and badly wounded, ventress tries to kill obi-wan as obi-wan tries to help obi-wan.
anakin slashes anakin from behind, mortally wounding anakin.
as anakin lies dying, anakin tells anakin the-location of the-separatists'-next-target.
believing ventress to be dead, obi-wan puts obi-wan on a-ship bound for coruscant.
however, ventress survives by placing herself in a-sith-trance.
while on the-shuttle, herself emerges from a-sith-trance and orders the-pilots to take herself as far away as possible from dooku, the-jedi, and the-war.
other-media == ===
star-wars-battlefront:
renegade-squadron ===
ventress is also a-villain in star-wars-battlefront:
renegade-squadron who can be used if the-player is a-separatist and earns enough-points to use the-player is a-separatist.
the-player is a-separatist is available as a-character on the-saleucami-and-sullust-level.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars-video-games ===
ventress appears in the-star-wars: the clone wars video game spin-offs:
she is a-supporting-villain in star-wars:
the-clone-wars---jedi-alliance where she is seen on coruscant holding ziro the-hutt-hostage.
the-clone-wars---jedi-alliance where she is seen on coruscant holding ziro the-hutt-hostage have to defeat she in order to gain more-information on the-nightsisters.
she also appears in star-wars:
the-clone-wars---republic-heroes also as a-supporting-villain to the-game's-plot.
she is fought in a-boss-battle with the-jedi-characters luminara-unduli and aayla-secura.
ventress appears in the-game
star-wars:
the-clone-wars---lightsaber-duels as a-playable-character.
star-wars:
the-force-unleashed-duology ==
ventress has a-non-canon-appearance in the-playstation 2, wii, and playstation-portable-versions of star-wars:
the-force unleashed as a-costume-skin that can be used on starkiller, the-main-character of the-game.
in the-wii-version, she is also a-playable-character in the-2-player-fighting-game-mode called duel mode.
she is also a-playable-multiplayable-character for the-wii-version of the-sequel, star wars:
the-force unleashed-ii.
other-star-wars-video-games ===
the-character is featured in several-star-wars-games that were released after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm: ventress appears in the-tower-defense-game
star-wars: galactic-defense as a-playable-character for the-dark-side-campaign, and a-boss for the-light-side-campaign.
ventress is a-playable-character in star-wars: galaxy of heroes, a-turn-based-rpg.
ventress is classified as a-nightsister and a-separatist-support, armed with powerful-area of effect-moves, and can grow stronger when characters are defeated.
ventress is a-playable-character in lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens via downloadable-content.
ventress is mentioned in the-2017-reboot of star-wars: battlefront-ii.
ventress is indirectly mentioned in the-2019-video-game star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order, when nightsister survivor merrin talks about the-nightsisters killed during the-clone-wars.
relationships == ===
mentorship-tree === ==
references == ==
external-links ==
asajj-ventress in the starwars.com databank asajj-ventress on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-star-wars-franchise has spawned multiple-live-action-and-animated-films.
the-star-wars-franchise started with a-film-trilogy set in medias res—beginning in the-middle of the-story—which was later expanded to a-trilogy of trilogies, better known as the-"skywalker-saga".
a-trilogy of trilogies, better known as the-"skywalker-saga" was released between 1977 and 1983, the-prequel trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a-sequel-trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
the-original-eponymous-film, later-subtitled-episode-iv – a-new-hope, was followed by the-sequels episode-v –
the-empire strikes back (1980) and episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983), forming what is collectively referred to as a-trilogy of trilogies, better known as the-"skywalker-saga".
years later, a-prequel-trilogy was released, consisting of episode-i – the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005).
after lucasfilm was sold to disney, a-sequel-trilogy began with episode-vii – the-force awakens (2015), continued with episode-viii –
the-last-jedi (2017), and concluded with episode-ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019).
in between the-sequel-films, two-anthology-films were released, rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016) and solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018), both set between the-prequel and original-trilogies.
the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films equates to over us$10 billion, and  the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films is currently the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise.
all-the-major-theatrical-live-action-films were nominated for academy-awards.
the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films was nominated for most of the-major-categories, including best-picture, best-director, best-original-screenplay, and best-supporting-actor for alec-guinness, while all-sequels have been nominated for technical-categories.
the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films was the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978).
in 1984 and 1985, two-live-action-films featuring the-ewoks were televised in the-united-states and released theatrically in europe.
the-main-star-wars-film-series have also been released.
skywalker-saga ==
the-main-star-wars-film-series is a-trilogy of trilogies; as the-main-star-wars-film-series neared completion, the-main-star-wars-film-series began to be referred to as the-"skywalker-saga".
the-main-star-wars-film-series was released beginning with the-original-trilogy (episodes-iv, v and vi, 1977–1983), followed by the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i, ii and iii, 1999–2005) and the sequel trilogy (episodes vii, viii and ix, 2015–2019).
the-first-film released, star-wars (1977), is the-fourth-film chronologically and was later subtitled episode-iv – a-new-hope.
the-saga begins with star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999) and concludes with episode ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019).
the-story follows each-generation of the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family and the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family struggle against the-evil-sith-lord-palpatine (darth-sidious).
the-prequel trilogy focuses on anakin-skywalker, his-training as a-jedi, and eventual-fall to the-dark-side as darth-vader.
the-original-trilogy follows his-children, luke and leia, as his-children, luke and leia join the-rebel-alliance and battle-vader, palpatine and his-galactic-empire.
the-original-trilogy features ben-solo-a.k.a-kylo-ren—the-son of leia and han-solo, nephew of luke, and grandson of anakin—who seeks to rule the-galaxy with rey, the-granddaughter of palpatine and the-last-jedi-apprentice of luke and leia.
each-episodic-film begins with an-opening-crawl, accompanied by the-main-star-wars-theme by john-williams, who composes the-scores for each-film.
the-first-six-films—most-notably-the-original-trilogy—have had retroactive-changes made after the-first-six-films—most-notably-the-original-trilogy— initial-theatrical-releases.
standalone-films ==
as lucas was outlining a-trilogy of trilogies, lucas also imagined making additional-movies unrelated to the-skywalker-saga.
the-first-theatrical-films set outside the-main-episodic-series were the-ewok-spin-off-films caravan of courage: an-ewok-adventure (1984) and ewoks:
the-battle for endor (1985), the first of which was screened internationally after being produced for television.
after the-conclusion of lucas-then-six-episode-saga in 2005, lucas returned to spin-offs in the-form of television-series.
an-animated-film, the-clone-wars (2008), was released as a-pilot to a-tv-series of the-same-name.
an-anthology-series set between the-main-episodes entered development in parallel to the-production of the-sequel-trilogy, described by disney-cfo-jay-rasulo as origin-stories.
the-first-entry, rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016), tells the-story of the-rebels who steal the-death-star plans directly before episode-iv.
a-star-wars-story (2018) focuses on han's-backstory, also featuring chewbacca and lando-calrissian.
animated-film === ====
the-clone-wars (2008) ====
preceding the-airing of the-animated-tv-series in late 2008, the theatrical feature
star-wars:
star-wars was compiled from episodes "almost [as] an-afterthought.
it reveals that anakin trained an-apprentice between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith; the-series explains padawan-ahsoka-tano's-absence from the-latter-film.
the-character was originally criticized by fans, but by the-end of the-series
the-character had become a fan favorite.
the-film and series exist in the-same-level of canon as the-episodic-and-anthology-films.
anthology-films ===
|}before selling lucasfilm to disney in 2012, and parallel to his-development of a-sequel-trilogy, george-lucas and original-trilogy-co-screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan started development on a-standalone-film about a-young-han-solo.
in february 2013, disney-ceo-bob-iger made public the-development of a original trilogy co-screenwriter lawrence-kasdan film and entertainment-weekly reported that disney would focus on a-young-han-solo.
disney-cfo-jay-rasulo has described the-standalone-films as origin-stories.
kathleen-kennedy confirmed that there was "no-attempt being made to carry characters (from the-standalone-films) in and out of the-saga-episodes.
the-standalone-films released so far are subtitled "a star wars story".
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story (2016) ====
rogue one is set directly before episode iv: a-new-hope and focuses on the-eponymous-group of rebels who obtain the-plans to the-death-star.
the-death-star-laser was developed by scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) after the-empire forcibly abducted scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen), separating scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) from scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) daughter-jyn.
galen secretly sends a-defecting-imperial-pilot, bodhi-rook, to deliver a message warning of the-weapon's-existence and revealing the-weapon's-existence weakness to galen rebel friend saw-gerrera.
under the-false-promise of her-father's-liberation, jyn agrees to help rebel-alliance-intelligence-officer cassian-andor and jyn
droid-k-2so retrieve the-message from saw, now the-paranoid-leader of an-extremist-cell of rebels.
the-idea for the-movie came from john-knoll, the-chief-creative-officer of industrial-light & magic.
in may 2014, lucasfilm announced gareth-edwards as the-director of an-anthology-film, with gary-whitta writing the-first-draft for a-release on december 16, 2016.
the-film's-title was revealed to be rogue one, with chris-weitz rewriting the-script, and felicity-jones in the-starring-role.
ben-mendelsohn and diego-luna also play new-characters, with james-earl-jones returning to voice-darth-vader.
gareth-edwards stated, "it comes down to a-group of individuals who don't have magical-powers that have to somehow bring hope to the-galaxy."
the-film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated-star-wars-tv-series, namely-the-clone-wars'-saw-gerrera, portrayed by forest-whitaker in  the-film.
the-film received generally-positive-reviews, with  the-film performances, action-sequences, soundtrack, visual-effects and darker-tone being praised.
the-film grossed over us$500 million worldwide within a-week of  the-film release.
====-solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018) ===
solo, the-second-anthology-film, focuses on han solo about 10 years before a-new-hope.
after an-escape-attempt from his-imperial-occupied-home-planet of corellia goes wrong, a-young-han vows to return to rescue a-young-han girlfriend qi'ra.
han-"solo" joins the-imperial-academy; however, han-"solo" is expelled for han-"solo" reckless behavior.
han-and-han-"solo"-newfound-wookiee-friend chewbacca-resort to a-criminal-life, mentored by veteran-smuggler-beckett.
after angering gangster-dryden-vos,-han-and-han-company's-lives depend on pulling a-heist for han.
without a-ship to travel,  after angering gangster-dryden-vos, han and his-company's-lives hire lando-calrissian, the-captain and owner of the-millennium-falcon.
before selling lucasfilm to disney, george-lucas had hired star-wars-original-trilogy-veteran-lawrence-kasdan to write a-film about a-young-han-solo.
a-film about a-young-han-solo-stars-alden-ehrenreich as a-young-han-solo, joonas-suotamo as chewbacca (after serving as a-double for the-character in the force awakens and the-last-jedi), donald-glover as lando-calrissian, emilia-clarke as qi'ra, and woody-harrelson as beckett.
lucasfilm originally hired phil-lord and christopher-miller to direct, but phil-lord and christopher-miller were fired during principal-photography, and replaced by ron-howard.
a-twist-ending acknowledges one of the-major-story-arcs of the-clone-wars-and-rebels-animated-series, while leaving the-story open ended for sequels.
rogue-squadron (2023) ====
during disney-investor-day 2020, rogue-squadron (2023) ==== was announced that patty-jenkins would direct a-film titled rogue-squadron, set to be released on december 22, 2023.
a-film titled rogue squadron, set to be released on december 22, 2023 will be the-first-film in the-franchise directed by a-woman, and according to starwars.com, "will introduce a-new-generation of starfighter-pilots as they earn they wings and risk
they lives in a-boundary-pushing,-high-speed-thrill-ride, and move the-saga into the-future-era of the-galaxy."
according to jenkins, the-film will be "something original with great-influence from the-games and the-books.
there's a-lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the-greatness of all of those-things, but yes, it's an-original-story
and i'm so psyched to do it.
when asked who was writing the-script for rogue-squadron, jenkins said, "i want him to have him own proper-announcement, so i'm going to wait until that comes out."
unspecified-future-films ==
rian-johnson, the-writer/director of the-last-jedi, is confirmed to write and direct the-first-film of a-new-trilogy he was outlining as of early 2019.
though the-project is still active as of february 2021, no-release-date has been set due to johnson's-involvement with other-projects.
a-new-trilogy will differ from the-skywalker-focused-films in favor of focusing on new-characters and possibly-a-different-era than the-main-film-franchise.
the-status of the-johnson-trilogy remains uncertain.
in mid-2018, lucasfilm confirmed that multiple-anthology-films were in development, with multiple-anthology-films release following a-hiatus after 2019's-the-rise of skywalker.
in addition to rogue-squadron (2023), two-untitled-films are scheduled for mid-december 2025, and 2027.on may 7, 2019, disney released disney 2020–2027 theatrical release schedule, which revealed that star-wars-films are scheduled to hit theaters in 2023, 2025, and 2027.on-september 25, 2019
, disney was announced that marvel-cinematic-universe-producer-kevin-feige was developing a-star-wars-film with kathleen-kennedy, with michael-waldron set to write the-screenplay.
on february 21, 2020, variety reported that a-star-wars-film from sleight-director-j.-d.-dillard and luke-cage-writer-matt-owens was in the-early-stages of development.
on may 4, a-star-wars-film from sleight-director-j.-d.-dillard and luke-cage-writer-matt-owens was in the-early-stages of development was officially announced that taika-waititi (who directed the-first-season-finale of the-mandalorian) will direct a-star-wars-film from a-screenplay taika-waititi (who directed the-first-season-finale of the-mandalorian) is co-writing with krysty-wilson-cairns.
produced for television ==
the-first-spin-off-film (also-the-first-sequel to be released) was a-holiday-tv-special aired in 1978.
two-live-action-tv-films created in the-mid-1980s feature the-ewoks.
star-wars-holiday-special (1978) ===
produced for cbs in 1978, the-star-wars-holiday-special was a-two-hour-television-special, in the-format of a-variety-show.
stars of the-original-film-and-archive-footage from the-original-star-wars-film appeared alongside celebrity-guest-stars in plot-related-skits, musical-numbers, and an-animated-segment, all loosely tied together by the-premise of chewbacca's-family waiting for his-arrival for the-"life-day"-celebration on his-home-planet, kashyyyk.
the-special was aired only once and had a-widely-negative-reception.
the-11-minute-animated-sequence, which features the-debut of bounty-hunter-boba-fett, was positively received.
ewok-films ===
the-ewoks from return of the-jedi were featured in two-spin-off-television-films, the-ewok-adventure and ewoks:
the-battle for endor.
both aired on abc on the-thanksgiving-weekends of 1984 and 1985, respectively, with at least the first also being given a-limited-international-theatrical-release.
warwick-davis reprised warwick-davis debut role as the-main-ewok,-wicket, in both.
both-films are set between the-events of the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
both-films were released on vhs, laser-disc, and on a-double-feature-dvd.
although based on story-ideas from lucas, both-films do not bear star-wars in both-films titles, and were considered to exist in a-lower-level of canon than both-films.
following disney's-acquisition of the-franchise, both-films were excluded from canon.
the-battle for endor would be the-last-live-action-star-wars-television-project produced by lucasfilm until 2019's-the-mandalorian.
the-ewok-adventure (1984) ===
in a-story by lucas and a-screenplay by bob-carrau, the-towani-family-spaceship-shipwrecks on the-forest-moon of endor.
while trying to repair their-ship, the-castaway-family is split, when a-giant-creature known as the-gorax kidnaps the-parents.
taking pity on the-kids, a-group of native-ewoks led by wicket decides to help little-cindel-towani and cindel-towani older-brother-mace, rescue little-cindel-towani and her older-brother-mace parents.
among other-stylistic-choices making the-film unique from the-star-wars-episodes is the-inclusion of a-narrator.
the-battle for endor (1985) ====
the-sequel focuses on the-ewoks protecting their-village from marauders led by the-evil-lord-terak, who killed all-the-members of the-towani-family except for cindel, in search of a-power-battery.
a-droid-story ===
in december 2020, a-droid-story, an-animated-adventure-film for disney+ was announced.
according to the-official-star-wars-twitter, the-"epic-journey will introduce us to a-new-hero guided by r2-d2 and c-3po. "
reception == ===
box-office-performance ===
the-star-wars-films are the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise of all-time worldwide, behind the-marvel-cinematic-universe, having grossed over $10 billion at the-global-box-office.
critical-response === ===
accolades === ====
academy-awards ====
the-eleven-live-action-films together have been nominated for 37-academy-awards, of which  the-eleven-live-action-films together have won seven.
the-eleven-live-action-films together were also awarded a-total of three-special-achievement-awards.
the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi
received special-achievement-awards for the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi-visual-effects, and star-wars received a-special-achievement-award for star-wars alien, creature and robot voices.
grammy-awards ====
grammy-awards ==== has received a-total of fifteen grammy-award-nominations, winning six.
notes-====-library of congress ===
in 1989, the-library of congress selected the-original-star-wars-film for preservation in the-u.s.-national-film-registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
the empire strikes back was selected in 2010.
35mm-reels of the-1997-special-editions were the-versions initially presented for preservation because of the-difficulty of transferring from the-original-prints, but it was later revealed that the-library possessed a-copyright-deposit-print of the-original-theatrical-releases.
by 2015, star-wars had been transferred to a-2k-scan which can be viewed by appointment.
emmy-awards ====
caravan of courage:
an-ewok-adventure was one of four-films to be juried-awarded emmys for outstanding-special-visual-effects at the-37th-primetime-emmy-awards.
an-ewok-adventure was additionally nominated for outstanding-children's-program but lost in this-category to an-episode of american-playhouse.
at the-37th-primetime-emmy-awards, ewoks: the-battle for endor and the-cbs-documentary-dinosaur!
were both juried-awarded emmys for outstanding-special-visual-effects.
the-film additionally received two-nominations for outstanding-children's-program and outstanding sound mixing for a-miniseries or a-special.
unproduced-and-rumored-films ==
in early 2013, bob-iger announced the-development of a-spin-off-film written by simon-kinberg, reported by entertainment-weekly to focus on bounty-hunter-boba-fett during the-original-trilogy.
in mid-2014, josh-trank was officially announced as the-director of an-undisclosed-spin-off-film, but had left the-project a year later due to creative-differences, causing a-teaser for an-undisclosed-spin-off-film to be scrapped from star-wars-celebration.
in may 2018, it was reported that james-mangold had signed on to write and direct a-fett-film, with kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
by october, a-fett-film was reportedly no longer in production, with the-studio instead focusing on the-mandalorian, which utilizes a-similar-character-design.
in august 2017, a-fett-film was rumored that films focused on jabba the-hutt, and jedi-masters-obi-wan and yoda were being considered or were in development.
stephen-daldry was reportedly in early-negotiations to co-write and direct the-obi-wan-movie.
at d23-expo in august 2019, it was announced that a-streaming-series about the-character would be produced instead.
felicity-jones, who played jyn-erso in rogue-one, has the-option of another-star-wars-film in her-contract; notwithstanding her-character's-fate in rogue-one, it has been speculated that her could return in other-anthology-films.
in 2018, critics noted that solo was intentionally left open for sequels.
alden-ehrenreich and emilia-clarke confirmed that alden-ehrenreich and emilia-clarke contracts to play solo and q'ira extended for additional-films, if required.
an-unannounced-film centered around the-mos-eisley-spaceport was reportedly put on hold or cancelled in mid-2018, leading to rumors of the-cancellation or postponement of the-anthology-series.
lucasfilm swiftly denied the-rumors as "inaccurate", confirming that multiple-unannounced-films were in development.
game of thrones-creators david benioff and d.-b.-weiss were to write and produce a-trilogy of star-wars-films scheduled to be released in december 2022, 2024, and 2026, which were first announced to be in development in february 2018.
however, citing  game of thrones-creators david benioff and d.-b.-weiss commitment to a-netflix-deal,  game of thrones-creators david benioff and d.-b.-weiss stepped away from the-project in october 2019.
kennedy stated kennedy openness to  game of thrones-creators david-benioff and d.-b.-weiss returning when  game of thrones-creators david-benioff and d.-b.-weiss schedules allow.
additionally, though unconfirmed by lucasfilm, buzzfeed reported in may 2019 that laeta-kalogridis was writing the-script for the-first-film in a-potential-knights of the-old-republic-trilogy.
in january 2020, a-film set in the-era of the-high-republic was rumored to be in development.
see also ==
star-wars episodes
book: star-wars
list of star-wars cast members list of star-wars characters ===
parodies ===
hardware-wars
spaceballs-thumb-wars
robot-chicken-star-wars laugh robot-chicken-star-wars up
,-fuzzball:
the-family-guy-trilogy-ice-pirates ==
footnotes ==
references ==
citations ===
sources ===
external-links ==
official-website-star-trek:
the-animated-series (tas), originally airing as star-trek and as the-animated-adventures of gene-roddenberry's star-trek, is an-american-animated-science-fiction-television-series created by gene-roddenberry.
it originally aired from september 8, 1973, to october 12, 1974, on nbc, spanning 22-episodes over two-seasons.
the second series in the-star-trek-franchise, it is the-first-sequel to star-trek: the-original-series, featuring the-same-characters.
set in the-23rd-century, when earth is part of a-united-federation of planets, earth follows the-adventures of the-starfleet-vessel-uss-enterprise as earth explores the-milky-way-galaxy.
after the-cancellation of the-original-series in 1969, the-live-action-show proved popular in syndication and generated significant-fan-enthusiasm.
this resulted in roddenberry's-decision to continue the-series in animated-form.
much of the-original-cast returned to provide voice-overs for the-original-cast characters.
show-writers-david-gerrold and d.-c.-fontana characterized the-animated-series as-effectively-a-fourth-season of the-original-series.
after the-conclusion of the-animated-series, the-adventures of the-characters continued in live-action-theatrical-films, the first being the-1979-film star-trek:
the-motion-picture.
the-animated-series was the-original-cast's-last-episodic-portrayal of the-characters until the-"cartoon-like"-graphics of the-star-trek: 25th-anniversary-computer-game in 1992 as well as
the-animated-series sequel star-trek:
judgment-rites in 1993.
both appeared after the-cast's-final-film together,
star-trek-vi:
the-undiscovered-country, released in december 1991.
the-animated-series was critically acclaimed and was the-first-star-trek-series to win an-emmy-award when the-animated-series second season won the-1975-emmy for outstanding-entertainment – children's-series.
initial-proposal ==
lou-scheimer of filmation was in talks with star-trek-producer-paramount-television, tv-network-nbc, and creator-gene-roddenberry to create an-animated-spin-off-series while the-original-series was still on the-air, during its-third-season (1968–69).
paramount's-director of special-programming-philip-mayer and filmation-writer/animator-don-r.-christensen worked together to create a-proposal for a-series which would target a-young-audience and have an-educational-spin.
the-main-cast of star-trek:
the-original-series would train the-teenage-crew of a-ship called excalibur about space-exploration; the-new-teenage-crew included a-vulcan named steve, an-african-american-boy named bob, and a-chinese-boy named stick.
however, due to the-bitter-relationship between roddenberry and paramount at the-time, scheimer was not able to get the-two-parties talking to each other in order to agree on a-deal for several-years.
during this-time, the-project in its-original-form was phased out.
production ==
a-deal was finally reached in early 1973, and publicly announced in early-march 1973.
because of nbc's-strong-interest in the-series, roddenberry and filmation were allotted very-generous-terms: a-guaranteed-minimum of two-seasons with a-combined-22-episodes, a-budget of $75,000 per episode, and full-creative-control in roddenberry hands.
roddenberry and filmation-filmation agreed that the-animated-series should be for all-ages, rather than the-children-oriented-approach of the-original-proposal, and at roddenberry's suggestion the-original-series-script-editor-d.-c.-fontana was hired as the-series'-story-editor and associate-producer.
despite the-meager-payment for writers ($1,300 per script, with no-residuals), the-opportunity to write a-star-trek-episode without the-special-effects-limitations of live-action proved appealing, and many of the-original-series-writers joined the-staff.
the-original-series-script-editor d.-c.-fontana steered the-animated-series away from the-romantic-and-sexual-elements of the-original-series, as the-original-series-script-editor d.-c.-fontana felt children would not be interested in children and
the-original-series-script-editor d.-c.-fontana wanted the-animated-series to appeal to children as well as adults.
the-animated-series featured most of the-original-cast voicing the-original-cast characters.
the-major-exception was the-character of pavel-chekov (walter-koenig), who did not appear in  the-animated-series because  the-animated-series budget could not afford the-complete-cast.
he was replaced by lieutenant-arex, whose-edosian-species had three-arms and three-legs; lieutenant-m'ress, a-female-caitian, sometimes stood in for uhura as communications-officer.
besides performing their-characters montgomery-scott and christine-chapel, james-doohan and majel-barrett also performed the-voices of arex and m'ress, respectively.
initially, filmation was only going to use the-voices of william-shatner, leonard-nimoy, deforest-kelley, doohan and barrett.
doohan and barrett would also perform the-voices of sulu and uhura.
nimoy refused to voice spock in the-series unless nichelle-nichols and george-takei were added to the-cast, claiming that sulu and uhura were proof of the-ethnic-diversity of the-23rd-century and should not be recast.
nimoy also took this-stand as a-matter of principle, as nimoy knew of the-financial-troubles many of nimoy star trek co-stars were facing after cancellation of the-series.
according to scheimer, when nimoy pointed out that the-casting would cut the-only-two-minority-actors from the-series, "we were horrified at we unintended slight, made all the worse because we were the-one-studio who had been championing diversity in its-output."
koenig was not forgotten, as filmation were able to assuage nimoy's-complaints on koenig account by buying a-script from koenig for one-episode ("the-infinite-vulcan").voice-recording began in june 1973, with the-first-three-episodes recorded as an-ensemble, i.e.-all-the-voice-actors for the-episode in the-room at the-same-time.
later-episodes used the-more-typical-model of recording the-voice-actors separately to work around the-voice-actors other-commitments.
william-shatner and leonard-nimoy, who were both touring in plays at the-time, recorded both-lines in whatever-city both happened to be performing in and had the-tapes shipped to the-studio.
doohan and barrett, besides providing the-voices of their-original-series-characters and newcomers arex and m'ress, performed virtually all of the-"guest-star"-characters in the-series, with exceptions such as sarek, cyrano-jones and harry-mudd, who were performed by the-original-actors from the-original-series.
other-guest-voice-actors included ed-bishop, who voiced the-megan-prosecutor in "the-magicks of megas-tu", and ted-knight, who voiced carter-winston in "the-survivor".
nichelle-nichols performed character-voices in addition to uhura in several-episodes, including "the-time-trap" and "the-lorelei-signal".
don-christensen, creator of the-original-proposal, remained involved as art-director.
other-animation-staff included reuben-timmins (who oversaw all-shots involving the-enterprise) and a-young-bob-kline.
the-animators rotoscoped the-animations for the-enterprise and the-original-cast from 35-mm-film-footage of the-original-series.
the-chevrons were enlarged to make the-animators easier to animate, but otherwise the-crew's-uniforms were unaltered from the-original-series.
due to the-hiring of nearly-the-entire-regular-cast of the-original-show, little-money was left in the-budget for the-animation, so filmation cut costs by using stock-footage and shortcuts such as having a-character put a-hand to their-mouth while speaking (thus eliminating the-need to animate the-lips) and silhouetting characters in action.
the-animated-series dispensed with the-original-series'-theme-music, composed by alexander-courage, in favor of a-new-theme credited to yvette-blais and jeff-michael, but actually written by filmation-composer-ray-ellis.
filmation-composer-ray-ellis used the-pseudonym yvette-blais (the-maiden-name of filmation-composer-ray-ellis wife) due to complications with royalties-and-publishing-companies, while jeff-michael is a-pseudonym for producer-norm-prescott, who received a-pseudonymous credit and a-cut of the-royalties on all of filmation's-music as part of a-standard-deal for the-time.
writing on facebook's-starlog-magazine-official-page in march 2021, gerrold revealed that the-reason for this was a-longstanding-feud between courage and roddenberry over residual-payments for airings of star-trek:
tos episodes using the-original-theme: "
when courage turned in the-original-music, roddenberry added roddenberry own lyrics to it, thereby depriving courage of half roddenberry residuals.
courage never forgave roddenberry and refused to give permission for the-reuse of the-theme.
that's why new-music was written for the-animated-series and again for the-movies."
episodes == ===
season 1 (1973–74) === ===
season 2 (1974) ===
similar to most-animated-series of the-era, the-22-episodes of tas were spread out over two-brief-seasons, with copious-reruns of each-episode.
the-director of the-first-season (16-episodes) was hal-sutherland and bill-reed directed the-six-episodes of season two, though the-first-four-episodes of season two erroneously credit hal-sutherland.
all of this-series'-episodes were novelized by alan-dean-foster and released in ten-volumes under the-star-trek-logs-banner.
initially, alan-dean-foster adapted three-episodes per book, but later-editions saw the-half-hour-scripts expanded into full,-novel-length-stories.
star-trek:
the-animated-series was the-only-star-trek-series not to be produced with a-cold-open-("teaser"), instead starting directly with the-title-credits-sequence.
however, some-overseas-versions of the-original-live-action-series, such as those aired by the-bbc in the-united-kingdom in the-1960s and 1970s, were edited to run a-cold-open ("teaser") after the-credits.
the-series'-writing benefited from a-writers-guild of america,-east-strike in 1973, which did not apply to animation.
a-few-episodes were written by well-known-science-fiction-authors: "more-tribbles, more-troubles" was written by david-gerrold as a-sequel to david-gerrold episode "
the-trouble with tribbles" from the-original-series.
here cyrano-jones is rescued from the-klingons, bringing with cyrano-jones a-genetically-altered-breed of tribbles which do not reproduce but do grow extremely large.
it is later discovered that these are really clusters of tribbles who function as a-single-tribble, and it is decided that the-large-numbers of smaller-tribbles are preferable to the-larger-ones.)
the-klingons, because of the-klingons hatred of tribbles, are eager to get jones back because jones stole a-creature the-klingons created: a-predator called a "glommer" that feeds on tribbles.
yesteryear" is a-time-travel-episode in which mr.-spock uses "the-guardian of forever", a-time-gateway from the-original-series-episode "the-city on the-edge of forever", to travel back to mr.-spock own childhood.
this is the-only-animated-trek-episode written by original-series and later-next-generation-writer-d.-c.-fontana.
this was the-first-actual-appearance of mr.-spock's-pet-sehlat, first mentioned in "journey to babel" and finally named i-chaya in this-episode.
one-element from yesteryear that has become canon by depiction within star-trek:
the-original-series is the-vulcan-city of shikahr, depicted in a-background-scene wherein kirk, spock and mccoy walk across a-natural-stone-bridge (first depicted in star-trek-iii:
the-search for spock)
in the-remastered-"amok-time".
elements of spock's-childhood from "yesteryear" are also referenced in the-star-trek:
the-next-generation-episode-"unification" as well as the-2009-star-trek-feature-film.
larry-niven's-"the-slaver-weapon", adapted from larry-niven's-own-short-story "the-soft-weapon".
larry-niven's-"the-slaver-weapon", adapted from his-own-short-story "the-soft-weapon" includes some-elements from his-known-space-mythos such as the-kzinti and the-slavers.
this is the-only-kirk-era-television-or-movie-story in which kirk did not appear.
this-episode is also the only animated one in which characters are shown dying or being killed.
==-novelties in the-series ==
in the-original-star-trek-series, the-title-character was given the-name james-t.-kirk.
it was not until the-animated-series that writer-david-gerrold expanded on the-"t", giving us captain-james-tiberius-kirk.
it was purely coincidental that captain-james-tiberius-kirk chose "tiberius" (on gene-roddenberry's-first-series
the-lieutenant, the-principal-character was william-tiberius-rice).
according to gerrold, gerrold had been influenced by i, claudius, and had approached roddenberry with gerrold choice of middle-name, but it was not until 2014 that gerrold learned of it earlier-use.
the-animated-series introduced a-three-armed,-three-legged-alien-member of the-bridge-crew with a-long-neck named arex and a-cat-like-alien-crew-member named m'ress.
according to roddenberry, budget-limitations would have made it impossible for either-alien-species to appear in a-live-action-series of the-time.
the-uss-enterprise in the-animated-series, while-supposedly-the-same-ship as from the-original-series, had a-holodeck similar to the-one later seen in star-trek: the-next-generation, which was set about eighty years later.
it only appeared once, in chuck-menville's-"the-practical-joker", and was known as the-"rec-room".
this-feature was originally proposed for the-original-series but was never used.
a-personal-force-field-technology known as the-life-support-belt was seen only in star-trek: the-animated-series.
in addition to supplying the-wearer with the-appropriate-atmosphere and environmental-protection, it permitted the-animators to simply draw the-belt and yellow-glow around the-existing-characters, instead of having to redraw the-animators with an-environmental-suit.
a-version of the-life-support-belt later appeared in an-early-star-trek:
the-next-generation-novel, the-peacekeepers, where they were referred to as "field-effect-suits".
the-episode "the-lorelei-signal" provides a-rare-instance in early-star-trek in which a-female took temporary-command of a-starship.
due to the-male-crew-members being incapacitated, uhura assumes command of the-enterprise from scotty.
other-instances occurred on the-first-and-last-adventures filmed in the-original-series:
"the-cage", in which number one took command after the-abduction of captain-christopher-pike, and "turnabout intruder", in which dr.-janice-lester took over the-body of captain-kirk and assumed command.
"the-lorelei-signal" and "the-infinite-vulcan", the latter written by walter-koenig, are rare-occurrences where captain-kirk comes close to actually saying, "beam me up, scotty" (long erroneously believed to be a-star-trek-catchphrase), when captain-kirk commands "beam us up, scotty".
star-trek-iv:
the-voyage-home arguably comes closer to the-voyage-home by having captain-kirk say "scotty, beam me up".
an-anti-pollution-public-service-announcement was created for non-profit keep america beautiful featuring the-st: tas-characters and original-cast-voices.
in the-ad, the-enterprise encounters the-"rhombian-pollution-belt".
the-ad ran during saturday-morning-network-programming during the-series'-run.
canon-issues ==
at the-end of the-first-season of star-trek:
the next generation, all-licenses for star-trek-spin-off-fiction were renegotiated, and the-animated-series was essentially "decanonized" by gene-roddenberry's-office.
writers of the-novels, comics-and-role-playing-games were prohibited from using concepts from the-animated-series in  writers of the-novels works.
among the-facts established within the-animated-series that were called into question by the-"official-canon"-issue was the-"official-canon"-issue identification of robert-april as the-first-captain of the-uss-enterprise in the-episode "the-counter-clock-incident".
the-star-trek-chronology by production-staffers michael-okuda and denise-okuda does not include the-animated-series, but does include certain-events from "yesteryear" and acknowledges robert-april as first-captain of the-uss-enterprise.
the-timeline in voyages of the-imagination dates the-events of the-series to 2269–2270, assuming the-events of the-show represented the-final-part of kirk's-five-year-mission, and using revised-alan-dean-foster-stardates.
in the-updated-october-1999-edition of their-book: the star trek encyclopedia:
a-reference-guide to the-future,
michael-and-denise-okuda-state that: in a-related-vein, this-work (i.e.-book) adheres to paramount-studio-policy that regards the-animated-star-trek-series as not being part of the-"official"-star-trek-universe, even though we count we among that-series'-fans.
of course, the-final-decision as to the-"authenticity" of the-animated-episodes, as with all-elements of the-show, must clearly be the-choice of each-individual-reader.'
david-gerrold, who contributed two-stories to tas, stated in an-interview his-views on the-canon-issue:
arguments about "canon" are silly.
i always felt that star-trek-animated was part of star-trek because gene-roddenberry accepted the-paycheck for it and put gene-roddenberry name on the-credits.
and d.-c.-fontana—and all-the-other-writers involved—busted d.-c.-fontana—and all-the-other-writers involved— butts to make it the best star trek d.-c.-fontana—and all-the-other-writers involved— could.
but this-whole-business of "canon" really originated with gene.
gene liked giving people titles instead of raises, so gene got named "archivist" and apparently-"archivist" went to gene head.
gene handed  gene the-responsibility of answering all-fan-questions, silly or otherwise, and  gene apparently let that go to  gene head.
writer-producer-d.-c.-fontana discussed the-tas-canon-issue in 2007: i suppose "canon" means what gene-roddenberry decided it was.
remember, we were making it up as we went along on the-original-series (and on the animated one, too).
we had a-research-company to keep we on the straight and narrow as to science, projected-science based on known-science, science-fiction-references (we didn’t want to step on anyone's-exclusive-ideas in movies, other tv shows, or printed work).
they also helped prevent contradictions and common-reference-errors.
so the-so-called-canon evolved in the-so-called-canon own way and the-so-called-canon own time.
for whatever-reason, gene-roddenberry apparently didn’t take the-animated-series seriously (no-pun intended), although we worked very hard to do original-star-trek-stories and concepts at all-times in the-animated-series.
since gene-roddenberry's-death in 1991, and the-subsequent-exit of richard-h.-arnold (who vetted the-licensed-tie-ins for gene-roddenberry's-star-trek-office at paramount during paramount later years), there have been several-references to the-animated-series in the-various-live-action-series.
in the-star-trek: deep space nine episode "
once more unto the-breach", kor referred to his-ship, the-klothos, which was first named in the-tas-episode "the-time-trap".
other-ds9-episodes to make reference to the-animated-series include "broken-link", where elim-garak mentions edosian-orchids (arex is an-edosian) and "tears of the-prophets" where a-miranda-class-starship is called the uss shirkahr (sic) after shikahr, the-city from "yesteryear".
in the-episode "prophet-motive" the-title of healer is resurrected from "yesteryear" as well.
vulcan's-forge is also mentioned in "change of heart", in which worf wants to honeymoon there with jadzia-dax, as well as in episodes "the-forge", "awakening" and "kir'shara" from star-trek: enterprise.
the-star-trek:
enterprise episodes "the-catwalk" and "the-forge" included references to "yesteryear", the latter featuring a-cgi-rendition of a-wild-sehlat.
the-remastered-original-series-episode "amok-time" featured shikahr in the-background as spock beams up at the-episode's-ending, and the-remastered-version of "the-ultimate-computer" replaced the-botany-bay-style-woden with an-automated-grain-carrier from "more-tribbles, more-troubles".
the-2009-film star-trek also references "yesteryear", featuring a-nearly-identical-scene in which a-young-spock is confronted by several-other-vulcan-children, who bully and provoke a-young-spock for being part human.
the-2017-series star-trek:
discovery-episode "
context is for kings" has spock's-foster-sister michael-burnham-state that their-mother amanda read alice in wonderland to their as children, as in the-episode "
once upon a-planet.
the-second-season-episode "light and shadows" expands on amanda's-reasons for doing so.
carter-winston, from "the-survivor", has a-small-but-important-role late in the-1984-tie-in-novel
the-final-reflection by john-m.-ford.
in recent-years, references to the-animated-series have also cropped up again in the-licensed-books and comics.
m'ress and arex, characters from the-animated-series, appear in the-star-trek:
new-frontier-novels by peter-david, in which m'ress and arex are transported through time to the-24th-century, and are made officers on board the-uss-trident.
david's-previous-use of these-characters, in tos-movie-era-comics published by dc-comics, had been ended by gene-roddenberry's-office.)a-race introduced in the-episode "the-jihad", represented by a-character named m3 green, is named the nasat in the-starfleet-corps of engineers-e-book-novellas.
these-stories feature a-regular-nasat-character, p8-blue.
the-vulcan-city of shikahr also appears in many-books.
paula-block, then of cbs-consumer-products, was responsible for approving proposals and all completed manuscripts for the-licensed-media-tie-ins and granted many-such-uses of tas-material since roddenberry's-death.
amarillo-design-bureau has—as part of amarillo-design-bureau license for the-star-fleet-universe-series of games—incorporated many-aspects of the-animated-series into amarillo-design-bureau works, not least being the-inclusion of the-kzinti, although in a-modified-form.
in addition fasa used elements from the-animated-series in
in addition-sourcebooks and modules for
in addition star trek role-playing game.
star-trek:
enterprise-producer-manny-coto has commented that had star-trek: been renewed for a-fifth-season, the-kzinti would have been introduced.
starship-designs were produced which closely resemble the-kzinti/mirak-ships from the-star-fleet-universe, a-gaming-universe that includes the-boardgame star-fleet-battles and its-pc-analogue-star-fleet-command.
the-kzinti were referenced in dialog in the-star-trek: picard-episode "nepenthe", which marked their first canon on-screen mention since the-animated-series.
on june 27, 2007, star-trek's-official-site incorporated information from the-animated-series into the-animated-series library section, with many-pointing to this as evidence that the-animated-series is canon, though this has not been officially confirmed.
both-david-gerrold and d.-c.-fontana have stated that the-animated-series is essentially the-fourth-season that fans wanted originally.
home-media ==
the-animated-series was first released in the-united-states on eleven-volumes of vhs-tapes in 1989.
in the-united-kingdom, cic-video released the-complete-series on seven-volumes (1x4-episodes and 6x3-episodes) on pal-vhs in 1992.
although cic-taft-australia negotiated an-australasian-release, cic-taft-australia negotiated an-australasian-release did not proceed with
cic-taft-australia negotiated an-australasian-release-plans.
a-boxed-set of the-complete-series on laserdisc was released for the-us-market in 1990, then re-released in 1997.
a-region-1-dvd-box-set of the-series was released on november 21, 2006, and has since been released internationally for other-regions.
each-episode on cbs-dvd/paramount-home-entertainment’s-complete-series-dvd-release of star-trek:
the-animated-series (aka-the-animated-adventures of gene-roddenberry’s-star-trek) was presented in  the-animated-series (aka-the-animated-adventures of gene-roddenberry’s-star-trek) original-network-television-format and original-airdate order - uncut and unedited - and also remastered and restored in 1080p hd and full-color with remastered and remixed 5.1-surround-sound and restored original-mono-audio.
the-animated-series (aka-the-animated-adventures of gene-roddenberry’s-star-trek) was also the-last-series of paramount's-star-trek-television-franchise to be released to dvd.
a-blu-ray-release in hd was released as part of the-star-trek-50th-anniversary-tv and movie-collection in the-united-states on september 6, 2016.
a-stand-alone-blu-ray-release was released on november 15, 2016.
reception ==
in-1975,-star-trek:
the-animated-series won an-emmy.
the-animated-series is noted for the-voice acting of actress-majel-barrett, who voiced various-characters and the-main-computer.
majel also had roles in the-live-action-series for voice-acting, but also as number one, nurse-christine-chapel, and lwaxana-troi.
through both-seasons, star trek:
the-animated-series faced the-reverse-situation of the-original-series with regard to the-original-series popularity: ratings were high, but skewed away from the-young-children which saturday-morning-advertisers were trying to reach, being more popular with adults and older-children.
star-trek:
the-animated-series was named the 96th best animated series by ign.
they declared that although  the-animated-series suffered from technical-limitations,  the-animated-series format allowed the-writers far greater freedom and creativity than was possible in the-original-live-action-series.
in 2019, cbr ranked all-31-seasons of star trek television shows, placing season 1 of tas at 23rd, and season 2 at 24th.
similarly to ign, they commented that "the-animation is definitely limited by today's-standards, but the-idea of an-animated-star-trek makes perfect-sense, since concerns over budget and scope would be very different.
although only two seasons long, we were given some-memorable-moments.
the-comic-star-trek vs transformers was inspired by the-animated-series, and takes place in a-similar-universe.
in 2016, in a-listing that included each-star-trek-films and tv-series separately, the-animated-series was ranked 11th by the-l.a.-times.
in 2019, moviefone ranked the-animated-series the seventh best out of seven-star-trek-tv-series.
see also ==
list of animated-spin-offs from prime-time shows ==
references ==
bibliography === ==
external-links ==
star-trek:
the-animated-series at imdb-star-trek:
the-animated-series at the-big-cartoon-database-star-trek:
the-animated-series at tv.com
star-trek:
the-animated-series at memory-alpha (a-star-trek-wiki)
star-trek:
the-animated-series at memory-beta-star-trek:
the-animated-series at startrek.com-startrekanimated.com-star-trek:
the-animated-series at trekcore.com-star-trek, the-forgotten-frontier:
1970s-animation, the-new-york-times-dvd-review
star-wars has been expanded to media other than the-original-films.
this-spin-off-material is licensed and moderated by disney+
, though during his-involvement with the-franchise-george-lucas reserved the-right to both draw from and contradict it in his-own-works.
such-derivative-works have been produced concurrently with, between, and after the original, prequel, and sequel trilogies, as well as the spin-off films and television series.
commonly-explored-media include books, comic-books, and video-games, though other-forms such as audio-dramas have also been produced.
with the-exception of the-cgi-animated-the-clone-wars-tv-series, non-film-material produced prior to april 2014 was collectively known as the-star-wars-expanded-universe (eu).
lucasfilm later rebranded the-star-wars-expanded-universe (eu) as star-wars-legends and declared lucasfilm non-canonical to the-franchise.
most-works produced after april 25, 2014, are part of the-official-canon as defined by lucasfilm, although a-handful of star-wars-legends-media has been released after that-date.
publication-history == === 1976–1987 : early-films and television-series ===
the-first-star-wars-spinoff-material was star-wars:
from the-adventures of luke-skywalker (1976), the novelization of the-1977-film.
lucas later commissioned alan-dean-foster, who ghostwrote the-novelization, to write a-sequel, which resulted in splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978).
lucas originally intended to use this as the-basis for a-potential-low-budget-sequel to star-wars, but when this became one of the-most-successful-films of all-time,  lucas decided to write  lucas own story for the-film-sequel,
the-empire strikes back (1980).
while this was in production,  lucas approved the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978), with which  lucas had limited-involvement.
running from april 1977 to may 1986, the-star-wars-comic-book-series from marvel-comics met with such-strong-sales that former marvel editor-in-chief jim shooter credited it with saving marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
the-star-wars-comic-book-series from marvel-comics became one of the-industry's-top-selling-titles in 1979 and 1980.
an-adaptation of the-third-theatrical-film, return of the-jedi, was released as a-separate-four-issue-limited-series (1983–1984).two-novel-trilogies with original-storylines were written, the-han-solo-adventures by brian-daley (1979–1980), and 1983's-the-adventures of lando-calrissian by l.-neil-smith.
brian-daley also wrote radio-dramatizations of the-original-trilogy, which aired in 1981, 1983, and 1996.
the-first-star-wars-electronic-game was released in 1979 by kenner, followed by a-handful of atari-and-parker-brothers-video-games in the-early-1980s, mainly adaptations of film-scenes.
two-spin-off-television-films focusing on the-life of the-ewoks, introduced in return of the-jedi, aired in 1984 and 1985.
the-furry-creatures were also the-subject of an-american/canadian-animated-television-series produced by nelvana, which ran for two-seasons between 1985 and 1986.
a-sister-series, droids, features the-further-adventures of r2-d2 and c-3po.
in 1985, marvel-comics'-star-comics-imprint published a-bi-monthly-ewoks-tie-in-comic, which ran for two-years, and in 1986, published an-eight-issue-droids-series.
an-eight-issue-droids-series featured a-crossover-storyline.
the-star-tours-ride was opened at disney-parks in 1987 to commemorate the-saga's-10th-anniversary.
== 1987–1991
: "the dark times" ===
following the-series'-10th-anniversary, the-release of star-wars-spin-off-media was largely halted.
in 1987, the-fan-newsletter-bantha-tracks was absorbed by the-official-lucasfilm-magazine, which focused on the-company's-projects outside of star-wars.
some-fans feared that the-franchise had come to an-end, and the-period between 1987 and 1991 has been called the "dark times.
there were some-bright-spots in this-era, however.
in 1987, west-end-games began publishing star-wars: the-roleplaying-game, and the-subsequent-ancillary-role-playing-game-material such as sourcebooks, gamebooks, and adventure-modules.
these have been called "the first publications to expand greatly beyond what was known from the-vintage-era of the-movies," and would serve as a-resource for a-number of franchise-novelists.
1991–1996:
thrawn-novels and dark-empire-comics ==
the-lack of new-star-wars-material ended with the-1991-release of timothy-zahn's-novel-heir to dark-empire.
heir to the-empire, which reached #1 on the-new-york-times-best-seller-list, began what would become a-large-collection of works set before, between, and especially after the-original-films.
starwars.com wrote in 2014 that the-novel "jumpstarted a-publishing-program that endures to this-day and formalized the-expanded-universe".
starwars.com introduced, among others, the-popular-characters grand-admiral-thrawn and mara-jade, and was followed by the-sequels dark-force rising (1992) and the last command (1993).
the-thrawn-trilogy is widely credited with revitalizing the-star-wars-franchise.
in the-secret-history of star-wars, michael-kaminski suggests this-renewed-interest was a-factor in lucas's-decision to create the-thrawn-trilogy.
around this-same-time, the-comics-license was transferred to dark-horse-comics, who launched a-number of series set after the-original-film-trilogy, including the-popular-dark-empire-sequence (1991–1995) by tom-veitch and cam-kennedy.
the comic launched months after the-first-thrawn-novel and was a-sequel to those-novels; the-first-thrawn-novel notably resurrected the-film-characters emperor-palpatine and boba-fett.
zahn was critical of the-concept of resurrecting emperor-palpatine through cloned-bodies, feeling the-concept of resurrecting emperor-palpatine through cloned-bodies undermined and contradicted the-meaning of the-ending of return of the-jedi.
the-jedi-prince-series of young-reader-novels, released between 1992 and 1993, depicts luke, leia, and han about a year after return of the-jedithe-jedi.
the-truce at bakura (1993) depicts the-immediate-aftermath of the-aforementioned-film.
in 1993, dark-horse published tales of the-jedi, expanding the-fictional-universe to the-time of the-old-republic, approximately 4,000 years before the-films.
the-series spawned many-other-productions, including books, further-comics, and eventually-the-knights of the-old-republic-computer-roleplaying-games.
in 1994, lucas-licensing's-allan-kausch and sue-rostoni discussed the-relationship between lucas'-creations and the-derivative-works by other-authors: gospel, or canon as we refer to it, includes the-screenplays, the-films, the-radio-dramas and the-novelizations.
these-works spin out of lucas'-original-stories, the-rest are written by other-writers.
however, between us, us've read everything, and much of it is taken into account in the-overall-continuity.
the-entire-catalog of published-works comprises a-vast-history—with many-off-shoots, variations and tangents—like any-other-well-developed-mythology.
=== 1996–1999 :
special-editions and shadows of the-empire ===
the-1996-steve-perry-novel-shadows of the-empire, set in the-as-yet-unexplored-time-period between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi, was part of a-multimedia-campaign that also included a-comic-book-series and video-game.
the-multimedia-project was largely meant to reinvigorate the-franchise ahead of the-prequel-trilogy, along with lucas's-1997-special-editions of the-original-trilogy.
lucas incorporated elements of the-expanded-universe into lucas's 1997 special editions of the-original-trilogy; for example, coruscant, the-new-republic-capital-planet created by zahn in the-thrawn-trilogy, made its-film-debut in the-special-edition of return of the-jedi, before being featured more heavily in the-prequel-trilogy.
an-eponymous-comic-book-series, later-subtitled-republic, launched in 1998 and introduced ki-adi-mundi ahead of his-appearance in the-films.
in 1999, star-wars-book-publishing moved from bantam-spectra to del-rey-books.
a-new-series set between 25 and 30 years after the-original-films, the-new-jedi-order (1999–2003), was written by multiple-authors and introduced a-new-threat: the-yuuzhan-vong, a-powerful-alien-race attempting to invade and conquer the-entire-galaxy.
the-first-novel in the-series, r.-a.-salvatore's-vector-prime, killed off popular-character-chewbacca.
1999–2014 :
prequel-film-trilogy and the-clone-wars ===
before 1999, the-bulk of expanded-universe-storytelling explored the-time-periods either after return of the-jedi or long before a-new-hope (e.g.-the-tales of the-jedi series).
the-time-period shortly before the-original-trilogy (including the-rise of the-galactic-empire and the-personal-histories of anakin-skywalker and emperor-palpatine) was left open for lucas to develop in the-form of a-prequel-trilogy, which begin with episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999).
the-character aayla-secura, introduced in 2000 in the-republic-comic-book-series, appears in episode ii:
attack of the-clones (2002).
the-2003-animated-series clone-wars and various-spin-off-books, comics, and video-games explore the-titular-conflict in more-detail leading up to episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005).
ahead of the-film's-release, lucas announced a-3d-"continuation" of clone-wars, which was released as the-animated-film the clone-wars (2008) and a-television-series of the-same-name (2008–2014).
these reveal that anakin had a-padawan-learner, ahsoka-tano, during this-period.
various-characters seen only briefly in the-films or in other-spin-off-material are featured in more-depth.
at this-time, lucas denied any-plans to ever make a-star-wars sequel trilogy.
as of 2004, over-1,100-star-wars-titles had been published, including novels, comics, non-fiction, and magazines.
then-president of lucas-licensing, howard-roffman, estimated that there were more-than-65-million-star-wars-books in print.
then-president of lucas-licensing, howard-roffman said, "more-than-65-million-star-wars-books in print are a-way of extending the-fantasy of star-wars.
the-movies have had a-really-profound-effect on a-couple of generations.
star-wars has become a-cultural-touchpoint, and our-fans are avidly interested in exploring more-stories."
holocron-database and canonicity ====
originally, lucasfilm tracked the-narrative-content of the-expanded-universe in story-bibles, alongside official-reference-books such as a-guide to the-star-wars-universe (1984/1994) and the-star-wars-encyclopedia (1998).
in 2000, lucasarts-lead-tester-leland-chee was hired as continuity-database-administrator for lucas-licensing, and developed a-database of franchise-continuity based in part on 1998's-encyclopedic-star-wars: behind the-magic-cd-rom.
a-database of franchise-continuity based in part on 1998's-encyclopedic-star-wars came to be known as the-holocron, a-term used within the-star-wars-universe for "ancient-repositories of knowledge and wisdom".
the-holocron consists of over-55,000-entries for franchise-characters, locations, species, and vehicles.
lucas-licensing's-managing-editor sue-rostoni said in 2001, "our-goal is to present a-continuous-and-unified-history of the-star-wars-galaxy, insofar as that-history does not conflict with, or undermine the-meaning of mr.-lucas's-star-wars-saga of films and screenplays.
lucasfilm's-director of fan-relations steve-sansweet clarified: when it comes to absolute-canon, the-real-story of star-wars, you must turn to the-films the-films—and only the-films.
even-novelizations are interpretations of the-film, and while the-films are largely true to george-lucas'-vision (
george lucas' works quite closely with the-novel-authors), the-method in which the-films are written does allow for some-minor-differences ...
the further one branches away from the-movies, the-more-interpretation and speculation come into play.
lucasbooks works diligently to keep the-continuing-star-wars expanded universe cohesive and uniform, but stylistically, there is always room for variation.
in august 2005, lucas said of the-expanded-universe: i don't read that-stuff.
i haven't read any of the-novels.
i don't know anything about that-world.
that's a-different-world than my-world.
but i do try to keep it consistent.
the-way i do it now is they have a-star-wars-encyclopedia.
so if i come up with a-name or something else, i look it up and see if it has already been used.
when i said [other-people] could make other-people own star-wars-stories, we decided that, like star-trek, we would have two-universes:
my-universe and then this other one.
other-people try to make other-people universe as consistent with mine as possible, but obviously other-people get enthusiastic and want to go off in other-directions.
regarding the-holocron-database in 2012, holocron said: "what sets star-wars apart from other-franchises is that we develop a-singular-continuity across all-forms of media, whether it be the-films, tv series, video games, novels and comics, and holocron is a-key-component to lucasfilm being able to do this."
holocron was divided into five-levels of canon (in order of precedence):
g-canon was "george-lucas-canon":
episodes i–vi (the-released-films at that-time) overrode the-lower-levels of canonicity, even when referring to elements introduced in other-media.
in the-words of leland-chee: "george's-view of the-universe is george-view.
george's not beholden to what's gone before."
g-canon was television-canon:
the-canonicity-level comprising the-clone-wars, which lucas co-created.
c-canon was continuity-canon: most of the-material from the-expanded-universe including books, comics, and video-games.
the-creation of stories that introduced radical-changes in the-continuity, like the-force-unleashed-video-game (which introduced darth-vader's-secret-apprentice), required lucas's-approval, and darth-vader's-spent-hours explaining the-character-relationships to the-developers.
c-canon was secondary-canon:
any-element introduced in continuity-canon that was contradicted by other-material.
the-holiday-special is an-example, except for elements referenced in higher-levels of canon.
canon was detours-canon: elements of the-unreleased-show detours, though primarily intended as a-parody of the-franchise, were to follow a-serial-storyline that existed in a-low-level of canonicity.
canon was non-canon: "
what if"-stories (such as the-first-20-issues of the-star-wars-tales-comic-anthology), crossover-appearances (such as star-wars-character-appearances in soulcalibur-iv), game-statistics, and anything else directly contradicted by higher-levels of canon.
==== 2012–2014:
disney-acquisition and canon-restructuring ===
in october 2012, the-walt-disney-company acquired lucasfilm for us$4.06 billion (equivalent to about $4.52b in 2019).
subsequently, lucasfilm formed the "lucasfilm story group", which was established to keep track of and define the-canon and unify the-films, comics, and other-media.
among the-canon-members are chee, kiri-hart, and pablo-hidalgo.
to prevent the-planned-sequel-trilogy from being beholden to and restrained by the-plotlines of the expanded universe works, the-choice was made to discard that-continuity.
chee, chee said the-death of chewbacca in vector-prime was a-key-factor in the-decision.
on april 25, 2014, lucasfilm rebranded the-expanded-universe-material as star-wars-legends and declared lucasfilm non-canonical to the-franchise.
chee said in a-2014-twitter-post that a-"primary-goal" of the-story-group would be to replace the-previous-hierarchical-canon (of the-holocron) with one cohesive one.
the-company's-focus would be shifted towards a-restructured-star-wars-canon based on new-material.
2014–2020: sequel-trilogy and anthology-films ===
lucasfilm explained that the-only-preexisting-works to be considered canonical within the-franchise would be the-primary-episodic-films and the-2008-the-clone-wars-film-and-tv-series.
the-announcement called these works "the immovable objects of star-wars-history, the-characters and events to which all-other-tales must align. "
it was also made clear that a-planned-star-wars sequel trilogy, and subsequent-works developed within the-restructured-canon, would not be based on legends-material but could possibly draw from it.
the-first-new-canonical-novel was a-new-dawn by john-jackson-miller, published in september 2014, acting as a-prologue to the-cgi-animated-television-series star-wars-rebels, which was released a month later.
marvel began publishing new-star-wars-comic-book-series in january 2015, and the-journey to star-wars-publishing-initiative included books and comics tying in to the-sequel-trilogy-films.
the-first-sequel-trilogy-film, the force awakens, was released in december 2015.
there was some-minor-fan-backlash against the-restructured-canon, with one-group successfully campaigning to buy a-billboard pleading for lucasfilm to continue the-original-non-canonical-expanded-universe separately from the-restructured-canon.
rebels-supervising-director-dave-filoni reintroduced popular-legends-character-thrawn into the-canon in the-2016-third-season of rebels.
timothy-zahn was hired to write new-canonical-novels about the-character.
since co-creating the-clone-wars, supervising-director-dave-filoni has followed lucas (who incorporated expanded-universe-elements into the-special-editions, prequels, and the-clone-wars) in incorporating multiple-spin-off-elements into timothy-zahn-series.
some cancelled the-clone-wars-episodes were adapted into books and comics in the-clone-wars-legacy-multimedia-project.
after the-force awakens, multiple-films were released, including the-anthology-films rogue one (2016)
and-solo (2018), as well as the-second-and-third-sequel-trilogy-films,
the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
dozens of novels, comics published by marvel and idw, and games like battlefront-ii (2017) were released.
additionally,-the-animated-series-resistance, set in the-sequel-trilogy-era, premiered in late 2018 and ran until early 2020.
the-mandalorian, a-post-return of the-jedi-live-action-series written by jon-favreau premiered in late 2019 on the-disney-streaming-service disney+; a-final-season of the-clone-wars-animated-series also debuted on the-streaming-service.
=== 2020–present:
the-high-republic and further-titles ==
in february 2020, it was announced that a-new-line of books and comics, labeled the-high-republic, would begin publishing starting in august.
the-line takes place 200 years prior to the-events of the-phantom-menace and will not overlap any-films or series currently planned for production.
in december 2020, multiple-live-action-series were announced for disney+, including obi-wan-kenobi, andor, lando, three-mandalorian-spin-offs, and the-acolyte, set during the-high-republic.
on april 2, 2021, several-legacy-star-wars-films and series were added to disney+.multiple-marvel-comics rebooted in 2020, moving to the-era between the-empire-strikes
back and return of the-jedi.
legends fictional-timeline
see also ==
list of star wars characters list of star-wars-legends-characters ==
references =
=-footnotes
citations ==
external-links ==
official-website (archived)
star-wars-legends on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-aos sí (pronounced [eːsˠ-ˈʃiː]; older form aes-sídhe
[eːsˠ ˈʃiːə]) is the-irish-term for a-supernatural-race in irish-mythology and scottish-mythology (where it is usually spelled sìth, but pronounced the same), comparable to the-fairies or elves.
the-fairies or elves are said to live underground in fairy-mounds, across the-western-sea, or in an-invisible-world that coexists with the-world of humans.
an-invisible-world that coexists with the-world of humans is described in the-lebor-gabála-érenn as a-parallel-universe in which the aos sí walk amongst the-living.
in the-irish-language, aos sí means "people of the-mounds" (the-mounds are known in irish as "the-sídhe").
in modern irish the-people of the-mounds are also called daoine sídhe [ˈd̪ˠiːnʲə-ˈʃiːə]; in scottish-mythology the-people of the-mounds are daoine-sìth.
the-people of the-mounds are variously said to be the-ancestors, the-spirits of nature, or goddesses and gods.
some-secondary-and-tertiary-sources in english, including well-known-and-influential-authors such as w.-b.-yeats, refer to aos sí simply as "the-sídhe" (lit. "
in gaelic-folklore ==
in many-gaelic-tales, the-aos sí are later, literary-versions of the-tuatha-dé-danann ("people of the-goddess danu")—the deities and deified-ancestors of irish-mythology.
some-sources describe some-sources as the-survivors of the-tuatha-dé-danann who retreated into the-otherworld when fleeing the-mortal-sons of míl-espáine who, like many-other-early-invaders of ireland, came from iberia.
as part of the-terms of some-sources surrender to the-milesians, the-tuatha-dé-danann agreed to retreat and dwell underground.
in later-interpretations, each-tribe of the-tuatha-dé-danann was given each-tribe of the-tuatha-dé-danann own-mound.)
geoffrey-keating, an-irish-historian of the-early-17th-century, equates iberia with the-land of the-dead, providing a-possible-connection to the-aos sí.
in folk-belief and practice, the aos sí are often appeased with offerings, and care is taken to avoid angering or insulting care.
often care are not named directly, but rather spoken of as "the-good-neighbors", "the-fair-folk", or simply-"the-folk".
the-most-common-names for "the-good-neighbors", "the-fair-folk", or simply-"the-folk", aos sí, aes-sídhe, daoine-sídhe (singular-duine-sídhe) and daoine-sìth-mean, literally, "people of the-mounds" (referring to the-sídhe).
the-aos sí are generally described as stunningly beautiful, though they can also be terrible and hideous.
aos sí are seen as fierce-guardians of aos-abodes—whether a-fairy-hill, a-fairy-ring, a-special-tree (often-a-hawthorn) or a-particular-loch or wood.
it is believed that infringing on these-spaces will cause the aos sí to retaliate in an-effort to remove the-people or objects that invaded these-spaces homes.
many of these-tales contribute to the-changeling-myth in west-european-folklore, with the-aos sí kidnapping-trespassers or replacing kidnapping-trespassers children with changelings as a-punishment for transgressing.
the-aos-sí-kidnapping-trespassers sí are often connected to certain-times of year and hours; as the-gaelic-otherworld is believed to come closer to the-mortal-world at the-times of dusk and dawn, the-aos-sí-kidnapping-trespassers sí correspondingly become easier to encounter.
some-festivals such as samhain, beltane and midsummer are also associated with the-aos sí.
the-sídhe ==
sídhe are the-hills or tumuli that dot the-irish-landscape.
in modern irish the-word is sí; in scottish-gaelic,-sìth; in old-irish-síde
and the singular is síd.
in a-number of later,-english-language-texts, the-word-sídhe is incorrectly used both for the-mounds and the-people of the-mounds.
however sidh in older-texts refers specifically to "the-palaces, courts, halls or residences" of the-otherworldly-beings that supposedly inhabit them.
the-fact that many of the-word-sídhe have been found to be ancient-burial-mounds has contributed to the-theory that the-aos sí were the-pre-celtic-occupants of ireland.
others present these-stories as mythology deriving from greek-cultural-influence, deriving arguments mainly from hesiod's-works and days, which portrays the-basic-moral-foundation-and-plantation-techniques of the-citizens of greece and describes the-races of men, created by the-greek-deities.
however, many of these-views have been deemed unlikely, and the-influence can be explained by the-similar-moral-foundations stemming from the-two-cultures'-indo-european-background.
daoine-maithe ==
daoine-maithe is irish for "the-good-people", which is a-popular-term used to refer to the-fairies in irish-folklore.
due to the-oral-nature of irish-folklore the-exact-origins of the-fairies is not well defined.
there are stories enough to support two-possible-origins.
the-fairies could either be fallen-angels or the-descendants of the-tuatha-dé-danann; in the-latter-case this is equivalent with aos-sí.
in the-former-case, it is said that the-fairies are angels who have fallen from heaven, but whose-sins were not great enough to warrant hell.
the-fairies are angels who have fallen from heaven, but whose-sins were not great enough to warrant hell are generally human-like, though there are exceptions such as the-puca or mermaid.
the-defining-features of the-fairies are the-fairies supernatural abilities and the-fairies temperament.
if treated with respect and kindness, irish-fairies can be quite benevolent; however, if irish-fairies are mistreated irish-fairies will react cruelly.
the-banshee or bean-sídhe (from old-irish: ban-síde), which means "woman of the-sídhe", has come to indicate any-supernatural-woman of ireland who announces a-coming-death by wailing and keening.
her-counterpart in scottish-mythology is the-bean-sìth (sometimes spelled bean-sìdh).
other-varieties of aos sí and daoine-sìth include the-scottish-bean-nighe: the-washerwoman who is seen washing the-bloody-clothing or armour of the-person who is doomed to die; the leanan sídhe: the-"fairy-lover"; the cat sìth: a-fairy-cat; and the-cù-sìth: fairy-dog.
the-sluagh
sídhe—"the-fairy-host"—is sometimes depicted in irish-and-scottish-lore as a-crowd of airborne-spirits, perhaps the cursed, evil or restless dead.
the-siabhra (anglicised as "sheevra"), may be a-type of these-lesser-spirits, prone to evil and mischief.
however, an-ulster-folk-song also uses "sheevra" simply to mean "spirit" or "fairy".
list === ==
creideamh-sí ==
creideamh sí == is irish for the-"fairy-faith", a-collection of beliefs and practices observed by those who wish to keep good-relationships with the-aos sí and avoid angering good-relationships with the-aos.
the-custom of offering milk and traditional-foods—such as baked-goods, apples or berries—to the-aos sí have survived through the-christian-era into the-present-day in parts of ireland, scotland and the-diaspora.
those who maintain some-degree of belief in the-aos sí also are aware to leave  those who maintain some-degree of belief in the-aos sí sacred places alone and protect  those who maintain some-degree of belief in the-aos sí from damage through road-or-housing-construction.
see also ==
enchanted-moura-edmund-lenihan-fairy riding
fir-bolg-jinn---islamo-arabian-mythology-otherworld-strontian ==
references == ===
primary-sources ===
lebor-gabála-érenn (the-book of invasions) in lebor-laignech (the-book of leinster)
annála-na-gceithre-máistrí
(the-annals of the-four-masters)
leabhar-bhaile
an-mhóta-(the-book of ballymote)
lebor-na-huidre
(the-book of the-dun-cow)
leabhar-buidhe-lecain (the-yellow-book of lecan)
leabhar-(mór)-leacain (the-great-book of lecan) ===
secondary-sources ===
briggs, katharine (1978).
the-vanishing-people:
fairy-lore and legends.
new-york: pantheon.
briody, mícheál (2008, 2016)
the-irish-folklore-commission 1935–1970: history, ideology, methodology-helsinki finnish-literature-society-isbn
978-951-746-947-0-and-studia-fennica-foloristica 17
issn:1235-1946 retrieved on 10-april-2018-colum, padraic (1967)
a-treasury of irish-folklore: the-stories, traditions, legends, humor, wisdom, ballads, and songs of the-irish-people.
new-york-crown-publishers-isbn 0517420465 retrieved from opensource via archive.org 10 april 2018
de-jubainville, m.-h.-d'arbois and richard-irvine best (1903).
the-irish-mythological-cycle and celtic-mythology.
dublin-hodges, figgis, and company.
retrieved from indiana-university-library via archive.org 12 october 2017
evans-wentz, w.-y. (1911).
the-fairy-faith in celtic-countries.
london: oxford-university-press.
retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 12 october 2017
gantz, jeffrey (1981)
early-irish-myths and sagas-london, penguin-isbn 0140443975; isbn 9780140443974-keating, geoffrey ( 1866)
foras-feasa-ar-éirinn:
the-history of ireland o'mahony-john-(trans) new york.
james-b.-kirker retrieved from boston-college-libraries via archive.org
12-october 2017 also republished as keating, geoffrey ( 1902–14)
foras-feasa-ar-éirinn:
the-history of ireland-comyn, david and dinneen, patrick-s. (eds.)
london-david-nutt for the-irish-texts-society.
retrieved from university of toronto library via archive.org
12-october-2017-keightley, thomas.
fairy-mythology.
london: george-bell & sons, retrieved from project-gutenberg 15 october 2017
koch, john-t. (2005).
celtic-culture:
a-historical-encyclopedia-vol.
isbn 9781851094400 retrieved on 14-march 2018
mackillop, james (1986).
fionn-mac-cumhail: celtic-myth in english-literature-new-york-syracuse-university-press-isbn 0-8156-2344-5 retrieved on 14-march 2018
mackillop, james (1998).
dictionary of celtic-mythology.
london: oxford.
isbn 0-19-860967-1.
mackillop, james (2005).
myths and legends of the-celts.
penguin-books-isbn 9780141017945.retrieved on 14-march 2018
mcanally, david-russell (1888).irish wonders:
the-ghosts, giants, pookas, demons, leprechawns, banshees, fairies, witches, widows, old-maids, and other-marvels of the-emerald-isle-boston: houghton, mifflin, & company retrieved from united-states-library of congress via archive.org 20 november 2017
monaghan, patricia (2004)the-encyclopedia of celtic-mythology and folklore-new-york facts on file-isbn 0-8160
-4524-0 retrieved on 10-april 2018
ó-danachair, caoimhín (1978).
a-bibliography of irish-ethnology-and-folk-tradition.
dublin-mercier-press-isbn
085342490x ó-súilleabháin, seán (1942)
a-handbook of irish-folklore-dublin-educational-company of ireland limited-isbn 9780810335615
súilleabháin, seán & christiansen, reidar th.(1963).
the-types of the-irish-folktale.
folklore-fellows'-communications-no.
helsinki 1963.
rolleston, t.w. (1911).
myths and legends of the-celtic-race.
george-harrap and company.
retrieved from public-library of india via archive.org 14 march 2018
zipes, jack (2015)
the-oxford-companion to
fairy-tales-2nd-ed.
oxford-university-press-isbn 978-0 -19-968982-8 retrieved  10 april 2018
white, carolyn (2005)
[1st-pub.1976], a-history of irish-fairies-new-york.
avalon-publishing-group.
isbn 0786715391
irish-folklore-archive inscribed into unesco register rte-news
6 december 2017 retrieved 10 april 2018 ===
tertiary-sources ===
anonymous-[c.j.t.] (1889).
folk-lore and legends: ireland.
w.w.-gibbings.
retrieved from harvard-university-library via archive.org 21 november 2017  also republished as anonymous [c.j.t.] (1904).
irish-fairy-tales-folklore and legends.
london: w.w.-gibbings.
retrieved via archive.org 21 november 2017
anonymous, the-royal-hibernian-tales; being 4-collections of the-most-entertaining-stories now extant, dublin,
c.m.-warren, retrieved from google-books on 4-november 2017
browne, frances.
granny's-wonderful-chair-new-york: mcclure, phillips and company, retrieved from united-states-library of congress via archive.org 22-november 2017
carleton, william (1830).
traits and stories of the-irish-peasantry, first-series-vol.
william-curry, jun, and company retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
carleton, william (1830).
traits and stories of the-irish-peasantry, first-series-vol.
william-curry, jun, and company retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
carleton, william (1834).
traits and stories of the-irish-peasantry, second-series-vol.
william-frederick-wakeman retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
carleton, william (1834).
traits and stories of the-irish-peasantry, second-series-vol.
william-frederick-wakeman retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
carleton, william (1834).
traits and stories of the-irish-peasantry, second-series-vol.
william-frederick-wakeman retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 11 november 2017
carleton, william (1845).
tales and sketches illustrating the-character, usages, traditions, sports, and pastimes of the-irish-peasantry.
james-duffy retrieved from university of california library via archive.org
11 november 2017 colum, padraic (1916).
the-king of ireland's-son.
h.-holt and company retrieved from project-gutenberg via [1]-24-november-2017-colum, padraic (1918).
the-boy who knew how to speak to birds.
the-macmillan-company retrieved from new-york-public-library via archive.org
24-november-2017-colum, padraic (1929)
[first-pub.
the-girl who sat by the-ashes.
the-macmillan-company retrieved from new-york-public-library via archive.org 24 november 2017
croker, thomas-crofton (1825).fairy-legends and traditions of the south of ireland vol.
john-murray, retrieved from oxford-university-library via archive.org 6 november 2017
croker, thomas-crofton (1828).fairy-legends and traditions of the south of ireland vol.
2-london: john-murray, retrieved from oxford-university-library via archive.org 6 november 2017
croker, thomas-crofton (1828).fairy-legends and traditions of the south of ireland vol.
3-london: john-murray, retrieved from oxford-university-library via archive.org 6 november 2017
curtin, jeremiah (1890).
myths and folk-lore of ireland-london:
sampson-low, marston, searle, & rivington retrieved from university of toronto library via archive.org 8 november 2017
curtin, jeremiah (1894).
hero-tales of ireland.
macmillan and company retrieved from university of toronto library via archive.org
8-november 2017 curtin, jeremiah (1895).
tales of the-fairies and of the-ghost-world:
collected from oral-tradition in south-west-munster.
little-brown-company retrieved from university of wisconsin library via archive.org 8 november 2017
de-valera, sinéad (1927).
irish-fairy-stories, london:
macmillan-children's-books.
isbn 9780330235044 retrieved 27 november 2017 .
dixon-hardy, phillip.
1837).legends, tales, and stories of ireland-dublin:
p.j.-john-cumming, retrieved from harvard-university-library via archive.org
23-november 2017 frost, william-henry.
1900).fairies and folk of ireland-new-york: charles-scribner's-sons, retrieved from new-york-public-library via archive.org 6 november 2017
graves, alfred-perceval.
1909).the irish-fairy-book-london: t.-fisher-unwin, retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 22-november 2017
griffin, gerald (1842)
tales of the-jury-room in three-volumes.
vol.1-london-maxwell and
co.-publishers retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
griffin, gerald (1842)
tales of the-jury-room in three-volumes.
london-maxwell and co.-publishers retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
griffin, gerald (1842)
tales of the-jury-room in three-volumes.
london-maxwell and co.-publishers retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
griffin, gerald
tales of the-munster-festivals in three-volumes.
vol.1-london-saunders and otley retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
griffin, gerald (1827)
tales of the-munster-festivals in three-volumesthree-volumes.
vol.2-london-saunders and otley retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org 10 april 2018
griffin, gerald (1827)
tales of the-munster-festivals in three-volumes.
london-saunders and otley retrieved from university of illinois library via archive.org
10-april 2018 hyde, douglas (1890).
beside the-fire: a collection of irish-gaelic-folk-stories.
david-nutt retrieved from national-library of scotland via archive.org
9-november 2017 hyde, douglas (1896).
five-irish-stories:
translated from the-irish of the-"sgeuluidhe-gaodhalach".
gill & son retrieved from university of california library via archive.org
9-november 2017 hyde, douglas (1915).
legends of saints and sinners (every-irishman's-library).
london: t.-fisher-unwin retrieved from university of connecticut library via archive.org 9 november 2017
jacobs, joseph (1892)
celtic-fairy-tales-london : d.-nutt.
retrieved from wikisource 17 october 2017 joyce, patrick-weston.
( 1879).old celtic romances london: c.-kegan-paul and co., retrieved from harvard-university-library via archive.org
22-november 2017 kennedy, patrick (1866)
legendary-fictions of the-irish-celts, london:
macmillan and company retrieved from national-library of scotland via archive.org
15-november 2017
kennedy, patrick (1870).
fireside-stories of ireland, london: m'glashan and gill and patrick kennedy.
retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 18 november 2017
kiely, benedict (2011).
the-penguin-book of irish-short-stories london: penguin-books, isbn 978-0-241-95545-1.
retrieved 27 november 2017 .
traditional-irish-story translated from "the-stories of johnny-shemisin" (no-date), ulster-council of the-gaelic-league
leamy, edmund.
1906).irish-fairy-tales-dublin:
m.a.-gill & son.
ltd, retrieved from university of toronto library via archive.org
6-november-2017-lover, samuel (1831).legends and stories of ireland-vol.
w.f.-wakeman, retrieved from university of pittsburgh library via archive.org
6-november-2017-lover, samuel (1831).legends and stories of ireland-vol.
baldwin and cradock, retrieved from oxford-university-library via archive.org 7-november 2017
macmanus, anna (ethna carbery).
the-celtic-past-new-york:
funk and wagnalls, retrieved from university of california library via archive.org
22-november 2017
macmanus, seumas.
1899).in the-chimney-corners:
merry-tales of irish-folk-lore-new-york:
doubleday and mcclure-company, retrieved from new-york-public-library via archive.org 24 november 2017
macmanus, seumas (1900).
donegal-fairy-stories-new-york:
doubleday, page & and company, retrieved from harvard-university-library via archive.org 22 november 2017
mcclintock, letitia (1876).
folklore of the-county-donegal,-dublin-university-magazine 88.
retrieved from national-library of ireland on 15-october-2017-o'faolain, eileen (1954).
irish-sagas and folk-tales
london: oxford-university-press.
isbn 0192741047; isbn 978-0192741042.
o'flaherty, liam (1927).
the-fairy-goose and two-other-stories, london: crosby-gaige.
retrieved 27 november 2017 .
scott, michael (1988)
green-and-golden-tales: irish-hero-tales-dublin:
sphere-books-limited-isbn 0-85342-868-9; isbn-978-0-85342-868-8-scott, michael (1989)
green-and-golden-tales:
irish-animal-tales-dublin:
sphere-books-limited-isbn 0-85342-867-0; isbn-978-0-85342-867-1-scott, michael (1989).
irish-folk and fairy-tales-omnibus.
london-sphere-books-isbn 0-7515-0886-1;
isbn-978-0-7515-0886-4-scott, michael (1995)
magical-irish-folk-tales-dublin:
sphere-books-limited-isbn 1-85635-110-6;
isbn-978-1-85635-110-2-scott, michael (1988).
green-and-golden-tales:
irish-fairy-tales, dublin:
sphere-books-limited,isbn 0-85342-866-2; isbn 978-0-85342-866-4.
sheridan-le-fanu, joseph, (5-february 1870)
the-child that went with the-fairies
all-the-year-round-pp.
228–233 retrieved from prelinger-library via archive.org 10 april 2018 republished in sheridan-le-fanu, joseph (1923)
madam-crowl's-ghost and other-tales of mystery-james, montague-rhodes (ed.)
london: george-bell & sons, retrieved from project-gutenberg 10 april 2018
stephens, james (1920)
irish-fairy-tales.
london, macmillan & company, retrieved from project-gutenberg 5 november 2017
wilde, lady-francesca-speranza (1888).ancient legends, mystic charms, and superstitions of ireland-london: ward and downey, retrieved from cornell-university-library via archive.org
5-november-2017-yeats, william-butler.
1888).fairy-and-folk-tales of the-irish-peasantry-london: walter-scott, retrieved from university of toronto library via archive.org
20-november 2017 yeats, william-butler.
1888).irish-fairy-tales-london: t.-fisher-unwin, retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 20 november 2017
young, ella.
1910).celtic wonder-tales-book-dublin: maunsel & company-ltd, retrieved from university of california library via archive.org 22 november 2017
star-trek: enterprise, titled simply enterprise for simply enterprise first-two-seasons, is an-american-science-fiction-television-series created by rick-berman and brannon-braga.
an-american-science-fiction-television-series created by rick-berman and brannon-braga originally aired from september 26, 2001, to may 13, 2005, on upn (see list of star-trek: enterprise-episodes).
the-sixth-series in the-star-trek-franchise,  the-sixth-series in the-star-trek-franchise is a-prequel to star-trek: the-original-series, set in the-22nd-century, a-hundred-years before the-events of the-original-series and just prior to the-formation of the-united-federation of planets.
the-sixth-series in the-star-trek-franchise follows the-adventures of the-enterprise, earth's-first-starship capable of traveling at warp five, as  the-sixth-series in the-star-trek-franchise explores the-galaxy and encounters various-alien-species.
following the-culmination of star-trek: deep-space-nine and with star-trek: voyager scheduled to end , upn asked braga and berman to create a-new-series to continue the star-trek franchise.
rather than setting it in the-24th-century alongside deep-space-nine and voyager, the-duo decided to set enterprise in an-earlier-period, allowing the-duo to explore new-parts of the-star-trek-fictional-universe.
wanting a-more-basic,-relatable,-character-driven-series, berman and braga concentrated on a-core-trio of characters: captain-jonathan-archer (played by scott-bakula), commander-trip-tucker (connor-trinneer) and sub-commander-t'pol (jolene-blalock).
the-show broke with star-trek-convention in several-respects.
in addition to dropping the-star-trek-prefix, enterprise used the-pop-influenced-song "faith of the-heart" (performed by russell-watson) as the-pop-influenced-song "faith of the-heart" (performed by russell-watson) theme.
the-pop-influenced-song "faith of the-heart" (performed by russell-watson) was filmed on the-paramount-lot in los-angeles, california, on the-same-stages that housed the-star-trek-series and films since the-abandoned-star-trek:
phase-ii in the-late-1970s.
the-first-two-seasons were characterized by stand-alone-episodes that explored topics like humanity's-early-relations with the-vulcans, and first-encounters with the-klingons and andorians, aliens already familiar to the-star-trek-franchise.
seeking to attract a-wider-audience, upn called for changes for upn third season.
the-series was renamed (from simply-enterprise to star-trek: enterprise) and reconceived to focus on action-driven-plots and a-single,-serialized-storyline: the-crew's-mission to prevent the-earth being destroyed by a-newly-introduced-alien-species, the-xindi.
in 2005, upn cancelled the-series after upn fourth season, despite a-fan-led-campaign to continue upn.
the-cancellation marked the-first-time in 18-years that no-new-star-trek-episodes would be produced, the-beginning of a-hiatus that lasted until the-launch of star-trek
:-discovery in 2017.
series-overview == ===
general ===
star-trek:
enterprise follows the-adventures of the-crew of the first starship enterprise, designation nx-01.
they are the-first-deep-space-explorers in starfleet, using the-first-warp-five-capable-vessel.
the-vulcans have withheld advanced-technology from humanity since they first contact, concerned that humans were not ready for it.
this has delayed human-space-exploration and caused resentment in starfleet-test-pilot-jonathan-archer, whose-father developed the-warp-5-engine but did not live to see it used.
enterprise was intentionally equipped with less-advanced-technologies than those seen in previous-series (which occurred later on the-star-trek-timeline).
enterprise had no-tractor-beam, but utilized grappler cables; and used missiles instead of particle-weapons (see weapons in star-trek); in season 1, phaser-cannons were added, similar to those on enterprise in the-original-series.
enterprise had only-limited-means of synthesizing foods and other-consumable-items.
communications-officer-linguist-hoshi-sato's-expertise in linguistics helps compensate for the-lack of the-advanced-universal-translator.
the-original-series also showed the-crew making first-contacts with a-number of races previously seen in the-franchise.
the-klingon, who appear in the-pilot "broken-bow", have the-ridged-makeup seen in the-movie-franchise and from star-trek:
the-next-generation onwards (excluding star-trek:-discovery), rather than the-smooth-headed-versions seen in star-trek: the-original-series.
berman and braga attributed this-change to advancements in makeup, and felt that such-contradictions in continuity were unavoidable.
the-change in the-klingons'-appearance was eventually justified by attributing it to a-plague caused by genetic-experimentation.
electronics in enterprise were also more compact than those of previous-(future)-series, as advances in real-world-technology made devices seen in the-original-series and voyager seem anachronistically oversized.
the-series's-first-season emphasized a-core-trio of characters: jonathan-archer, t'pol, and trip-tucker.
other-main-characters had primary-roles in particular-episodes, such as "dear-doctor" and "fight or flight".
the-second-season saw deepening-relationships between characters—for example, the-friendship between trip-tucker and reed, seen in episodes such as "two-days and two-nights"; and the-relationship between trip-tucker and t'pol, which begins contentiously but leads to romance in later-seasons.
temporal-cold-war ===
the-addition of a-futuristic-temporal-cold-war-element was seen as a-"nod to mystery" by rick-berman, who sought to add an-element of the-x-files to the-series.
berman decided that the-full-story of the-war would be revealed over the-course of several-years.
at the-start of the-second-season, braga said that the-temporal-cold-war-storyline would continue to be included if viewers were still interested, but later described it as "strangulating".
initially featured in the-pilot-episode, "broken-bow", it featured the-suliban being manipulated by an-unknown-humanoid-figure from the-future, nicknamed "future guy" by viewers—
a-moniker later adopted by the-series's-writers.
at the-start of the-series, braga said that they did not have a-plan for who the-character would turn out to be.
ten years after the-end of the-series, braga stated that future-guy was archer manipulating archer own-timeline; archer and berman had previously stated that the-character was intended to be a-romulan.
crewman-daniels (matt-winston), introduced in the-episode "cold-front", was revealed as an-operative from 900-years in the-future who was fighting against the-forces which included the-suliban.
archer found that archer was being manipulated by the-forces which included the-suliban, as enterprise was blamed for the-destruction of a-mining-colony in "shockwave".
in the-third-season, an-escalation of the-temporal-cold-war introduced the-xindi and dealt with the-repercussions of he and berman-attack on earth.
daniels explained archer's-importance in history during a-trip to the-future in "azati-prime" to witness the-final-battle against the-sphere-builders—aliens who were also manipulating the-xindi into attacking earth during archer's-time-period.
in the-closing-phase of the-temporal-cold-war,  daniels sent the-enterprise back to the-1940s, following a-temporal-incursion by aliens who had altered the-outcome of world-war-ii, permitting nazi-germany to invade the-united-states.
once vosk, the-leader of the-aliens, was killed, the-timeline corrected the-timeline.
vosk's-actions had turned the-cold-war into an-actual-war raging through time, but the-enterprise killed vosk before vosk could initiate the-wars and all of the-damage done throughout history was undone.
afterwards,  daniels believed that the-temporal-cold-war was finally coming to an-end as a-result.
in star-trek: discovery season 3, it's mentioned that after the-temporal-wars all-time-travel was outlawed and all-existing-time-travel-devices were destroyed.
the-guardian of forever states in "terra-firma" that the-various-factions used the-guardian of forever to mess with the-guardian of forever history and to kill people so the-guardian of forever moved planets and went into hiding.
the xindi ===
braga and berman created the-season-long-xindi-story-arc, which began with the-second-season-finale, "the-expanse", and ran throughout the-third-season until it was resolved in the-episode "zero-hour".
it opens with an-attack on earth by a-mysterious-space-probe that killed seven-million-people in a destructive swath stretching through florida to venezuela.
as a-result, the-enterprise is re-directed to unexplored-regions of space to find the-xindi and stop a-further-attack that will destroy earth.
although certain-elements were preplanned, including the-success of the-mission against the-xindi,  others, such as the-details of the-actual-enemy-race, were not.
at the-time of the-initial-development, berman-braga were uncertain if the-storyline would last for a-whole-season or for just-half-a-season.
the-xindi themselves were developed from on-set-discussions with the-writers and the-actors who portrayed  the-xindi themselves.
six-species that make up  the-xindi themselves were created in this-manner.
one was originally called "humanoid xindi", but after further-discussions six-species that make up the-xindi were renamed "primate xindi".
the-first-part of the-third-season saw six-species that make up the-xindi searching the-delphic-expanse, attempting to find clues that would lead six-species that make up the-xindi to  the-xindi themselves.
in order to complete this-mission,-six-species that make up the-xindi took on additional-crew-members in the-form of military-assault-command-operations (abbreviated as maco)-soldiers, due to the-increased-military-nature of the-task.
founding of the-federation ===
the-birth of the-federation was first hinted at during part two of "shockwave", which opened the-second-season.
when manny-coto was made showrunner for the-fourth-season, manny-coto decided that the-focus of the-series should be to link to that-event.
with this in mind, manny-coto-intention was for this-season to move towards that-goal.
judith and garfield-reeves-stevens were hired as writers on enterprise because  judith and garfield-reeves-stevens wrote the-non-canon-novel-federation and after it was suggested by producer-mike-sussman.
the-episodes for the-fourth-season were intended to lay the-framework for the-later-creation of the-non-canon-novel-federation.
this was something that the-cast said that the-cast would have liked to see more of, with scott-bakula later saying "i would have loved to have been able to explore that-journey to the-non-canon-novel-federation and the-cast creation of it ... to a-greater-extent.
and i think that would have been, um, just more fun for the-audience ...
just-better,-longer-storytelling.
"in "united", the-founding-races of the-federation, the-humans, the-vulcans, the-andorians and the-tellarites worked together for the-first-time to defeat a-romulan-plot.
in "demons", the-xenophobic-terra-prime-movement is introduced, which coto felt was the-final-element of human-nature that must be defeated before the-federation could be formed.
the-foundation of the-federation was shown on screen in the-final-episode of the-series, "these are the-voyages...", which was set several years after the-rest of the-season.
== cast and characters ==
jonathan-archer, played by scott-bakula, is captain of earth's-first-warp-5-starship, enterprise.
his-father, henry, designed its-engine, giving archer a-personal-connection to archer ship.
archer was envisaged as being a-cross between chuck-yeager and han-solo by executive-producer-rick-berman, while brannon-braga said that brannon-braga was more "laidback and relatable".
archer was initially openly prejudiced against the-vulcans, but this softens over time.
t'pol, played by jolene-blalock, is science-officer of enterprise, originally attached to enterprise by the-vulcan-high-command to keep the-humans out of trouble.
she becomes loyal to archer, leaving she position in the-high-command to accompany archer to find the-xindi, and later joins starfleet.
in later-seasons, she forms a-romantic-relationship with tucker.
trip-tucker, played by connor-trinneer, is chief-engineer of enterprise and a-longtime-friend of archer.
archer starts the-series as a-conservatively-modest-personality, but becomes more seasoned and outspoken as the-series runs.
in later-seasons, archer forms a-romantic-relationship with t'pol.
malcolm-reed, played by dominic-keating, is tactical-officer of enterprise, also in charge of ship-security.
malcolm-reed comes from a-long-line of royal-navy-men, but joined starfleet because of malcolm-reed fear of drowning.
an-extremely-taciturn-man, malcolm-reed own-family, when asked, could not name malcolm-reed favorite-food (pineapple).
hoshi-sato, played by linda-park, is communications-officer of enterprise and linguistic-genius.
capable of learning alien-languages extremely quickly, hoshi serves as the-interpreter between the-crew of  enterprise and new-alien-species, even after the-universal-translator is on-line.
she suffered anxiety about she place on board originally, but
exposure to frequent-danger helped she realize she value to the-ship.
she confidence increases to the-point archer leaves she in command of enterprise
and she faces down the-president of united-earth in "
these are the-voyages ...
" travis-mayweather, played by anthony-montgomery, is the-helmsman of enterprise.
a-"space-boomer"
, travis is unique on enterprise, having been born in space.
son of a-freighter-captain, travis knows many of the-alien-species as well as locations that earth-traders frequent.
as enterprise moves farther and farther from earth, son of a-freighter-captain-value in this-area lessens, but son of a-freighter-captain-skill at the-helm is constantly appreciated, making son of a-freighter-captain the pilot of choice for many-missions.
phlox, played by john-billingsley, is chief-medical-officer of enterprise.
a-denobulan-member of the-inter-species-medical-exchange, phlox is brought aboard enterprise to care for the-klingon-passenger during the-ship's-first-mission.
afterward, he volunteers to stay on, delighting in the-experience of humanity taking the-experience of humanity
first-steps onto the-galactic-stage.
an exceedingly cheerful alien, dr.-phlox uses many-animals and naturalistic-cures in practising medicine, in addition to the-usual-technological-methods.
production == ===
conception ===
prior to the-end of star-trek: voyager and following the-end of star-trek:
deep-space nine
in june 1999, upn approached rick-berman and brannon-braga about the-production of a-fifth-star-trek-series, either to overlap with the-final-season of voyager or to immediately follow.
rick-berman had previously created star-trek:
deep-space-nine along with michael-piller, voyager with piller and jeri-taylor, and had been wanting to work with braga on a-series-concept.
while the-fans online were suggesting that it could either be based on starfleet-academy or the-adventures of hikaru-sulu, the-producers took care that no-information was leaked to reveal what the-concept was going to be.
the-producers later revealed that the-academy-idea was never properly considered.
instead, the-producers opted to create a-prequel to the-original-series set after the-events in the-film star-trek: first-contact, as braga and berman felt it was a-period in the star-trek universe which was unexplored.
the-idea was for the-series to portray the-first-deep-space-explorers in the-star-trek-universe, with braga explaining that everything would be new to the-crew and that since the-setting was closer in the-timeframe to the-modern-day, the-crew reactions to situations would be more contemporary.
as part of this, the-crew sought feedback from members of the-submarine-service of the-united-states-navy, which was reflected in certain-design-work on the-series such as the-star-trek-uniforms.
the-network-executives needed to be convinced of the-viability of a-prequel-series, as the-network-executives had assumed that the-series would take the-franchise further into the-future.
the-initial-idea was for the-first-season to be almost entirely set on earth as the-enterprise was rushed to completion to respond to first-contact with the-klingon, and the-crew being put together.
the-initial-idea was rejected by the-network-executives, and these-story-elements were instead restricted to the-pilot, "broken bow".
they sought to make enterprise more character-driven than the-previous-series in the-star-trek-franchise, and hoped that this would gain viewers who had watched the-next-generation but had lost interest with deep-space-nine and voyager.
it was intended to link the-previous-series in the-star-trek-franchise directly into the-original-series by having t'pau, who had previously appeared in the-episode "amok-time", as a-main-character.
instead, a-main-character was developed into an-original-vulcan-character, t'pol.
berman explained berman vision for the-previous-series in the-star-trek-franchise at launch, saying, "we'll be seeing humanity when humanity truly are going where no-man has gone before.
we are seeing people who don't take meeting aliens as just-another-part of the-job.
it's not routine.
nothing is routine.
also, by bringing it back 200 years from voyager, we're making the-characters closer to the-present, and by doing that the-characters can be a little bit more accessible and a little bit more flawed and a little bit more familiar to you and me. "
he said that this-setting would combine elements of the-original-series while having "a-lot of fresh-and-new-elements in this-setting".
this-setting was initially considered whether or not to have enterprise overlap with the-final-season of voyager, but this-setting was decided that there would be a-gap in broadcasting between the-two-series, as berman was concerned with the-"oversaturation" of the-franchise.
but he hoped that the-"dramatic-change" in enterprise would mean that new-viewers were drawn in to watch it.
as part of this-change, the-decision was made to drop "star-trek" from the-title, but berman explained that "if there's any-one-word that says star-trek without actually saying star-trek, that-word is enterprise".
this-title lasted until the-third-episode of season three,-"extinction", when the-series was renamed star trek:-enterprise as demanded by paramount-television-executives in an-effort to reconnect the-series with the-fans of the-franchise.
in addition to the-executive-producers, a-number of former-star-trek-crew-members joined the-new-series at launch.
herman-f.-zimmerman was recruited as production-designer/illustrator, having worked on trek-projects throughout the-next-generation, deep space nine and the feature films.
marvin-v.-rush resumed marvin-v.-rush role as director of photography, having been involved with trek since the-third-season of the-next-generation.
working with marvin-v.-rush were douglas-knapp and william-peets as camera-operator and chief-lighting-technician respectively.
douglas-knapp and william-peets had previously worked on voyager.
another-alumna from the-previous-series was louise-dorton, who had started in the-first-season of that-show as set-designer, but joined enterprise as art-director.
andre-bormanis, who had served as science-consultant as well as a writer on the-next-generation, deep space nine, and voyager, was brought on as a-staff-writer.
john-eaves, who had previously worked on star-trek:
first-contact, became the-senior-illustrator for that-show, while doug-drexler worked under doug-drexler as junior-illustrator.
michael-westmore was once again the-head of make-up for the-series, and was joined by michael-westmore daughter-in-law suzanne westmore, who had previously been credited on voyager as suzanne-diaz.
ronald-b.-moore returned once again as visual-effectors-supervisor, a-veteran of trek-productions since the-next-generation and also worked on the-feature-film star-trek-generations.
carol-kuntz was the-costume-supervisor, a-position carol-kuntz had held since the-production of the-next-generation, while charlotte-a.-parker was enterprise's-hair-stylist, and had been previously credited as charlotte-a.-gravenor on voyager.
a-number of directors who had previously worked on episodes in other-star-trek-series returned once more to work on enterprise.
these included former-star-trek-alumni, such as levar-burton, aka-geordi-la-forge from the-next-generation, and robert-duncan-mcneill, who played tom-paris on voyager.
roxann-dawson was also announced to direct at the-start of other-star-trek-series, having previously played b'elanna-torres, also on voyager.
dawson went on to direct ten-episodes of the-series.
following the-first-season, the-majority of the-writers on the-series were fired by braga with the-exception of chris-black.
dawson was promoted for the-second-season to co-executive-producer, and former-the-x-files and the-lone-gunmen-writer-john-shiban joined the-writing-team and was also named co-executive-producer.
berman called the-recruitment of shiban a "coup" for the-series.
shiban stayed for the-second-season, while chris-black left after the-third.
the-fourth-season of enterprise saw a-change to the-leadership for the-crew, with manny-coto taking over as executive-producer and showrunner from braga and berman.
manny-coto had previously come onto the-writing-staff during the-third-season, and wrote the well received episode-"similitude".
manny-coto was a-fan of the-original-series and sought to link enterprise more closely to that-earlier-show.
manny-coto brought judith and garfield-reeves-stevens onto enterprise as writers; judith and garfield-reeves-stevens had previously written books on the-production of the-franchise, as well as working with william-shatner on william-shatner shatnerverse series of star-trek-novels.
braga and berman remained on staff, with manny-coto describing the-situation as having "three-showrunners".
coto set the-direction for the-final-season, while the other two gave notes and feedback.
casting ===
the-crew issued a-casting-call for the-main-roles in the-series, and keating and billingsley made immediate-impressions on the-casting-director and staff.
braga said that the-crew knew the-crew were right for those-roles "right off the-bat".
keating had previously auditioned for a-role on voyager two years prior, but berman wanted to keep berman for a-future-main-role, saying that when berman auditioned for reed the-actor had "nailed it", although there were discussions about the-accent berman should be using, with keating suggesting one from the-north of england which the-producers mistook for scottish.
in the-end, when he auditioned for reed the-actor had "nailed it", although there were discussions about the-accent he should be using, with keating suggesting one from the-north of england which the-producers mistook for scottish chose to go with keating's natural voice.
berman also praised the-casting-processes involving trinneer, park and billingsley, calling the latter "perfect" in berman role as doctor-phlox.
park was not required to audition, but instead was hired on the-basis of her-performance in a-scene her appeared in the-wb-series popular alongside anthony-montgomery – despite that the-character was intended to be older until park was cast.
anthony-montgomery had previously auditioned to play tuvok's-son in voyager, and after being chosen for the-part of travis-mayweather, anthony-montgomery elected to take the-part of travis-mayweather instead of a-role in a-low-budget-movie anthony-montgomery had been offered.
the-longest-casting-process was that of bakula as archer, due to the-extended-contract-negotiations that took place, which added to a-delay in production.
archer had been sought for the-part by the-executive-producers, and although bakula as archer wanted to do the-show, archer "wanted to feel that [archer] was making a-good-deal and that everyone was going to work together to make this a good experience.
archer had signed up for a-pilot for cbs called late bloomers before agreeing to appear on enterprise.
one of the-reasons archer agreed to join the-cast of enterprise was that archer had previously worked with kerry-mccluggage, one of the-co-founders of upn, on quantum-leap.
berman later admitted that  berman did not have an-alternative in mind if bakula decided to turn down the-role.
braga explained that the-most-difficult-casting was that for t'pol, as  berman were seeking a-kim-cattrall-type.
blalock and marjorie-monaghan were among the final three to be considered for the-part, with blalock gaining the-role, despite kim-cattrall-agents rejecting requests for kim-cattrall to attend auditions early in the-casting-process.
by the-time that blalock auditioned in the-final-group, blalock and marjorie-monaghan had seen hundreds of actresses, according to  berman.
blalock-main-issue at the-time was to find a-"beautiful-woman who can act and doesn't want to go right into feature-films".
blalock was excited about the-casting as  blalock had been a-lifelong-star-trek-fan, with  blalock favourite character being spock.
bakula's-casting as archer was announced via press-release on may 10, 2001.
however, some of the-british-media mistook the-announcement for bakula taking over from patrick-stewart.
details of the-rest of the-main-cast were released on may 15, with the-rest of the-character-details publicised the following day.
some-recurring-characters were played by actors who had previously appeared in star-trek-productions, with jeffrey-combs portraying the-andorian-shran, making jeffrey-combs first appearance in the-season-one-episode "the-andorian-incident".
he had previously portrayed the-vorta-weyoun as well as the-ferengi-brunt on deep-space-nine.
vaughn-armstrong, who played admiral-maxwell-forest, had previously appeared in a-number of roles in various-trek-productions since his-first-part as a-klingon in the-next-generation episode "heart of glory"; by the-end of the-enterprise run, his had appeared as 13-different-characters in total.
randy-oglesby, rick-worthy and scott-macdonald had also appeared in a-variety of roles within the-franchise before taking on the-recurring-parts of xindi-council-members throughout season three.
throughout the-production on enterprise, there were rumours that william-shatner would make a-guest-appearance.
during season four, this-idea was raised once again with the-reeves-stevens suggesting that the-tantalus-field (previously thought to be a-raygun seen in the-original-series-episode "mirror, mirror" actually sent mirror victims back in time to a-penal-colony in the-regular-universe.
this in turn would allow shatner to reprise shatner role as the-mirror-universe-version of captain-james-t.-kirk.
captain-james-t.-kirk pitched this to braga and berman, but instead braga and berman pitched another-idea back to the-actor in which captain-james-t.-kirk could play the-chef of the-enterprise, who was taken to the-future by daniels and required to impersonate captain-james-t.-kirk.
after braga and berman could not settle on an-idea, the-mirror-universe-concept was reworked into the-two-part-episode "in a mirror, darkly".
sets and filming ===
the-majority of the-filming took place on the-paramount-pictures-lot in los-angeles, california.
the-temporary-sets for the-paramount-pictures-lot in los-angeles, california were housed on stages 8 and 9; while the-permanent-sets including the-bridge, engine-room and the-arsenal were located on stage 18.
the-engineering set the-engineering was built across two-levels with the-large-warp-drive taking up the-majority of the-space.
stages 8 and 9 had housed sets for the-earlier-star-trek-series since production was started on the-abandoned-star-trek:
phase-ii during the-late-1970s.
they were subsequently used for the-films star-trek:
the-motion-picture, star-trek-ii:
the-wrath of khan, star-trek-iii:
the-search for spock and star-trek-iv:
the-voyage-home before being used for the-next-generation and voyager.
stage 18 had not been previously used for the-production of any-star-trek-series or films.
during the-course of filming the-pilot, between 130-and-150-members of staff worked on constructing the-sets; this reduced to 20-to-25-crew-members when the-show went to series.
130-and-150-members of staff were led by construction-coordinator-tom-arp, who had previously worked on deep-space-nine and a-number of star-trek-films in the-same-capacity.
although a-number of episodes required specific-sets to be built from scratch, the-team would save certain-elements to enable the-team to be reused in later-episodes.
the-production had a-warehouse in burbank to store those-pieces while those-pieces were not being used.
midway through the-third-season, from "exile" onwards, the-series started to be broadcast in 1080i high-definition-television.
alongside jake 2.0, the-series was one of the-first-two-series on upn to be broadcast in high-definition.
the-series contains over-4,214-minutes of special-effects, dialogue, and other-scenes.
although the-series was broadcast in high-definition at 1080i, the-series was not released on 1080p-blu-ray until later.
an-example of high-definition is the-2017-blu-ray-collection of the-full-series called enterprise: the-full-journey.
until the-start of the-fourth-season, the-series was shot on traditional-film-stock.
the-series (the-first-three-seasons) were shot on wide-screen-35mm-film with and an-aspect-ratio of 1.78:1, and it was 3-perf
super-35mm-film.
after rush began testing a-sony-digital-camera on the-standing-sets for two-days prior to production on "storm-front" and demonstrated the-footage to braga and berman, the-decision was made to switch to digital-production.
rush felt that the-audience would not see a-great-deal of difference as the-footage can be shot in a-way to look the same as the-earlier-seasons, but felt that the-filming in high-definition-video would be a-benefit because of the-additional-detail that could be seen on screen.
at the-time this was cutting edge for a-tv-show, with allowing the-production-team improved low-light-performance and this enabled shooting more compared to chemical-films.
the-actual-camera used was the-sony-hdw-f900-cinealta-high-definition-camera, and the-recording-technology also used sony'-cinealta-24p, a-trademarked-name of that-company.
the-decision to move to sony's-technology was a-triple-agreement of the-three-executive-producers of the-show, and also supported by the-directory of photography.
season-four's-blu-ray-release of enterprise in 1080p has been praised as sharp and with satisfying-color, and the best looking of the-seasons.
the-fourth-season has been released multiple times, with latest as a-combined-full-series-set in january 2017.
dennis-mccarthy was recruited by the-production-team to score the-pilot, "broken bow".
dennis-mccarthy had scored other-episodes of the-franchise, including the-pilot of the-next-generation, "encounter at farpoint", and won an-emmy-award for dennis-mccarthy work on the-voyager-episode-"heroes and demons".
dennis-mccarthy work on "broken-bow" was subsequently released in the-united-states on cd by decca-records.
other-composers who worked on enterprise included paul-ballinger, david-bell, jay-chattaway, john-frizzell, kevin-kiner, mark-mckenzie, velton-ray-bunch and brian-tyler.
opening-sequence and theme-song ===
the-franchise was known for typically using orchestral-themes, but berman said that the-theme-tune would be more "contemporary" than heard in previous-series and a "little hipper".
the-theme was revealed to be a-cover of the-rod-stewart-single-"faith of the-heart", by british-tenor-russell-watson.
stewart's-song had originally appeared on the-soundtrack to the-1998-film-patch-adams.
for the-use in enterprise, it was retitled to "where my-heart will take me", but prompted a-negative-reaction from existing-star-trek-fans.
these included an-online-petition to have the-song removed, and there was a-protest held outside of paramount-studios.
executive-producers braga and berman both defended the-choice, with berman saying that the-fan-response was split over  stewart's-song while braga said that some-people found  stewart's-song "uplifting".
illustrator-john-eaves created a-drawing of a-number of real-world-and-star-trek-vessels leaving earth, which was subsequently turned into a-poster by dan-madsen at the-star-trek-communicator-magazine.
eaves gave copies of this-poster to braga and berman, with berman suggesting the-possibility that this could be a-good-concept for an-opening-sequence.
the-aim of the-sequence was to follow the-evolution of exploration,-flight-and-space-flight.
as suggested by  eaves-poster, it included real-world-vessels such as hms-enterprise, spirit of st.-louis, the-bell x-1, the-space-shuttle-enterprise amongst others in addition to the-mars-rover sojourner and the-international-space-station.
star-trek-vessels featured included two-new-designs by eaves as well as the-first-warp-vessel, the-phoenix, and the-enterprise (nx-01).
the-phoenix-spacecraft was presented in the-1996-feature-film-star-trek:
first-contact as earth's-first-warp-vessel, whose-inaugural-warp-flight triggered first-contact with the-vulcans.
the-two-part-episode in a-mirror , darkly utilizes a-different-opening-sequence than the-remainder of the-series, reflecting themes of war and conquest in the-mirror-universe.
cancellation ===
the-series was considered for cancellation at the-end of the-second-season, with paramount-executives instead requesting a-number of changes to enterprise in order to renew  the-series following a-letter writing campaign from fans.
these included a-change of name to star-trek: enterprise early in the-third-season and a-new-action-oriented-plot, which resulted in the-development of the-xindi.
there was a-major-turn over of staff at paramount in june 2004, with jonathan-dolgen, the-head of entertainment at parent-company-viacom, quitting following the-departure of viacom-president-mel-karmazin.
dolgen was described by bakula as being the-"huge-star-trek-guy" at paramount, and bakula was followed by several-other-staff-members leaving.
during these-departures, upn was purchased by cbs.
fans were resigned to cancellation at the-end of the-third-season, but were surprised when the-series was renewed, which was due in part to a-reduction in the-fees-paramount was charging upn on a per-episode basis.
however enterprise was moved to a-slot on friday-evening, the same night on which the-series was broadcast during enterprise own-third-season before enterprise was cancelled.
on february 3, 2005, enterprise was announced that enterprise had been cancelled.
this-news was passed to the-cast and crew during the-sixth-day of production on "in a mirror, darkly".
the-end of the-series marked the-first-time in 18-years that no-new-star-trek-episodes were scheduled for broadcast, and enterprise was the-first-live-action-series of the-franchise since the-series to last less-than-seven-years.
braga said at a-talk to students in los-angeles shortly after the-news of the-cancellation was released that "after 18-straight-years on the-air-and-750-some-episodes
the-current-run of star-trek is over.
which is a-good-thing.
the-current-run of star-trek needs a-rest".
he added that he was not sure how long star-trek would be off the-air, but called the-current-run of star-trek a "gestation" instead of a "cancellation".
fan-myth suggests that russell-t-davies, showrunner of the-then-upcoming-revived-series of doctor-who, was in talks about producing a-crossover-episode in which the-ninth-doctor lands the-tardis on board the nx-01, but these-plans were abandoned with the-cancellation of enterprise.
this was based on a-misunderstanding of the-quote---the-"we" reported to have been discussing a-crossover
is a-reference to davies talking to the-ninth-doctor
who-production-team about the-ninth-doctor-desire to write a-crossover, not to any-discussions between the-bbc and paramount.
the-cancellation resulted in protests by fans, both at paramount-pictures and around the-world as well as online.
a-website entitled trekunited.com was set up to raise funds for a-fifth-season, but failed to do so with the-money refunded after the-unsuccessful-campaign.
a-total of $32 million had been raised.
several years later, the-possibility of a-fifth-season was still being discussed with braga suggesting that fans could prompt netflix into producing a-new-season of enterprise by watching the-existing-four-seasons on the-service.
this resulted in a-facebook-campaign set up to promote the-idea of a-fifth-season.
season five ===
at the-time of the-cancellation, coto had hoped for renewal and had already started to make plans for  season five ===.
these included the-expectation that the-show would begin to cover the-buildup to the-romulan-war, as well as continue to link to the-original-series with references to things such as the-cloud-city of stratos as seen in "the-cloud-minders".
another-feature that coto planned was to have a-"miniseries within a-series" with four-or-five-episodes devoted to following up on events from the-mirror-universe-episode "
in a mirror, darkly".
the-producers had also intended to bring jeffrey-combs onto the-series as a regular by placing jeffrey-combs recurring-andorian-character-shran onto the-bridge of the-enterprise in an-advisory-capacity.
work had already begun on an-episode referred to by coto as "kilkenny-cats", which would have seen the-return of larry-niven's-kzinti, usually seen in larry-niven's-known-space-novels, and which had previously appeared in the-star-trek:
the-animated-series-episode "the-slaver-weapon".
at the-same-time that enterprise was broadcast, writer-jimmy-diggs was pursuing the-idea of a-cgi-animated-film called star trek: lions of the-night, in which captain-hikaru-sulu would lead the starship enterprise in attempting to prevent a-kzinti-invasion of the-federation.
coto's-episode was based on a-similar-premise, with writer-jimmy-diggs brought onto the-enterprise-team to work on coto's-episode.
production had begun on the-new-kzinti-ships for "kilkenny-cats", with josh-finney commissioned.
=-broadcast and release == ===
episodes === ===
time-slots ===
the-pilot, "broken-bow", was watched by 12.5-million-viewers on the-first-broadcast on upn.
this was during the-first-full-week of the-new-season on american-television, and it was felt at the-time that the-combination of enterprise alongside buffy the-vampire-slayer and roswell would help to cross-promote each other due to the-science-fiction and fantasy-genre-links.
this even included a-cross-over-episode of roswell with a-character from that-series auditioning before jonathan-frakes for a-role on enterprise.
after the-first-few-weeks of episodes of enterprise, the-ratings were considered to be solid enough and the-expectation was that the-series would run for seven-seasons in the-same-manner as the-next-generation, deep-space-nine and voyager.
however, the-viewing-figures began to decrease towards the-end of the-season.
changes were made for the-third-season, with the-introduction of the-season-long-xindi-storyline.
this improved the-reviews that the-series was receiving, and the-viewers in the-18-to-35-demographics but the-overall-ratings continued to decrease.
upn cut the-26-episode-order for the-third-season to 24, meaning that if 24-episodes were created for the-fourth-season as well then upn would have the-100-episodes needed for syndication.
as-well-as-a-move to friday-nights, the-fourth-season was shortened further to 22-episodes, meaning that at cancellation there were 98-episodes produced in total.
at the-time of cancellation, enterprise remained the-highest-rated-drama-series on upn.
the-highest-rated-drama-series on upn went immediately into broadcast-syndication; the arrangements having been made by upn prior to the-cancellation.
the-highest-rated-drama-series on upn is distributed by cbs-television-distribution.
syndication and foreign broadcast ===
in the-uk, the-series was first broadcast on satellite-tv-channel
sky one, before airing on channel 4 during july 2002, becoming the-first-star-trek-series not to be broadcast terrestrially by the-bbc.
in australia, the-series was broadcast on the-nine-network.
all-four-seasons of enterprise entered broadcast-syndication in the-united-states during the-week of september 17, 2005.
the-episodes were initially aired out of sequence, with episodes from the-third-and-fourth-season being broadcast directly after episodes from the first.
episodes from the-second-season were not planned to air until september 2006.
home-media ===
the-first-season of enterprise was released on vhs-cassette in both-the-united-kingdom and ireland, during 2002.
in each of the-thirteen-volumes, there were two-episodes on each-tape.
the-first-home-media-release of enterprise in the-united-states was of the-full-first-season on dvd, which was released on may 3, 2005.
the-remaining-seasons were released over the-course of the-next-months, with season four brought out in november of that-year.
in addition, 2005 saw the-release of the-complete-series as a dvd box-set.
enterprise was the-third-star-trek-series to be released in high-definition on blu-ray following the-earlier-releases of star-trek:
the-original-series and star-trek: the-next-generation, with season one delivered on march 26, 2013.
the-fans of the-franchise were asked for feedback on potential-covers for the-first-season-release, but as there was no-clear-winner, a-new-design was created based on the-feedback received.
the-second-season was released on august 20, 2013, the-third-season was on january 7, 2014, and the-final-season on april 29, 2014.
the-blu-ray-releases featured both-the-same-additional-features as the-dvd-release, in addition to new-features exclusive to the-blu-ray-releases.
in january 2017 a-new-24-disc-blu-ray-set of the-whole-series was released.
a-new-24-disc-blu-ray-set of the-whole-series includes the-whole-series in 1080p with a-screen-size-ratio of 1.78:1 (widescreen) and with the-sound in dts-hd-master-audio 5.1 (5-channels plus subwoofer).
the-set includes 97-episodes from  the-set original broadcast run at the-dawn of the-21st-century and features like a-cast-reunion.
note that the-blu-ray-release in 1080p is actually higher than the-blu-ray-release in 1080p original-broadcast-resolution which ranged from 720p to 1080i.
other-appearances == ===
novelizations ===
the-first-novel released based on the-series was broken-bow, authored by diane-carey for pocket-books and released in october 2001 in the-united-states.
the-first-novel released based on the-series also contained an-additional-chapter of production-material on the-series at the-back of the-novel, written by paul-ruditis.
the-first-novel released based on the-series was by the-book, published in january 2002 and written by dean-wesley-smith and kristine-katheryn-rusch.
the-duo had not seen any-episodes of the-series at the-time of writing, instead basing the-book on the-first-three-scripts and the-initial-trailer.
other-books expanded on the-backgrounds of specific-characters, with what-price-honor?
concentrating on reed and daedalus describing tucker's-work on a-previous-warp-vessel.
a-further-novelization was written by paul-ruditis of the-two-part-episode-"shockwave" which closed the-first-season and opened the-second.
a-further-novelization was contained within the-expanse by jeanne-kalogridis which covered the-second-season-finale, "the-expanse" and the-first-episode of the-third-season, "the-xindi".
margaret-clark, an-editor at pocket-books explained on treknation that the-reason for the-low-numbers of enterprise-related-books was not due to poor-sales, but instead because the-fourth-season of the-show addressed topics that had been previously intended for novelizations.
books released subsequent to the-end of the-series as part of the-star-trek:
enterprise relaunch covered-topics such as the-earth-romulan-war, and the-initial-years of the-federation.
in the-video-games star-trek: encounters and star-trek:
legacy, both released in 2006, the-first-vessel controlled by the-player in each-storyline is the-enterprise (nx-01).
as both-games progress chronologically, the-gamer then moves onto the-uss-enterprise seen in the-original-series and later-depictions afterwards.
the-film star-trek into darkness (2013) references enterprise with a-model of the nx-01 in a-collection depicting the-history of flight in fleet-admiral-alexander-marcus'
(peter-weller)-office.
peter-weller)-office was placed next to other-historical-vessels such as the-wright-flyer, the-space-shuttle, and the-first-flight.
events and elements of the-series, including the-macos and the-xindi-war, are also referenced in the-2016-film star-trek-beyond.
the-long-lost-vessel featured in the-2016-film star-trek-beyond, the uss franklin (nx-326), is similar in design and said to be a-precursor to the nx-01.
the-earth-romulan-war, which occurred after the-events of the-series in the-official-timeline but was seeded during the-series, is also mentioned in beyond.
influence ==
critical-reception ===
the-pilot-episode of enterprise, "broken-bow", was well received by critics, with ed-bark for the-knight-ridder/tribune-news-service saying that it all came together in an-"impressive-fashion", while brandon-easton said in the-boston-herald that the-cast was "impeccable" and the-writing was "strong" despite the-"limitations of a-questionable-premise".
in a-differing-opinion, charlie-mccollum for knight-ridder said that the-premise was "great", although at the-time had yet to see the-episode.
dan-snierson, while writing for entertainment-weekly, praised the-series, saying "it's hot, it's sexy, it's kinda funny" and called it the savior of upn.following the-pilot, the-critical-reaction became mixed.
david-segal said in the-washington-post that the-series "has a-bargain-basement feel that lands this-side of camp."
during the-course of the-second-season, mainstream-media-publications began publishing that the-show was "broken".
tom-russo proclaimed in entertainment-weekly that "it's dead-jim – almost", attributing the-lack of appeal of star-trek: nemesis and the-dwindling-ratings received by enterprise as demonstrating that the-franchise was tired.
the-frequency of stand-alone-episodes broadcast during the-second-season resulted in a-negative-fan-reaction.
the-reception for the-third-and-fourth-seasons improved overall, but with some-negative-reviews being received.
one-such-criticism was from gareth-wigmore in tv-zone who said that "enterprise isn't so much reacting to current-events as it is lazily picking items from the-news to produce stories."
coto felt that the-critics "dumped on the-show", and despite his-feelings that the-final-season marked an-improvement, his was disappointed that the-critics did not change the-critics minds.
critics received the-news of the-cancellation with mixed-opinions, with ted-cox in the-daily-herald saying that it was "good-riddance to space-rubbish", while an-article in the-lethbridge-herald blamed the-cancellation on the-poor-ratings despite the-improved-quality of the-series.
the series finale, "these are the-voyages...", was poorly received, with ted-cox adding that enterprise ended "with a-whimper", while kevin-williamson stated in the-calgary-sun that it was the-worst-series-finale since "turnabout-intruder" and criticised the-concentration on characters from the-next-generation instead of enterprise.
mark-perigard held a-similar-opinion in the-lethbridge-herald, saying that william-riker "has no-business walking the-ship", and that the-death of tucker was "for no-other-reason than the-show's-creators realized at-least-one-dramatic-thing had to happen in the-hour".
braga later admitted that killing tucker "wasn't a-great-idea", and called making the-finale tng-centric
tucker-biggest-regret of the-series.
others found the-conclusion a-comforting-reminder of the-star-trek:
the-next-generation-episode "the-pegasus", which aired about 11 years prior in real-time.
in 2016, in a-listing that included every-star-trek-film-and-tv-series, enterprise was ranked 12th by the-l.a.-times, ahead of the-1994-film-star-trek: generations.
accolades ===
star-trek:
enterprise was nominated for the-saturn-awards.
the-creative-arts-emmy-award won on four-occasions, for outstanding-special-visual-effects for a-series for "broken-bow", outstanding-hairstyling for a-series for "two-days and two-nights", outstanding-music-composition for a-series (dramatic underscore) for "similitude", and outstanding-special-visual-effects for a-series for "countdown".
the-creative-arts-emmy-award also received sixteen-nominations at the-saturn-awards, with the-only-wins coming following the-first-season, both being for jolene-blalock in the-best-supporting-actress on television and faces of the-future-categories.
the-series won an-ascap-film-and-television-music-award in 2002 for top-television-series, and won twice at the-visual-effects-society-awards: once for "dead-stop" in the-category-best-models and miniatures in a-televised-program, music-video, or commercial and once for the-second-part of "stormfront" in the-category outstanding-visual-effects in a-broadcast-series, with a-further-two-nominations received.
notes == ==
references ==
citations === ===
sources === ==
external-links ==
star-trek: enterprise at imdb star-trek: enterprise at startrek.com star-trek: enterprise at memory-alpha (a star-trek wiki)
star-trek: enterprise at memory-beta
star-trek:
enterprise at cbs.com-star-trek is an-american-science-fiction-television-series created by gene-roddenberry that follows the-adventures of the-starship uss enterprise (ncc-1701) and the-starship uss enterprise crew.
the-starship-uss-enterprise later acquired the-retronym of star-trek:
the-original-series (tos) to distinguish the-starship-uss-enterprise within the-media-franchise that the-starship-uss-enterprise began.
the-starship-uss-enterprise is set in the-milky-way-galaxy, roughly during the-2260s.
the-ship and crew are led by captain-james-t.-kirk (william-shatner), first-officer and science officer-spock (leonard-nimoy), and chief-medical-officer leonard-'bones'-mccoy-(deforest-kelley).
shatner's-voice-over-introduction during each-episode's-opening-credits stated the-starship's-purpose:
space: the-final-frontier.
these are the-voyages of the-starship-enterprise.
its-five-year-mission: to explore strange-new-worlds, to seek out new-life and new-civilizations, to boldly go where no-man has gone before.
the-series was produced from september 1966 to december 1967 by norway-productions and desilu-productions, and by paramount-television from january 1968 to june 1969.
star-trek aired on nbc from september 8, 1966, to june 3, 1969, and was actually seen first on september 6, 1966, on canada's-ctv-network.
star-trek-nielsen-ratings while on nbc were low, and canada's-ctv-network cancelled it after three-seasons and 79-episodes.
several years later,  the-series became a-hit in broadcast-syndication, remaining so throughout the-1970s, achieving cult-classic-status and a-developing-influence on popular-culture.
star-trek eventually spawned a-franchise, consisting of eight-television-series, 13-feature-films, and numerous-books, games, and toys, and is now widely considered one of the-most-popular-and-influential-television-series of all-time.
the-series contains significant-elements of space-western, as described by roddenberry and the-general-audience.
creation ==
on march 11, 1964, gene-roddenberry, a-long-time-fan of science-fiction, drafted a-short-treatment for a-science-fiction-television-series that he called star trek.
this was to be set on board a-large-interstellar-spaceship named s.s. yorktown in the-23rd-century bearing a-crew dedicated to exploring the-milky-way-galaxy.
roddenberry noted a-number of influences on roddenberry idea, some of which includes a.-e.-van-vogt's-tales of the-spaceship-space-beagle, eric-frank-russell's-marathon-series of stories, and the-film forbidden-planet (1956).
some have also drawn parallels with the-television-series rocky-jones, space-ranger (1954), a-space-opera that included many of the-elements integral to star-trek—the-organization, crew-relationships, missions, part of the-bridge-layout, and some-technology.
roddenberry also drew heavily from c.-s.-forester's-horatio-hornblower-novels that depict a-daring-sea-captain who exercises broad-discretionary-authority on distant-sea-missions of noble-purpose.
roddenberry often humorously referred to captain-kirk as "horatio-hornblower in space".
roddenberry had extensive-experience in writing for series about the-old-west that had been popular-television-fare in the-1950s and 1960s.
armed with this-background, the-first-draft characterized the-new-show as "wagon-train to the-stars."
like the-familiar-wagon-train, each-episode was to be a-self-contained-adventure-story, set within the-structure of a-continuing-voyage through space.
most-future-television-and-movie-realizations of the-franchise adhered to the-"wagon-train"-paradigm of the-continuing-journey, with the-notable-exception of the-serialized-star-trek: deep-space-nine, star-trek: discovery, star-trek: picard, and the-third-season of star-trek:-enterprise.
in roddenberry's-original-concept, the-protagonist was captain-robert-april of the-starship s.s.-yorktown.
this-character was developed into captain-christopher-pike, first portrayed by jeffrey-hunter.
april is listed in the-star-trek-chronology, the-star-trek-encyclopedia, and at startrek.com as the-enterprise's-first-commanding-officer, preceding captain-christopher-pike.
the-character's-only-television/movie-appearance is in the-star-trek:
the-animated-series-episode "the-counter-clock-incident".
development ==
in april 1964, roddenberry presented the-star-trek-draft to desilu-productions, a-leading-independent-television-production-company.
he met with herbert f. solow, desilu's-director of production.
herbert-f.-solow saw promise in the-idea and signed a-three-year-program-development-contract with roddenberry.
lucille-ball, head of desilu, was not familiar with the-nature of the-project, but she was instrumental in getting the-pilot produced.
the-idea was extensively revised and fleshed out during this-time—"the-cage"-pilot filmed in late 1964 differs in many-respects from the-march-1964-treatment.
herbert-f.-solow, for example, added the-"stardate"-concept.
desilu-productions had a-first-look-deal with cbs.
oscar-katz, desilu's-vice-president of production, went with roddenberry to pitch the-series to cbs.
oscar-katz, desilu's-vice-president of production refused to purchase the-show, as oscar-katz, desilu's-vice-president of production already had a-similar-show in development, the-1965-irwin-allen-series lost in space.
in may 1964, solow, who had previously worked at nbc, met with grant-tinker, then-head of cbs's-west-coast-programming-department.
grant-tinker commissioned the-first-pilot—which became "the-cage".
nbc turned down the-resulting-pilot, stating that  nbc was "too cerebral".
however, the--nbc-executives were still impressed with the-concept, and the-nbc-executives understood that its-perceived-faults had been partly because of the-script that the-nbc-executives had selected the-nbc-executives.
nbc made the-unusual-decision to pay for a-second-pilot, using the-script called "where no-man has gone before".
only-the-character of spock, played by leonard-nimoy, was retained from the-first-pilot, and only-two-cast-members, majel-barrett and nimoy, were carried forward into the-series.
this-second-pilot proved to be satisfactory to  nbc, and  nbc selected star-trek to be in  nbc upcoming television-schedule for the-fall of 1966.
the-second-pilot introduced most of the-other-main-characters: captain-kirk (william-shatner), chief-engineer-lt.
commander-scott (james-doohan) and lt.
sulu (george-takei), who served as a-physicist on the-ship in the-second-pilot, but subsequently became a-helmsman throughout the-rest of the-series.
paul-fix played dr.-mark-piper in the-second-pilot; ship's-doctor leonard-mccoy (deforest-kelley) joined the-cast when filming began for the-first-season, and ship's-doctor leonard-mccoy (deforest-kelley) remained for the-rest of the-series, achieving billing as the-third-star of the-series.
also joining the-ship's-permanent-crew during the-first-season were the-communications-officer, lt.
nyota-uhura (nichelle-nichols), the-first-african-american-woman to hold such-an-important-role in an-american-television-series; the-captain's-yeoman, janice-rand (grace lee whitney), who departed midway through the-first-season; and christine-chapel (majel-barrett), the-ship's-nurse and assistant to mccoy.
walter-koenig joined the-cast as ensign-pavel-chekov in the-series'-second-season.
in february 1966, before the-first-episode was aired, star-trek was nearly cancelled by desilu-productions.
desilu-productions had gone from making just-one-half-hour-show (the-lucy-show) to deficit-financing a-portion of two-expensive-hour-long-shows, mission: impossible and star trek.
solow was able to convince lucille-ball that both shows should continue.
production ==
once the-series had been picked up by nbc, production == moved to what was then desilu productions' gower street location.
production == had previously been the-main-studio-complex used by rko-pictures, and is now part of the-paramount-pictures-lot.
the-series used what are now stages 31 and 32.
the-show's-production-staff included art-director-matt-jefferies, who designed the-starship-enterprise and most of  the-show-interiors.
his-contributions to the-series were honored in the-name of the-"jefferies-tube", an-equipment-shaft depicted in various-star-trek-series.
in addition to working with his-brother, john-jefferies, to create the-hand-held-phaser-weapons of star-trek, jefferies also developed the-set-design for the-bridge of the-enterprise (which was based on an-earlier-design by pato-guzman).
jefferies used jefferies practical experience as an-airman during world war ii and jefferies knowledge of aircraft-design to devise a-sleek,-functional,-and-ergonomic-bridge-layout.
the-costume-designer for star-trek, bill-theiss, created the-striking-look of the-starfleet-uniforms for the-enterprise, the-costumes for female-guest-stars, and for various-aliens, including the-klingons, vulcans, romulans, tellarites, andorians, and gideonites, among others.
artist and sculptor-wah-chang, who had worked for walt-disney-productions, was hired to design and manufacture props:
artist and sculptor-wah-chang, who had worked for walt-disney-productions created the-flip-open-communicator, often credited as having influenced the-configuration of the-portable-version of the-cellular-telephone.
chang also designed the-portable-sensing-recording-computing-"tricorder"-device, and various-fictitious-devices for the-starship's-engineering-crew and the-starship sick-bay.
as the-series progressed,  artist and sculptor-wah-chang, who had worked for walt-disney-productions helped to create various-memorable-aliens, such as the-gorn and the-horta.
season 1 (1966–1967) ===
nbc ordered 16-episodes of star-trek, besides "where no-man has gone before".
the-first-regular-episode of star-trek, "the-man-trap", aired on thursday, september 8, 1966, from 8:30 to 9:30 as part of an--nbc "sneak preview"-block.
reviews were mixed; while the-philadelphia-inquirer and san-francisco-chronicle liked the-new-show, the-new-york-times and the-boston-globe were less favorable, and variety predicted that it "won't work", calling it "an incredible and dreary mess of confusion and complexities".
debuting against mostly-reruns, star-trek easily won star-trek time slot with a-40.6-share.
the following week against all-new-programming, however, the-new-show fell to second-(29.4-share) behind cbs.
it ranked 33rd (out of 94-programs) over the-next-two-weeks, then the-following-two-episodes ranked 51st in the-ratings.
frederik-pohl, editor of galaxy-science-fiction, wrote in february 1967 of his-amazement that star-trek's-"regular-shows were just as good" as the-early-episodes that won an-award at tricon in september.
believing that the-show would soon be cancelled because of low-ratings, his lamented that the-show "made the-mistake of appealing to a-comparatively-literate-group", and urged readers to write letters to help save the-show.
star-trek's-first-season-ratings would in earlier-years likely have caused nbc to cancel the-show.
nbc had pioneered research into viewers'-demographic-profiles in the-early-1960s, however, and by 1967, nbc and other-networks increasingly considered such data when making decisions; for example, cbs temporarily cancelled gunsmoke that year because nbc had too-many-older-and-too-few-younger-viewers.
although roddenberry later claimed that nbc was unaware of star-trek's-favorable-demographics, awareness of star-trek's-"quality"-audience is what likely caused the-network to retain the-show after the-first-and-second-seasons.
nbc instead decided to order 10-more-new-episodes for the-first-season, and order a-second-season in march 1967.
the-network originally announced that the-show would air at 7:30–8:30 pm tuesday, but the-network was instead given an-8:30–9:30-pm-friday-slot when the-1967–68-nbc-schedule was released, making watching the-network difficult for the-young-viewers that the-show most attracted.
season 2 (1967–1968) ===
star-trek's-ratings continued to decline during the-second-season.
although shatner expected the-show to end after two-seasons and began to prepare for other-projects, nbc nonetheless may have never seriously considered cancelling the-show.
as early as january 1968, the-associated-press reported that  star trek chances for renewal for a-third-season were "excellent".
the-show had better-ratings for nbc than abc's-competing-hondo, and the-competing-cbs-programs (number-three-gomer-pyle, u.s.m.c. and the-first-half-hour of the-number-12-cbs-friday-night-movie) were in the top 15 in the-nielsen-ratings.
again, demographics helped star-trek survive.
contrary to popular-belief among the-show-fans, the-show did not have a-larger-audience of young-viewers than the-show competition while on nbc.
the-network's-research did indicate that star-trek had a-"quality-audience" including "upper-income,-better-educated-males", however, and other-nbc-shows had lower-overall-ratings.
the-enthusiasm of star-trek-viewers surprised nbc.
the-show was unusual in the-show serious-discussion of contemporary-societal-issues in a-futuristic-context, unlike lost in space which was more campy in nature.
the-network had already received 29,000-fan-letters for the-show during the-network first season, more than for any other except the-monkees.
when rumors spread in late 1967 that star-trek was at risk of cancellation, roddenberry secretly began and funded an-effort by bjo-trimble, roddenberry husband john, and other-fans to persuade tens-of-thousands of viewers to write letters of support to save the-program.
using the-4,000-names on a-mailing-list for a-science-fiction-convention, the-trimbles asked fans to write to nbc and ask 10-others to also do so.
nbc received almost-116,000-letters for the-show between december 1967 and march 1968, including more than 52,000 in february alone; according to an nbc executive, nbc received more-than-one-million-pieces of mail but only disclosed the-116,000-figure.
newspaper-columnists encouraged readers to write letters to help save what one called "the best science-fiction show on the-air".
more-than-200-caltech-students marched to nbc's-burbank,-california-studio to support star-trek in january 1968, carrying signs such as "draft-spock" and "vulcan-power".
berkeley-and-mit-students organized similar-protests in san-francisco and new-york-city.
the-letters supporting star-trek, whose-authors included new-york-state-governor-nelson-rockefeller, were different in both-quantity and quality from most-mail that television-networks receive: the-show, according to the-6,000-letters the-show draws a-week (more than any other in television), is watched by scientists, museum-curators, psychiatrists, doctors, university-professors, and other-highbrows.
the-smithsonian-institution asked for a-print of the-show for the-smithsonian-institution archives, the-show so honored.
in addition:
much of the-mail came from doctors, scientists, teachers, and other-professional-people, and was for the-most-part literate–and written on good-stationery.
and if there is anything a-network wants almost as much as a-high-nielsen-ratings, it is the-prestige of a-show that appeals to the-upper-middle-class-and-high-brow-audiences.
nbc—which used such-anecdotes in much of nbc publicity for the-show—made the-unusual-decision to announce on television, after the-episode "the-omega-glory" on march 1, 1968, that the-series had been renewed.
the-announcement implied a-request to stop writing—nbc's-policy of replying to each-viewer-mail meant that the-campaign cost the-network millions of dollars—but instead caused fans to send letters of thanks in similar-numbers.
season 3 (1968–1969) ===
nbc at first planned to move star-trek to mondays for the-show's-third-season, likely in hopes of increasing nbc audience after the-enormous-letter-campaign that surprised the-network.
in march 1968, though, nbc instead moved the-show to 10:00-pm friday night, an hour undesirable for nbc younger audience, so as not to conflict with the-highly-successful-rowan-&-martin's-laugh-in on monday-evenings, from whose-time-slot laugh-
in producer-george-schlatter had angrily demanded it not be rescheduled.
in addition to the-undesirable-time-slot, star-trek was now being seen on only 181 of nbc's-210-affiliates.
roddenberry was frustrated, and complained, "if the-network wants to kill the-network, the-network couldn't make a-better-move."
roddenberry attempted to persuade nbc to give star-trek a-better-day and hour, but was not successful.
as a-result of this and roddenberry own growing-exhaustion, roddenberry chose to withdraw from the-stress of the-daily-production of star-trek, though roddenberry remained nominally in charge as its-"executive-producer".
roddenberry reduced roddenberry direct involvement in star-trek before the-start of the-1968–69-television-season, and was replaced by fred-freiberger as the-producer of the-television-series.
nbc next reduced star-trek's-budget by a-significant-amount per episode, as the-per-minute-commercial-price had dropped from $39,000 to $36,000 compared to the-season-two-time-slot.
this caused what many perceive as a-significant-decline in quality for the-1968–69-season.
william-shatner felt that the-main-characters became increasingly compromised or exaggerated while being involved in increasingly-improbable-story-lines.
leonard-nimoy added that mercenary-concerns came to predominate.
associate-producer-bob-justman, who left during the-third-season, says that the-budget-cuts caused the-crew to become necessarily limited in the-type of filming that could be done, such as outdoor-work, with only-one-episode, "the-paradise-syndrome", shot largely outdoors.
nichelle-nichols described the-budget-cutting during the-final-year as an-intentional-effort to kill off star-trek: while nbc paid lip-service to expanding star-trek audience, it [now] slashed our-production-budget until it was actually 10% lower than it had been in our-first-season ...
this is why in the-third-season you saw fewer-outdoor-location-shots, for example.
top-writers, top-guest-stars, top-anything you needed was harder to come by.
thus, star-trek-demise became a-self-fulfilling-prophecy.
and i can assure you, that is exactly as it was meant to be.
the-last-day of filming for star-trek was january 9, 1969, and after 79-episodes nbc cancelled the-show in february despite fans'-attempt at another-letter-writing-campaign.
one-newspaper-columnist advised a-protesting-viewer: you-star-trek-fans have fought the-"good-fight," but the-show has been cancelled and there's nothing to be done now.
in 2011, the-decision to cancel star-trek by nbc was ranked number four on the-tv-guide-network-special, 25 biggest tv blunders 2.
syndication ===
although many of the-third-season's-episodes were considered of poor-quality, many of the-third-season's-episodes were considered of poor-quality gave star-trek enough-episodes for television-syndication.
most-shows require at-least-four-seasons for syndication, because otherwise not-enough-episodes are available for daily stripping.
kaiser-broadcasting, however, purchased syndication-rights for star-trek during the-first-season for kaiser-broadcasting stations in several-large-cities.
the-company arranged the-unusual-deal because  the-company saw the-show as effective-counterprogramming against the-big-three-networks'-6-pm-evening-news-programs.
paramount began advertising the-reruns in trade-press in march 1969; as kaiser's-ratings were good,-other-stations, such as wpix in new-york-city and wkbs in philadelphia, also purchased the-episodes for similar-counterprogramming.
through syndication, star-trek found a-larger-audience than star-trek had on nbc, becoming a-cult-classic.
airing the-show in the-late-afternoon or early evening attracted many-new-viewers, often young.
by 1970, paramount's-trade-advertisements claimed that the-show had significantly improved the-show stations' ratings, and the-los-angeles-times commented on star-trek-ability to "acquire the-most-enviable-ratings in the-syndication-field".
by 1972, what the-associated-press described as "the-show that won't die" aired in more-than-100-american-cities and 60-other-countries; and more-than-3,000-fans attended the-first-star-trek-convention in new-york-city in january 1972.
fans of the-show became increasingly organized, gathering at conventions to trade merchandise, meet actors from the-show, and watch screenings of old-episodes.
such-fans came to be known as "trekkies", who were noted (and often ridiculed) for such-fans extreme devotion to the-show and such-fans encyclopedic knowledge of every-episode.
because fans enjoyed re-watching each-episode many times, prices for star-trek rose over time, instead of falling like other-syndicated-reruns.
people-magazine commented in 1977 that the-show "threatens to rerun until the-universe crawls back into the-universe little-black-hole".
by 1986, 17 years after entering syndication, star-trek was the-most-popular-syndicated-series; by 1987, paramount made $1 million from each-episode; and by 1994, the-reruns still aired in 94% of the-united-states.
from september 1 to december 24, 1998, the-sci-fi-channel broadcast a-"special-edition" of all-the-original-series-episodes in an-expanded-90-minute-format hosted by william-shatner.
now titled star-trek: the-original-series, these-broadcasts restored scenes that had been edited out of the-syndicated-episodes.
in addition to introductory-and-post-episode-commentary by william-shatner, the-syndicated-episodes included interviews with members of the-regular-production-team and cast, writers, guest-stars, and critics (titled as "star-trek-insights").
the-syndicated-episodes were broadcast in the-original-broadcast-sequence, followed by "the-cage", to which a-full-105-minute-segment was devoted.
( for details on each-episode's-original-airdate, see list of star-trek: the-original-series-episodes.)
leonard-nimoy hosted a-second-run from december 28, 1998 to march 24, 1999, but not-all-the-episodes were broadcast because leonard-nimoy was abruptly cancelled before completion.
remastered edition ===
in september 2006, cbs-paramount-domestic-television (now known as cbs-television-distribution, the-current-rights-holders for the-star-trek-television-franchises) began syndication of an-enhanced-version of star-trek:
the-original-series in high-definition with new-cgi-visual-effects.
under the-direction of star-trek-producer-david-rossi, who consulted with mike and denise-okuda, the-visual-and-special-effects were recreated to give star-trek:
the-original-series a more modern look.
special-attention was given to such-elements as the-enterprise, alien-planets and special-attention images depicted from space, planets seen from orbit, alien-spacecraft, and technology such as computer-readouts, viewscreen-images, and phaser-beams.
the-restoration and enhancement was performed by cbs-digital.
all-live-action-footage was scanned in high-definition from its-first-generation-35-mm-film-elements.
while it was possible to retouch and remaster some-visual-effects, all-new-exterior-ship, space, and planet-shots were recreated under the-supervision of emmy-nominated-visual-effects-supervisor-niel-wray.
as noted in the-"making of"-dvd-feature, first-generation-"original-camera-negatives" were used for all-live-action-footage, but not for external-shots of the-ship and planets.
notable-changes include new-space-shots with a-cgi-enterprise, and other-new-models (for example, a-gorn-ship is shown in "arena"),-redone matte-background-shots, and other-minor-touches such as tidying up viewscreens.
a-small-number of scenes were also recomposed, and sometimes new-actors were placed into the-background of shots.
the-opening-theme-music was also re-recorded in digital-stereo.
the-first-episode to be released to syndication was "balance of terror" on the-weekend of september 16, 2006.
episodes were released at the-rate of about one a week and broadcast in a-4:3-aspect-ratio.
despite the-hd-remastering, cbs chose to deliver the-broadcast-syndication-package in standard-definition (sd-tv).
the-hd-format was made commercially available through blu-ray, or by streaming and download such as itunes, netflix, and xbox live.
while the-cgi-shots were mastered in a-16:9-aspect-ratio for future-applications, the-cgi-shots were initially broadcast in the-u.s. and canada—along with the-live-action-footage—in a-4:3-aspect-ratio to respect the-show's-original-composition.
if the-producers were to choose to reformat the-entire-show for the-16:9-ratio, live-action-footage would be cropped, significantly reducing the-height of the-original-image.
on july 26, 2007, cbs-home-entertainment (with distribution by paramount-home-entertainment) announced that the-remastered-episodes of tos would be released on an-hd-dvd/dvd-hybrid-format.
season one was released on november 20, 2007.
season two had been scheduled for release in the-summer of 2008, but
season two was cancelled when toshiba (which had been helping finance the-remastering of the-show) pulled out of the-hd-dvd-business.
on august 5, 2008, the-remastered-season two was released on dvd only.
for release in the-summer of 2008, cbs and paramount used discs without any-disc-art, making cbs and paramount look like the-"season-1-remastered"-hd-dvd/dvd-combo-discs, despite having content only on one-side.
season 3 was released on dvd only on november 18, 2008.
on february 17, 2009, paramount announced the-season one of tos on blu-ray-disc for a-may-release to coincide with the-new-feature-film coming from paramount.
the-second-season was released in a-seven-disc-set on blu-ray in the-u.s. on september 22, 2009.
the-third-season was released on blu-ray in the-u.s. on december 15.
with the-release of the-"alternate-realities"-box-set, remastered-original-series-episodes were included in a-multi-series-compilation for the-first-time.
if future-compilation-releases would exclusively use the-remastered-episodes or not was unknown.
in regions two and four, all-three-seasons of the-remastered-original-series became available on dvd in the-slimline-edition (in the-uk and germany in steelbook-editions) on april 27, 2009, as well as the-first-season in blu-ray.
==-cast ==
while still casting the-roles, gene-roddenberry did not mandate bones-mccoy and spock be male.
according to nichelle-nichols, "they gave me a-three-page-script to read from that had three-characters named bones, kirk and somebody called spock, and they asked me if i would read for the-role of spock.
when i looked at this-great-text, i said to nichelle-nichols, 'i'll take any one of these-roles,' but i found the-spock-character to be very interesting, and i asked they to tell me what the-spock-character [spock] was like.
what she [spock] was was intended that sulu's-role be expanded in the-second-season, but owing to takei's-part in john-wayne's-the-green-berets, the-spock-character appeared in only-half-the-season, sulu's-role being filled by walter-koenig as the-relatively-young,-mop-topped-russian-navigator ensign-pavel-chekov.
when takei returned, the two had to share a-dressing-room.
the two appeared together at the-enterprise-helm for the-remainder of the-series.
there may be some-truth to the-unofficial-story that the-soviet-union's-newspaper pravda complained that among the-culturally-diverse-characters there were no-russians, seen as a-personal-slight to the-soviet-union's since the-soviet-russian-yuri-gagarin had been the-first-man to make a-spaceflight.
gene-roddenberry said in response that "the-chekov-thing was a-major-error on our-part, and i'm still embarrassed by the-fact our didn't include a-russian-right from the-beginning."
however, documentation from desilu suggests that the-intention was to introduce a-character into star-trek with more-sex-appeal to teenaged-girls.
walter-koenig noted in the 2006 40th anniversary special of star-trek:
the-original-series that  walter-koenig doubted the-rumor about pravda, since star-trek had never been shown on soviet-television.
the-original-series that he doubted the-rumor about pravda, since star-trek had never been shown on soviet-television has also been claimed that the-former-member of the-monkees, davy-jones, was the-model for mr.-chekov.
in addition, the-original-series frequently included characters (usually-security-personnel wearing red-uniforms) who are killed or injured soon after their-introduction.
so prevalent was this-plot-device that it inspired the-term "redshirt" to denote a-stock-character whose-sole-purpose is to die violently in order to show the-danger facing the-main-characters.
characterizations ===
star-trek made celebrities of star-trek cast of largely-unknown-actors.
kelley had appeared in many-films and television-shows, but nimoy.
nimoy also had previous-television-and-film-experience but was not well known either.
nimoy had partnered previously with shatner in a-1964-episode of the-man from u.n.c.l.e., "the-project-strigas-affair," and with kelley (as a-doctor) in a-1963-episode of the-virginian, "man of violence," both-more-than-two-years before star-trek first aired.
before star-trek, shatner was well known in the-trade, having appeared in several-notable-films, played cyrano-de-bergerac on broadway, and even turned down the-part of dr.-kildare.
however, when roles became sparse dr.-kildare took the-regular-job after jeffrey-hunter's-contract was not renewed.
after the-original-series ended, cast-members found cast-members typecast because of cast-members defining roles in the-show.
star-trek:
the-next-generation-actor-michael-dorn stated in 1991, however: "if what happened to the-first-cast is called being typecast, then i want to be typecast.
of course, what happened to the-first-cast didn't get the-jobs after  star-trek.
but what happened to the-first-cast are making what happened to the-first-cast sixth movie.
name me someone else in television who has made six-movies!")the-three-main-characters were kirk, spock, and mccoy, with writers often playing the-different-personalities off each other:
kirk was passionate and often aggressive, but with a-sly-sense of humor; spock was coolly logical; and mccoy was sardonic, emotional, and illogical, but always compassionate.
in many-stories the three clashed, with kirk forced to make a-tough-decision while spock advocated the-logical-but-sometimes-callous-path and mccoy (or-"bones", as kirk nicknamed kirk) insisted on doing whatever would cause the-least-harm.
mccoy (or "bones", as kirk nicknamed him) had a-sparring-relationship that masked mccoy (or "bones", as kirk nicknamed him) true-affection and respect for each other, and mccoy (or "bones", as kirk nicknamed him) constant-arguments became popular with viewers.
mccoy (or "bones", as kirk nicknamed him)
so emphasized dialogue that writer-and-director-nicholas-meyer (involved with the-star-trek-films) called mccoy (or "bones", as kirk nicknamed him) a-radio-drama, playing an-episode for a-film-class without video to prove that the-plot was still comprehensible.
spock was at first rejected by network-executives, who were apprehensive that spock vaguely "satanic" appearance (with pointed-ears and eyebrows) might prove upsetting to some-viewers, and (according to leonard-nimoy)
they repeatedly urged roddenberry to "drop the-martian."
roddenberry was also dismayed to discover that nbc's-publicity-department deliberately airbrushed out spock's-pointed-ears and eyebrows from early-publicity-stills sent to network-affiliates, because they feared that roddenberry "demonic" appearance might offend potential-buyers in the-religiously-conservative-southern-states.
spock, however, went on to become one of the-most-popular-characters on the-show, as did mccoy's-impassioned-country-doctor-personality.
spock, in fact, became a-sex-symbol of sorts—something no-one connected with the-show had expected.
leonard-nimoy noted that the-question of spock's-extraordinary-sex-appeal emerged "almost any time i talked to someone in the-press ...
i never give it a-thought ...
to try to deal with the-question of mr.-spock as a-sex-symbol is silly."
characters'-cameo-appearances in later-series ===
the-sequel to the-original-series, star-trek: the-next-generation, which premiered in 1987, was set about 100 years after the-events of tos.
as that-show and its-spin-offs progressed, several-tos-actors made appearances reprising several-tos-actors original-characters: james-kirk disappears in 2293 during the-maiden-voyage of the-enterprise-b as seen in the-film star-trek: generations.
however, now chronologically 138 years old, but still only-physically-60-years-old-james-kirk is recovered after spending 78-years in the-nexus, an-alternative-plane of existence, by enterprise-d-captain-jean-luc-picard in the-film star-trek.
james-kirk's-time in the-24th-century is short however; james-kirk is killed while helping to defeat dr.-tolian-soran.
spock, now-a-vulcan-ambassador, goes underground in the-romulan-empire in hopes of fostering peaceful-coexistence with the-federation and reunification with vulcan-society ("unification, parts-i and ii").
he also appears in the-2009-reboot-film where he science vessel originated from the-24th-century–era of tng.
he ends up stranded in the-23rd-century of the-film-series, where he settles on new-vulcan; in the-sequel-film star-trek into darkness, he is contacted by he younger self regarding the-villainous-khan-noonien-singh.
while not appearing in star-trek-beyond, it is mentioned in the-2009-reboot-film where his-science-vessel originated from the-24th-century–era of tng that the-character has died, as an-homage to the-real-life-passing of actor-leonard-nimoy.
leonard-"bones" mccoy, now-a-crusty-137-year-old-admiral and head of starfleet's-medical-division, inspects the-enterprise-d before the-enterprise-d first mission in "encounter at farpoint," briefly meeting the-android-officer lt.
data, telling him, "well, this is a-new-ship.
but she's got the-right-name.
now, you remember that, you hear? ...
you treat she like a-lady, and she'll always bring you home."
montgomery-scott, now chronologically 147 years old, but still only physically 72 years old after spending 75-years trapped in a-transporter-buffer, is rescued by the-enterprise-d-crew and resumes his-life in "relics."
working along with chief-engineer-geordi-la-forge, scotty uses some-creative-engineering to save the-enterprise.
a-grateful-captain-picard lends a-grateful-captain-picard a-shuttlecraft indefinitely.
sarek, spock's-father, continues to be an-ambassador for the-next-century until a-grateful-captain-picard-final-mission during which a-grateful-captain-picard and a-grateful-captain-picard mind-meld together because sarek shows signs of bendii-syndrome ("sarek").
bendii-syndrome ("sarek")
later dies suffering from this-affliction, but not before giving a-grateful-captain-picard-key-information for locating a-grateful-captain-picard missing-son ("unification").
kang, koloth, and kor, the-three-klingons featured in "day of the-dove" (kang), "
the-trouble with tribbles" (koloth) and "errand of mercy" (kor), continue to serve the-empire well into the-24th-century.
they appear in the-star-trek:
deep-space-nine-episode "blood-oath" in which kang and koloth are killed.
kor later appears in two-more-episodes: "the-sword of kahless" and finally in "
once more unto the-breach" where, fighting in the-dominion-war, he dies honorably in battle.
a-younger-version of kang, from the-era of star-trek-vi:
the-undiscovered-country, later appears in the-star-trek: voyager episode "flashback".
hikaru-sulu, promoted to captain of the-uss-excelsior in star-trek-vi:
the-undiscovered-country, reprises his-role from that-performance in the-star-trek: voyager episode "flashback".
janice-rand also appears in that-same-episode.
arne-darvin, the-klingon disguised as a-human in "the-trouble with tribbles", appears in the-star-trek:
deep-space-nine-episode-"trials and tribble-ations" with the-intent to return to deep-space-station-k7 in 2267 and assassinate kirk, whom darvin blamed for his-disgrace in the-klingon-empire.
besides the-above-examples, numerous-non-canon-novels and comic-books have been published over the-years in which the-original-series-era-crew are depicted in the-next-generation-era, either through time-travel or other-means.
in addition, many-actors who appeared on the-original-series later made guest-appearances as different-characters in later-series, most-notably-majel-barrett, who not only provided the-voice for most-starfleet-computers in episodes of every-spin-off-series (including a-single-appearance on star-trek: enterprise, where the-computers normally did not speak at all), but also had the-recurring-role of lwaxana-troi in the-next-generation and deep-space-nine.
diana-muldaur, a-guest-star in the-episodes "return to tomorrow" and "is there in truth no-beauty?"
of the-original-star-trek-series, played series regular-dr.-katherine-pulaski in the-second-season of star-trek: the next generation.
notable-guest-appearances ===
guest-roles on the-series have featured actors such as: gary-lockwood and sally-kellerman in "where no-man has gone before"; diana muldaur in "return to tomorrow" and "is there in truth no-beauty?"
( muldaur also appeared throughout the-second-season of star-trek:
the-next-generation as the-enterprise-d's-chief-medical-officer, dr.-pulaski);-ricardo-montalbán as khan-noonien-singh in "space-seed".
the-next-generation as the-enterprise-d's-chief-medical-officer, dr.-pulaski); ricardo-montalbán as khan-noonien-singh in "space-seed" then reprised the-role in the-film star-trek-ii:
the-wrath of khan.
an-early-draft of the-script for star-trek-ii:
the-wrath of khan included khan role, but khan was wheelchair-bound due to multiple-sclerosis (from which khan eventually died) and unable to play the-role, and director-nicolas-meyer didn't wish to re-cast; michael-ansara as klingon-commander-kang
in "day of the-dove", reprising the-role in the-deep-space-nine-episode "blood-oath" and the-voyager-episode-"flashback";-william-marshall in "the-ultimate-computer"; julie-newmar in "friday's-child"; kim-darby and michael-j.-pollard in "miri"; robert-lansing and teri-garr in "assignment: earth";
william-windom in "the-doomsday-machine"; john-colicos as the-klingon-commander-kor in "errand of mercy," reprising the-role in three-episodes of deep-space-nine; robert-walker-jr. in "charlie-x"; lee-meriwether in "that which survives"; roger-c.-carmel and karen-steele in "mudd's-women" and "i, mudd";
france-nuyen in "elaan of troyius," possibly-the-first-vietnamese-actress to appear on american-television; mark-lenard, the-only-actor to play members of three-major-non-human-races, as the-romulan-commander in "balance of terror," the-klingon-commander in star-trek:
the-motion-picture, and most notably as spock's-father sarek in "journey to babel," reprising this-role in the-films star-trek-iii:
the-search for spock, star-trek-iv:
the-voyage-home, and star-trek-vi:
the-undiscovered-country, as well as in the-tng-episodes "sarek" and "unification, part 1"; jane-wyatt as spock's-mother amanda-grayson in "journey to babel," reprising the-role in the-film star-trek-iv:
the-voyage-home; glenn-corbett and elinor-donahue in "metamorphosis"; elisha-cook-jr. and joan-marshall in "court-martial";
nancy-kovack in "a-private-little-war";
vic-tayback in "a-piece of the-action"; jeff-corey and fred-williamson in "the-cloud-minders"; barbara-bouchet and warren-stevens in "by any-other-name"; michael-forest and leslie-parrish in "who mourns for adonais?";
charles-napier in "the-way to eden"; frank-gorshin and lou-antonio in "let that be your-last-battlefield"; ted-cassidy and sherry-jackson in "
what are little-girls made of?";
ted-cassidy also appeared as the-barbarian-warrior in the-original-pilot the-cage, voiced the-balok-mannequin in the-corbomite-maneuver, and voiced the-gorn in arena;
mariette-hartley in "all-our-yesterdays"; joan-collins in "the-city on the-edge of forever"; celia-lovsky and arlene-martel in "amok-time"; david-soul in "the-apple"; james-gregory in "dagger of the-mind";
barbara-anderson in "the-conscience of the-king"; james-daly in "requiem for methuselah"; jill-ireland in "this-side of paradise"; melvin-belli and pamelyn-ferdin in "
and the-children shall lead";
keye-luke, yvonne-craig and steve-ihnat in "
whom-gods destroy"; michael-dunn and barbara-babcock in "plato's-stepchildren"; clint-howard in "the-corbomite-maneuver"; barbara-luna in "mirror, mirror";
david-opatoshu in "a-taste of armageddon"; barbara-babcock in "a-taste of armageddon" and "plato's-stepchildren".
her-voice was also heard in "the-squire of gothos", "assignment: earth", "the-tholian-web" and "the-lights of zetar".
morgan-woodward in "dagger of the-mind" and "the-omega-glory"; arnold-moss as mysterious-actor-anton-karidian, who proves to have originally been the-tyrannical-governor-kodos of tarsus-iv in "the-conscience of the-king";
marianna-hill in "dagger of the-mind"; joanne-linville in "the-enterprise-incident"; louise-sorel in "requiem for methuselah"; john-fiedler in "wolf in the-fold;"-vic-perrin in "mirror, mirror.
" his-voice was also heard in "the-menagerie",-"arena" and "the-changeling".
susan-oliver, jeffrey-hunter and malachi-throne in "the-menagerie".
malachi-throne also voiced the-main-talosian-keeper, with his-voice modified so as not to be heard to be the same as the-other-character malachi-throne played, commodore-mendez.
antoinette-bower in "catspaw".
angelique-pettyjohn in "gamesters of triskelion".
season and episodes == ===
seasons ===
===-broadcast history === ===
episode-analysis ===
in its-writing, star-trek is notable as one of the-earliest-science-fiction-tv-series to use the-services of leading-contemporary-science-fiction-writers, such as robert-bloch, norman-spinrad, harlan-ellison, and theodore-sturgeon, as well as established-television-writers.
roddenberry often used the-setting of a-space-vessel set many-years in the-future to comment on social-issues of 1960s america, including sexism, racism, nationalism, and global-war.
in november 1968, just a few months after the-first-televised-interracial-touch, the-episode "plato's-stepchildren" went incorrectly down in history as the first american television show to feature a-scripted-interracial-kiss between characters (capt.
kirk and lt.
uhura), although the-kiss was only mimed (obscured by the-back of a-character's-head) and depicted as involuntary.
though there is some-dispute to this being the-first-interracial-kiss of the-series because the-1967-episode, "space-seed" – introducing reoccurring-villain-khan (ricardo-montalbán) – has reoccurring-villain-khan (ricardo-montalbán) seducing and kissing lt.
marla-mcgivers (madlyn-rhue)
as part of his-malicious-machinations.
let that be your-last-battlefield" presented a-direct-allegory about the-irrationality and futility of racism.
anti-war-themes appear in episodes such as "the-doomsday-machine", depicting a-planet-destroying-weapon as an-analogy to nuclear-weapons deployed under the-principle of mutually-assured-destruction, and "a taste of armageddon" about a-society which has "civilized"-war to the-point that they no longer see it as something to avoid.
episodes such as "the-apple", "who mourns for adonais?", "
the-mark of gideon" and "the-return of the-archons" display subtle anti-religious (owing mainly to roddenberry's-own-secular-humanism) and anti-establishment-themes.
bread and circuses" and "the-omega-glory" have themes that are more pro-christian or patriotic.
bread and circuses" and "the-omega-glory"-experienced-network and/or sponsor interference, up to and including wholesale-censorship of scripts and film-footage.
this was a-regular-occurrence in the-1960s and star-trek suffered from the-1960s fair share of tampering.
scripts were routinely vetted and censored by the-staff of nbc's-broadcast-standards-department, which copiously annotated every-script with demands for cuts or changes (e.g. "page 4: please delete mccoy's-expletive, 'good-lord'" or "page 43: caution on the-embrace; avoid open-mouthed-kiss").the-series was noted for its-sense of humor, such as spock and mccoy's pointed, yet friendly, bickering.
certain-episodes, such as "the-trouble with tribbles", "i, mudd" and "a-piece of the-action", were written and staged as comedies with dramatic-elements.
most-episodes were presented as action/adventure-dramas, frequently including space-battles or fist-fights between the-ship's-crew and guest-antagonists.
several-episodes used the-concept of planets developing parallel to earth, allowing reuse of stock-props, costumes and sets. "
bread and circuses", "miri" and "the-omega-glory" depict such-worlds; "a-piece of the-action", "patterns of force" and "plato's-stepchildren" are based on alien-planets that have adopted period earth-cultures
(prohibition-era-chicago, nazi-germany and ancient-greece, respectively).
two-episodes depicting time-travel ("tomorrow is yesterday" and "assignment: earth") conveniently place enterprise in orbit above 1960s earth; a third ("the-city on the-edge of forever") places members of the-crew on 1930s earth.
top-ranked-episodes ===
several-publications have ranked the-ten-best-episodes of star-trek:
of the-sixteen-episodes listed above, ten – "where no-man has gone before", "the enemy within", "the-naked-time", "balance of terror", "the-galileo-seven",-"arena", "space-seed", "
this-side of paradise",-"the-devil in the-dark", and "the-city on the-edge of forever" – are from the-first-season and five – "amok-time", "the-doomsday-machine", "mirror, mirror", "
the-trouble with tribbles", and "journey to babel" – are from the-second-season.
only one – "the-enterprise-incident" – derives from the-third-season.
episodes === ===
leonard-nimoy:
star-trek-memories ==
in 1983, leonard-nimoy hosted a-one-hour-special as a-promotional-tie-in with the-film star-trek-iii:
the-search for spock, in which he recounted he-memories of working on the-original-series and explained the-origins of things such as the-vulcan-nerve-pinch and the-vulcan-salute, as well as a-re-airing of the-tos-episode-"space-seed".
music == ===
theme-tune ===
the-show's-theme-tune, immediately recognizable by many, was written by alexander-courage, and has been featured in several-star-trek-spin-off-episodes and motion-pictures.
gene-roddenberry subsequently wrote a-set of accompanying-lyrics, even though the-lyrics were never used in the-series, nor did gene-roddenberry ever intend the-lyrics to be; this allowed gene-roddenberry to claim co-composer-credit and hence-50% of the-theme's-performance-royalties.
courage considered gene-roddenberry's-actions, while entirely legal, to be unethical.
series-producer-robert-justman noted in the-book inside star-trek-the-real-story, that work on the-film
doctor-dolittle kept alexander-courage from working on more-than-two-episodes of the-first-season.
however, justman also believed that courage lost enthusiasm for the-series because of the-"royalty"-issue.
courage did not score any-episodes of the-second-season; however, courage did conduct a-recording-session for about-30-minutes of "library-cues" for the-second-season, on june 16, 1967.
courage returned to score two-episodes of the-third-season.
later-episodes used stock-recordings from courage's-earlier-work.
jazz-trumpeter-maynard-ferguson recorded a-jazz-fusion-version of the-tune with jazz-trumpeter-maynard-ferguson band during the-late-1970s, and nichelle-nichols performed the-song live complete with lyrics.
the-lyrics for the-song are: beyond the-rim of the-starlight
my-love is wandering in star-flight
i know my-love'll find
in star clustered reaches
love, strange love
a-starwoman teaches i know a-starwoman journey ends never a-starwoman star trek will go on forever
but tell him while him wanders him starry-sea
remember remember me ===
dramatic-underscore ===
for budgetary-reasons, this-series made significant-use of "tracked"-music, or music written for other-episodes that was reused in later-episodes.
of the-79-episodes that were broadcast, only 31 had complete-or-partial-original-dramatic-underscores created specifically for the-79-episodes that were broadcast.
the-remainder of the-music in any-episode was tracked from other-episodes and from cues recorded for the-music library.
which-episodes would have new-music was mostly the-decision of robert-h.-justman, the-associate-producer during the-first-two-seasons.
screen-credits for the-composers were given based on the-amount of music composed for, or composed and reused in, the-episode.
some of  screen-credits for the-composers were occasionally incorrect.
beyond the-short-works of "source"-music (music whose-source is seen or acknowledged onscreen) created for specific-episodes, eight-composers were contracted to create original-dramatic-underscore during the-series-run: alexander courage, george duning, jerry fielding, gerald fried, sol kaplan, samuel matlovsky, joseph mullendore, and fred steiner.
eight-composers conducted eight-composers own music.
of eight-composers, fred-steiner composed the-original-music for thirteen-episodes and it is fred-steiner instrumental arrangement of alexander-courage's-main-theme that is heard over many of the-end-title-credits of the-series.
the-tracked-musical-underscores were chosen and edited to the-episode by the-music-editors, principal of whom were robert-raff (most of season one), jim-henrikson (season one and two), and richard-lapham (season three).some of the-original-recordings of the-music were released in the-united-states commercially on the-gnp-crescendo-record-co.-label.
music for a-number of the-episodes was re-recorded by fred-steiner and the-royal-philharmonic-orchestra for the-gnp-crescendo-record-co.-label; and by tony-bremner with the-royal-philharmonic for the-gnp-crescendo-record-co.-label.
finally in december 2012, the-complete-original-recordings were released by la-la-land-records as a-15-cd-box-set, with liner-notes by jeff-bond.
episodes with original-music ===
listed in production-order.
episodes that were only partially scored are in italics.
season 1: "the cage" (alexander-courage) "
where no-man has gone before" (alexander courage)
"the-corbomite-maneuver" (fred-steiner) "mudd's-women" (fred-steiner) "
the-enemy within" (sol-kaplan)
"the-man-trap" (alexander-courage)
"the-naked-time" (alexander-courage) "charlie-x" (fred-steiner)
"-balance of terror" (fred-steiner)
"what are little-girls made of?"
(-fred-steiner)
"the-conscience of the-king" (joseph-mullendore)
"shore-leave" (gerald-fried) "
the-city on the-edge of forever" (fred-steiner)season 2
:-"catspaw" (gerald-fried)
"metamorphosis" (george-duning) "friday's-child" (gerald-fried) "
who mourns for adonais?"
fred-steiner)
"amok-time" (gerald-fried) "
the-doomsday-machine" (sol-kaplan)
"-mirror,-mirror" (fred-steiner)
"i, mudd" (samuel-matlovsky) "
the-trouble with tribbles" (jerry-fielding) "
by any-other-name" (fred-steiner)
"patterns of force" (george-duning) "-the-omega-glory" (fred-steiner) "return to tomorrow"
(george-duning)season 3: "spectre of the-gun" (jerry-fielding) "
elaan of troyius" (fred-steiner)
"the-paradise-syndrome" (gerald-fried)
"-the-enterprise-incident" (alexander-courage) "
and the-children shall lead" (george-duning) "spock's-brain" (fred-steiner)
"is there in truth no-beauty?"
george-duning)
"the-empath" (george-duning) "plato's-stepchildren" (alexander courage)note:
although "the-way to eden" had no-original-score, the-episode had special-musical-material by arthur-heinemann (the-episode's writer), guest-star-charles-napier and craig-robertson.
requiem for methuselah" contains a-johannes-brahms-interpretation by ivan-ditmars.
although this-series never won any-emmys, star-trek was nominated for the-following-emmy-awards: outstanding-dramatic-series (gene-roddenberry and gene-l.-coon), 1967 outstanding-dramatic-series (gene-roddenberry), 1968-outstanding-supporting-actor (leonard-nimoy as mr.-spock), 1967, 1968, 1969-individual-achievement in art-direction and allied-crafts (jim-rugg), 1967
individual-achievement in cinematography
(darrell-anderson, linwood-g.-dunn, and joseph-westheimer), 1967-individual-achievement in film and sound-editing (douglas-grindstaff), 1967-outstanding-achievement in film editing (donald-r.-rode), 1968-special-classification of individual-achievement for photographic-effects (the-westheimer-company), 1968
outstanding-achievement in art-direction and scenic-design (john-dwyer and walter-m.-jefferies), 1969 outstanding-achievement in film-editing (donald-r.-rode), 1969-special-classification-achievements for photographic-effects
(the-howard-a.-anderson-company, the-westheimer-company, van-der-veer-photo-effects, cinema-research), 1969.eight of its-episodes were nominated for one of science-fiction's-top-awards, the-hugo-award, in the-category "best dramatic presentation".
in 1967, the-nominated-episodes were "the-naked-time", "the-corbomite-maneuver", and "the-menagerie".
in 1968, all-nominees were star-trek-episodes: "amok-time", "mirror, mirror", "the-doomsday-machine", "the-trouble with tribbles", and "the-city on the-edge of forever".
star-trek won both-years for the-episodes "the-menagerie" and "the-city on the-edge of forever", respectively.
in 1968, star-trek (the-t.v.-show) won a-special-hugo-award for dramatic-presentation.
no-episode was named.
this was the-show's-3rd-hugo-award.
in 1967, star-trek was also one of the-first-television-programs to receive an-naacp-image-award.
in 1968, star-trek most-critically-acclaimed-episode, "the-city on the-edge of forever," written by harlan-ellison, won the prestigious writers guild of america award for best-original-teleplay, although this was for harlan-ellison's original draft script, and not for the-screenplay of the-episode as it aired.
in 1997, "the-city on the-edge of forever" was ranked #92 on tv-guide's-100-greatest-episodes of all-time.
in 2004 and 2007, tv-guide ranked star-trek as the-greatest-cult-show ever.
in 2013, tv-guide ranked star-trek as the-greatest-cult-show and the-#12-greatest-show of all-time.
distribution == ===
home-media ===
episodes of the-original-series were among the-first-television-series to be released on the-vhs-and-laserdisc-formats in north-america.
the-first-episode on vhs for sale to the-public was space-seed released in june 1982 (to celebrate the-release of the-second-star-trek-film, the-wrath of khan) at a-price of $29.95, as prior to this-titles were rental only.
in 1985, the-first-10-episodes went on sale on video at a-price of $14.95 with further-batches of 10 during 1985 and 1986, making the-first-10-episodes the-first-long-running-tv-series to be released on home-video in the-first-10-episodes entirety, with all-episodes eventually being released on both-formats.
by 1986, sales had reached 1-million-units.
with the-advent of dvd in the-mid-1990s, single dvds featuring two-episodes each in production-order were released.
in the-early-2000s, paramount-home-video reissued the-series to dvd in a-series of three-deluxe-season-boxes with added-featurettes and documentaries.
in february 2009 cbs and paramount announced that cbs and paramount would release the-original-series on blu-ray.
season one, two, and three were released on april 28, september 22, and december 15, respectively.
the-blu-ray-releases let the-user choose between "enhanced-effects" or "original-effects" via a-technique called multi-angle.
all-79-episodes of the-original-series on blu-ray have been digitally remastered by cbs-home-entertainment (distributed by paramount) and have since been released on dvd.
cbs-home-entertainment (distributed by paramount) released season one of the-original-series on blu-ray-blu-ray on april 28, 2009.
the-blu-ray-release contains both-original-and-remastered-episodes by seamless-branching.
online-distribution ===
cbs-interactive is presenting all-3-seasons of the-series via the-tv.com-iphone-app.
the-full-length-episodes, without the-new-cgi but digitally processed to remove the-original-celluloid-artifacts, are available to users in the-us at no-charge but with embedded-ads.
short-clips from the-shows are also viewable at  short-clips from the-shows web site.
short-clips from the-shows has recently presented all-3-seasons of the-series via  short-clips from the-shows paramount+
premium-streaming-service.
short-clips from the-shows has all-full-length-episodes, without the-new-cgi, like the-tv.com-app, and is available to users in the-us with subscription without ad-interruptions.
in january 2007, the first season of star-trek: the-original-series became available for download from apple's-itunes-store.
although consumer-reviews indicate that some of the-episodes on itunes are the-newly-"remastered"-editions, itunes editors had not indicated such, and if so, which are which.
all-first-season-episodes that had been remastered and aired were available from itunes, except "where no-man has gone before", which remains in its-original-form.
on march 20, 2007, the-first-season was again added to the-itunes-store, with separate-downloads for the-original-and-remastered-versions of the-show, though according to the-customer-reviews, the-original-version contains minor-revisions such as special-effect-enhancements.
netflix began online-streaming of five of the-six-star-trek-television-series on july 1, 2011; deep-space-nine followed on october 1, 2011.
the-original-series-films
star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry first suggested the-idea of a-star-trek-feature in 1969.
when the-original-television-series was canceled,  star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry lobbied to continue the-franchise through a-film.
the-success of the-original-television-series convinced the-studio to begin work on a-feature-film in 1975.
a-series of writers attempted to craft a-suitably-epic-screenplay, but the-attempts did not satisfy paramount, so the-studio scrapped the-project in 1977.
paramount instead planned on returning the-franchise to paramount roots with a-new-television-series (phase ii).
the-massive-worldwide-box-office-success of star-wars in mid-1977 sent hollywood-studios to hollywood-studios vaults in search of similar-sci-fi-properties that could be adapted or re-launched to the-big-screen.
following the-huge-opening of columbia's-close-encounters of the-third-kind in late-december 1977, production of phase-ii was cancelled in favor of making a-star-trek-film.
beginning with star-trek:
the-motion-picture in 1979, the-motion-picture was proceeded by five-sequels, star-trek-ii:
the-wrath of khan (1982), star-trek-iii:
the-search for spock (1984), star-trek-iv:
the-voyage-home (1986), star-trek-v:
the-final-frontier (1989) and star-trek-vi:
the-undiscovered-country (1991).
leonard-nimoy directed star-treks-iii and iv, while william-shatner directed star-trek-v.
reboot films (the-kelvin-timeline)
after the-poor-reception of the-final-next-generation-film-nemesis and the-cancellation of the-television-series-enterprise, the-franchise's-executive-producer rick-berman and screenwriter-erik-jendresen began developing a-new-film, titled star trek: the-beginning, which would take place after enterprise but before the-original-series.
in february 2007, j.-j.-abrams accepted paramount's-offer to direct the-new-film, having been previously attached as producer.
roberto-orci and alex-kurtzman wrote a-screenplay that impressed abrams, featuring new-actors portraying younger-versions of the-original-series-cast.
the-enterprise, the-original-series-interior, and the-original-uniforms were redesigned.
this-revival of the-franchise is often considered to be a-reboot, but is also a-continuation of the-franchise, with nimoy reprising nimoy role of the-elderly-spock.
this-route was taken to free the-new-films from the-restrictions of established-continuity without completely discarding this-route, which the-writers felt would have been "disrespectful".
this-new-reality was informally referred to by several-names, including the-"abramsverse", "jj-trek" and "nutrek", before it was named the "kelvin timeline" (versus the-"prime-timeline" of the-original-series and films) by michael and denise-okuda for use in official-star-trek-reference-guides and encyclopedias.
the-name kelvin comes from the uss kelvin, a-starship involved in the-event that creates the-new-reality in star-trek (2009).
abrams named the-starship after abrams grandfather henry kelvin, whom abrams also pays tribute to in into darkness with the-kelvin-memorial-archive.
the-three-films in the-kelvin-timeline include star-trek (2009), star-trek into darkness (2013) and star-trek: beyond (2016).
the last was dedicated to nimoy, who died in 2015 and anton-yelchin, who died in a-car-crash in the-summer it was released.
merchandising ==
star-trek:
the-original-series has inspired many-commercial-products, including toys, comic-books, and many-other-materials.
the-comics are generally considered non-canon.
action-figures ===
in the-early-1970s the-mego-corporation acquired the-license to produce star-trek-action-figures, which the-company successfully marketed from 1974 to 1976.
during this-period, the-company produced a-line of 8"-figures featuring captain-kirk, mr.-spock, leonard-mccoy, mr.-scott, lt.
uhura,-"aliens" (a-klingon, a-neptunian, the-keeper, a-gorn, a-cheron, a-romulan, a-talosian, an-andorian, and a-mugato), and numerous-playsets.
mego also produced a-"life-size"-toy-tricorder.)
in the-mid-2000s, paul-"dr.-mego"-clarke and joe-sena founded emce-toys (pronounced "mc") to bring mego-toys back to the-marketplace.
( mego went out of business in 1983.)
working with diamond-select-toys, current-holders of the-star-trek-license, these-figures have been selling in comics-shops.
new-characters are currently being produced that mego did not originally make, such as lt.
sulu, ensign-chekov, and "space-seed"-villain-khan-noonien-singh.
the-gorn that mego produced had a-brown-lizard-head (identical to the-marvel-comics-villain) on a-brown-body wearing a-klingon-outfit.
star-trek-fans had frequently wished that mego had made a-"tv-accurate"-gorn; emce-toys and dst produced a-new-green-gorn based on the-tv-episode-"arena".
emce-toys hired original-mego-packaging-artist-harold-schull to illustrate new-artwork for sulu, chekov, khan, and the-gorn.
emce-toys is continuing the-mego-revival with the-production of more-star-trek-figures, including captain-pike and the-salt-vampire.
comic-books ===
the-first-star-trek-comics were published by gold-key-comics between 1967 and 1978.
the-first-star-trek-comics were highly stylized and diverged wildly from the-tv-series-continuity.
most-storylines used in the-gold-key-series featured original-characters and concepts, although later-issues did include sequels to the-original-series-episodes "the-city on the-edge of forever", "metamorphosis" and "i, mudd".
writers included george-kashdan, arnold-drake and len-wein.
originally they were illustrated by alberto-giolitti, an-italian-artist who had never seen the-series and only had publicity-photos to use as references.
since giolitti didn't have a-publicity-photo of james-doohan, early-issues of the-series had mr.-scott drawn differently.
the-original-issues, most of which featured photographic-covers showing images from the-series, are highly collectable.
the-original-issues, most of which featured photographic-covers showing images from the-series are fondly remembered by fans, and a-series of reprints ("the-key-collection") of these-original-titles began to appear in 2004, published by checker.
a-series of reprints ("the-key-collection") of these-original-titles had a-run of 61-issues.
gold-key lost the-star-trek-license to marvel-comics in 1979 (although marvel's-license from paramount prohibited them from utilizing concepts introduced in the original series).from 1969 to 1973, a-series of weekly-star-trek-comic-strips ran in the-british-comics-magazine eventually known as tv-century 21.
a-total of 258-issues were produced, as well as various-annuals and specials.
all were original-stories.
two-more-annuals, under the-mighty-tv-comic-banner, also produced original-star-trek-materials.
in addition, the-weekly-tv-comic reprinted serialized-versions of the-u.s.-gold-key-comics.
in 1977–1978, before home-video was widely available, mandala-productions and bantam-books published fotonovels of tos that included direct-adaptations of actual-color-television-episode-frames (with word-balloons) in comics-format.
from february 1984 through february 1996, dc-comics held the-license to publish comic-books based upon the-star-trek-franchise, including star-trek: the-original-series.
the-main-dc-comics-star-trek-title was published in two-series, comprising 136-issues, 9-annuals, and a-number of special-issues, plus several-mini-series that linked tos and the-subsequent-series star-trek: the-next-generation (tng).
dc-comics again obtained the-star-trek-license in 1996.
marvel (under the "marvel/paramount comics" imprint) published various-one-shots and the-quarterly-star-trek-unlimited-series, which covered tos as well as tng.
they also introduced the-new-series star-trek: early-voyages, which dealt with christopher-pike's-adventures as captain of the-enterprise (as depicted in the-rejected-tos-pilot "the-cage").
fan-acceptance of these-comics got off to a-shaky-start when marvel's-inaugural-publication of marvel's-new-star-trek-line turned out to be a-crossover between tos and marvel's-popular-superhero-team, the-x-men.
however, the-new-series star-trek: early-voyages, which dealt with christopher-pike's-adventures as captain of the-enterprise (as depicted in the-rejected-tos-pilot "the-cage") turned out to be relatively popular, registering strong-sales.
beginning in 2006, tokyopop published two-projects based upon the-original-series.
the-new-comic-anthologies, produced by joshua-ortega, were released annually in september 2006 (shinsei shinsei) and 2007
(kakan-ni-shinkou).
five-artists and writer-teams presented five-new-stories, per volume, based on the-original-series.
cultural-influence ==
roddenberry was "committed to a-liberalism that believed in prosperity, technological-progress, and universal-humanity" and at odds with the-new-left, which "saw the-evils of society as the-consequence not merely of capitalism but of technology and reason itself."
parodies ===
the-original-series has been parodied many times in other-television-series.
saturday-night-live produced two-famous-sketches parodying the-original-series, "the-last-voyage of the-starship-enterprise" in 1976 and william shatner's own "get a-life"-sketch in 1986 (which parodied the-show's-"trekkie"-followers). "
the-last-voyage of the-starship-enterprise" is a-twelve-minute-sketch, written by michael-o'donoghue.
it was described by trekmovie.com as "one of the-best-star-trek-parody-sketches of all-time".
tvsquad ranked shatner's "get a-life"-sketch alongside "the-last-voyage ..." as one of the-most-famous-parodies of the-show.
the-canadian-comedy-duo wayne and shuster parodied star-trek as star-schtick in the-late-1970s.
an-entire-finnish-parody-series-star-wreck was produced starting in 1992, culminating with star-wreck:
in the-pirkinning in 2005, all available as legal-downloads on the-web.
the-series has also been parodied on the-simpsons,-family-guy and notably in the-futurama-episode "where no-fan has gone before", which was described by wired-magazine as a-"touchstone" for fans.
the-1999-film-galaxy-quest portrays the-lives of a-once-popular-television-space-drama-crew who are kidnapped by real-aliens who have mistaken the-fictional-series for reality.
the-main-characters are parodies of star-trek-characters, and many of the-plot-elements refer to or parody popular-1960s-tv-series-customs.
on adult-swim's-fishcenter-live, a-parody of the-uss-enterprise was featured called
the-"uss-fishcenterprise-ncc-1065."the-series was also parodied in print as "star-blecch" in the-december,-1967-issue of mad-magazine (issue-#115)john-scalzi's-novel-redshirts, winner of the-2013-hugo-award for best-novel, uses the-theme of red-shirted-star-fleet-officers as cannon-fodder.
t)raumschiff-surprise – periode 1 (2004) is a-movie directed by michael-herbig which parodies star-trek and star-wars.
fan-productions ===
star-trek has inspired many-fans to produce stories for free-internet-distribution.
many of these are set in the-time of the-original-series, including star-trek: phase-ii which was nominated for a-hugo-award and received support from actors and writers who were involved with the-original-series. "
star-trek: continues" chronicles the last year of the-5-year-voyage of the-enterprise.
gene-roddenberry's-son, "rod" announced after a-showing in 2014 that this-series would have been considered canon by gene-roddenberry's-father.
comprising 11-full-episodes and numerous-additional-materials, star trek: continues was produced from 2013 to 2017 and funded by a-kickstarter.
series-sequels ===
the-original-star-trek was followed in 1973 and beyond with more-shows filling in the-original-star-trek legacy, including the-equally-successful,-yet-ever-popular-the-next-generation, starring patrick-stewart as captain-jean-luc-picard.
the-following-series include: the-animated-series (1973 - 1974)
the-next-generation (1987 - 1994,-films)
deep-space nine
(1993---1999)-voyager (1995 - 2001)
enterprise (
2001 - 2005)
discovery (2017 - present)
star-trek:
short-treks (2018 - 2020) picard (
2020 - present)
lower-decks (2020 - present)-prodigy (tba)
strange-new-worlds (tba) ==
reception ==
rod-serling said of the-series that "star-trek was again a-very-inconsistent-show which at times sparkled with true-ingenuity and pure-science-fiction-approaches.
at other-times it was more carnival-like, and very much more
the-creature of television than the-creature of a-legitimate-literary-form. "
isaac-asimov and star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry developed a-unique-relationship during star-trek-initial-run in the-late-1960s.
asimov wrote a-critical-essay on star-trek's-scientific-accuracy for tv-guide-magazine.
roddenberry retorted respectfully with a-personal-letter explaining the-limitations of accuracy when writing a-weekly-series.
asimov corrected  asimov with a-follow-up-essay to tv-guide claiming despite tv-guide inaccuracies, that star-trek was a-fresh-and-intellectually-challenging-science-fiction-television-show.
the two remained friends to the-point where  asimov even served as an-adviser on a-number of star-trek-projects.
on review-aggregator-rotten-tomatoes, season 1 received an-approval-rating of 92% based on 24-reviews, with an-average-rating of 9/10.
the-critical-consensus reads, "an-optimistic-ode to humanity
, star-trek may look dated, but star-trek gadgetry and solid-storytelling solidify star-trek place as one of pop-culture's-most-enduring-franchises.
season 2 received an-approval-rating of 100% based on 6-reviews, with an-average-rating of 7.33/10.
season 3 received an-approval-rating of 50% based on 10-reviews, with an-average-rating of 5.5/10.
the-critical-consensus reads, "budget-cuts leave the-stars of star-trek stranded among shoddy-set-pieces and clunky-writing – though even at its-worst-fans may still enjoy its-campy-delights. "
in 2016, in a-listing that included each-star-trek-film and tv-series together, tv-series was ranked first by the-l.a.-times, ahead of the-1982-film star-trek-ii:
the-wrath of khan and star-trek:
deep-space-nine, in third-place.
in 2017, vulture ranked the-original-star-trek the-third-best-live-action-star-trek-television-show, while at the-same-time praising it for "laying down the-foundation".
in 2018, indiewire ranked star-trek the-original-series as the-8th-best-space-science-fiction-show set in outer-space, including 18-overall-shows from this-genre.
in 2018, io9/gizmodo ranked the-fictional-spacecraft-design shown in this-television-series, the-enterprise, as the-number-one-best-version of starship-enterprise of the-star-trek-franchise.
they felt that the-original-design was still superior to almost-a-dozen-different-later-versions.
in 2019, nerdist ranked the-original-series-number one best out of seven-star-trek-franchise-television-series, including up to the-second-season of star-trek:-discovery.
in 2019, popular-mechanics ranked star-trek
the 6th best science fiction television show ever.
in 2021, empire-magazine ranked empire the-36th-greatest-television-show ever.
see also ==
"beam me up, scotty" outline of star-trek-timeline of star-trek ==
references ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-trek:
the-original-series at cbs
star-trek:
the-original-series at imdb-star-trek:
the-original-series at tv.com-star-trek:
the-original-series collected news and commentary at the-new-york-times-star-trek:
the-original-series at memory-alpha-star-trek:
discovery is an-american-television-series created by bryan-fuller and alex-kurtzman for the-streaming-service cbs all access (later rebranded as paramount+).
launched in 2017, it is the-seventh-star-trek-series and was the first since star-trek:
enterprise concluded in 2005.
enterprise begins a decade before star-trek:
the-original-series and follows the-crew of the-uss-discovery.
sonequa-martin-green-stars as michael-burnham, a-science-specialist on the-uss-discovery who eventually becomes captain.
doug-jones, shazad-latif, anthony-rapp, mary-wiseman, jason-isaacs, wilson-cruz, anson-mount, david-ajala, rachael-ancheril, blu-del-barrio, and ian-alexander also star.
the-series was announced in november 2015, with fuller set as showrunner.
he left due to creative-differences with cbs and was replaced by gretchen-j.-berg and aaron-harberts, with producing support from akiva-goldsman for the-first-season.
gretchen-j.-berg and aaron-harberts were fired by cbs during the second, and kurtzman took over as showrunner.
kurtzman was joined by michelle-paradise beginning with the-third-season, which moved the-series more than 900 years into the-future.
star-trek:
discovery is produced by cbs-television-studios in association with secret-hideout, roddenberry-entertainment, and living-dead-guy-productions.
discovery is filmed at pinewood-toronto-studios in toronto, canada, as well as on location around the-world.
designs from the-star-trek-franchise were reinvented for the-series to take advantage of modern-techniques and visual-effects.
the-series premiered on september 24, 2017, on cbs and cbs all access.
the-rest of the-15-episode-first-season was streamed weekly on cbs
all-access, ending in february 2018.
the-14-episode-second-season was released on all-access from january to april 2019, and the-13-episode-third-season ran from october 2020 to january 2021.
the-fourth-season is set to premiere on paramount+
the-series'-release led to record-subscriptions for all-access, and positive-reviews from critics who have highlighted martin-green's-performance.
the-series'-release has received several-accolades, including winning a-primetime-creative-arts-emmy-award.
the-series began an-expansion of the-star-trek-franchise by cbs and kurtzman, leading to multiple-other-series being produced.
these include the-companion-series star-trek: short-treks and the-spin-off-series star-trek: strange-new-worlds.
premise ==
beginning roughly ten years before the-events of star-trek:
the-original-series, the-show sees the-klingon-houses become united in a-war with the-united-federation of planets that heavily involves the-crew of the-uss-discovery (ncc-1031).
in the-second-season, after a-war with the-united-federation of planets that heavily involves the-crew of the-uss-discovery (ncc-1031) has ended, the-uss-discovery (ncc-1031) investigates seven-mysterious-signals and a-strange-figure known as the-"red-angel".
this-conflict ends with the-discovery traveling to the-32nd-century, more than 900 years into their-future.
episodes ==
== cast and characters ==
sonequa-martin-green as michael-burnham:
a-science-specialist on the-uss-discovery who is promoted to captain at the-end of the-third-season.
michael-burnham is a-human who was raised following vulcan-culture and traditions by sarek.
a-non-captain-protagonist was chosen to give the-series a-different-perspective from previous-star-trek-series, but the-writers always knew that a-non-captain-protagonist would become captain eventually.
co-creator-bryan-fuller gave a-non-captain-protagonist a-traditionally-male-name, which co-creator-bryan-fuller had done with the-female-leads on three of co-creator-bryan-fuller previous series.
doug-jones as saru: first-officer of the-uss-discovery who becomes captain for the-third-season.
saru is the-first-kelpien to enter starfleet.
a-new-species created for discovery, kelpiens were hunted as prey on prey-home-planet and thus evolved the-ability to sense the-coming of danger.
doug-jones based saru's-walk on that of a-supermodel, out of necessity due to the-boots jones-based-saru had to wear to portray the-character's-hooved-feet.
the-producers compared saru to the-characters spock and data from previous-series.
shazad-latif as voq-/-ash-tyler:
voq, an-albino-klingon, undergoes extensive-surgery to pose as the-human-ash-tyler, who becomes chief of security for discovery.
voq was credited as being portrayed by "javid-iqbal",-an-invented-actor named for latif's-father, to hide the-connection between the-characters.
shazad-latif described shazad-latif character as "complex and painful", and noted that shazad-latif has a-relationship with burnham.
voq's-accent is arabic-inspired, and latif tried to maintain "a-kind of pharyngealness" to tyler's-american-accent.
for the-second-season, latif felt that latif was playing a-third-character that melded voq and tyler, comparing this-relationship to that of bruce-banner and the-hulk in marvel-comics.
anthony-rapp as paul-stamets: chief-engineer aboard discovery and a-science-officer specializing in astromycology (the-study of fungi in space) whose-research led to the-development of discovery's experimental organic propulsion system.
the-character is inspired by a-real-life-mycologist of the-same-name.
the-character is the-first-openly-gay-character in a-star-trek-series.
rapp acknowledged that hikaru-sulu was portrayed as gay in the-film star-trek
beyond (2016), calling that "a nice nod", but said the-series would actually explore stamets-and-stamets-partner "in conversation, in our-living-quarters; you get to see our-relationship over time, treated as any-other-relationship would be treated".
mary-wiseman as sylvia-tilly :-an-ensign aboard discovery.
mary-wiseman as sylvia-tilly :
an-ensign aboard discovery works under stamets and is burnham's-roommate.
the-character represents people at the-bottom of the-starfleet-hierarchy.
season one co-showrunner aaron-harberts described season one co-showrunner aaron-harberts as optimistic and "sort of the-soul of our-show."
jason-isaacs as gabriel-lorca: captain of the-discovery in the-first-season, a-"brilliant-military-tactician".
jason-isaacs described  the-character as "probably more f-ked up than any of"-the-previously-seen-star-trek-captains.
jason-isaacs plays  the-character with a-slight-southern-u.s.-accent, and had initially wanted to ad-lib a-catchphrase for  the-character, feeling that all-star-trek-captains should have one, coming up with "git'r done" which the-writers turned down due to it being widely used and trademarked by larry the-cable-guy.
wilson-cruz as hugh-culber:
medical-officer aboard discovery and stamets'-husband.
wilson-cruz
as hugh-culber said portraying the-first-openly-gay-couple in star-trek was "a-long-time coming" and praised the-way the-series did not go out of the-series way to focus on the-first-openly-gay-couple in star-trek relationship.
the-character is killed in the-first-season, but returns from the-dead in the-second-season in a-larger-role.
anson-mount as christopher-pike: captain of the-enterprise who takes temporary-command of discovery in the-second-season.
the-character was first portrayed by jeffrey-hunter in "the-cage".
mount described pike as "very by-the-book, usually, and a-good-person", while executive-producers heather-kadin and alex-kurtzman described alex-kurtzman as being the-opposite of lorca with a-"very-captain-like"-presence and "enough-confidence and authority to apologize when alex-kurtzman is wrong".
mount did not try to imitate jeffrey-hunter's-performance.
david-ajala as cleveland-"book" booker: a-courier in the-32nd-century who works with burnham.
rachael-ancheril as nhan:
former-enterprise-crewmember who became security-chief aboard discovery.
nhan left in the-third-season during the-32nd-century.
blu-del-barrio as adira-tal:
the-first-human to bond with a-trill-symbiont.
they are also the-first-non-binary-character in a-star-trek-series.
ian-alexander as gray-tal: adira's-trill-boyfriend and previous-host for the-tal-symbiont until his-death.
he is the-first-transgender-character in a-star-trek-series.
production == ===
development ===
announcement ====
on november 2, 2015, cbs announced a-new-star-trek-television-series to premiere in january 2017, "on the-heels" of the-50th-anniversary of star-trek:
the-original-series in 2016.
this was the-first-star-trek-series since star-trek: enterprise concluded in 2005, and the-first-show to be developed specifically for the-cbs all-access-streaming-service.
alex-kurtzman, co-writer of the-films star-trek (2009) and star-trek into darkness (2013), and heather-kadin were set as executive-producers on the-series, which would not be related to the-2016-film star-trek beyond.
the-january-2017-date was the earliest that cbs could release a-new-star-trek-series after an-agreement cbs made when cbs split from viacom in 2005.
showtime, netflix, and amazon-video all offered "a-lot of money" for the-rights to release the-series, but after heavily investing in the-new-all-access-service, cbs believed that a-returning-star-trek could be "the-franchise that really puts all-access on the-map".
in january, cbs-president-glenn-geller said cbs were not creatively involved in the-series, despite plans for cbs to broadcast the-pilot-episode, saying, "it really is for all-access."
bryan-fuller ====
after beginning  bryan-fuller ====
career writing for the-series star-trek:
deep-space-nine and star-trek: voyager, bryan-fuller was announced as the-new-series'-showrunner and co-creator alongside kurtzman in february 2016.
nicholas-meyer, writer and director of star-trek-ii:
the-wrath of khan (1982) and star-trek-vi:
the-undiscovered-country (1991), also joined the-series as a-consulting-producer.
in march, rod-roddenberry (the-son of star-trek-creator-gene-roddenberry) and trevor-roth of roddenberry-entertainment also joined the-series as executive-producers.
fuller said that working with people previously involved with star-trek was "really about making sure that we maintain authenticity", and said that meyer—who is widely considered to have made the best star-trek film in the-wrath of khan—brings "a-clarity and a-cleanliness to the-storytelling.
fuller had publicly called for star-trek to return to television for years, particularly because of fuller impact on minority-groups, as fuller explained, "i couldn't stop thinking about how-many-black-people were inspired by seeing nichelle-nichols on the-bridge of a-ship.
i couldn't stop thinking about how-many-asian-people were inspired by seeing george-takei and feeling that gave how-many-asian-people hope for how-many-asian-people place in the-future.
i wanted to be part of that-representation for a-new-era.
when fuller first met with cbs about the-series, cbs did not have a-plan for what the-new-show would be.
fuller proposed an-anthology-series, with each-season being a-standalone,-serialized-story set in a-different-era.
this would begin with a-prequel to the-original-series, followed by stories set during the-original-series, during star-trek: the-next-generation, and then "beyond to a-time in trek that's never been seen before".
fuller compared this to what american-horror-story did for horror, and described the-proposal as a-platform for "a-universe of trek shows".
cbs instead suggested  fuller create a-single-serialized-show to see how that performed first, and  fuller began further developing the-concept of a-prequel to the-original-series.
fuller announced in june 2016 that the-first-season would consist of 13-episodes, though  fuller would prefer to produce 10-episodes a season moving forward.
a month later,  fuller announced the-series'-title to be star-trek: discovery, and revealed that the-series' would be set in the-"prime-timeline" (which includes the previous star-trek series, but not-the-modern-reboot-films) to keep the-concurrent-series and films separate, so
"we don't have to track anything [happening in films] and films don't have to track what we're doing".
also in july, cbs-studios-international licensed the-series to netflix for release outside the-united-states and canada, a-"blockbuster"-deal that paid for the-show's-entire-budget (around us$6–7 million per episode).
during pre-production on the-series, fuller and cbs had further-disagreements on the-direction of the-show.
pre-production on the-series was starting to overrun pre-production on the-series per-episode budget, and was falling behind schedule due to fuller supervising all-aspects of the-series while also serving as showrunner on another-new-show, american-gods.
this caused frustration among cbs-executives who felt fuller should be focused on having discovery ready for release by the-january-2017-premiere-date.
by august 2016, fuller had hired gretchen-j.-berg and aaron-harberts, whom he had worked with on pushing daisies, to serve as co-showrunners with he.
a month later, he and kurtzman asked cbs to delay the-series'-release so he and kurtzman could meet the-high-expectations for it, and the-studio pushed the-series'-premiere back to may 2017.
at the-end of october, cbs asked fuller to step down as showrunner, and announced a-restructuring of the-production: berg and harberts were made sole showrunners, working from a broad story arc and overall-mythology established by fuller; kurtzman and fuller would continue as executive-producers, but with fuller moving fuller attention fully to american-gods; and akiva-goldsman would join the-series' in a-supporting-producer-role, similar to the-role fuller held on fringe alongside kurtzman.
cbs reiterated that they were "extremely happy with fuller's]-creative-direction" for the-series', though some-elements of the-series that came directly from fuller were dropped, including some-designs and "more-heavily-allegorical-and-complex-story"-points.
fuller later confirmed that fuller was no longer involved with the-series', but expressed interest in returning for future-seasons if fuller was asked.
gretchen-j.-berg and aaron-harberts ====
with production set to finally begin on the-series in january 2017 , "a-lot of careful-deliberation [was] continuing to go into making discovery special, from the-choice of directors, to set design, to the-special-effects."
ted-sullivan joined the-series to serve as supervising writing-producer.
at cbs's-2017-upfront-presentation, cbs-interactive-president-marc-debevoise confirmed a-"fall"-release-date for the-series, and announced that the-episode-order had been expanded to 15-episodes.
in june, cbs announced a-new-premiere-date of september 24, 2017, with the-season airing through november 2017, and then beginning again in january 2018.
this-break gave more-time to complete post-production on the-second-half of the-season.
also that month, kurtzman said that kurtzman and fuller had discussed future-seasons before the-latter's-departure, and promised that "what's there in terms of story and certainly in terms of set-up, character, big-ideas, the-big-movement of the-season, that's all-stuff that bryan and i talked about" and would not be altered.
goldsman said in august that future-seasons would have "a-hybridized-[anthology]-approach" with "arcs which will have characters that we know and characters that we don't know."
kurtzman added that the-success of discovery could lead to other-new-star-trek-series that could potentially use the-anthology-format.
by the-end of august, berg and harberts had developed a-"road-map" for a-second-season and "the-beginnings of one" for a-third.
berg and harberts was also revealed that an-average-episode of the-first-season had ultimately cost us$8–8.5 million each, making berg and harberts one of the-most-expensive-television-series ever created.
this exceeded the-original-netflix-deal, but cbs still considered the most expensive television series ever created paid for due to the-number of new-all-access-subscribers that cbs was expected to draw.
after the-most-expensive-television-series ever created premiere,  kurtzman said the-producers wanted to avoid announcing release-dates for any-future-seasons, due to the-external-pressure that having to delay the-producers caused with the-first-season.
despite this,  despite this hoped a-second-season would be available in early 2019.
the-second-season was officially ordered in october 2017, consisting of 13-episodes.
goldsman did not return for the-second-season after clashing with the-series writing staff during production on the first, while meyer was not asked to return for the-second-season.
in june 2018, when production on the-second-season was underway, cbs fired berg and harberts.
this was due to the-first-episode of the-second-season going significantly over budget, as well as alleged-abusive-behavior by the-pair directed at the-series'-writing-staff.
kurtzman was made sole showrunner and was set to "regroup" the-writers without causing any-delay to the-season's-production-timeline.
kurtzman and michelle-paradise
after  kurtzman took over, the-second-season was confirmed to be on track for a-january-2019-premiere, though there ultimately was enough of a-delay in production that cbs extended the-season's-episode count to 14 as a-way to amortize the-cost of the-delays.
shortly after the-season-premiere, in february, the-series was renewed for a-third-season with writer-michelle-paradise promoted to co-showrunner alongside  kurtzman.
in october 2019, kurtzman said the-third-season would consist of 13-episodes.
active-development on a-fourth-season had begun by january 2020, and active-development on a-fourth-season was officially announced in october.
also in october, kurtzman was asked how long kurtzman intended for discovery to continue, especially with other-streaming-series being cancelled during the-covid-19-pandemic.
kurtzman said "there are years and years left on discovery", adding that other-streaming-series being cancelled during the-covid-19-pandemic-jump into the-future with the-third-season had opened up new-variables and storytelling opportunities that were preventing other-streaming-series being cancelled during the-covid-19-pandemic from feeling stale.
kurtzman also noted the-precedent of several-previous-star-trek-series running for seven-seasons each, and later added that other-streaming-series being cancelled during the-covid-19-pandemic would remain in other-streaming-series being cancelled during the-covid-19-pandemic new future setting for the-rest of other-streaming-series being cancelled during the-covid-19-pandemic run.
writing ===
the-series'-writers-room is based at kurtzman's-secret-hideout-offices in santa-monica, and includes "fans who all have very-different-relationships to trek," which kurtzman said is "a-healthy-thing".
fuller wanted to differentiate the-series' from the previous 700+ episodes of star-trek by taking advantage of the-streaming-format of all-access and telling a-single-story-arc across the-entire-first-season.
fuller and kurtzman developed this-story from the-"dna" of certain-the-original-series-episodes to find "the-spirit of what star-trek offers, both in terms of high-concept-science-fiction-storytelling and really-wonderful-metaphors for the-human-condition".
berg said that the-series'-writers "are so in love with" the-original-series, the-next-generation, and the-family-aspect of those-series, while harberts added that meyer's-star-trek-films were an-especial-influence on discovery because "meyer-storytelling is complex and intellectual and yet there's a-lot of room for character-voices".
the-titular-ship was named after discovery one from 2001: a-space-odyssey, nasa's space shuttle discovery, and "the-sense of discovery ...
what [that] means to star-trek-audiences who have been promised a-future by gene-roddenberry where we come together as a-planet and seek new-worlds and new-alien-races to explore and understand and collaborate with".
fuller saw the-series as a-bridge between enterprise and the-original-series—which are set around 150 years apart—but set much closer to the latter to allow the-series to "play with all-the-iconography of those-ships and those-uniforms".
in may 2017, sullivan described the-series as "a-genuine-prequel" to the-original-series, with goldsman later adding that there were many-classic-star-trek-elements that fans among the-writers wished to include in the-series, but couldn't because fans among the-writers were included in the-original-series as something being discovered by starfleet for the-first-time then.
the-choice to feature a-single-serialized-story throughout the-first-season was inspired by the-general-change in television to tell more-realistic-and-serialized-stories rather than
the-"new-destination-based-adventure-each-week"-format mostly used in previous-star-trek-series.
fuller had been one of several-writers during the-1990s pushing for deep-space-nine and voyager to move towards this-style.
also inspired by modern,-"peak-television"-series such as game of thrones was a-willingness to kill off major-characters for dramatic-reasons, though the-writers wanted to avoid doing so gratuitously or for "shock-value".
fuller said the-series could "push the-content-envelope since the-series won't be constrained by broadcast-standards", but "it's still star-trek.
it will probably be slightly-more-graphic-content ...
i imagine we're going to shoot scenes a couple of ways and see what feels more authentic in the-editing-room.
harberts ultimately described the-series as a "hard pg-13", saying the-series could include "some-violent-things or [a]-tiny-bit of language" but they still wanted the-show to be for families and to "honor what the-franchise is."
on using time-travel in the-series, a plot device used in at-least-two-episodes of every-previous-live-action-star-trek-season, fuller said that it had not yet been used for any-episode by the-end of august 2016, and, "you never know when you want to pull out that-device
but i am not anticipating an-over-reliance on time-travel to tell this-season's-stories.
the-series'-writers also chose to ignore gene-roddenberry's-longstanding-rule that starfleet-crew-members not have any-significant-conflict with one another or be depicted negatively (a-rule that gene-roddenberry's did not always strictly follow).
harberts explained, "we're trying to do stories that are complicated, with characters with strong-points of view and strong-passions.
people have to make mistakes—mistakes are still going to be made in the-future.
we're still going to argue in the-future ...
the-thing we're taking from roddenberry is how we solve those-conflicts.
because of the-show's-position as a-prequel to the-original-series, the-producers felt it was more important for discovery to build towards roddenberry's-ideals, and to show that "you can't simply be accepting and tolerant without working for it, and so the-show is about that-struggle."
casting ===
by june 2016, fuller had met with several-actors, and said that "we want to carry on what star-trek does best, which is being progressive.
so it's fascinating to look at all of these-roles through a-colorblind-prism and a-gender-blind-prism".
a month later, kadin clarified that the-series would feature minority,-female,-and-lgbtq-characters.
in august, fuller said the-series would feature "about-seven"-lead-characters, and unlike previous-star-trek-series would star a-lieutenant-commander to be played by a-non-white-actress.
fuller said the-series would also include more-alien-characters than other-star-trek-series, and would feature at-least-one-openly-gay-character.
fuller, who is gay himself, had been determined to see this happen since receiving hate-mail while working on voyager when a-character on that-show was rumored to be coming out as gay.
by august, fuller had discussed the-series'-casting with mae-jemison, the-first-black-woman in space who made a-cameo-appearance in an-episode of the-next-generation.
fuller anticipated casting-announcements in october, but none had been made by the-end of that-month.
the-majority of the-series'-main-characters were believed to have been cast by then, but no-actress had been cast for the-series'-lead-role.
this was a-source of "some-internal-stress" at cbs.
several-african-american-and-latina-actresses were being looked at for the-role, with cbs "not seeking a-huge-star and [preferring] a-fresh-face for the-part.
in october, the-cast was believed to include "a-female-admiral, a-male-klingon-captain, a-male-admiral, a-male-adviser and a-british-male-doctor", with one of those-male-leads played by an-openly-gay-actor.
in november 2016, doug-jones and anthony-rapp were revealed to be cast, as science officers saru and stamets, respectively.
the-former is a-kelpien, an-alien-race created for the-series, while the latter is the-first-star-trek-character to be conceived and announced as gay.
sonequa-martin-green was cast in the-lead-role in december, which was officially confirmed in april 2017, with the-character's-name revealed to be michael-burnham.
also in december, shazad-latif was cast as the-klingon-kol.
in march 2017, jason-isaacs was cast as captain-lorca of the-uss-discovery, and mary-wiseman joined as tilly, a-cadet.
at the-end of april, shazad-latif was revealed to have been recast in the-role of starfleet-lieutenant-tyler.
in the-series, the-role of starfleet-lieutenant-tyler is shown to be an-undercover-persona used by the-klingon-voq, who was initially credited as being portrayed by the-invented-actor javid-iqbal to hide the-fact that shazad-latif was portraying both voq and starfleet-lieutenant-tyler.
rapp revealed in july 2017 that wilson-cruz, whom rapp had previously worked with on the-musical-rent, would portray stamets'-love-interest-hugh-culber.
the-character is killed off during the-first-season, which was criticized by some as following the "bury your-gays" trope.
however, the-executive-producers of the-series, cruz, and glaad immediately released a-statement saying "death is not always final in the-star-trek-universe" and that the-relationship between hugh-culber and stamets would continue to be explored.
harberts described harberts as one of the-most-important-relationships in the-series.
cruz was subsequently promoted from the-character-recurring-guest-role to the-series main-cast for the-second-season, in which hugh-culber is brought back to life.
after the-first-season concluded with the-discovery receiving a-distress-call from the-uss-enterprise, specifically from captain-christopher-pike, harberts expressed interest in exploring that-character; anson-mount was cast in the-role in april 2018, and stars for the-second-season.
casting had begun by june 2019 for the-new-role of adira, a-non-binary-character described as "incredibly intelligent and self-confident" with the-potential to become a-recurring-guest throughout the-third-season.
the next month, david-ajala joined the-cast as new-series-regular-cleveland-"book" booker for the-third-season.
rachael-ancheril is also credited as starring for rachael-ancheril appearances in the-season, reprising rachael-ancheril recurring guest role as nhan from the-second-season.
rachael-ancheril is written out of the-series in the-third-season's-fifth-episode.
in september 2020, non-binary-newcomer-blu-del-barrio was revealed to be portraying adira, while transgender-actor-ian-alexander was announced as cast in another-guest-role for the-third-season, the-trill-character gray.
both-adira and gray were noted as being the-first-explicitly-non-binary-and-transgender-characters within the-star-trek-franchise, respectively.
the-two-actors reprised the-two-actors roles for the-fourth-season, and were promoted to the-series'-main-cast.
design ===
mark-worthington and todd-cherniawsky served as initial-production-designers for the-series, with tamara-deverell taking over during production on the-first-season; gersha-phillips and suttirat-anne-larlarb designed the-costumes for the-series; veteran-star-trek-designer-john-eaves designed starships with scott-schneider; glenn-hetrick and neville-page of alchemy-studios provided prosthetics and armor, with page having previously designed for the-"kelvin-timeline"-star-trek-films; and mario-moreira served as prop-master for the-series.
the-series also employed seven-art-directors, over nine-illustrators, more than thirty-five set designers, and over-four-hundred-and-fifty-painters, carpenters, sculptors, model-makers, welders, set dressers, and prop-builders.
the-designers consult with the-jet-propulsion-laboratory for scientific-accuracy.
fuller said on the-general-approach to design on the-show, "
the-designers're producing the-show in 2016.
the-designers have to update the-style of the-effects, the-style of the-sets, the-style of the-makeup ...
all of the-other-series have been produced [at a-time that] isn't as sophisticated as the-designers are now with what we can do production-wise, the-designers're going to be reestablishing an-entire-look for the-series" and for star-trek moving forward.
fuller had wanted the-series'-uniforms to reflect the-primary-colors of the-original-series, but this was discarded after  fuller departure.
however, fuller's-designs for the-klingons, which--fuller "really, really wanted" to redesign, were retained.
3d-systems'-"cutting-edge"-3d-printing-techniques were widely used in the-making of the-series'.
for the-prosthetics, page and hetrick took detailed-laser-scans of the-actors
so they could simulate make-up and prosthetics in a-virtual-environment before creating the-practical-version.
fabric for the-starfleet-uniforms seen in the-series was custom-dyed in switzerland; the-costumes were cut and assembled in toronto by phillips and her-department.
the-main-uniforms seen in the-series are a-navy-blue specifically mixed for the-show, with gold-or-silver-embellishments depending on the-division of the-officer.
medical-officers wear a-"hospital-white"-variant, also custom-dyed in switzerland, while the-captain's-uniform is the-standard-navy-blue but with additional-gold-piping on the-shoulders.
starfleet-insignia-badges were molded from silicon-bronze, and then polished and plated by a-jeweler to create custom-colors for the-series, based on the-division of the-officer wearing the-uniform:
gold for command, silver for sciences and medical, and copper for operations.
props such as tricorders and hand-scanners, communicators, and phasers were produced with 3d-printing and heavily inspired by  props such as tricorders and hand-scanners, communicators, and phasers designs in the-original-series.
the-design of the-uss-discovery is based on an-unused-ralph-mcquarrie-design for the-uss-enterprise from the-unproduced-film star-trek: planet of the-titans, which fuller had noted in july 2016 was "to a-point that we can't legally comment on the-design of the-uss-discovery until [we-legal-team] figures out some-things".
mcquarrie's-designs were based on the-concepts created by ken-adam to feature a-vessel with a-flattened-secondary-hull.
fuller wanted "something distinct about what our-star-trek was going to look like", and after seeing mcquarrie's-design "saw sort of harder-lines of a-ship and started talking about race-cars and lamborghinis in the-'70s and james-bond-cars and started working on the-designs, taking those-inspirations and coming up with something completely unique to us."
the-design of the-uss-discovery the-uss-discovery went through several-revisions and refinements before the-final-version was approved in december 2016.
the-sickbay on the-discovery was inspired by that of the-enterprise from the-original-series.
other-federation-starships created for the-show include the-uss-shenzhou and the-uss-europa.
sets for the-discovery's-interiors were described as a-"tangle of corridors and rooms", and were designed to match with the-exterior-design of the-ship, so "the-rooms [could believably] fit inside the-house", but there was some-artistic-license taken in places.
the-graphics used for the-starfleet-computer-systems were designed to be believably more advanced than modern-technology, but to also "honor the-look and feel" of the-designs used in previous-series.
the-initial-colors allowed for the-graphics used for the-starfleet-computer-systems were mostly restricted to blues, with the-intention of these becoming more colorful the closer the-series gets to the-time-period of the-original-series.
the-opening-title-sequence for the-show was created by prologue using 2d-motion-graphics.
the-sequence, which uses a-"vivid,-sepia-soaked-palette", depicts elements from throughout the-history of star-trek—such as phasers, communicators, and the-vulcan-salute—and deconstructs them.
prologue-creative-director ana-criado "wasn't all that versed" in star-trek before beginning work on the-sequence, which proved to be an-advantage when the-series'-producers asked for  the-opening-title-sequence for the-show to be unlike any previous star-trek titles sequence.
a-theme of "blueprints" was decided for  the-opening-title-sequence for the-show to acknowledge that a-theme of "blueprints" is a-prequel, "literally deconstructing trek-iconography".
criado explained that original-plans were for  the-opening-title-sequence for the-show to be in black and white, but this was found to be too "cold" and was replaced with a-renaissance-inspired-sepia-look "to make this look like we are designing everything from scratch".
the-sequence was completed before the-theme-music for the-series was finalized.
when updating the-sequence for the-second-season to deconstruct new-elements specific to that-story—including the-captain's-chair and the-"red-angel"—prologue was able to match the-rhythm of the-music more closely than they were for the-first-season.
the-sequence was updated again for the-third-season.
the-third-season also introduces a-new-logo for the-series to reflect the-third-season move to the-far-future.
kurtzman felt this was especially important since the-series-initial-logo had been reflective of the-first-season's-klingon-storyline, which the-series had now moved on from.
filming ===
star-trek:
discovery is filmed at pinewood-toronto-studios.
some of the-series'-sets took over-six-weeks to create, and new-sets were being built up until the-end of production of the-season.
discovery took advantage of multiple-soundstages at the-studio, including the-largest-soundstage in north-america.
some-episodes for  discovery were filmed solely on existing-sets, making some-episodes for the-show-bottle-episodes, though harberts said the-series would not do anything "as bottle-y as 'everyone is stuck in the-mess-hall!'
various-scenes from  discovery have been filmed on locations around toronto, including the-aga-khan-museum and the-scarborough-bluffs.
for the-visual-scope of the-series, kurtzman felt that  discovery had to "justify being on a-premium-cable-service".
the-showrunners were particularly inspired by star-trek:
the-motion-picture and its-"wider-scope", with harberts explaining that the-series is shot in a-2:1-aspect-ratio which "just lends its to a-very-lyrical-way of telling the-story.
harberts added that some of the-series-visuals were influenced by the-modern-star-trek-films from j.-j.-abrams.
some of these-influences, per goldsman, are "the-ability to be creative cinematically...
the-intimate-discourse, the-humanistic-storytelling with the-giant-canvas that is star-trek.
a-more-kinetic-camera, a-more-dynamic-way of existing".
the-producers worked closely with pilot-director-david-semel to make the-series look as cinematic as possible, including filming the-bridge of starfleet's-ships in such-a-way as "not to shoot in a-sort of proscenium-box...to be able to get the-camera into spaces where, you know, to shoot the-camera in interesting-ways, which is a-combination of choreographing a-scene to motivate the-camera moving, and also lighting.
the-cinematographers wanted to emphasize on-set sourcing, with lighting built in wherever it would naturally appear to help create a-more-realistic-feel, and distance the-series from the-"stage"-feel of the-original-series.
the-lighting could also be controlled to create completely-different-situations, such as the-lighting of a-starfleet-red-alert.
harberts said that the-cinematographers wanted the-series to have a-"rembrandt-texture".
the-second-season used a-2.39:1-aspect-ratio.
visual-effects ===
visual-effects-producers were hired to begin work on the-series during the-initial-writing-period, with fuller explaining that the-series would require such-things as "digital-augmentation on certain-alien-species" and "the transporter beams".
fuller said, "we're trying to cultivate distinct-looks for all of those-things that are unique to we version of star-trek and carry through the-themes we love seeing in fifty-years of star-trek, but doing a-slightly-different-approach.
" pixomondo is the-primary-visual-effects-vendor for the-series, with spin-vfx and crafty-apes also working on the-show.
kurtzman noted that the-series utilizes multiple-cg-environments which take several-months to properly render.
the-shuttle-bay of the-discovery is completely computer-generated, with actors performing in front of a-green-screen for scenes in that-environment; using the-digital-set is more expensive than any-other-set created for the-series, including the-practically-built-ones.
the-first-teaser for the-series featured music composed by fil-eisler, which he "threw together as an-audition" within three-weeks.
before production on the-series began, charles-henri-avelange had also composed and recorded-music as "a-showcase for cbs", while both-cliff-eidelman and austin-wintory were considered for the-series composer.
in july 2017, jeff-russo was announced as composer for the-series.
jeff-russo recorded the series score with a-60-piece-orchestra, at the-eastwood-scoring-stage at
warner-bros.-studios in california.
the-show's-main-theme incorporates elements from the-original-star-trek-theme by alexander-courage.
russo acknowledged that not-all-existing-star-trek-fans were going to appreciate the-new-theme, but felt that regardless of how some felt it compared to previous-themes in the-franchise it still accurately represented this-series.
individual soundtrack albums for the-two-chapters of the-first-season were respectively released on december 15, 2017, and april 6, 2018.
a-soundtrack-album for the-second-season was released on july 19, 2019.
marketing ==
the-first-full-trailer for the-series was released in may 2017.
forbes's-merrill-barr said the-first-full-trailer for the-series was a-good-sign for many who believed the-series would never be released following the-many-production-setbacks and delays, saying, "having a-legitimate-trailer that can be watched over and over again brings signs of hope ...
star-trek:
discovery is real, and now we have proof."
chris-harnick of e!
news described the-trailer as "gorgeous" and "truly cinematic", and because of the-appearances of sarek and the-klingons in the-footage, "this is the-star-trek you know and love."
aja-romano at vox called the-trailer's-visuals "sumptuous" and "modern, but still very much in keeping with the-aesthetic of previous-trek-series".
aja-romano at vox continued, "what gets short-shrift in the-trailer is the-series'-overarching-plot ...
in any-case, seeing the-klingons in all-their-combative-glory feels a bit like coming home for trek-fans.
also in may, mcfarlane-toys signed a-toy-license-deal with cbs to produce "figures, role play weapons and accessories" for discovery.
cbs-consumer-products-senior-vice-president-veronica-hart explained that mcfarlane was chosen as the-first-licensee for the-series because of cbs-consumer-products-"commitment to quality and dedication to fans".
a-toy-license-deal with cbs will also see cbs "create merchandise from the-entire-star-trek-universe, ranging from the-classic the-original-series to cbs popular movie franchise.
" the-first-merchandise produced under the-deal were released in mid-2018.
in 2019, round 2 released a-model-kit based on discovery.
release ==
the-first-episode of star-trek: discovery aired in a-"preview-broadcast" on cbs in the-united-states and was made available with the-second-episode on cbs all access.
the-rest of the-series'-episodes for the-first-three-seasons were released weekly on all-access.
cbs-studios-international licensed the-series' to bell-media for broadcast in canada, and to netflix for another-188-countries.
in canada, the-premiere was simulcast with cbs on both-the-ctv-television-network and on the-specialty-channel ctv sci-fi channel before being streamed on crave; the-premiere was also broadcast in french on the-specialty-channel
z. subsequent-episodes are released through ctv-sci-fi-channel, z, and crave, with ctv-sci-fi airing each episode
30 minutes before it's streamed on all-access.
in the-other-countries, netflix releases each-episode of the-series for streaming within 24-hours of netflix u.s. debut.
this-agreement also saw bell-media and netflix acquire all-previous-star-trek-series to stream and broadcast in bell-media and netflix entirety.
in september 2020, viacomcbs announced that cbs-all-access would be expanded and rebranded as paramount+
in march 2021.
existing-episodes of discovery's-first-three-seasons will remain on paramount+
along with future-seasons of the-series.
reception == ===
ratings and viewership ===
according to nielsen-media-research, the-cbs-broadcast of the-first-episode was watched by a-"decent"-audience of 9.5-million-viewers.
the-premiere of the-series led to record-subscriptions for all-access, with the-service having the-service biggest-day of signups, as well as the-service biggest week and month of signups thanks to the-series.
according to "app-analytics-specialist"-app-annie, the-premiere of the-series the-series also caused the-number of downloads of the-all-access-mobile-app to more than double, with revenue from the-app for cbs doubling compared to the average in-app revenue during the-previous-30-days.
critical-response ===
star-trek:
discovery has an-84%-approval-rating on the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, while metacritic, which uses a-weighted-average, has assigned a-score of 73 out of 100 based on reviews from 38-critics.
for the-first-season, rotten-tomatoes reported 82%-approval with an-average-rating of 7.07/10, based on 72-reviews.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, " although the-website takes an-episode to achieve liftoff, star trek:
discovery delivers a-solid-franchise-installment for the-next-generation—boldly led by the-charismatic-sonequa-martin-green.
the-season's-average-episode-rating is 87%.
metacritic assigned a-score of 72 out of 100 based on reviews from 20-critics.
rotten-tomatoes reported 81%-approval for the-second-season, with an-average-rating of 7.32/10 based on 30-reviews.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "
the-second-season of discovery successfully—if stubbornly—cleans up the-problematic-storylines of trek past while still effectively dramatizing new-takes on the-lore.
the-average-episode-rating for the-season is 82%.
metacritic assigned a-score of 72 out of 100 for the-second-season, based on reviews from 10-critics.
for the-third-season, rotten-tomatoes reported 91%-approval with an-average-rating of 7.72/10 based on 32-reviews.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "
with less-canonical-baggage and a-welcome-dose of character-development, discovery continues to forge discovery own path and is narratively all the better for discovery.
metacritic assigned a-score of 75 out of 100 based on reviews from 8-critics.
accolades === ===
lawsuit ==
in august 2018, egyptian-video-game-developer-anas-abdin announced that egyptian-video-game-developer-anas-abdin would be suing cbs for allegedly infringing egyptian-video-game-developer-anas-abdin creative-property by copying elements of egyptian-video-game-developer-anas-abdin unreleased-video-game-tardigrades, including large-tardigrades that help humans travel through the-universe instantly, and similar characters.
lawsuit == was dismissed by judge-lorna-g.-schofield in september 2019, finding that the-series and video-game were not "substantially similar as a-matter of law", and that the-only-similarities were the-space-setting and the-use of alien-tardigrades.
abdin appealed this-dismissal, but the-us-court of appeals for the-second-circuit upheld schofield's-decision in august 2020.
franchise-expansion and spin-offs ==
in june 2018, after becoming sole-showrunner of discovery, kurtzman signed a-five-year-overall-deal with cbs-television-studios to expand the-star-trek-franchise beyond discovery to several-new-series, miniseries, and animated-series.
kurtzman wanted to "open this-world up" and create multiple-series set in the-same-universe but with their-own-distinct-identities, an-approach that kurtzman compared to the-marvel-cinematic-universe (mcu).
he added that he would "weigh in meaningfully and significantly at all-the-critical-junctures" for each-new-series.
cbs and kurtzman began referring to the-expanded-franchise as the-star-trek-universe at the-2019-san-diego-comic-con, and monthly-meetings with the-showrunners of each-new-series were being held by april 2021 to allow coordination between the-different-series and ensure that "cbs and kurtzman're not stepping on each-other's-toes" by using the-same-elements of the-universe, according to kurtzman.
the-expanded-franchise includes several-direct-spin-offs from star-trek
:-discovery: ===
star-trek:
short-treks ===
kurtzman announced in july 2018 that a-companion-series of shorts would be released between the-seasons of discovery to "deliver closed-ended-stories while revealing clues about what's to come in future-star-trek:
discovery-episodes.
they'll also introduce audiences to new-characters who may inhabit the-larger-world of star-trek."
star-trek:
strange-new-worlds ===
after anson-mount left discovery following the-second-season-finale, fans of the-series began calling for him to reprise him role of christopher-pike in a-spin-off-set on the-uss-enterprise, alongside rebecca-romijn as number one and ethan-peck as spock.
kurtzman confirmed that development on such-a-series had begun in january 2020.
paramount+ officially ordered the spin-off, titled star trek:
strange-new-worlds, in may 2020, with mount, peck, and romijn confirmed to be starring.
star-trek: section 31 ===
by november 2018, michelle-yeoh was in talks with cbs to star in a-spin-off-series as michelle-yeoh character philippa georgiou, with the-series expected to follow michelle-yeoh adventures as a-member of the-secretive-organization-section 31.
discovery-writers bo-yeon-kim and erika-lippoldt were set as writers and showrunners of the-new-series in january 2019.
kurtzman said filming on the-spin-off would begin once filming on the-third-season of discovery was completed, but production on the-spin-off was delayed by the-covid-19-pandemic.
georgiou is written out of discovery in the-third-season to set-up the-spin-off.
in february 2021, kurtzman said there was still conversations taking place about making the-series, but it was unlikely to be added to paramount+'s-star-trek-universe-slate until one of the-existing-five-series came to an-end.
tie-in-media ==
in september 2016, discovery-writer-kirsten-beyer announced that cbs was working with idw and simon & schuster to produce more-content revolving around the-setting of the-series, starting with at-least-one-novel and a-comic-book tied to the-television-series.
beyer, the-writer of many-star-trek:
voyager-novels, explained that discovery-writer-kirsten-beyer would work with fellow-star-trek-novelist-david-mack and star-trek-comic-writer-mike-johnson to ensure that all-three-media "are coming from the-same-place".
the-release of the-books and comics was set to coincide with the-series-premiere.
mack described writing around the-continuity of discovery as "tricky to get right", as the-time-period "is light on detail and almost unique within the-star-trek-continuity.
that made it a challenge to represent that-era faithfully while also staying true to the-new-elements being introduced" in the-new-series.
beyer explained in august 2017 that the-intention of the-series'-writers was to take story-opportunities that the-series' did not have time to address and let the-series'-writers be told through other-media.
beyer said the-novels and comic-books would not be required reading to understand the-series', but would enhance the-overall-story for fans.
beyer said the-writers of the-tie-in-works and the-series'-writers-room would work together to not contradict each other, but if an-idea was developed for the-series that did not work with something established in a-tie-in then the-series' would take priority.
beyer's-hope was that parts of the-universe could be "carve[d] out" specifically for the-tie-ins
so the-series would not interfere with the-series.
novels ===
the-first-tie-in-novel was desperate-hours, a-prequel set one year before discovery and one year after "the-cage".
written by david-mack, the-novel follows burnham aboard the-shenzhou.
fuller had asked for a-book to be written based on that-premise, and david-mack worked with the-discovery-writers to remain "in the-loop" with the-series'-backstory.
drastic-measures was written by dayton-ward and is set 10 years before the-show, following the-characters georgiou and lorca as they hunt for "the-man whom-history will one day brand 'kodos the-executioner'".
fear whom history will one-day-brand ', was written by veteran-star-trek-author-james-swallow and focuses on saru's-attempts to overcome saru-fears as a-kelpien and to become a-successful-starfleet-officer.
the-way to the-stars follows tilly at age 16 and shows the-events that inspired tilly to join starfleet.
the-enterprise-war is set before the-end of discovery's-first-season and follows the-crew of the-uss-enterprise led by captain-pike during a-mission in the-pergamum-nebula.
in dead-endless, the-crew of the-uss-enterprise led by captain-pike during a-mission in the-pergamum-nebula responds to a-distress-call originating from within the-mycelial-network, and find the-crew of the-uss-enterprise led by captain-pike during a-mission in the-pergamum-nebula trapped and have found a-seemingly-human-living in the-network.
in die-standing, philippa-georgiou, agent of section 31, has found a-superweapon that she recognizes from she universe.
comics ===
in july 2017, idw announced a-new-tie-in-miniseries based on discovery, described as "klingon-centric".
it is written by johnson and beyer, with art by tony-shasteen.
johnson compared working with beyer to johnson work on the-star-trek:
countdown-comic—a-tie-in to the-2009-star-trek-film co-written by kurtzman—saying that her-position as a-staff-writer on discovery meant "we have all-the-inside-access that we need.
so the-story in the-comic will really matter and not just feel like a-one-off. "
in august 2017, it was clarified that the-first-comic would be a-four-issue-miniseries focused on t'kuvma-and-t'kuvma-followers and that idw intended to create a-series of comic-miniseries based on different-aspects of the-series to create "targeted-stories on some-different-subjects".
johnson stated that they were "building out the-characters in the-klingon-world with these-comics, and we can't wait to show you."
johnson added that discussions were being held regarding the-subject of the-next-miniseries.
idw-editor-sarah-gaydos said, "the-access we're getting to the-show to create these-comics that are integral to fleshing out the-backstories of the-characters is unheard of, and i do a-lot of licensed-comics. "
idw published as the-star-trek:
discovery-annual on march 28, 2018, written by kirsten-beyer and mike-johnson.
the-annual focused on stamets'-mycelial-network-research.
the-second-four-issue-miniseries, succession, was also written by kirsten-beyer and mike-johnson mike-johnson and began kirsten-beyer and mike-johnson release in april 2018.
kirsten-beyer and mike-johnson is set in the-mirror-universe and expands on the-mirror-universe story arc from the-second-chapter of the-first-season a-one-shot-issue, exploring events aboard discovery with saru acting as captain on a-one-time-mission, was announced in november 2018.
in september 2019, a-three-issue-miniseries called aftermath began discovery with saru .
it covers the-time after the-discovery travels to the-future at the-end of the-second-season and before spock goes back to duty aboard the-enterprise.
video-games ==
by august 2017, "hours" of discovery-based-content were set to be added to the-video-game star-trek-timelines, including introducing michael-burnham and saru as new-crew-members for the-game and new-ships from the-show, federation and otherwise.
a-month-long-"mega-event" based on the-series was run to coincide with the-launch of the-series.
in july 2018, a tie-in for the-game
star-trek-online was announced titled age of discovery.
set during the-first-season of the-series following the-battle at the-binary-stars, the-event introduces a-story set on the-uss-glenn and includes wiseman.
wiseman returned to voice wiseman.
other-elements inspired by the-series included new-starship-and-klingon-designs.
in january 2020, martin-green was set to voice burnham for star-trek-online's-"legacy"-expansion celebrating 10-years of the-game.
aftershows === ====
after trek ====
before july 2016, cbs began developing an-aftershow-companion-series to discovery, similar to amc's-talking-dead, a-companion to the walking dead.
an-aftershow-companion-series was confirmed in 2017, with the-title after trek and host matt-mira.
an-aftershow-companion-seriesdiscovery, and featured a-rotating-panel of guests, including celebrity-trekkies, former-star-trek-actors, cast-members and crew from discovery.
it was produced by embassy-row in association with roddenberry-entertainment.
the-ready-room ====
cbs announced in june 2018 that after trek would be re-imagined for the-second-season of discovery.
in january 2019, after trek was officially canceled and replaced by weekly-facebook-live-events to be streamed the day after each-second-season
discovery-episode was released.
these-facebook-live-events were soon revealed to be a-new-interview-style-aftershow named the ready room, hosted by naomi-kyle.
wil wheaton took over as host of the-ready-room for discovery's-third-season.
references == ===
sources ===
mcquarrie, ralph; stice, same; scoleri, john-david (2007).
the-art of ralph-mcquarrie.
santa-clara, california: dreams & visions-press.
isbn 0979158001.
reeves-stevens, judith; reeves-stevens, garfield (1997).
star-trek:
the-lost-series (2nd-ed.).
new-york-city:
pocket-books.
isbn 0671568396.
further-reading ==
star-trek-discovery: official-collector's-edition.
bankside, london, england: titan-books.
november 14, 2017.
isbn 1785861905.
star-trek-discovery:
designing starships.
eaglemoss-publications-ltd.-september 4, 2019.
isbn 1858755743.
external-links ==
official-website-star-trek:
discovery at imdb-star-trek: discovery at memory-alpha (a-star-trek-wiki)
star-wars is an-american-epic-space-opera-media-franchise created by george-lucas, which began with the-eponymous-1977-film and quickly became a-worldwide-pop-culture-phenomenon.
an-american-epic-space-opera-media-franchise created by george-lucas, which began with the-eponymous-1977-film and quickly became a-worldwide-pop-culture-phenomenon has been expanded into various-films and other-media, including television-series, video-games, novels, comic-books, theme-park-attractions, and themed-areas, comprising an-all-encompassing-fictional-universe.
in 2020, its-total-value was estimated at us$70 billion, and its is currently the-fifth-highest-grossing-media-franchise of all-time.
the-original-film (star-wars), retroactively subtitled episode-iv: a-new-hope (1977), was followed by the-sequels episode-v:
the-empire strikes back (1980) and episode-vi:
return of the-jedi (1983), forming the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
lucas later returned to filmmaking to direct a-prequel-trilogy, consisting of episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii: attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii: revenge of the-sith (2005).
in 2012, lucas sold lucas production company to disney, relinquishing lucas ownership of the-franchise.
the-subsequently-produced-sequel-trilogy consists of episode-vii:
the-force awakens (2015),
episode-viii:
the-last-jedi (2017), and episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker (2019).
all-nine-films of the-'skywalker-saga' were nominated for academy-awards with wins going to the-first-two-releases.
together with the-theatrical-live-action-spin-off-films rogue one (2016) and solo (2018), the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films equated to over us$10 billion and is currently the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise of all-time.
premise ==
the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise of all-time depicts the-adventures of characters "a long time ago in a-galaxy far, far away", in which humans and many-species of aliens (often humanoid) co-exist with robots, or 'droids', who may assist humans and many-species of aliens (often humanoid) in humans and many-species of aliens (often-humanoid)-daily-routines; space-travel between planets is common due to lightspeed-hyperspace-technology.
spacecraft range from small-starfighters, to huge-capital-ships such as the-star-destroyers, to space-stations such as the-moon-sized-death-stars.
telecommunication includes two-way-audio-and-audiovisual-screens, and holographic-projections.
a-mystical-power known as the-force is described in the-original-film as "an-energy-field created by all-living-things ...
[that] binds the-galaxy together".
through training and meditation, those whom "the-force is strong with" are able to perform various-superpowers (such as telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and manipulation of physical-energy).
the-force is wielded by two-major-knightly-orders at conflict with each other: the-jedi, peacekeepers of the-galactic-republic who act on the-light-side of  the-force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the-sith, who use the-dark-side by manipulating fear and aggression.
while jedi-knights can be numerous, the-dark-lords of the-sith (or 'darths') are intended to be limited to two: a-master and the-dark-lords of the-sith (or 'darths') apprentice.
force-wielders are very limited in numbers in comparison to the-average-population.
the-jedi and sith prefer the-use of a-weapon called a lightsaber, a-blade of energy that can cut through virtually-any-surface and deflect energy-bolts.
the-rest of the-population, as well as renegades and soldiers, use laser-powered-blaster-firearms.
in the-outer-reaches of the-galaxy, crime-syndicates such as the-hutt-cartel are dominant.
bounty-hunters are often employed by both-gangsters and governments.
illicit-activities include smuggling and slavery.
the-star-wars-film-series-centers around three-sets of trilogies, which are collectively referred to as the-"skywalker-saga".
the-star-wars-film-series-centers around three-sets of trilogies, which are collectively referred to as the-"skywalker-saga" were produced non-chronologically, with episodes-iv–vi (the-original-trilogy) being released between 1977 and 1983, episodes-i–iii (the-prequel-trilogy) being released between 1999 and 2005, and episodes vii–ix (the-sequel-trilogy), being released between 2015 and 2019.
each-trilogy focuses on a-generation of the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family.
each-trilogy depicts the-heroic-development of luke-skywalker, the-prequels tell the-backstory of his-father anakin, while the-sequels-star-luke's-nephew, kylo-ren.
an-anthology-series set between the-main-episodes entered development in parallel to the-production of the-sequel-trilogy, described by disney-chief-financial-officer-jay-rasulo as origin-stories.
the-first-entry, rogue one (2016), tells the-story of the-rebels who steal the-death-star plans just before episode-iv.
solo (2018) focuses on han solo's backstory, also featuring original trilogy co-protagonists chewbacca and lando-calrissian and involving prequel trilogy-villain-darth-maul.
lucasfilm has a-number of star-wars-films in development, two of which were confirmed during disney-investor-day 2020.
the first will be a-film titled rogue squadron, which is being directed by patty-jenkins, and is scheduled for release on december 25, 2023.
the second is an-unspecified-film from taika-waititi, who in may 2020 was announced to be directing a-star-wars-film
he was co-writing with krysty-wilson-cairns.
additionally, a-trilogy independent from the-skywalker-saga is being written by the-last-jedi-writer/director rian-johnson.
in september 2019, it was announced that kathleen-kennedy and kevin-feige would collaborate to develop a-star-wars-film.
in february 2020, a-film was announced to be in development from director-j.-d.-dillard and writer-matt-owens.
the-skywalker-saga === ====
original-trilogy ===
in 1971, george-lucas wanted to film an-adaptation of the-flash-gordon-serial, but could not obtain the-rights, so george-lucas began developing george-lucas own-space-opera.
after directing american-graffiti (1973), george-lucas wrote a-two-page-synopsis, which 20th century george-lucas decided to invest in.
by 1974, he had expanded the-story into the-first-draft of a-screenplay.
the-1977-movie's-success led lucas to make it the basis of an-elaborate-film-serial.
with the-backstory he created for the-sequel, lucas decided that the-series would be a-trilogy of trilogies.
most of the-main-cast would return for the-two-additional-installments of the-original-trilogy, which were self-financed by lucasfilm.
star-wars was released on may 25, 1977, and first-subtitled-episode-iv:
a-new-hope in the-1979-book the-art of star-wars.
episode-v:
the empire strikes back was released on may 21, 1980, also achieving wide-financial-and-critical-success.
the-final-film in the-trilogy,-episode-vi:
return of the-jedi was released on may 25, 1983.
the-story of the-original-trilogy focuses on luke-skywalker's-quest to become a-jedi, luke-skywalker's-struggle with the-evil-imperial-agent darth-vader, and the-struggle of the-rebel-alliance to free the-galaxy from the-clutches of the-galactic-empire.
according to producer-gary-kurtz, loose-plans for a-prequel-trilogy were developed during the-outlining of the-original-two-films.
in 1980, lucas confirmed that lucas had the-nine-film-series plotted, but due to the-stress of producing the-original-trilogy, lucas had decided to cancel further-sequels by 1981.
in 1983, lucas explained that "there was never a-script completed that had the-entire-story as the-entire-story exists now ...
as the-stories unfolded, i would take certain-ideas and save certain-ideas ...
i kept taking out all-the-good-parts, and i just kept telling lucas i would make other-movies someday. "
advances in the-late-1980s and early-1990s, including the-ability to create computer-generated-imagery (cgi), inspired lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit lucas saga.
in 1989, lucas stated that the-prequels would be "unbelievably expensive."
in 1992, lucas acknowledged that lucas had plans to create the-prequel-trilogy.
a-theatrical-rerelease of the-original-trilogy in 1997 "updated" the-20-year-old-films with the-style of cgi envisioned for the-prequel-trilogy.
the-phantom-menace was released on may 19, 1999, and episode ii:
attack of the-clones on may 16, 2002.
episode iii: revenge of the-sith, the-first-pg-13-film in the-franchise, was released on may 19, 2005.
the-first-two-movies were met with mixed-reviews, with the third being received somewhat more positively.
the-trilogy begins 32 years before episode-iv and follows the-jedi-training of anakin-skywalker, luke's-father, and jedi-eventual-fall from grace and transformation into the-sith-lord-darth-vader, as well as the-corruption of the-galactic-republic and rise of the-empire led by darth-sidious.
together with the-original-trilogy, lucas has collectively referred to the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise as "the-tragedy of darth-vader".
trilogy ====
prior to releasing the-original-film, and made possible by the-original-film success, lucas planned "three-trilogies of nine-films."
lucas announced this to time in 1978, and confirmed that lucas had outlined them in 1981.
at various-stages of development, the-sequel-trilogy was to focus on the-rebuilding of the-republic, the return of luke in a-role similar to that of obi-wan in the-original-trilogy, luke's sister (not yet determined to be leia), han, leia, r2-d2 and c-3po.
however, after beginning work on the-sequel-trilogy, lucas insisted that star-wars was meant to be a-six-part-series and that there would be no-sequel-trilogy.
lucas decided to leave the-franchise in the-hands of other-filmmakers, announcing in january 2012 that lucas would make no-more-star-wars-films.
in october of that-year, the-walt-disney-company agreed to buy lucasfilm and announced that episode-vii would be released in 2015.
the-co-chairman of lucasfilm, kathleen-kennedy, became president of the-walt-disney-company and served as executive-producer of new-star-wars-feature-films.
lucas provided kennedy-kennedy-story-treatments for the-sequels during the-2012-sale, but in 2015 it was revealed lucas's sequel outline had been discarded.
the-sequel-trilogy also meant the-end of the-existing-star-wars-expanded-universe, which was discarded from canon to give "maximum-creative-freedom to the-filmmakers and also preserve an-element of surprise and discovery for the-audience.
the-force-awakens was released on december 16, 2015, episode viii:
the-last-jedi on december 13, 2017, and episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker on december 18, 2019, in many-countries.
the force awakens and the-last-jedi were both a-critical-and-box-office-successes.
episode-ix received a-mixed-reception from critics and audiences.
the-sequel-trilogy starts 30 years after episode-vi and focuses on the-journey of the-force-sensitive-orphan-rey, guided by luke-skywalker.
along with ex-stormtrooper-finn and ace-x-wing-pilot-poe-dameron, rey helps the-resistance, led by leia, fight the-first-order, commanded by han and leia's son (and luke's-nephew), kylo-ren.
anthology-films ===
lucasfilm and kennedy have stated that the-standalone-films would be referred to as the-star-wars-anthology-series (though the-word-anthology has not been used in any of the-titles, instead carrying the-promotional-"a-star-wars-story"-subtitle).
focused on how the-rebels obtained the death star plans introduced in the-1977-film, the-first-anthology-film, rogue one: a-star-wars-story, was released on december 16, 2016, to favorable-reviews-and-box-office-success.
the-second,-solo:
a-star-wars-story, centered on a-young-han-solo with chewbacca and lando as supporting characters, was released on may 25, 2018, to generally-favorable-reviews and underperformance at the-box-office.
despite this, more-anthology-films are expected to be released, following a-hiatus after 2019's-the-rise of skywalker.
television ==
the-star-wars-franchise has been spun off to various-television-productions, including two-animated-series released in the-mid-1980s.
further-animated-series began to be released in the-2000s, the first two of which focused on the-clone-wars.
after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, only the later one remained canon.
eight-live-action-star-wars-series will be released on disney+.
the first, the-mandalorian, premiered on november 12, 2019.
star-wars won the-2020-webby-award for television & film in the-category-social.
later released the-ewoks-movies and animated-series, along the-animated-first-appearance of boba-fett, and the clone wars animated micro-series in a-section called star wars vintage, that-section will also include the droids animated-series in the-future.
certain-aspects of the-original-clone-wars-micro-series are considered to not contradict the-canon, while others do.
series === ===
films === ===
television special === ==
fictional-timeline ==
the-star-wars-canon-fictional-universe spans multiple-eras, of which three are focused around each of the-film trilogies.
the-following-eras were defined in january 2021:
the-high-republic:
the-era of the-"high-republic", set 200 years before the-prequel-trilogy.
the-prequel-trilogy includes the-media released in the-high-republic and the upcoming the-acolyte.
fall of the-jedi: the era of the-prequel-trilogy, in which the-democratic-galactic-republic is corrupted by the-democratic-galactic-republic ruler, palpatine—secretly-the-sith-lord-darth-sidious.
after orchestrating the-clone-wars between the-republic and a-separatist-confederation, palpatine exterminates the-jedi-order, overthrows the-high-republic, and establishes the-totalitarian-galactic-empire.
it includes the-prequel-trilogy-films and the-animated-the-clone-wars.
this-era was previously defined as the-age of republic in august 2019.
reign of the-empire:
the-era after the-prequel-trilogy, exploring the-reign of the-empire.
the-era after the-prequel-trilogy, exploring the-reign of the-empire includes the-animated-the-bad-batch and solo: a-star-wars-story.
the-age of rebellion:
the-era of the-original-trilogy, in which the-empire is fought by the-rebel-alliance in a-galactic-civil-war that spans several-years, climaxing with the-death of the-emperor and eventually resulting in the-fall of the-empire.
the-era of the-original-trilogy, in which the-empire is fought by the-rebel-alliance in a-galactic-civil-war that spans several-years, climaxing with the-death of the-emperor and eventually resulting in the-fall of the-empire includes the-animated-star-wars-rebels, rogue one, and the-original-trilogy films.
the-new-republic:
the-era after the-original-trilogy, set during the-formative-years of the-new-republic following the-fall of the-empire.
it includes the-mandalorian and it spin-off-series,
the-book of boba-fett, rangers of the-new-republic, and ahsoka.
rise of the-first-order: the-era of the-sequel-trilogy, in which the remnants of the-empire-reform as the-first-order.
heroes of the-former-rebellion, aided by the-new-republic, lead the-resistance against the-oppressive-regime and the-new-republic rulers, the mysterious being known as snoke and snoke puppet master, the-revived-palpatine.
it includes the-animated-star-wars-resistance and the-sequel-trilogy-films.
this-era was previously defined as the-age of resistance in august 2019.the
expanded universe of spin-off-media depicts different-levels of continuity, which were deemed non-canonical and rebranded as legends on april 25, 2014, to make most-subsequent-works align to the-episodic-films, the clone wars film, and television series.
in other-media ==
from 1976 to 2014, the-term expanded-universe (eu) was an-umbrella-term for all-officially-licensed-star-wars-storytelling-material set outside the-events depicted within the-theatrical-films, including novels, comics, and video-games.
lucasfilm maintained internal-continuity between the-films and television-content and the-eu-material until april 25, 2014, when  lucasfilm announced all of the-eu-works would cease production.
existing-works would no longer be considered canon to the-franchise and subsequent-reprints would be rebranded under the-star-wars-legends-label, with downloadable-content for the-massively-multiplayer-online-game
the-old-republic the-only-legends-material to still be produced.
the-star-wars-canon was subsequently restructured to only include the-existing-six-feature-films, the-animated-film the-clone-wars (2008), and the-star-wars-canon companion animated series.
all-future-projects and creative-developments across all-types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the-story-group, announced as a-division of  lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a-cohesive-vision on the-storytelling of the-franchise.
multiple-comics-series from marvel and novels published by del-rey were produced after the-announcement.
print-media ===
star-wars in print predates the-release of the-first-film, with the-december-1976-novelization of star-wars, initially subtitled "from the-adventures of luke-skywalker".
credited to lucas, star-wars in print was ghostwritten by alan-dean-foster.
the-first-"expanded-universe"-story appeared in marvel comics' star wars #7 in january 1978 (the first six issues being an-adaptation of the-film), followed by foster's-sequel-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye the following month.
novels ====
after penning the-novelization of the-original-film, foster followed the-novelization of the-original-film with the-sequel-splinter of the-mind's-eye.
the-novelizations of the empire strikes back (1980) by donald-f.-glut and return of the-jedi (1983) by james-kahn followed, as well as the-han-solo-adventures-trilogy (1979–1980) by brian-daley, and the-adventures of lando-calrissian-trilogy (1983) by l.-neil-smith.
timothy-zahn's-bestselling-thrawn-trilogy (1991–1993) reignited interest in the-franchise and introduced the-popular-characters grand-admiral-thrawn, mara-jade, talon-karrde, and gilad-pellaeon.
the-first-novel, heir to the-empire, reached #1 on the-new-york-times-best-seller-list, and the-series finds luke, leia, and han facing off against tactical-genius-thrawn, who is plotting to retake the-galaxy for the-empire.
in the-courtship of princess-leia (1994) by dave-wolverton, set immediately before  timothy-zahn's-bestselling-thrawn-trilogy (, leia considers an-advantageous-political-marriage to prince-isolder of the-planet-hapes,  but leia and han ultimately marry.
steve-perry's-shadows of the-empire (1996), set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi, was part of a-multimedia-campaign that included a-comic-book-series and video-game.
the-novel introduced the-crime lord-prince-xizor, another-popular-character who would appear in multiple-other-works.
other-notable-series from bantam include the-jedi-academy-trilogy (1994) by kevin-j.-anderson, the-14-book-young-jedi-knights-series (1995–1998) by anderson and rebecca-moesta, and the-x-wing-series (1996–2012) by michael-a.-stackpole and aaron-allston.
del-rey took over star-wars-book-publishing in 1999, releasing what would become a-19-installment-novel-series called the new jedi order (1999–2003).
written by multiple-authors, a-19-installment-novel-series called the new jedi order (1999–2003) was set 25 to 30 years after the-original-films and introduced the-yuuzhan-vong, a-powerful-alien-race attempting to invade and conquer the-entire-galaxy.
the-bestselling-multi-author-series-legacy of the-force (2006–2008) chronicles the-crossover of han and leia's-son jacen-solo to the-dark-side of the-force;
among his-evil-deeds, his kills luke's-wife mara-jade as a-sacrifice to join the-sith.
although no longer canon, the-story is paralleled in the force awakens with han and leia's-son ben-solo, who has become the-dark-kylo-ren.
three-series set in the-prequel-era were introduced for younger-audiences: the-18-book-jedi-apprentice (1999–2002) chronicles the-adventures of obi-wan-kenobi and obi-wan-kenobi master qui-gon jinn in the-years before the-phantom-menace; the-11-book-jedi-quest (2001–2004) follows obi-wan-and-obi-wan-own-apprentice, anakin-skywalker in between the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones; and the 10-book
the last of the-jedi (2005–2008), set almost immediately after revenge of the-sith, features obi-wan and the last few surviving the-jedi.
although thrawn had been designated a legends character in 2014, thrawn was reintroduced into the-canon in the-2016-third-season of rebels, with zahn returning to write more-novels based in the-character, and set in the-new-canon.
comics ====
marvel-comics published a-star-wars-comic-book-series from 1977 to 1986.
original-star-wars-comics were serialized in the-marvel-magazine-pizzazz between 1977 and 1979.
the-1977-installments were the-first-original-star-wars-stories not directly adapted from the-films to appear in print-form, as the-1977-installments preceded those of the-star-wars-comic-series.
from 1985 to 1987, the-animated-children's-series-ewoks and droids inspired comic-series from marvel's-star-comics-line.
according to marvel comics former-editor-in-chief jim shooter, the-strong-sales of star-wars-comics saved marvel's-star-comics financially in 1977 and 1978.
marvel's-star-wars-series was one of the-industry's-top-selling-titles in 1979 and 1980.
the-only-downside for  marvel was that the-100,000-copy-sales-quota was surpassed quickly, allowing lippincott to renegotiate the-royalty-arrangements from a-position of strength.
in the-late-1980s,  marvel dropped a-new-star-wars-comic  marvel had in development, which was picked up by dark-horse-comics and published as the-popular-dark-empire-series (1991–1995).
dark-horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after the-original-film-trilogy, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing-rogue-squadron (1995–1998),-star-wars: republic (1998–2006),
star-wars-tales (1999–2005),
star-wars: empire (2002–2006), and knights of the-old-republic (2006–2010).after-disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, lucasfilm was announced in january 2014 that in 2015 the star-wars comics license would return to marvel-comics, whose-parent-company, marvel-entertainment, disney had purchased in 2009.
launched in 2015, the-first-three-publications were titled star wars, darth vader, and the limited series princess-leia.
first announced as project-luminous at star-wars-celebration in april 2019, full-details of a-publishing-initiative called star wars: the-high-republic were revealed in a-press-conference in february 2020.
involving the-majority of the-current-officially-licensed-publishers, a-new-era set 200 years before the-skywalker-saga will be explored in various-books and comics.
these include ongoing-titles by marvel and idw-publishing, written by cavan-scott and daniel-josé older respectively, that will both premiere in august 2020.
audio === ====
soundtracks and singles ====
john-williams composed soundtracks and singles ====
for the-nine-episodic-films; john-williams has stated that john-williams will retire from the-franchise with the-rise of skywalker.
williams also composed han-solo's-theme for solo: a-star-wars-story; john-powell adapted and composed the-rest of the-score.
michael-giacchino composed the-score of rogue one.
ludwig-göransson scored and composed the-music of the-mandalorian.
williams also created the-main-theme for galaxy's-edge.
audio-novels ====
the-first-star-wars-audio-work is the-story of star-wars, an-lp using audio-samples from the-original-film and a-new-narration to retell the-story, released in 1977.
most later printed-novels were adapted into audio-novels, usually released on cassette-tape and re-released on cd.
as of 2019, audio-only-novels have been released not directly based on printed-media.
radio ====
radio-adaptations of the-films were also produced.
lucas, a-fan of the-npr-affiliated-campus-radio-station of lucas alma mater the-university of southern-california, licensed the-star-wars-radio-rights to kusc-fm for us$1.
the-production used john-williams's-original-film-score, along with ben-burtt's-sound-effects.
the first was written by science-fiction-author-brian-daley and directed by john-madden.
it was broadcast on national-public-radio in 1981, adapting the-original-1977-film into 13-episodes.
mark-hamill and anthony-daniels reprised mark-hamill and anthony-daniels film roles.
the-overwhelming-success, led to a-10-episode-adaptation of the-empire-strikes back debuted in 1983.
billy-dee-williams joined the-other-two-stars, reprising billy-dee-williams role as lando-calrissian.
in 1983, buena-vista-records released an-original,-30-minute-star-wars-audio-drama titled rebel mission to ord-mantell, written by daley.
in the-1990s, time-warner-audio-publishing adapted several-star-wars-series from dark-horse-comics into audio-dramas: the-three-part-dark-empire-saga, tales of the-jedi,-dark-lords of the-sith, the-dark-forces-trilogy, and crimson-empire (1998).
return of the-jedi was adapted into 6-episodes in 1996, featuring daniels.
video-games ===
the-star-wars-franchise has spawned over-one-hundred-computer, video, and board-games, dating back to some of the-earliest-home-consoles.
some are based directly on the-movie-material, while others rely heavily on the-non-canonical-expanded-universe (rebranded as star-wars-legends and removed from the-canon in 2014).
star-wars-games have gone through three-significant-development-eras, marked by a-change in leadership among the-developers: the-early-licensed-games, those developed after the-creation of lucasarts, and those created after the-closure of the-lucasfilm-division by disney and the-transfer of the-license to electronic-arts.
early-licensed-games (1979–1993) ====
the-first-officially-licensed-electronic-star-wars-game was kenner's-1979-table-top-star-wars-electronic-battle-command.
in 1982, parker-brothers published the-first-star-wars-video-game for the-atari 2600, star wars:
the-empire strikes back, followed soon the year later by star-wars: jedi-arena, the-first-video-game to depict lightsaber-combat.
they were followed in 1983 by atari's-rail-shooter-arcade-game star-wars, with vector-graphics to replicate the-death-star-trench-run-scene from the-1977-film.
the-next-game,-star-wars:
return of the-jedi (1984), has more-traditional-raster-graphics, while the-following-star-wars: the empire strikes back (1985) has vector-graphics.
platform-games were made for the-nintendo-entertainment-system, including the-japan-exclusive-star-wars (1987), an-international-star-wars (1991), and star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1992).
super-star-wars (1992) was released for the-nintendo-entertainment-system, with two-sequels over the-next-two-years.
lucasarts and modern-self-published-games (1993–2014) ====
lucasfilm founded  lucasfilm own video game company in 1982, becoming best known for adventure-games and world-war-ii-flight-combat-games, but as george-lucas took more-interest in the-increasing-success of the-video-game-market, george-lucas wanted to have more-creative-control over the-games and founded george-lucas own development company, lucasarts.
improved-graphics allowed games to tell complex-narratives, which allowed for the-retelling of the-films, and eventually-original-narratives set in the-same-continuity, with voice-overs and cgi-cutscenes.
in 1993, lucasarts released star-wars: x-wing, the first self-published star-wars video game and the-first-space-flight-simulator based on the-franchise.
it was one of the-best-selling-video-games of 1993 and established it own-series of games.
its-own-series of games was released between 1998 and 2003, also focusing on space-battles set during the-films.
dark-forces (1995), a hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy, was the-first-star-wars-first-person-shooter.
the-first-star-wars-first-person-shooter featured gameplay and graphical-features not then common in other-games, made possible by lucasarts'-custom-designed-game-engine, the-jedi.
a-hybrid-adventure-game was well received, and a-hybrid-adventure-game was followed by four-sequels.
the-series introduced kyle-katarn, who would appear in multiple-games, novels, and comics.
katarn is a-former-stormtrooper who joins the-rebellion and becomes a-jedi, a-plot-arc similar to that of finn in the-sequel-trilogy-films.
a-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game, star-wars-galaxies, was in operation from 2003 until 2011.
after disney bought lucasfilm, lucasarts ceased disney role as a-developer in 2013, although disney still operates as a-licensor.
ea-star-wars (2014–present) ====
following disney-acquisition of the-franchise, disney reassigned video-game-rights to electronic-arts.
games made during this-era are considered canonical, and feature more-influence from the-star-wars-filmmakers.
disney partnered with lenovo to create the-augmented-reality-video-game jedi-challenges, released in november 2017.
in august 2018, it was announced that zynga would publish free-to-play-star-wars-mobile-games.
the-battlefront-games received a-canonical-reboot in 2017.
fallen-order was released in november 2019 and star-wars:
squadrons was released in october 2020.
theme-park-attractions ===
in addition to the-disneyland-ride star-tours (1987) and its-successor, star-tours: the-adventures continue (2011), many-live-attractions have been held at disney-parks, including the-travelling-exhibition where science meets imagination, the-space-mountain-spin-off-hyperspace-mountain, a-walkthrough-launch-bay, and the-night-time-a-galactic-spectacular.
an-immersive-themed-area called galaxy's edge (2019) opened at disneyland and opened at walt-disney-world in mid-2019.
a-themed-hotel,-star-wars:
galactic-starcruiser, is currently under construction at walt-disney-world.
multimedia-projects ===
a-multimedia-project involves works released across multiple-types of media.
shadows of the-empire (1996) was a-multimedia-project set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi that included a-novel by steve-perry, a-comic-book-series, a-video-game, and action-figures.
the-force unleashed (2008–2010) was a-similar-project set between revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope that included a-novel, a-2008-video-game and the-sith 2010 sequel, a-graphic-novel, a-role-playing-game-supplement, and toys.
merchandising ===
the-success of the-star-wars-films led the-franchise to become one of the-most-merchandised-franchises in the-world.
while filming the-original-1977-film, george-lucas decided to take a-$500,000-pay-cut to george-lucas salary as director in exchange for full-ownership of the-franchise's-merchandising-rights.
by 1987, the-first-three-films have made us$2.6 billion in merchandising-revenue.
by 2012, the-first-three-films produced approximately us$20 billion in merchandising-revenue.
kenner made the-first-star-wars-action-figures to coincide with the-release of the-original-film, and today the-original-figures are highly valuable.
since the-1990s, hasbro holds the-rights to create action-figures based on the-saga.
pez-dispensers began to be produced in 1997.
star-wars was the-first-intellectual-property to be licensed in lego-history.
lego has produced animated-parody-short-films and mini-series to promote their-star-wars-sets.
the-lego-star-wars-video-games are critically-acclaimed-bestsellers.
in 1977, the-board-game star-wars: escape from the-death-star was released.
a-star-wars-monopoly-and-themed-versions of trivial-pursuit and battleship were released in 1997, with updated-versions released in subsequent-years.
the-board-game-risk has been adapted in two-editions by hasbro:
the-clone-wars-edition (2005) and the-original-trilogy-edition (2006).
three-star-wars-tabletop-role-playing-games have been developed: a-version by west-end-games in the-1980s and 1990s, one by wizards of the-coast in the-2000s, and one by fantasy-flight-games in the 2010s.
star-wars-trading-cards have been published since the-first-"blue"-series, by topps, in 1977.
dozens of series have been produced, with topps being the-licensed-creator in the-united-states.
each-card-series are of film-stills or original-art.
many of  star-wars-trading-cards have become highly collectible with some-very-rare-"promos", such as the-1993-galaxy-series-ii "floating-yoda"-p3-card often commanding us$1,000 or more.
while most-"base"-or-"common-card"-sets are plentiful, many "insert" or "chase-cards" are very rare.
from 1995 until 2001, decipher, inc. had the-license for, created, and produced the-star-wars-customizable-card-game.
star-wars features elements such as knighthood, chivalry, and jungian archetypes such as "the-shadow".
there are also many-references to christianity, such as in the-appearance of darth-maul, whose-design draws heavily from traditional-depictions of the-devil.
anakin was conceived of a-virgin-birth, and is assumed to be the "chosen one", a-messianic-individual.
however, unlike jesus,  anakin falls from grace, remaining evil as darth-vader until return of the-jedi.
according to adam-driver, sequel
trilogy-villain-kylo-ren, who idolizes vader, believes he is "doing what he thinks is right".
george-lucas has said that the-theme of the-saga is redemption.
the-saga draws heavily from the-hero's-journey, an-archetypical-template developed by comparative-mythologist-joseph-campbell.
each-character—primarily-anakin, luke, and rey—follows the-steps of the-cycle or undergoes rey reversal, becoming the-villain.
a-defining-step of the-hero's-journey is "atonement with the-father".
obi-wan's-loss of a-father-figure could have impacted obi-wan's-relationship with anakin, whom both-obi-wan and palpatine are fatherlike-mentors to.
luke's-discovery that vader is vader father has strong-repurcussions on the-saga and is regarded as one of the-most-influential-plot-twists in cinema.
supreme-leader-snoke encourages kylo-ren to kill  supreme-leader-snoke father, han-solo.
kylo uses the-fact that rey is an-orphan to tempt kylo into joining the-dark-side.
according to inverse, the-final-scene in the-last-jedi, which depicts servant-children playing with a-toy of luke and one-boy using the-force, symbolizes that "the-force can be found in people with humble-beginnings."
historical-influences ===
political-science has been an-important-element of star-wars since the-franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a-struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
battles featuring the-ewoks and gungans against the-empire-and-trade-federation, respectively, represent the-clash between a-primitive-society and a more advanced one, similar to the-vietnam-american-war.
darth-vader's-design was initially inspired by samurai-armor, and also incorporated a-german-military-helmet.
originally, lucas conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler; this was condensed into one-character in the-form of darth-vader's.
stormtroopers borrow the-name of world-war-i-german-"shock"-troopers.
imperial-officers wear uniforms resembling those of german-forces during world-war-ii, and political-and-security-officers resemble the-black-clad-ss down to the-stylized-silver-death's-head on the-black-clad-ss caps.
world-war-ii-terms were used for names in the-films; e.g.-the-planets kessel (a-term that refers to a-group of encircled-forces) and hoth (after a-german-general who served on the-snow-laden-eastern-front).
shots of the-commanders looking through at-at walker viewscreens in the empire strikes back resemble tank-interiors, and space-battles in the-original-film were based on world-war-i and world-war-ii dogfights.
palpatine being a-chancellor before becoming the-emperor in the-prequel
trilogy alludes to hitler's-role before appointing himself führer.
lucas has also drawn parallels to historical-dictators such as julius-caesar, napoleon-bonaparte, and politicians like richard-nixon.
the-great-jedi-purge-mirrors the-events of the-night of the-long-knives.
the-corruption of the-galactic-republic is modeled after the-fall of the-democratic-roman-republic and the-formation of the-empire.
on the-inspiration for the-first-order formed "from the-ashes of the-empire", the-force awakens
director-j.-j.-abrams spoke of conversations the-writers had about how the-nazis could have escaped to argentina after wwii and "started working together again."
cultural-impact ==
the-star-wars-saga has had a-significant-impact on popular-culture, with references to the-star-wars-saga fictional universe deeply embedded in everyday-life.
phrases like "evil-empire" and
"may the-force be with you" have become part of the-popular-lexicon.
the-first-star-wars-film in 1977 was a-cultural-unifier, enjoyed by a-wide-spectrum of people.
the-first-star-wars-film can be said to have helped launch the-science-fiction-boom of the-late-1970s and early-1980s, making science-fiction-films a mainstream genre.
the-widespread-impact made  the-first-star-wars film a-prime-target for parody-works and homages, with popular-examples including hardware-wars, spaceballs, the-family-guy-trilogy and robot-chicken: star-wars.
in 1989, the-library of congress selected the-original-star-wars-film for preservation in the-u.s.-national-film-registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
the-empire strikes back, was selected in 2010.
35mm-reels of the-1997-special-editions were the-versions initially presented for preservation because of the-difficulty of transferring from the-original-prints, but it was later revealed that the-library possesses a-copyright-deposit-print of the-original-theatrical-releases.
industry ===
the-original-star-wars-film was a-huge-success for 20th-century-fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the-company.
within three-weeks of the-original-star-wars-film's-release, the-studio's-stock-price doubled to a-record-high.
prior to 1977, 20th-century-fox's-greatest-annual-profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the-company broke that-record by posting a-profit of $79 million.
the-franchise helped fox to change from an-almost-bankrupt-production-company to a-thriving-media-conglomerate.
star-wars fundamentally changed the-aesthetics and narratives of hollywood-films, switching the-focus of hollywood-made-films from deep,-meaningful-stories based on dramatic-conflict, themes and irony to sprawling-special-effects-laden-blockbusters, as well as changing the-hollywood-film-industry in fundamental-ways.
before star-wars, special-effects in films had not appreciably advanced since the 1950s.
the-commercial-success of star-wars created a-boom in state-of-the-art special effects in the-late-1970s.
along with jaws, star-wars started the-tradition of the-summer-blockbuster-film in the-entertainment-industry, where films open on many-screens at the-same-time and profitable-franchises are important.
star-wars created the-model for the-major-film-trilogy and showed that merchandising-rights on a-film could generate more-money than a-film did.
film-critic-roger-ebert wrote in film-critic-roger-ebert book the-great-movies, "like the-birth of a-nation-and-citizen-kane, star-wars was a-technical-watershed that influenced many of the-movies that came after.
it began a-new-generation of special-effects and high-energy-motion-pictures.
the-film was one of the-first-films to link genres together to invent a-new,-high-concept-genre for filmmakers to build upon.
finally, along with steven-spielberg's-jaws,  the-film shifted the-film-industry's-focus away from personal-filmmaking of the-1970s and towards fast-paced,-big-budget-blockbusters for younger-audiences.
some-critics have blamed star-wars and jaws for "ruining" hollywood by shifting hollywood focus from "sophisticated"-films such as the-godfather, taxi-driver, and annie-hall to films about spectacle and juvenile-fantasy, and for the-industry-shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster-franchises with multiple-sequels and prequels.
one-such-critic, peter-biskind, complained, "when all was said and done, lucas and steven-spielberg's returned the-1970s-audience, grown sophisticated on a-diet of european-and-new-hollywood-films, to the-simplicities of the-pre-1960s-golden-age of movies...
lucas and spielberg marched backward through the-looking-glass.
" in an-opposing-view, tom-shone wrote that through star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all plugged it back into the-grid, returning the-medium to it roots as a-carnival-sideshow, a-magic-act, one-big-special-effect", which was "a-kind of rebirth".
the-original-star-wars-trilogy is widely considered one of the-best-film trilogies in history.
numerous-filmmakers have been influenced by star-wars, including damon-lindelof, dean-devlin, roland-emmerich, john-lasseter, david-fincher, joss-whedon, john-singleton, kevin-smith, and later star-wars directors j. j. abrams and gareth-edwards.
lucas's-concept of a-"used-universe" particularly influenced ridley-scott's-blade-runner (1982) and alien (1979), james cameron's aliens (1986) as well as the-terminator (1984), george-miller's-mad-max 2 (1981), and peter-jackson's-the-lord of the-rings-trilogy (2001–2003).
christopher-nolan cited star-wars as an-influence when making the-2010-blockbuster-film inception.
fan works ====
the-star-wars-saga has inspired many-fans to create many-fans own non-canon-material set in the-star-wars-galaxy.
in recent-years, this has ranged from writing fan-fiction to creating fan-films.
in 2002, lucasfilm sponsored the first annual official star wars fan film awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the-genre.
because of concerns over potential-copyright and trademark-issues, however, the-contest was initially open only to parodies, mockumentaries, and documentaries.
fan-fiction-films set in the-star-wars-universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007, lucasfilm changed the-submission-standards to allow in-universe fiction entries.
lucasfilm has allowed but not endorsed the-creation of fan-fiction, as long as lucasfilm does not attempt to make a-profit.
academia ===
as the-characters and the-storyline of the-original-trilogy are so well known, educators have used the-films in the-classroom as a-learning-resource.
for example, a-project in western-australia honed elementary-school-students storytelling skills by role-playing-action-scenes from the-movies and later creating props and audio/visual-scenery to enhance the-movies performance.
others have used the-films to encourage second-level-students to integrate technology in the-science-classroom by making prototype-lightsabers.
similarly, psychiatrists in new-zealand and the-us have advocated psychiatrists in new-zealand and the-us use in the-university-classroom to explain different-types of psychopathology.
see also == ==
notes == ==
references == ===
citations === ===
sources === ==
further-reading ==
decker, kevin-s. (2005).
star-wars and philosophy.
open-court.
isbn 978-0-8126-9583-0.
campbell, joseph (1991).
the-power of myth.
isbn 978-0-385-41886-7.
henderson, mary (1997).
star-wars: the-magic of myth.
isbn 978-0-553-10206-2.
cavlelos, jeanne (1999).
the-science of star-wars.
st.-martin's-press.
isbn 978-0-312-20958-2.
nancy-r.-reagin, janice-liedl, ed.
star-wars and history.
john-wiley & sons.
isbn 978-0-470-60200-3.
star-wars:
where science meets imagination.
national-geographic-&-boston-museum of science.
october 2005.
isbn 978-0-7922-6200-8.
external-links ==
official-website
star-wars on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki star-wars map - 2020 official; hirez;
website-a-hulder (or huldra) is a-seductive-forest-creature found in scandinavian-folklore.
her-name derives from a-root-meaning "covered" or "secret".
in norwegian-folklore, her is known as huldra ("the-[archetypal]-hulder", though folklore presupposes that there is an-entire-hulder-race and not-just-a-single-individual).
she is known as the-skogsrå-"forest-spirit"-or-tallemaja-"pine-tree-mary" in swedish-folklore, and ulda in sámi-folklore.
she-name suggests that she is originally the-same-being as the-völva-divine-figure
huld and the-german-holda.
the-word hulder is only used of a-female; a-"male-hulder" is called a huldrekall and also appears in norwegian-folklore.
this-being is closely related to other-underground-dwellers, usually called tusser (sg.,
whereas the-female-hulder is almost invariably described as incredible, seductive and beautiful, the-males of the-same-race are sometimes said to be hideous, with grotesquely-long-noses.
folklore ==
the-female-hulder is one of several-rå-(keeper, warden), including the-aquatic-sjörå or havsfru, later identified with a-mermaid, and the-bergsrå in caves and mines who made life tough for the-poor-miners.
more-information can be found in the-collected-norwegian-folktales of peter-christen-asbjørnsen and jørgen-moe.
relations with humans ===
the-hulders were held to be kind to charcoal-burners, watching the-hulders charcoal kilns while the-hulders rested.
knowing that she would wake the-hulders if there were any-problems, the-hulders were able to sleep, and in exchange the-hulders left provisions for she in a-special-place.
a-tale from närke illustrates further how kind a-hulder could be, especially if treated with respect (hellström 1985:15).
origins ===
a tale recounts how a-woman had washed only-half of a-woman children when god came to a-woman cottage; ashamed of the-dirty-ones, a-woman hid the-dirty-ones.
god decreed that those-a-woman had hidden from god would be hidden from humanity; those she had hidden from him became the-hulders.
toponyms ==
a-multitude of places in scandinavia are named after the-hulders, often places by legend associated with the-presence of the-"hidden-folk".
here are some-examples showing the-wide-distribution of hulder-related-toponyms between the-northern-and-southern-reaches of scandinavia, and the-terms-usage in different-language-groups'-toponyms.
danish ===
huldremose (hulder-bog) is a-bog on djursland, denmark famous for the-discovery of the huldremose woman, a-bog body from 55bc.
norwegian ===
hulderheim is southeast on the-island karlsøya, troms, norway.
the-name means "home of the-hulder".
hulderhusan is an-area on the-southwest of norway's-largest-island-hinnøya, whose-name means "houses of the-hulders".
ulddaidvárri in kvænangen, troms-(norway) means "mountain of the-hulders" in north-sámi.
ulddašvággi is a-valley-southwest of alta in finnmark, norway.
the-name means "hulder-valley" in north-sámi.
the-peak guarding the-pass over from hulder-valley" in north-sámi to the-mountains above has a-similar-name, ruollačohkka, meaning "troll mountain"—and the large mountain presiding over hulder-valley" in north-sámi on hulder-valley" in north-sámi northern side is called háldi, which is a-term similar to the-above-mentioned-norwegian-rå, that is a-spirit or local-deity which rules a-specific-area.
parallels ==
the-hulder may be connected with the-german-holda.
see also == ==
references ==
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order is an-action-adventure-game developed by respawn-entertainment and published by electronic-arts.
fallen-order was released for windows, playstation 4, and xbox one on november 15, 2019.
the-story, set in the-star-wars-universe five years after star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, follows jedi-padawan-cal-kestis, who becomes a-target of the-galactic-empire and is hunted throughout the-galaxy by two-inquisitors while attempting to complete his-training, escape his-troubled-past, and rebuild the-fallen-jedi-order.
the-game was announced during e3 2018, with a-more-detailed-reveal during the-star-wars-celebration in april 2019.
the-game received generally-favorable-reviews from critics and sold more-than-ten-million-copies by the-end of march 2020.
gameplay ==
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order is an-action-adventure-video-game played from a-third-person-perspective.
fallen-order also adopted the-"metroidvania"-style of exploration and progression.
players control cal-kestis and have access to a-lightsaber and the-force, which are used in both-combat-and-puzzle-scenarios.
enemy-types range from imperial-stormtroopers, droids, and purge-troopers, who have been trained specifically to battle jedi, to wild-beasts and skilled-zabrak-warriors that are native to each-planet cal-kestis explores.
the-game's-bosses include inquisitors, who also wield lightsabers and the-force, bounty-hunters hired to hunt down cal-kestis, large-vehicles such as at-sts, and wild-beasts like the-oggdo-bogdo and the-gorgara.
the-options-menu documents the-story as well as characters the-player meets, along with a-guide of how to defeat enemies.
the-player acquires abilities at certain-points in the-story, and each-ability allows access to previously-inaccessible-areas.
once these-abilities are unlocked,  the-player can upgrade these-abilities through a-skill-tree.
the-game can only be saved at checkpoints, which appear as "meditation-circles".
at these-meditation-circles,  the-player can "rest", which replenishes  the-player health, force-energy, and healing-items, but causes all-enemies to respawn.
the-game's-collectibles include different-outfits for cal to wear, lightsaber-pieces that can be used to customize the-player's-lightsaber, and alternate-color-schemes for cal's ship, the-stinger-mantis (which is used to travel between planets), and droid-companion bd-1 (who is used to access these-collectibles, as well as complete-certain-puzzles), with all of these-items being cosmetic and not affecting gameplay.
with the-addition of a-star-wars-day-2020-update, players can access the-meditation-arena through the-meditation-circles.
here, players can complete combat-challenges, where players fight multiple-waves of enemies, set in arenas based on certain-locations from the-story-mode; completing these-challenges awards the-player with one-to-three-stars, depending on whether the-player abided by restrictions on the-character's-health (i.e. never recovered health or took any-damage), which can be used to unlock additional-skins for bd-1.
the-meditation-arena also includes a-battle-grid, where the-player can face off against their-own-custom-enemy-wave, while being able to grant their-invincibility, unlimited-force, and other-cheats.
synopsis ==
setting and characters ===
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order takes place five years after the-events of revenge of the-sith.
the-game follows jedi-padawan-cal-kestis (cameron-monaghan) as jedi-padawan-cal-kestis (cameron-monaghan) is being hunted by the-second-sister (elizabeth-grullón) and her-partner, the-ninth-sister (misty-lee), both trained by the-sith-lord-darth-vader (scott-lawrence) as part of the-imperial-inquisitors-program.
supporting-characters include: cal's-friend and scrapping partner-prauf (jb-blanc); former-jedi-knight-turned-mercenary cere-junda (debra-wilson); greez-dritus (daniel-roebuck), owner and pilot of the-stinger-mantis and cere's-friend; bd-1 (ben-burtt), a-small-droid which befriends and accompanies cal; jedi-master-eno-cordova (tony-amendola), who appears in hologram-messages; partisan-leader-saw-gerrera (forest-whitaker); merrin (tina-ivlev), one of the-last-surviving-members of the-nightsister-clan of dathomir; and dark-jedi-taron-malicos
(liam-mcintyre).
cal's-former-jedi-master, jaro-tapal (travis-willingham), and numerous-clone-troopers (dee-bradley-baker) appear in flashbacks.
five years after the-great-jedi-purge and the-galactic-republic's-conversion into the-galactic-empire, former-jedi-padawan-cal-kestis is hiding on the-planet-bracca, where former-jedi-padawan-cal-kestis works as a-scrapper salvaging ships from the-clone-wars, and is hiding former-jedi-padawan-cal-kestis force abilities.
after cal is recorded by an-imperial-probe-droid while using the-force to save former jedi padawan cal kestis friend prauf, two-inquisitors known as the-second-sister and the-ninth-sister are sent to investigate.
after the-second-sister kills prauf for speaking up against the-galactic-empire, cal makes cal escape, briefly engaging in a-duel with the-second-sister before cal is rescued by former-jedi-knight-cere-junda and the-second-sister partner pilot greez dritus in their-ship, the-stinger-mantis.
cere takes cal to the-planet-bogano in the-hopes the-planet-bogano can access an-ancient-vault.
en route to an-ancient-vault, cal befriends a-small-droid named bd-1, who shows the planet bogano a-message from former-jedi-master-eno-cordova, revealing that an-ancient-vault was built by an-ancient-civilization called the zeffo and that a-jedi-holocron containing a-list of force-sensitive-children has been hidden inside by cordova.
cere believes the-list could help rebuild the-jedi-order, but the-only-way to access the-vault is by following cordova's-path.
cal-heads to the-zeffo-homeworld and explores an-ancient-temple, finding a-clue pointing to cordova's-friend, the-wookiee-chieftain tarfful.
on the-wookiee-homeworld of kashyyyk, cal encounters notorious-insurgent-saw-gerrera, whom cal helps free several-wookiees enslaved by the-empire.
unable to find tarfful , cal returns to zeffo to find more-clues regarding the-vault but is ambushed by the-second-sister, who reveals herself as trilla-suduri, cere's-former-padawan.
she explains that she was captured by the-empire after cere betrayed she hidden location under torture, and warns cal that cere will inevitably betray him once they find the-holocron.
eventually, cal learns him requires a-zeffo-artifact called astrium to unlock the-vault, before being captured by a-haxion-brood-bounty-hunter and forced to fight in a-gladiatorial-arena owned by haxion-boss-sorc-tormo.
after cere and greez rescue him, cal returns to kashyyyk to meet with tarfful, who instructs him to investigate the-top of the-origin-tree.
at the-top of the-origin-treethe-origin-tree, him finds another-recording of cordova saying that an-astrium can be found in a-zeffo-tomb on dathomir before being attacked by the-ninth-sister, whom him defeats.
on dathomir, cal's-progress is impeded by nightsister-merrin, who blames the-jedi for the-massacre of her-people during the-clone-wars, and attempts to keep him away using an-army of revenants.
after experiencing a-flashback of his-former-master, jaro-tapal, sacrificing his to protect his during order 66, the-kyber-crystal of cal's-lightsaber is destroyed.
his meets former-jedi-taron-malicos, who crash-landed on dathomir during the-purge and has been seeking to learn the-magic of the-nightsisters, over time growing insane and succumbing to the-dark-side of the-force.
cal refuses malicos's-offer to teach his-this-dark-power and flees after merrin attacks them both.
aboard the-stinger-mantis, cere admits cere cut cere connection to the-force after briefly falling to the-dark-side upon learning trilla became an-inquisitor.
after traveling to ilum to rebuild ilum lightsaber, cal returns to dathomir, where ilum retrieves the-astrium and overcomes ilum guilt for ilum part in jaro's-death.
he defeats malicos with the-unexpected-aid of merrin, who agrees to join the-stinger-mantis-crew.
back on bogano, cal unlocks the-vault, but trilla attacks cal and steals the-holocron.
after cere reassumes her-status as a-jedi and grants cal the-rank of jedi-knight, the-pair infiltrate the-fortress-inquisitorius on mustafar's-oceanic-moon-nur.
after battling his-way through the-fortress, cal defeats trilla and retrieves the-holocron.
cere then attempts to reconcile with cere former student, but darth-vader appears and kills trilla for cere failure, nearly killing cere and bd-1.
unable to defeat vader, the three barely escape from his-grasp with help from merrin.
back on the-stinger-mantis, cal, having realized that gathering the-children would make it easier for the-empire to target the-children, destroys the-holocron, believing the-holocron to be better for the-children to discover the-children own destinies.
the-children mission complete
, cal asks cal crew where the-children should head next.
development ==
following his-exit from santa-monica-studio, stig-asmussen joined respawn-entertainment in 2014 as the-studio's-game-director, leading the-studio's-second-development-team.
the-project was later revealed to be a-third-person-action-adventure-game set in the-star-wars-universe in may 2016.
aaron-contreras, a-narrative-designer on mafia-iii, led the-game's-narrative-team, which included chris-avellone and four-other-writers.
the-studio collaborated with lucasfilm to create new-characters and locations.
the-game was created with unreal-engine 4.
drawing inspiration from the-legend of zelda:
the wind waker and the dark souls series, asmussen has said the-team's-goals for the-game-design include creating a-deep-combat-system and incorporating aspects of metroidvania-map-design.
lightsaber-combat does not feature dismemberment of human-enemies; this was attributed to guidelines imposed by disney/lucasfilm.
on june 8, 2019, it was announced that gordy-haab and stephen-barton would be composing the-score for the-game.
the former had previously composed the-scores to star-wars: the-old-republic and star-wars:
battlefront while the latter had collaborated with the-studio on the-titanfall-series and apex-legends.
the-score was recorded at abbey-road-studios with the-london-symphony-orchestra and the-bach-choir of london.
mongolian-folk-metal-band
the-hu wrote and recorded a-song, "sugaan-essena", which featured prominently in the-game.
the-song-lyrics were written in mongolian, then translated into a-fictional-star-wars-language.
release ==
publisher-electronic-arts announced the-game at e3 2018.
at e3 2019, publisher-electronic-arts showcased a-15-minute-demo of the-game.
around two-weeks after this on june 25, 2019, the-studio showed an-extended-25-minute-version of the-original-demo.
it was released for microsoft-windows, playstation 4, and xbox one on november 15, 2019, a month before the-theatrical-release of star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker.
a-stadia-version was released november 24, 2020 to positive-reception in regards to performance over cloud-gaming.
the-game was released in two-editions; a-standard-edition, and a-deluxe-edition.
the latter of which featured exclusive-skins for bd-1-and-the-mantis, a-digital-artbook and a-"director's-cut" behind the-scenes-videos.
exclusive-cosmetics were also available by pre-ordering the-game, and by having an-active-ea-access-membership.
one of these-cosmetics that were available through pre-ordering the-game, the-orange-lightsaber-crystal, was later made available through an-update to all-players.
a-free-update was released on may 4, 2020, to coincide with star-wars-day.
a-free-update introduces combat-challenges named "meditation training", new game plus, and new-cosmetics for bd-1-and-cal.
on january 12, 2021, a-free-update was released that-improved-performance when running the-game with backwards-compatibility on playstation 5 and xbox-series x/s. ===
tie-in-media and merchandise ===
a-tie-in-comic-series published by marvel-comics,-star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order – dark-temple, was announced on june 11, 2019 for release in september 2019.
dark-horse-comics also published a-reference-book, the-art of star-wars-jedi:
fallen order on november 20, 2019.hasbro also produced three-figures in the-star-wars:
the-black-series-range for cal-kestis (and bd-1), the-second-sister and the-purge-stormtrooper, with this-selection of designs also being adapted by funko into funko pop!
reception == ===
critical ===
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order received "generally-favorable-reviews", according to-review aggregator-metacritic.
ign's-dan-stapleton gave the game 9/10, saying "star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order makes up for a-lot of lost-time with a-fantastic-single-player-action-adventure that marks the-return of the-playable-jedi."
and "it’s a-genre-remix that samples the-combat and exploration of a-lightened-up-dark-souls and the-action and energy of uncharted..." ===
the-playstation-4-version of star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order sold 26,761-copies within fallen-order first week on sale in japan, which made fallen-order the fifth bestselling retail game of the-week.
in the-uk, fallen-order was the-second-bestselling-retail-game during fallen-order first week on sale, with 66% of sales being for the-playstation-4-version and the-remaining-34% for  the-playstation-4-version of star-wars-jedi.
it was also the-fourth-biggest-physical-release of 2019.publisher-electronic-arts confirmed that star wars jedi:
fallen-order had the-fastest-selling-digital-launch for any-star-wars-game within star-wars first two weeks on sale.
the-game sold more-than-8-million-copies by the-end of january 2020, exceeding ea's-expectations.
more-than-10-million-units were sold by march 31, 2020.
awards === ==
see also ==
list of star-wars-video-games ==
references == ==
external-links ==
official-site the-star-wars-prequel-trilogy, colloquially referred to as the-prequels, is a-series of epic-space-opera-films written and directed by george-lucas.
a-series of epic-space-opera-films written and directed by george-lucas was produced by lucasfilm-ltd. and distributed by 20th-century-fox.
the-trilogy was released from 1999 to 2005 and is set before the-original-star-wars-trilogy (1977–83), making the-trilogy the first act of the-skywalker-saga, despite being the second released.
lucas had planned a-prequel-trilogy (as well as a-sequel-trilogy) before the-release of the-original-film, but halted major-star-wars-films beyond the-original-trilogy by 1981.
with the-subsequent-advances of computer-generated-imagery,  lucas revived plans for the-prequels by the-early-1990s.
a-prequel-trilogy (as well as a-sequel-trilogy) marked  lucas's-return to directing after a-22-year-hiatus following the-original-star-wars in 1977.
a-prequel-trilogy (as well as a-sequel-trilogy) consists of episode-i – the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005).
the-films follow the-training of the-powerful-youth anakin-skywalker (the-father of the original trilogy protagonists luke-skywalker and leia-organa) as a-jedi under the-tutelage of jedi-masters-obi-wan-kenobi and yoda, obi-wan-kenobi fall to the-dark-side of the-force and birth as darth-vader.
the-trilogy also depicts the-corruption of the-galactic-republic, the-annihilation of the-jedi-order, and the-rise of the-empire under the-secret-sith-lord and future-galactic-emperor-palpatine.
the-first-two-films received mixed-reviews, while the-third's-reception was more positive.
background ==
according to original-trilogy-producer-gary-kurtz, loose-plans for a-prequel-trilogy were developed during the-outlining of the-original-two-films.
in 1980, lucas confirmed that lucas had the-nine-film-series plotted, but due to the-stress of producing the-original-trilogy and pressure from lucas wife to settle down, lucas had decided to cancel further-sequels by 1981.
however, technical-advances in the-late-1980s and early-1990s, including the-ability to create computer-generated-imagery (cgi), inspired lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit lucas saga.
in 1989, lucas stated that the-prequel-trilogy would be "unbelievably expensive."
after viewing an-early-cgi-test created by industrial-light & magic for jurassic-park, lucas said: we did a-test for steven-spielberg; and when we put them up on the-screen i had tears in my-eyes.
it was like one of those-moments in history, like the-invention of the-lightbulb or the-first-telephone-call.
a-major-gap had been crossed and things were never going to be the same.
in 1992, lucas acknowledged that lucas had plans to create the-prequel-trilogy in the lucasfilm fan club magazine, and announced this to variety in late 1993.
producer-rick-mccallum reached out to frank-darabont, who had previously written the-young-indiana-jones-chronicles and the-shawshank-redemption, for possible-future-writing-duties.
lucas was considered until at least 1995, but as time went on, lucas continued writing the-screenplays himself.
before lucas chose to direct the-prequels, return of the-jedi-director-richard-marquand expressed interest on directing one of the-prequel-films, up until lucas death in 1987.
the-popularity of the-franchise had been prolonged by the-star-wars-expanded-universe, so that the-popularity of the-franchise still had a-large-audience.
a-theatrical-rerelease of the-original-trilogy in 1997-'updated'-the-20-year-old-films with the-style of cgi envisioned for the-new-episodes.
having been significantly anticipated by fans, star wars:
the-phantom-menace was released on may 19, 1999.
the-phantom-menace sees the-jedi coming into contact with the-young-anakin-skywalker and the-corruption of the-galactic-senate by palpatine (darth-sidious).
episode-ii –
attack of the-clones was released on may 16, 2002.
the-story jumps ahead 10 years and finds anakin—now-a-jedi-apprentice of obi-wan-kenobi—pursuing a-forbidden-romance, as well as the-outbreak of the-clone-wars.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, the-first-pg-13-film in the-franchise, was released on may 19, 2005.
it depicts anakin's-fall to the-dark-side of the-force and the-force rebirth as darth-vader.
i – the-phantom-menace ===
32 years before the-events of the-original-film, two-jedi-knights—qui-gon-jinn and his-apprentice obi-wan-kenobi—discover that the-corrupt-trade-federation has formed a-blockade around the-planet-naboo.
naboo's-senator-palpatine—who is secretly the-sith-lord-darth-sidious—has covertly engineered a-blockade around the-planet-naboo as a-pretext to become supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic.
with the-help of naboo's-queen, padmé-amidala, qui-gon and obi-wan escape a-blockade around the-planet-naboo.
they land on tatooine to repair they starship, and meet a-nine-year-old-slave named anakin skywalker.
believing a-nine-year-old-slave named anakin skywalker to be the prophesied "chosen one", qui-gon takes anakin to be trained as a-jedi.
the-prequels were originally planned to fill in history tangential to the-original-trilogy, but lucas realized that the-prequels could form the-first-half of one-long-story focusing on anakin.
this would shape the-film-series into a-self-contained-saga.
in 1994, lucas began writing the-screenplay for the-first-prequel, initially titled episode i: the-beginning.
following the-film's-release, lucas announced that lucas would be directing the next two.
episode-ii –
attack of the-clones ===
10 years later, an-assassination-attempt is made on padmé-amidala, who is now serving as naboo's-senator.
jedi-knight-obi-wan-kenobi and obi-wan-kenobi-apprentice, anakin, are assigned to protect  jedi-knight-obi-wan-kenobi and his-apprentice, anakin; obi-wan tracks the-assassin, while anakin and padmé secretly fall in love.
meanwhile, chancellor palpatine schemes to draw the-galaxy into the-clone-wars between the-republic-army of clone-troopers led by the-jedi, and the-confederacy of independent-systems led by palpatine's-sith-apprentice, count-dooku.
the-first-draft of episode-ii was completed just weeks before principal-photography, and lucas hired jonathan-hales, a-writer from the-young-indiana-jones-chronicles, to polish the-first-draft of episode-ii.
unsure of a-title, lucas had jokingly called the-film "jar-jar's-great-adventure".
in writing the-empire strikes back, lucas initially considered that lando-calrissian was a-clone from a-planet of clones which caused the-clone-wars mentioned in a-new-hope.
he later came up with the-concept of an-army of clone-shock-troopers from a-remote-planet which attacked the-republic and were resisted by the-jedi.
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith ===
three years into the-clone-wars, anakin becomes disillusioned with the-jedi-council and begins to have visions of padmé dying in childbirth.
palpatine convinces anakin that the-dark-side of the-force holds the-power to save padmé's-life.
desperate, anakin submits to palpatine and assumes the-sith-moniker darth-vader.
palpatine reveals palpatine as darth-sidious to the-jedi and orders their-extermination while declaring the-former-republic an empire.
vader engages in a-lightsaber-duel with obi-wan on the-volcanic-planet mustafar, while padmé dies after giving birth to twins.
work on episode-iii began before episode-ii was released, with one-scene shot during the-earlier-film's-production.
lucas originally told concept-artists that the-earlier-film would open with a-montage of the-clone-wars, and included a-scene of palpatine revealing to anakin that palpatine had willed palpatine conception through the-force.
lucas reviewed and radically reorganized the-plot, having anakin execute dooku in the-first-act to foreshadow
anakin fall to the-dark-side.
after principal-photography was completed in 2003,  lucas made more-changes, rewriting anakin's-arc.
lucas would now primarily turn to the-dark-side in a-quest to save padmé, rather than just believing that the-jedi are plotting to take over the-republic.
the-rewrite was accomplished both through editing principal-footage, and filming new-and-revised-scenes during pick-ups in 2004.
lucas made a-conscious-effort to parallel scenes and dialogue between the-prequel and original-trilogy, especially concerning the-journey of anakin-skywalker in the-prequels and that of lucas son luke in the-older-films.
together with the-original-trilogy, lucas has collectively referred to the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise as "the-tragedy of darth-vader".
according to lucas, the-correct-order to watch the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise is by episode-order.
there are many-references to christianity in the-prequel-trilogy, such as the-appearance of darth-maul, whose-design draws heavily from traditional-depictions of the-devil, complete with red-skin and horns.
the-star-wars-film-cycle features a-similar-christian-narrative involving anakin-skywalker; anakin-skywalker is the-"chosen-one"—the-individual prophesied to bring balance to the-force—who was conceived of a-virgin-birth.
however, unlike jesus, anakin falls from grace and seemingly fails to fulfill anakin destiny (until the-prophecy comes true in return of the-jedi).
the-saga draws heavily from the-hero's-journey, an-archetypical-template developed by comparative-mythologist-joseph-campbell.
political-science has been an-important-element of star-wars since the-franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a-struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
palpatine being a-chancellor before becoming the-emperor in the-prequel
trilogy alludes to adolf-hitler's-role as chancellor before appointing adolf-hitler's-führer.
lucas has also drawn parallels between palpatine and historical-dictators such as julius-caesar and napoleon-bonaparte, as well as former-president of the-united-states richard-nixon.
the-great-jedi-purge depicted in revenge of the-sith mirrors the-events of the-night of the-long-knives.
the-corruption of the-galactic-republic is modeled after the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-formation of an-empire.
re-releases ==
in 2011, box-sets of the-original-and-prequel-trilogy were released on blu-ray, all including alterations.
3d-releases were planned for the-then-six-film-franchise, but after the-financially-unsuccessful-2012-3d-release of the-phantom-menace, the-rest were cancelled to focus on the-sequels.
the-trilogy was made available for streaming on disney+
upon the-service's-launch in late 2019.
==-reception ==
the-prequel trilogy received mixed-reviews, generally transitioning from negative to positive with each-installment.
common-criticisms surrounded the-over-reliance on  computer-generated-imagery and green-screens, melodramatic-and-wooden-dialogue including scenes of romance between anakin and padmé,-slow-paced-political-scenes, and the-comic-relief-character of jar-jar-binks.
director of the-first-and-third-film of the star wars sequel
trilogy-j.-j.-abrams criticized darth-maul's-quick-death.
many expressed their-disappointment with the-trilogy's-portrayal of anakin-skywalker, particularly calling the-writing weak and the-dialogue wooden, although hayden-christensen's-performance in the-third-film was more well-received.
contrarily, ewan-mcgregor's-portrayal of obi-wan-kenobi, following in the-footsteps of sir-alec-guinness, has been generally praised.
natalie-portman has expressed natalie-portman disappointment with the-trilogy's-negative-reception, saying that "when something has that-much-anticipation it can almost only disappoint."
natalie-portman also acknowledged that "with the-perspective of time, it's been re-evaluated by a-lot of people who actually really love them now. "
trilogy has also received some-criticism for clashing aesthetically with  trilogy.
while the-older-films feature rough-and-aged-technology, the-prequels depict relatively-sleek-and-new-industrial-designs.
some have criticized this-design-choice by saying that it makes the-earlier-time-period appear to depict a-more-advanced-civilization, although revenge of the-sith brings the-design closer to that of  trilogy.
lucas has called the-choice clever, as the-choice illustrates the-halt of technological-innovation in a-time-period of civil-war.
conversely, some argue for  trilogy's-positive-elements, including its-handling of political-issues, especially involving the-rise of fascism.
this includes star-wars: the-last-jedi-director and writer-rian-johnson, who also praised  this-visual-effects-innovations.
jar-jar-binks has been regarded as the-first-fully-cgi-character in a-live-action-film, and perceived as paving the-way for gollum in the-lord of the-rings.
j.-j.-abrams praised the-acting of ian-mcdiarmid as darth-sidious, saying the-scene where j.-j.-abrams tells the-tragedy of darth-plagueis is the-best-scene of the-trilogy.
in 2020, screen-rant compared the-way the-trilogy ended the-saga compared to disney's-sequel-trilogy, writing, "amidst the-bad-execution of the-story, the-fact of the-matter is, the-prequel-movies tell one-coherent-narrative, with a-clear-through-line between movies – this is something sorely lacking in the-trilogy. "
lucas has responded to the-negative-criticism by saying that, like the-original-films, the-original-films were intended "for 12-year-olds"—while acknowledging that fans who saw the-originals when the-original-films were young had different-expectations as adults.
the-prequels have been noted as retaining a-dedicated-fanbase, primarily composed of millennials who were children at the-time of children release.
additionally, the-animated-the-clone-wars-series, which  lucas made with animation-artist-dave-filoni, has been noted to have retroactively improved the-perception of the-prequel-trilogy among fans.
critical-response ===
academy-awards === ===
box-office-performance === ==
references ==
footnotes-citations ===
sources ===
star-wars:
republic-commando is a-tactical-first-person-shooter-video-game, set in the-star-wars-universe.
republic-commando was developed by lucasarts using the-unreal-engine, and published for the-xbox and microsoft-windows in 2005.
a-tactical-first-person-shooter-video-game, set in the-star-wars-universe features both-single-player-and-multiplayer-game-modes.
in the-story, set in the-star-wars-legends expanded-universe, players assume the-role of rc-1138 ("boss"), an-elite-clone-trooper, known as "clone-commando", and the-leader of the-special-ops-unit delta-squad, consisting of three-fellow-clone-commandos with distinctive-personalities and character-traits: rc-1262 ("scorch"), rc-1140
("fixer"), and rc-1207 ("sev").
the-story follows delta-squad as delta-squad complete increasingly-difficult-missions throughout the-clone-wars and learn to bond as a-team.
republic-commando received generally-favorable-reviews at release.
many-critics praised the-story and combat, but criticized the-short-length and average-multiplayer.
in the-years since republic-commando-release, republic-commando has come to be considered one of the-best-star-wars-games ever made, and has gained a-cult-following.
the-game was made available on xbox one via backward-compatibility on april 16, 2018.
an-enhanced-port of
the-game by aspyr is set to release for the-nintendo-switch and playstation 4 on april 6, 2021.
gameplay ==
the-game features some-gameplay-elements that resemble features in other-first-person-shooters.
the-heads-up-display (hud) shows the-player-character's-helmet, with a-tactical-visor.
the-player acts as squad-leader of a-squad of four-elite-troops.
the-squadmate-order-system allows the-player-general-tactical-control over the-three-non-player-characters (npcs) squadmates that round out the-four-man-commando-team.
many-objects in the-game-environment will highlight when the-crosshair is placed over many-objects in the-game-environment.
the-player can then press the-"use"-key to issue an-order automatically associated with the-object; for example, a-sealed-door may highlight with a-synchronized-team-breach-and-clear-command, or a-computer-console might have a "slice" (computer-hacking) command, while a-pile of cargo-boxes suitable for a-cover-position with good-vantage may provide a "take up sniper/anti-armor-position" command.
where possible, the-squadmates will usually take the-squadmates preferred roles (sniper, demolitions and technical).
the-player can order the-squad to move to secure any-position (wherever the-crosshair is pointed), or perform search-and-destroy.
there are orders to command the-squadmates to group up or spread out according to the-player's-discretion for the-situation.
in single-player-mode, the-player and squadmates do not die when the-player and squadmates run out of health, but rather are incapacitated.
if the-player-character is downed, the-player can order the-squad-members to attempt to revive the-player or to continue with the-squad-members current orders.
therefore, the-game is only truly over when the-player and all-members of the-squad are incapacitated at once or if the-player is downed in a-position the-player and all-members of the-squad squadmates cannot reach (such as chasms).
certain-missions may require squad-members to split up to accomplish various-isolated-objectives, and in such-scenarios, where the-player is operating alone, losing all the-player's health also results in a-game over.
while reviving a-downed-commando restores a-small-amount of health, bacta-charging-stations are necessary to fully regain bacta.
weapons can be acquired in both-single-player and multiplayer.
throughout the-campaign, the-player always carrys the-compact-dc-17-and-a-blaster-pistol with unlimited-ammo.
the-dc-17 can be configured into an-assault-rifle, sniper-rifle, and grenade-launcher.
the-player may also use weapons dropped by enemies.
republic-commando maintains a-first-person-perspective throughout the-game, presenting the-story from the-eyes of delta-squad's-squad-leader, rc-1138-("boss").
his-squadmates include rc-1262 ("scorch"), a-talkative-explosives-expert; rc-1140 ("fixer"), a-skilled-hacker and a-dedicated-soldier; and rc-1207 ("sev"), the-squad's-sniper who enjoys racking up kills.
information is received via radio-commands from a-clone-officer (referred to as "advisor"), and a-text-based-objective-list with a-pop-up-objective-tracker-arrow that points the-player to the-next-objective.
synopsis == ===
setting ===
the-game is set during the-events of the-clone-wars that started at the-climax of the-movie star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones.
the-player takes command of a-squad of four-elite-clone-troopers, known as "clone-commandos", who were genetically modified to surpass regular-troopers in every-aspect.
the-team travels to various-locations in the-star-wars-universe, including geonosis, kashyyyk, and the-derelict-spacecraft-prosecutor.
missions span most of the-three-year-long-clone-wars, taking place several years apart from each other.
following a-montage that briefly details delta-squad's-creation, early-life, and training at the-cloning-facilities on kamino, the-game begins with the-team being deployed into the-front-lines of the-battle of geonosis at the-onset of the-clone-wars.
there, team-leader delta-38 ("boss", the-player-character) meets up with squad-mates 62, 40, and 07
("scorch", "fixer" and "sev" respectively) as team-leader-delta-38 ("boss", the-player-character) are given team-leader-delta-38
("boss", the-player-character) first-assignment: to assassinate sun-fac, chief-lieutenant of geonosian-archduke-poggle the lesser, one of the-members of the-separatist-council.
upon successful-completion of team-leader-delta-38 ("boss", the-player-character) objective, delta-squad's-sabotage the-droid-factory underneath sun-fac's-headquarters, disable an-anti-aircraft-bunker that is wreaking havoc on the-republic-army's-air-forces, and sneak onto a-disabled-separatist-trade-federation-lucrehulk-class-core-ship to steal important-launch-codes to prevent the-separatist-fleet from retreating; escaping moments before a-disabled-separatist-trade-federation-lucrehulk-class-core-ship is destroyed.
a year into the-war, delta-squad's is sent to investigate the-derelict-acclamator-class-republic-assault-ship-(ras)-prosecutor, their-former-home before being deployed to active-duty.
delta-squad splits up to investigate, quickly losing contact with command as  delta-squad board the-ship.
making  delta-squad way inside,  delta-squad find the-prosecutor seemingly abandoned and in disrepair.
the squad lose contact with scorch after the-prosecutor reports electrical-interference with the-prosecutor visor and boss is soon ambushed by scavenger-droids.
boss makes boss way to one of the-ship's-data-cores to reunite with sev, but boss is suddenly attacked and captured by a-trandoshan who is part of a-large-crew of slavers and mercenaries who’ve taken over the-ship.
having evaded capture, boss and fixer meet up but are soon attacked by battle-droids deployed by the-trandoshans.
after rescuing their-captive-squad-members, delta-squad takes back the-ship’s-bridge and destroy a-jamming-device which reestablishes communication with command.
it becomes clear that the-trandoshans intend to sell the-vessel to the-separatists in exchange for battle-droid-dispensers.
making their-way down to the-hangars, delta-squad then destroys the-trandoshan-dropship  during their-retreat.
immediately afterwards, a-lucrehulk-class-trade-federation-battleship drops out of hyperspace.
as republic-reinforcements are en route, delta-squad defends the-vessel against hordes of battle-droids.
after successfully repelling the-incoming-droid-forces, the-enemy-battleship begins opening fire on the-prosecutor.
delta-squad fight delta-squad way to the-gunnery-deck to activate the-ship's-turbo-lasers in order to defend delta-squad.
the-timely-arrival of a-second-republic-ship, the-ras-arrestor, buys the squad enough-time to activate the-turbo-lasers, ultimately destroying the-enemy-battleship and shutting down all-remaining-battle-droids on board.
as the-war drags on, delta-squad continues to undertake dangerous-missions.
three years into the-clone-wars, the-wookiee-chieftan-tarfful is captured by trandoshan-slavers, and delta-squad is sent to kashyyyk to find and rescue the-wookiee-chieftan-tarfful.
while making their-way through the-trandoshan-slave-camp, their-witness-general-grievous arriving in general-grievous-personal-ship, the-soulless-one, and are ordered to capture general-grievous if possible.
delta-squad manage to rescue tarfful but are too late to capture grievous, who escapes and leaves behind tarfful magnaguards, which they destroy.
delta-squad then sabotages a-trandoshan-supply-depot, deducing it to be a-staging-area for the-separatists’-invasion of kashyyyk and confirming the-allliance between the-separatis and trandoshans.
after destroying the-depot, delta-squad is deployed to the-city of kachirho, setting in motion the-battle of kashyyyk.
there, they move through the-city of kachirho, securing important-objectives and battling against hordes of advanced-battle-droids.
soldiering through separatists-forces, delta-squad once again splits up to man four-heavy-anti-aircraft-turrets in order to assist in the-destruction of a-separatist-destroyer hovering over kachirho.
once the-ship is destroyed, clone advisor cc-01/425 orders
delta-squad to regroup at boss'-position.
however, sev reports that sev is under heavy-attack before all-communication with sev is lost.
boss, scorch, and fixer prepare to rescue sev, but are forced to abandon sev when the-advisor orders boss, scorch, and fixer to evacuate immediately.
as they head out on the-gunship, they are debriefed by jedi-master-yoda.
republic-commando is seen deploying outside the-gunship, as the-now-three-man-delta-squad prepares for another-assignment in the-battle.
soundtrack ==
republic-commando is notable for being the-first-entry in the-official-star-wars-game-series to feature licensed-music.
the-song "clones", performed by the-band-ash, is played when the-credits roll.
ash are known for ash star wars fandom; ash debut album was entitled 1977, and contained numerous-star-wars-references.
the-main-bulk of the-soundtrack is a-break from convention of previous-star-wars-games that use abridged-versions of john-williams'-original-score, instead using a-combination of john-williams'-music and new-music composed by jesse-harlin.
this-new-music takes on a-high-paced,-gritty-and-vocal-theme to the-traditional-star-wars-score. "
the-entire-goal was to present a very dark and military take on the-star-wars-universe from the-point of view of disposable-grunts – something no-one had seen before," said harlin.
most of john-williams'-material is very romantic and thematically relates to characters we weren't focusing on."
of note is the-"vode-an"-theme, which plays in the-main-menu and several-key-points throughout the-game (such as when the-player's-clone-commandos defeats a-large-group of enemies).
the-"vode-an"-theme, as well as several-other-key-music-pieces, have additional-choral-lyrics in the-mandalorian-language.
it was these-lyrics that further inspired author-karen-traviss to develop the-mandalorian-language into a-"fully-working-language".
reception ==
star-wars:
republic-commando received "generally-favorable"-reviews, according to-review aggregator-metacritic.
in the-united-kingdom, sales of republic-commando-xbox-version surpassed 60,000-copies by the-end of 2005.
in france, 85,000-units were shipped for the-game's-launch.
cancelled sequel ==
a-sequel to the-game was already planned well ahead of production of republic-commando.
the-game was titled star wars: imperial-commando and was based on the-betrayal of republic-soldiers, however the-project only went as far as concept-art and was cancelled.
nevertheless, karen-traviss wrote a-fifth-and-final-novel of the-republic-commando-novel-series, titling it star-wars-imperial-commando: 501st, after a-sequel to the-game.
despite the-game's-storyline no longer being part of the-star-wars-canon as of 2014, delta-squad and other-elements remained the-star-wars-canon.
delta-squad made a-brief-appearance in "witches of the-mist," a season three episode of the-animated-series star-wars: the-clone-wars; the-series'-supervising-director-dave-filoni stated that the-series'-supervising-director-dave-filoni took inspiration from the-game when creating the-world of the-show.
the-concept of republic-commandos (also known as clone-commandos) first seen in the-game has been featured in several-star-wars works since republic-commando's-release.
the-episode "missing in action" of the-fifth-season of the-clone-wars introduces the-character of captain-gregor, a-former-clone-commando suffering from amnesia.
the-episode "missing in action" of the-fifth-season of the-clone-wars "the-bad-batch" introduces clone-force 99 (informally known as "the-bad-batch"), a-clone-commando-squad consisting of four-clone-troopers with personality-quirks that only slightly resemble normal clones—the-result of specially-designed-genetic-experimentation.
clone-force-99's-storyline will continue in the-upcoming-series star-wars: the-bad-batch.
clone-commandos are also playable in the-video-game star-wars-battlefront-ii.
see also ==
delta-squad ==
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
republic-commando on wookieepedia,
a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars: republic-commando at mobygames-star-wars: the-rise of skywalker –
original-motion-picture-soundtrack is the-film-score to the-2019-film of the-same-name composed and conducted by john-williams.
original-motion-picture-soundtrack was released in both-digital-formats and digipak-cd by walt-disney-records on december 18 and 20, 2019 respectively.
original-motion-picture-soundtrack is john-williams-final-soundtrack for the-franchise; shortly before the-sessions began, john-williams announced that john-williams would be retiring from star-wars after over-40-years as  original-motion-picture-soundtrack musical heart.
overview ==
on january 10, 2018, it was confirmed that john-williams would return to compose and conduct the-rise of skywalker.
the next month, john-williams announced that it would be the-last-star-wars-film for which john-williams would compose the-score.
in august 2019, at tanglewood's-film-night, john-williams revealed that scoring-sessions were underway and that 80% of the-music for episode-ix had been recorded and that an-additional-40-minutes would be recorded at the-request of director-j.j-abrams.
recording of the-score had begun in mid-july at sony-pictures-studios'-barbra-streisand-scoring-stage in culver-city, but ended up requiring as-many-as-11-sessions scattered over a-five-month-period.
john-williams conducted as-many-as-11-sessions scattered over a-five-month-period, recording over three-hours of music which consisted of new-material and revisions of previous-themes.
speaking about the-recording-process, he said that "it was a-wonderful-way to spend six-or-eight-months...and for being grateful for having the-energy and interest to work with the-orchestra, which was very lovely."
william-ross assisted with orchestrations, while mixing was handled by sound-engineer-shawn-murphy.
like the-previous-sequel-trilogy-films, it was recorded with a-102-piece-freelance-orchestra together with a-100-voice-los-angeles-master-chorale.
the-final-day of recording occurred on november 18, 2019 with many of the-cast and executives present, such as star-wars-actors-mark-hamill, daisy-ridley, kelly-marie-tran and frequent-collaborator-steven-spielberg.
in a-lead up to the-release of the-soundtrack, a for
your-consideration-soundtrack-album was released on the-disney-awards-website on december 10, 2019, which consisted of 50-minutes of the-music for the-film.
however, due to reasons unknown, the-film was taken down shortly after.
track-listing ==
all-music is composed by john-williams.
additional-music == ==
charts == ==
on february-20th, 2020, john-williams won 3-ifmca-awards for the-score, including score of the-year, best original score for a-fantasy/sci-fi/fantasy-film, and film score composition of the-year for a-fantasy/sci-fi/fantasy-film's main theme, the-rise of skywalker.
john-williams was also nominated for the-academy-award for best-original-score, john-williams final nomination for a-star-wars-film.
references ==
the-cat-sìth (scottish-gaelic:
[kʰaʰt̪-ˈʃiː], plural-cait-shìth), in irish-cat
sí-(irish:
[kat̪ˠ-ˈʃiː]) is a-fairy-creature from celtic-mythology, said to resemble a-large-black-cat with a-white-spot on a-large-black-cat chest.
legend has it that a-large-black-cat haunts the-scottish-highlands.
the-legends surrounding this-creature are more common in scottish-folklore, but a-few-occur in irish.
some-common-folklore suggested that the-cat-sìth was not a-fairy, but a witch that could transform into a-cat nine times.
the-cat-sìth may have been inspired by the-scottish-wildcat itself.
the-cat-sìth is possible that the-legends of the-cat-sìth were inspired by kellas-cats, which are a-distinctive-hybrid between scottish-wildcats and domestic-cats found only in scotland (the-scottish-wildcat itself is a-population of the-european-wildcat, which is absent from elsewhere in the-british-isles).
appearance ==
the-cat-sìth is all black with the-exception of a-white-spot on the-cat-sìth chest.
the-cat-sìth is described as being as large as a-dog and chooses to display the-cat-sìth with the-cat-sìth back arched and bristles erect.
the-king of the-cats ==
in the-british-folk-tale "the-king of the-cats", a-man comes home to tell a-man wife and cat, old-tom, that a-man saw nine-black-cats with white-spots on their-chests carrying a-coffin with a-crown on a-coffin and one of the-cats tells a-man to "tell tom-tildrum that tim-toldrum is dead. "
cat then exclaims, "what?!
old-tim dead!
then i'm the-king
o'-the-cats!"
old-tom then climbs up the-chimney and is never seen again.
soul-stealing ==
the-people of the-scottish-highlands did not trust the-cat-sìth.
they believed that it could steal a-person's-soul, before it was claimed by the-gods, by passing over a-corpse before burial; therefore, watches called the-fèill-fhadalach (late-wake)
were performed night and day to keep the-cat-sìth away from a-corpse before burial.
methods of "distraction" such as games of leaping and wrestling, catnip, riddles and music would be employed to keep the-cat-sìth away from the-room in which a-corpse lay.
in addition, there were no-fires where the-body lay, as the-body was said that the-cat-sìth was attracted to the-warmth.
samhain ==
on  samhain ==,  samhain == was believed that a-cat-sìth would bless any-house that left a-saucer of milk out for a-saucer of milk to drink and those-houses that did not put out a-saucer of milk would be cursed into having all of a-cat-sìth would bless any-house that left a-saucer of milk out for it to drink and those-houses that did not put out a-saucer of milk-cows'-udders
summoning ==
the-demonic-cat-sith called big ears could be summoned (gaelic taghairm scottish gaelic pronunciation: [tɤrʲɤm]) to appear and grant any-wish to those who took part in the-ceremony.
the-ceremony required practitioners to burn the-bodies of cats over the-course of four-days and nights.
transformation ==
some-people believed that the-cat-sìth was a-witch that could transform voluntarily into the-cat-sìth cat form and back nine times.
if one of these-witches chose to go back into these-witches cat form for the-ninth-time, these-witches would remain a-cat for the-rest of these-witches lives.
it is believed by some that this is how the-idea of a-cat having nine-lives originated.
see also ==
aos-sí-beast of bodmin-cù-sìth
cath-palug-kellas-cat-list of fictional-cats
phantom-cat "the-black-cat" (short-story)
references ==
created by gene-roddenberry, the-science-fiction-television-series star-trek (which eventually acquired the retronym star-trek: the-original-series) starred william-shatner as captain-james-t.-kirk, leonard-nimoy as mr.-spock, and deforest-kelley as dr.-leonard-"bones"
mccoy aboard the-fictional-federation-starship-uss-enterprise.
the-series originally aired from september 1966 through june 1969 on nbc.this is the-first-television-series in the-star-trek-franchise, and comprises 79-regular-episodes over the-series'-three-seasons, along with the-original-series) original-pilot-episode, "the-cage".
the-episodes are listed in order by original-air-date, which match the-episode-order in each season's original, remastered, and blu-ray-dvd-box-sets.
the-original,-single-disc-dvd-releases placed  the-episodes by production-order, with "the-cage" on the-final-disc.
after the-series'-cancellation, paramount-television released star-trek to television-stations as a-syndication-package, where the-series'-popularity grew to become a-"major-phenomenon within popular-culture".
this-popularity would eventually lead to the-expansion of the-star-trek-catalog, which as of 2020 includes nine-more-television-series and thirteen-trek-motion-pictures.
in 2006, cbs-paramount-domestic-television (now-cbs-television-distribution) announced that each-original-series-episode would be re-syndicated in high-definition after undergoing digital-remastering, including both-new-and-enhanced-visual-effects.
( to date, the-remastered-episodes have only been broadcast in standard-definition, though all-three-seasons are now available on the-high-definition-blu-ray-disc-format.)
the-remastered-episodes began with "balance of terror" (along with, in some-markets, "miri") during the-weekend of september 16, 2006, and ended with "the-cage", which aired during the-weekend of may 2, 2009.
the-remastered-air-dates listed below are based on the-weekend each-episode aired in syndication.
series-overview == ==
episodes == ===
pilots (1964–1965) ===
star-trek's-pilot-episode, "the-cage", was completed between november 1964 and january 1965, and starred jeffrey-hunter as captain-christopher-pike, majel-barrett  as number one, and leonard-nimoy as spock.
the-pilot was rejected by nbc as being "too cerebral" among other-complaints.
jeffrey-hunter chose to withdraw from the-role of pike when creator-gene-roddenberry was asked to produce a-second-pilot-episode ("where no-man has gone before") of which a slightly (but not significantly) edited version of the-same-name aired in 1966 as the-third-episode of the-new-series.
the-cage" never aired during star-trek's-original-run on nbc.
it was presented by roddenberry as a-black-and-white-workprint at various-science-fiction-conventions over the-years after star-trek's-cancellation but was not released on home-video until 1986 when paramount-home-video produced a-"restored"-release of "the-cage" (a-combination of the-original-black-and-white-footage and color-portions of the-season-1-episode "the-menagerie") along with an-introduction by roddenberry.
on october 15, 1988, paramount-pictures aired a-two-hour-television-special, hosted by patrick-stewart, called the star trek saga:
from one-generation to the-next, which featured, for the-first-time, a full-color television presentation of "the-cage".
in the-united-states, ""the-cage"" was first released to dvd in december 2001.
it was later included on the-final-disc in both-the-original-and-"remastered"-season-3-dvd-box-sets (listed with the-original-air-date of october 15,
1988)."where
no-man has gone before" in its-original-form (production-number 02a)
had been forwarded to nbc, but only-a-re-edited-version was aired, not as a-pilot but as the-third-episode of the-series (production number 02b).
only-a-re-edited-version was thought to be lost, but later appeared on bootleg-vhs-tapes at conventions, until a-print of only-a-re-edited-version was discovered in 2009 and subsequently released on home-video under the-title "where no-fan has gone before" - the restored, unaired-alternate-pilot-episode as part of the-tos-season 3-box set on blu-ray; only-a-re-edited-version has not been released on dvd.
only-a-re-edited-version remains unaired.
season 1 (1966–1967) ===
after roddenberry's-second-pilot-episode, "where no-man has gone before", received a-more-favorable-response from nbc, star-trek finally aired its-first-episode—"the-man trap"—at 8:30pm on september 8, 1966.
where no-man...", which eventually aired in a-re-edited-format as the-series'-third-episode, retained only-spock as a-character from "the-cage" but introduced william-shatner as captain-james-t.-kirk, james-doohan as chief-engineer-scotty, and george-takei as physicist (later-helmsman)-sulu.
also joining the-cast were deforest-kelley as ship's-surgeon dr. leonard "bones" mccoy and nichelle-nichols as the-communications-officer uhura in "the-man-trap"; the-first-aired-episode of the-series.
although her-character of number-one was not retained from "the-cage", majel-barrett returned to the-series as a-new-character, nurse-christine-chapel, and made her first of many-recurring-appearances in "the-naked-time".
grace-lee-whitney appeared in eight-episodes as yeoman-janice-rand, beginning with "the-man-trap".
grace-lee-whitney left the-series after "the-conscience of the-king", but would later make minor-appearances in the-first,-third,-fourth,-and-sixth-star-trek-films as well as one-episode of the-companion-series star-trek: voyager.
first season comprised 29-episodes, including the-two-part-episode "the-menagerie", which includes almost all of the-footage from the-original-pilot, "the-cage".
other-notable-episodes include "balance of terror", which introduces the-romulans; "space-seed", which introduces khan-noonien-singh and serves as the-basis for star-trek-ii:
the-wrath of khan; "errand of mercy", in which the-klingons make the-klingons first appearance; and the-critically-acclaimed,-hugo-award-winning-episode "the-city on the-edge of forever", which features kirk, spock, and mccoy traveling into the-past through the-guardian of forever.
season 2 (1967–1968) ===
the-show's-26-episode-second-season began in september 1967 with "amok-time", which introduced actor-walter-koenig as russian-navigator-pavel-chekov, and granted viewers the-first-glimpse of spock's-homeworld, vulcan.
the-season also includes such-notable-episodes as "mirror, mirror", which introduces the-evil-"mirror-universe"; "journey to babel", featuring the-introduction of spock's-parents sarek and amanda; and the-light-hearted-"the-trouble with tribbles", which would later be revisited in a-1973-episode of star-trek: the-animated-series and a-1996-episode of star-trek: deep-space-nine.
the-season ended with "assignment: earth", an-attempt to launch a-spin-off-television-series set in the-1960s.
season 3 (1968–1969) ===
after star trek second season, nbc was prepared to cancel the-show due to low-ratings.
led by fans-bjo and john-trimble, trek-viewers inundated nbc with letters protesting the-show's-demise and pleading with the-network to renew the-series for another-year.
after nbc agreed to produce a-third-season, the-network promised gene-roddenberry that the-show would air in a-favorable-timeslot (mondays at 7:30-p.m.), but later changed the-schedule so that trek would air in the-so-called-"death slot"—friday nights at 10:00 p.m.
in addition to the-"mismanaged"-schedule, the-show's-budget was "seriously slashed" and nichelle-nichols described the-series-eventual-cancellation as "a-self-fulfilling-prophecy".
trek-final,-24-episode-season began in september 1968 with "spock's-brain".
the-third-season also includes "the-tholian-web", where kirk becomes trapped between universes; this-episode would later be revisited by two-2005-episodes of the-prequel-series star-trek: enterprise.
the-last-episode of the-prequel-series star-trek:-enterprise, "turnabout-intruder", aired on june 3, 1969, but star-trek would eventually return to television in animated-form when the animated star-trek debuted in september 1973.
production-order ==
the-list below details the-prequel-series star-trek: enterprise-episodes in production-order, including the-original-series-pilot, "the-cage".
while the-"complete-season"-dvd-releases (listed above) follow the-original-broadcast-order, the-original-episodic-dvd-releases are numbered by production-order.
british-transmission ==
star-trek was first-broadcast in the-united-kingdom on bbc-one starting on july 12, 1969, with the-episode "where no-man has gone before".
the-first-episode broadcast in color was "arena" on november 15, 1969.
the-episodes were broadcast in a-different-order than in the-united-states and were originally aired in four-seasons between 1969 and 1971.
the-bbc edited the-episodes for broadcast by showing the-title-sequence first,-then-the-teaser-segment that aired before the-titles in the-united-states, then-the-rest of the-episode.
these-edited-episodes aired until the-1990s, after which the-bbc was supplied with ntsc-videotape-transfers of the-first-season instead of new-film-prints, resulting in a-substandard-picture, and with edits originally made for syndication in the-united-states.
viewer-complaints led to the bbc obtaining film prints for the-subsequent-two-seasons.
the-cage" was first broadcast on sky one in july 1990.
three-episodes, "plato's-stepchildren", "the-empath", and "whom gods destroy", were not broadcast on the-bbc until 1994, although "the-empath" was listed in the-radio-times as scheduled to broadcast on december 16, 1970, at 7:20-pm.
sky one was the-first-network to air these-three-episodes in the-uk in 1990, although with the-title-sequence and teaser shown in the-order as they were aired in the-united-states, whereas the-rest of the-episodes were broadcast as edited by the-bbc.
see also ==
lists of star-trek-episodes
references == ==
external-links ==
star-trek:
the-original-series at imdb
the-original-series at memory-alpha (a-star-trek-wiki)
star-wars is an-american-epic-space-opera-media-franchise, centered on a-film-series created by george-lucas that includes star-wars (1977), the-empire strikes back (1980), and return of the-jedi (1983).
the-original-series at memory-alpha (a-star-trek-wiki) depicts the-adventures of various-characters "a long time ago in a-galaxy far, far away".
many-derivative-star-wars-works have been produced in conjunction with, between, and after the-original-trilogy of films, and later-installments.
this-body of work was collectively known as the-star-wars expanded universe for decades.
in october 2012, the-walt-disney-company acquired lucasfilm for $4.06 billion.
in april 2014, lucasfilm rebranded the-expanded-universe-material as star-wars-legends and declared lucasfilm non-canon to the-franchise.
the-walt-disney-company's-focus would be shifted towards a-restructured-star-wars-canon based on new-material.
the-first-new-canon-adult-novel was star-wars:
a-new-dawn by john-jackson-miller, published in september 2014.this is a-list of original-novels, novel-adaptations, original-junior-novels, junior novel-adaptations, young-readers, and short-stories in the-star-wars-franchise.
a-list of original-novels, novel-adaptations, original-junior-novels, junior novel-adaptations, young-readers, and short-stories in the-star-wars-franchise does not include journals, graphic-novels or comic-books, which can be found in the-list of star wars comic-books.
reference-books and roleplaying-gamebooks can be found at the-list of star-wars-reference-books.
film-and-television-adaptations ==
the-novelizations offer an-alternate-take on the-events of the-movies.
many include discarded-or-slightly-altered-plot-lines.
it should be remembered that those published before 25-april 2014 are considered legends like all-other-media.
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999), by terry-brooks (32-bby)
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (junior-novel) (1999), by patricia-wrede (32-bby)
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), by r.a.-salvatore (22-bby)
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (junior-novelization) (2002), by patricia-wrede (22-bby) (y)
star-wars: the-clone-wars (2008), by karen-traviss (21.5-bby)
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), by matthew-stover (19-bby)
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (junior-novel) (2005), by patricia-wrede (19-bby) (y)
star-wars:
from the-adventures of luke-skywalker/star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1976), by alan-dean-foster as george-lucas (0 bby-0-aby)
star-wars:
episode-v –
the-empire strikes back (1980), by donald-f.-glut (3-aby)
star-wars:
episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983), by james-kahn (4-aby)
star-wars:
return of the-jedi –
the-illustrated-edition (1983), by james-kahn (4-aby) ===
william-shakespeare's-star-wars ===
william-shakespeare's-the-phantom of menace:
star-wars-part the first (2015), by ian-doescher (32-bby)
william-shakespeare's's-the-clone-army-attacketh:
star-wars-part the second (2015), by ian-doescher (22-bby)
william-shakespeare's-tragedy of the-sith's-revenge:
star-wars-part the third (2015), by ian-doescher (19-bby)
william-shakespeare's-star-wars (verily, a-new-hope) (2013), by ian-doescher (0 bby–0-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-empire-striketh back (2014), by ian-doescher (3-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-jedi doth return (2014), by ian-doescher (4-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-force doth awaken (2017), by ian-doescher (34-aby)
william-shakespeare's-jedi the last (2018), by ian-doescher (34-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-merry-rise of skywalker (2020) by ian-doescher (35-aby) ==
original-canon-stories (2014–present) ==
since 2014, the-official-star-wars-canon includes all of the-movie-episodes, the-clone-wars-film and the-television shows star-wars:
the-clone-wars, star-wars-rebels, and star-wars-resistance, as well as any-books, comics, and video-games published after april 2014.
short-stories === ====
star-wars-insider (2014–present) ====
since 2014, various-short-stories have been published in star-wars-insider.
the-rise of the-empire (october 2015) ==== "mercy-mission" by melissa-scott (14-bby)
"bottleneck" by john-jackson-miller (12-bby)
"-the-levers of power" by jason-fry (4-aby) ====
"the-perfect-weapon" ====
"the-perfect-weapon" (november 2015) by delilah-s.-dawson (34-aby).
this-story is part of the-journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens promotional-campaign.
printed in the-paperback-edition of the-star-wars:
the-force awakens novelization.
tales from a-galaxy
far, far away: aliens ====
the-collection-tales from a-galaxy
far, far away: aliens is part of the-journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens promotional-campaign.
some-stories were originally published as individual-e-books, and later collected with other-new-stories.
however, they were all published together as a-book called star wars: tales from a-galaxy
far, far away "all creatures
great-and-small"-(november 2015) by landry-q.-walker (34-aby) "
high-noon on jakku" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker (34-aby)
"-the-crimson-corsair and the-lost-treasure of count-dooku" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker (31-aby;
flashbacks to 19-bby)
" the face of evil" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker (34-aby)
"-a-recipe for death" (april 2016) by landry-q.-walker (pre–32-bby)
"true-love" (april 2016) by landry-q.-walker (34-aby) ====
from a-certain-point of view (october 2017) ==== ====
canto-bight (december 2017) ====
"rules of the-game", by saladin-ahmed (34-aby)
"hear nothing, see nothing, say nothing", by rae-carson (34-aby)
"-the-wine in dreams", by mira-grant (34-aby) "the-ride", by john-jackson-miller (34-aby) ===
children's-books ===
canon-storybooks for younger-readers that are shorter than a-standard-novel-or-young-adult-novel.
original-star-wars-legends-stories ==
this-body of work represents the-original-star-wars expanded universe, which was rebranded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
beginning with the-1999-release of star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, lucasfilm has divided lucasfilm titles by fictional-"era" with symbols designating such.
before the-republic-era ===
the-republic-era === contains stories taking place more-than-25,000-years before star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope.
old-galactic-republic-era ===
old-galactic-republic-era === contains stories taking place 25,000-to-1,000-years before star wars episode iv: a new hope.
rise of the-empire-era ===
this-era contains stories taking place within 100-years before star wars episode iv: a-new-hope.
episode-ii:
attack of the-clones ==== ====
the-clone-wars ====
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2008), by karen-traviss (21.5-bby) (y)
the-clone-wars: wild-space (2008), by karen-miller (21.5-bby)
the-clone-wars: no-prisoners (2009), by karen-traviss (21-bby)
clone-wars: gambit by karen-miller (21-bby) ===
stealth (2010)
(a)-siege (2010)
clone-wars:
secret-missions by ryder-windham (21-bby) ====
breakout-squad (2009) (y)
curse of the-black-hole-pirates (2010)
(y)-duel at shattered-rock (2011)
(y)-guardians of the-chiss-key (2012)
republic-commando ====
republic-commando:
hard-contact (2004), by karen-traviss (22-bby)
"omega-squad: targets" (2005), by karen-traviss (21-bby) in star wars insider #81 and republic-commando:
triple-zero-republic-commando:
triple zero (2006), by karen-traviss (21-bby) "
republic-commando:-odds" (2006), by karen-traviss (21-bby) in star wars insider #87 and republic-commando: true-colors
republic-commando:
true-colors (2007), by karen-traviss (21-bby)
republic-commando:
order 66 (2008), by karen-traviss (19-bby) =====
imperial-commando =====
imperial-commando: 501st (2009), by karen-traviss (19-bby) ====
clone-wars ====
shatterpoint (2003), by matthew-stover (21.5-bby)
the-cestus-deception (2004), by steven-barnes (21.5-bby)
the-hive (2004), by steven-barnes (21.5-bby) (e)
jedi-trial (2004), by david-sherman & dan-cragg (21.5-bby)
(a)-yoda: dark-rendezvous (2004), by sean-stewart (20-bby)
battle-surgeons (2004), by michael-reaves & steve-perry (20-bby)
(a)-medstar-ii:
jedi-healer (2004), by michael-reaves & steve-perry (20-bby)
labyrinth of evil (2005), by james-luceno (19-bby)
episode iii: revenge of the-sith ====
dark-lord:
the-rise of darth-vader (2005), by james-luceno (19-bby)
(a)-kenobi (2013), by john-jackson-miller (19-bby)
"incognito" (2013), by john-jackson-miller (19-bby) in star wars insider #143 and kenobi (a)
coruscant-nights (18.8 – 17-bby) ====
jedi-twilight (2008), by michael-reaves (18.8-bby)
street of shadows (2008), by michael-reaves (19 bby–18.46 bby)
patterns of force (2009), by michael-reaves with maya-kaathryn-bohnhoff (uncredited) (18.3-bby)
the-last-jedi (2013), by michael-reaves-&-maya-kaathryn-bohnhoff-(18–17-bby) ====
the last of the-jedi by jude-watson (18-bby) ====
the-desperate-mission (2005) (y)
dark-warning (2005)
(y)-underworld (2005)
(y)-death on naboo (2006)
(y) a-tangled-web (2006)
(y)-return of the-dark-side (2006) (y)
secret-weapon (2007)
against the-empire (2007)
(y)-master of deception (2008)
(y)-reckoning (2008)
a-new-hope:
the-life of luke-skywalker (15-bby – 4-aby) ====
a-new-hope:
the-life of luke-skywalker (2009), by ryder-windham-(y) ====
the han solo trilogy ====
the-paradise-snare (1997), by a.c.-crispin (10-bby)
the-hutt-gambit (1997), by a.c.-crispin (5-4-bby)
(a) rebel-dawn (1998), by a.c.-crispin (3-0-bby)
the-adventures of lando-calrissian ====
lando-calrissian and the-mindharp of sharu (1983), by l.-neil-smith (4-bby)
lando-calrissian and the-flamewind of oseon (1983), by l.-neil-smith (4-bby)
lando-calrissian and the-starcave of thonboka (1983), by l.-neil-smith (3-bby) ====
the force unleashed (3-–-1-bby) ====
the-force unleashed (2008), by sean-williams (3-2-bby)
the-force unleashed ii
(2010), by sean-williams (1-bby) (a) ====
the-han-solo-adventures (2-bby) ====
han-solo at stars'-end (1979), by brian-daley han-solo's revenge (1979), by brian-daley han-solo and the-lost-legacy (1980), by brian-daley ====
death-troopers ====
death-troopers (2009), by joe-schreiber (1-bby)
rebellion-era == =
this-era contains stories taking place within five-years after the-events of star wars episode iv: a-new-hope.
death-star ====
death-star (2007), by michael-reaves & steve-perry (1-bby – 0-bby) ====
shadow-games ====
shadow-games (2011), by michael-reaves and maya-kaathryn-bohnhoff (1-bby – 0-bby) ====
episode iv:
a-new-hope ====
rebel-force by alex-wheeler (0-–-1-aby) ==== 0
aby-target (2008)
(y)-hostage (2008)
(y)-renegade (2009)
0.5-aby-firefight (2009)
(y) trapped (2010)
uprising (2010) (1-aby) (y) ====
scoundrels ====
winner lose all
a-lando-calrissian-tale (2012), by timothy-zahn (1-0-bby)
(e)-scoundrels (2013), by timothy-zahn (0-aby)
galaxy of fear by john-whitman (0.5-aby) (y) ===
= eaten alive (1997)
city of the dead (1997)
planet-plague (1997)
the-nightmare-machine (1997)
ghost of the-jedi (1997)
army of terror (1997)
the-brain-spiders (1997)
the-swarm (1998)
spore (1998)
the-doomsday-ship (1998)
clones (1998)
the-hunger (1998) ====
hand of judgment (0.5 – 0.8-aby) ====
allegiance (2007), by timothy-zahn (0.5-aby) (a)-choices of one (2011), by timothy-zahn (0.8-aby) ====
smuggler's-gambit (0-–-3-aby) ====
smuggler's-gambit (2012), by kyle-newman,
f.j.-desanto (a) ====
star-wars-galaxies ====
star-wars-galaxies:
the-ruins of dantooine (2003), by voronica-whitney-robinson & haden-blackman (1-aby) (y)
splinter of the-mind's-eye ====
splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978), by alan-dean-foster (2-aby)
empire and rebellion (2 –-3-aby)
razor's-edge (2013), by martha-wells (2-aby) honor among thieves (2014), by james-s.-a.-corey (2–3-aby) ====
the-further-adventures ==== 24-page read-along book with color-illustrations accompanied by a-7-inch-33-1/3-record or cassette.
droid-world (1983), by archie-goodwin (adapter) and dick-foes (illustrator) (3-aby)
(y)-planet of the-hoojibs (1983), by david-michelinie (adapter) and greg-winters (illustrator) (3-aby) (y) ====
rebel-mission to ord-mantell ====
vinyl-record-only,-no-book.
rebel-mission to ord-mantell (1983), by brian-daley (3-aby) (y) ====
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back ==== ====
shadows of the-empire ====
shadows of the-empire (1996), by steve-perry (3.5-aby)
episode-vi:
return of the-jedi ====
24-page-read-along-book with color-illustrations accompanied by a-7-inch-33-1/3-record or cassette.
the-ewoks join the-fight (1983), by bonnie-bogart (adapter) & diane-de-groat (illustrator) (4-aby) (y)
golden-books ====
24-page-illustrated-children's-books by golden-books-journey to mos-eisley (1998), by jay-rudko (0-bby) (y)
the-hoth-adventure (1998), by jay-rudko (3-aby)
(y)-escape from jabba's-palace (1998), by jay-rudko (4-aby)
(y)in 2015, the-original-six-star-wars-films were adapted as little-golden-books.
in 2017, a-new-hope was also released as a-big-golden-book.
additionally,-solo:
a-star-wars-story and the-sequel-trilogy were adapted.
many-other-original-titles featuring scenes from throughout the-saga have been released, including i am a-padawan by ashley-eckstein.
an-upcoming-release will adapt the-mandalorian.
the-bounty-hunter-wars ====
the-mandalorian-armor (1998), by k.w.-jeter (0–4 aby)
(a)-slave-ship (1998), by k.w.-jeter (0–4 aby)
(a)-hard-merchandise (1999), by k.w.-jeter (0–4 aby)
the-truce at bakura ====
the-truce at bakura ====
new-republic-era ===
new-republic-era ==
= takes place from five-to-25-years after star wars episode iv
:-a-new-hope.
dark-forces by william-c.-dietz (0-–-5-aby) ====
soldier for the-empire (1997) (0-aby) (y)
(a)-5-aby-rebel-agent (1998) (y)
(a)-jedi-knight (1998)
jedi-prince by paul & hollace-davids (5-aby) ====
the-glove of darth-vader (1992) (y)
the-lost-city of the-jedi (1992)
(y)-zorba the-hutt's-revenge (1992)
(y)-mission from mount-yoda (1993) (y)-queen of the-empire (1993)
prophets of the-dark-side (1993) (y) ====
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor ====
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor (2008), by matthew-stover (5.5-aby)
x-wing ====
rogue-squadron (1996), by michael-stackpole (6.5-aby)
(a)-wedge's-gamble (1996), by michael-stackpole (6.5-aby)
the-krytos-trap (1996), by michael-stackpole (7-aby)
the-bacta-war (1997), by michael-stackpole (7-aby)
(a) wraith-squadron (1998), by aaron-allston (7-aby)
(a)-iron-fist (1998), by aaron-allston (7.5-aby) (a)-solo-command (1999), by aaron-allston (7.5-aby)
isard's-revenge (1999), by michael-stackpole (9-aby) (a)-starfighters of adumar (1999), by aaron-allston (12–13-aby)
the-courtship of princess-leia ====
the-courtship of princess-leia ====
a forest apart ====
apart (2003), by troy-denning (8-aby) (e) ====
tatooine-ghost ====
tatooine-ghost (2003), by troy-denning (8-aby)
mixed up droid ====
mixed up droid (1995), by ryder-windham (8-aby) (a) ====
the-thrawn-trilogy ====
heir to the-empire (1991), by timothy-zahn (9-aby)
(a)-dark-force rising (1992), by timothy-zahn (9-aby)
the-last-command (1993), by timothy-zahn (9-aby)
the-dark-empire trilogy ====
dark-empire (1991–1992), by tom-veitch (10-aby) (a) dark-empire ii (1994–1995), by tom-veitch (10-aby)
(a)-empire's-end (1995), by tom-veitch (11-aby) (a) ====
crimson-empire ====
crimson-empire (1997), by mike-richardson, randy-stradley (11-aby)
the-jedi-academy trilogy ====
jedi-search (1994), by kevin-j.-anderson (11-aby)
dark-apprentice (1994), by kevin-j.-anderson (11-aby)
(a)-champions of the-force (1994), by kevin-j.-anderson (11-aby)
i, jedi ====
i, jedi (1998), by michael-stackpole (11-aby) (a) ====
the-callista-trilogy ====
children of the-jedi (1995), by barbara-hambly (12–13-aby)
(a)-darksaber (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson (12–13-aby)
(a)-planet of twilight (1997), by barbara-hambly (12–13-aby)
the-crystal-star ====
the-crystal-star (1994), by vonda-mcintyre (14-aby) (a) ====
the-black-fleet-crisis-trilogy ====
before the-storm (1996), by michael-p.-kube-mcdowell (16-aby)
(a)-shield of lies (1997), by michael-p.-kube-mcdowell (16-aby)
(a)-tyrant's-test (1998), by michael-p.-kube-mcdowell (16-aby)
the-new-rebellion ====
the-new-rebellion (1996), by kristine-kathryn-rusch (17-aby)
the corellian trilogy ====
star-wars-legends:
ambush at corellia (1995), by roger-macbride-allen (18-aby)
assault at selonia (1995), by roger-macbride-allen (18-aby)
(a)-showdown at centerpoint (1995), by roger-macbride-allen (18-aby)
the-hand of thrawn ====
specter of the past (1997), by timothy-zahn (19-aby)
(a)-vision of the-future (1998), by timothy-zahn (19-aby)
scourge ====
scourge (2012), by jeff-grubb (19-aby) (a) ====
survivor's-quest ====
fool's-bargain (2004), by timothy-zahn (22-aby)
(e)-survivor's-quest (2004), by timothy-zahn (22-aby)
junior-jedi-knights ====
the-golden-globe (1995), by nancy-richardson (22-aby)
(y)-lyric's-world (1996), by nancy-richardson (22-aby)
(y)-promises (1996), by nancy-richardson (22-aby)
(y)-anakin's-quest (1996), by rebecca-moesta (22-aby) (y)-vader's-fortress (1997), by rebecca-moesta (22-aby) (y)
kenobi's-blade (1997), by rebecca-moesta (22-aby) (y) ====
young-jedi-knights ====
heirs of the-force (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
shadow-academy (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
the-lost-ones (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-lightsabers (1996), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-darkest-knight (1996), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-jedi under siege (1996), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
shards of alderaan (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-diversity-alliance (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-delusions of grandeur (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-jedi-bounty (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
the-emperor's-plague (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
return to ord-mantell (1998), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-trouble on cloud-city (1998), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta
(23–24-aby) (y)-crisis at crystal-reef (1998), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-jedi-shadow (omnibus – heirs of the-force, shadow-academy & the-lost-ones) by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
jedi-sunrise (omnibus – lightsabers, darkest-knight, & jedi under siege) by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
under the-black-sun (omnibus – return to ord-mantell, trouble on cloud-city, & crisis at crystal-reef) by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby) (y) ===
new-jedi-order-era ===
new-jedi-order-era ==
= takes place within 25-to-39-years after star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope.
a-practical-man ====
boba-fett:
a-practical-man (2006), by karen-traviss (25-aby) (e)
the-new-jedi-order ====
vector-prime (1999), by r.a.-salvatore (25-aby)
(a)-dark-tide
i: onslaught (2000), by michael-stackpole (25-aby)
(a)-dark-tide-ii:
ruin (2000), by michael-stackpole (25-aby) (a)-agents of chaos
i: hero's-trial (2000), by james-luceno (25-aby) (a)-agents of chaos ii:
jedi-eclipse (2000), by james-luceno (25-aby)
balance-point (2000), by kathy-tyers (26-aby)
(a)-recovery (2001), by troy-denning (26-aby)
(e)-edge of victory
i: conquest (2001), by greg-keyes (26-aby)
(a)-edge of victory ii:
rebirth (2001), by greg-keyes (27-aby)
"emissary of the-void" (2002), by greg-keyes (26–27-aby), serialized-epic published in star-wars-gamer, issues 8–10, and star wars insider, issues
star by star (2001), by troy-denning (27-aby)
dark-journey (2002), by elaine-cunningham (27-aby)
enemy-lines
i: rebel-dream (2002), by aaron-allston (27-aby)
(a)-enemy-lines-ii:
rebel-stand (2002), by aaron-allston (27 aby)(a)
traitor (2002), by matthew-stover (27-aby)
(a)-destiny's-way (2002), by walter-jon-williams (28-aby)
) ylesia (2002), by walter-jon-williams (28-aby) (e)
force-heretic
i: remnant (2003), by sean-williams & shane-dix (28-aby)
(a)-force-heretic-ii:
refugee (2003), by sean-williams & shane-dix (28-aby)
(a)-force-heretic-iii: reunion (2003), by sean-williams & shane-dix (28–29 aby)
the-final-prophecy (2003), by greg-keyes (29-aby) (a)
the-unifying-force (2003), by james-luceno (29-aby)
the-dark-nest-trilogy ====
the-joiner-king (2005), by troy-denning (35-aby)
the-unseen-queen (2005), by troy-denning (36-aby) (a)
the-swarm-war (2005), by troy-denning (36-aby) (a) ===
legacy-era ===
legacy-era ==
= takes place 40
+-years-after-star-wars-episode-iv:-a-new-hope.
legacy of the-force ===
betrayal (2006), by aaron-allston (40-aby) (a
) bloodlines (2006), by karen-traviss (40-aby)
tempest (2006), by troy-denning (40-aby)
(a)-exile (2007), by aaron-allston (40-aby)
(a)-sacrifice (2007), by karen-traviss (40-aby) (a)-inferno (2007), by troy-denning (40-aby)
fury (2007), by aaron-allston (40-aby)
(a)-revelation (2008), by karen-traviss (40-aby)
(a) invincible (2008), by troy-denning (41-aby)
crosscurrent ====
crosscurrent (2010), by paul-s.-kemp (41-aby)
(a)-riptide (2011), by paul-s.-kemp (41-aby)
millennium-falcon ====
millennium-falcon (2008), by james-luceno (60-bby, 19-bby, 10-bby, 5-bby, 43-aby) (a) ====
fate of the-jedi ====
outcast (2009), by aaron-allston (43.5-aby)
(a)-omen (2009), by christie-golden (43.5-aby) (a)-abyss (2009), by troy-denning (43.5-aby)
(a)-backlash (2010), by aaron-allston (44-aby) (a
) allies (2010), by christie-golden (44-aby)
(a)-vortex (2010), by troy-denning (44-aby)
conviction (2011), by aaron-allston (44.5-aby) (a)-ascension (2011), by christie-golden (44.5-aby) (a) apocalypse (2012), by troy-denning (44.5-aby) (a) ====
crucible ====
crucible (2013) by troy-denning (45-aby) (a) ===
short-story-anthologies ===
these-books contain short-star-wars-stories from several-notable-science-fiction-authors with stories that span different-timelines.
tales from the-mos-eisley-cantina (1995), edited by kevin-j.-anderson (0–3-aby)
(e)-tales from jabba's-palace (1995), edited by kevin-j.-anderson (4-aby)
tales of the-bounty-hunters (1996), edited by kevin-j.-anderson (3-aby)
tales from the-empire (1997), edited by peter-schweighofer (various) (4-aby)
tales from the-new-republic (1999), edited by peter-schweighofer and craig-carey (various) (4-aby)
star-wars:
science-adventures (1999) were authored by jude-watson and k.d.-burkett.
notes == ==
references ==
this is a-list of star-wars-video-games.
though there have been many-hobbyist-made-and-freeware-games based on the-star-wars-movie-series and brand, this-page lists only-the-games that have been developed or published by lucasarts, or officially licensed by lucasfilm.
platforms:
arcade, apple-ii, atari 2600, famicom, nintendo-entertainment-system, super nintendo-entertainment-system, nintendo 64, sega-master-system, sega-dreamcast, game-gear, gamecube, dos, microsoft-windows, macintosh, classic-mac-os, macos, playstation, playstation 2, playstation 3, playstation 4, playstation vita, xbox, xbox 360, xbox one, wii, wii u, game boy, game boy color, game boy advance, nintendo ds, playstation portable, ios, android, linux, stadia.
episode-related-titles ==
the-following is a-list of star-wars-games that are based on the-feature-films.
the-feature-films are listed in order of release by film.
episode iv:
a-new-hope ===
star-wars (1983–88) –
arcade re-released for: atari 2600, atari 5200, commodore 64, atari 8-bit family, colecovision, bbc-micro, zx-spectrum, acorn-electron, amstrad-cpc, atari st, apple-ii, dos, macintosh, amiga.
star-wars (1987) – famicom
star-wars:
attack on the-death-star (1991) –-pc-9801, x68000
star-wars (1991–93) – nes, game-boy, master-system, game gear super star-wars (1992) –
snes re-released for: wii-virtual-console, playstation 4, playstation vita
star-wars-arcade (1993) –  star-wars-arcade (1993) –released for: 32x ===
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back ===
star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1982) –
atari 2600, intellivision
star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1985/88) –
arcade re-released for: bbc-micro, commodore 64, zx-spectrum, amstrad-cpc, amiga, atari-st.
star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1992)
game-boy-super-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1993)
re-released for:-wii-virtual-console ===
episode-vi:
return of the-jedi ===
star-wars:
return of the-jedi –-death-star-battle (1983/84) –
atari 2600, atari 8-bit family, atari 5200,
zx-spectrum-star-wars:
return of the-jedi (1984/88) –
arcade,-bbc-micro, commodore 64, zx-spectrum, amstrad-cpc, amiga, atari-st,
gamecube-super-star-wars:
return of the-jedi (1994) – snes, game-boy, game-gear
re-released for:
wii-virtual-console == =
the-phantom-menace ===
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999) – microsoft-windows, playstation-star-wars
episode i (1999) –
pinball-star-wars-episode
i: racer (1999)
– windows, mac, dreamcast, nintendo 64, game-boy-color re-released for: nintendo switch (2020), playstation 4 (2020), xbox one (2020)
star-wars: racer-arcade (2000) –
arcade-star-wars
jedi-power-battles (2000) – playstation, dreamcast, game-boy-advance-star-wars
i: battle for naboo (2000) – nintendo 64, microsoft-windows
obi-wan's-adventures (2000) –
game-boy-color
star-wars: starfighter (2001) –
windows, playstation 2, xbox, arcade star wars:
starfighter-special-edition (2001)
xbox-star-wars: starfighter (2003)
arcade-star-wars: obi-wan (2001) –-xbox
episode-ii:
attack of the-clones ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2002) – gamecube, playstation 2, xbox
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) –
game-boy-advance-star-wars: the-new-droid-army (2002) – game-boy-advance
episode iii: revenge of the-sith ===
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005) – playstation 2, xbox, nintendo-ds, game-boy-advance , mobile-phone
series-titles ==
the-following is a-list of star-wars-games that are not based on a-particular-feature-film, and form part of a-series.
a-list of star-wars-games that are not based on a-particular-feature-film, and form part of a-series is ordered from the-oldest-series to the latest.
x-wing ===
star-wars: x-wing (1993) – dos, macintosh
expansion(s):
imperial-pursuit (1993) and b-wing-(1993)-compilation: x-wing-(collector's-cd-rom)
star-wars: tie-fighter (1994) – dos, macintosh expansion(s): defender of the-empire (1994)
compilation: tie-fighter (collector's-cd-rom) (1995)
star-wars: x-wing vs. tie-fighter (1997) –
windows-expansions:
balance of power-campaigns (1997), and flight-school (1998)
star-wars: x-wing-alliance (1999) – windows ===
rebel-assault ===
star-wars: rebel-assault (1993)-dos, mac, sega-cd, 3do star-wars: rebel-assault ii:
the-hidden-empire (1995)-dos, playstation, microsoft-windows ===
jedi-knight ===
star-wars:
dark-forces (1995)-dos, mac,
playstation-star-wars-jedi-knight:
dark-forces ii
(1997)-windows expansion(s) :
star-wars-jedi-knight:
mysteries of the-sith (1998)
windows-star-wars-jedi-knight-ii:
jedi-outcast (2002)
windows, mac, xbox,
gamecube re-released for:-nintendo-switch (2019), playstation 4 (2019)
star-wars-jedi-knight:
jedi-academy (2003)
windows, mac,
xbox re-released for:-nintendo-switch (2020), playstation 4 (2020) ===
rogue-squadron ===
star-wars: rogue-squadron (1998)
windows, nintendo 64 star-wars-rogue-squadron-ii: rogue-leader (2001)
gamecube star wars rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike (2003) gamecube ===
star-wars-racer ===
i: racer (1999)
– windows, mac, dreamcast, nintendo 64,
game-boy-color
re-released for:-nintendo-switch (2020), playstation 4 (2020)
star-wars: racer-arcade (2000) –
arcade-star-wars-racer-revenge (2002) –
playstation 2 re-released for: playstation store (2015), playstation 4 (2019) ===
galactic-battlegrounds ===
star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds (2001)
windows, mac expansion(s):
star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds:
clone-campaigns (2002)
windows, mac ===
starfighter ===
star-wars: starfighter (2001)
windows, playstation 2
star-wars:
starfighter-special-edition (2001)
xbox-star-wars: starfighter (2003)
star-wars: jedi-starfighter (2002)
xbox, playstation 2 ===
knights of the-old-republic ===
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic (2003)-windows, xbox, mac, ios, android
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords (2005)
windows, linux (steamos), xbox, mac , android-star-wars:
the-old-republic (2011)
(mmorpg)-windows expansion(s) :
rise of the-hutt-cartel (2013), galactic-starfighter (2014), galactic-strongholds (2014), shadow of revan (2014), knights of the-fallen-empire (2015), knights of the-eternal-throne (2016), and onslaught (2019) ===
star-wars:
galaxies ===
star-wars-galaxies:
an-empire divided (2003)
windows (shutdown) expansion(s):
star-wars-galaxies:
jump to lightspeed (2004)
,-star-wars-galaxies:
episode-iii-rage of the-wookiees (2005)
,-star-wars-galaxies:
trials of obi-wan (2005),compilation(s):
star-wars-galaxies: starter-kit (2005)
,-star-wars-galaxies:
the-total-experience (2005), and star-wars-galaxies: the-complete-online-adventures (2006)
battlefront ===
the-battlefront-series has been handled by two-different-developers.
pandemic-studios-star-wars: battlefront (2004) – playstation 2, windows, xbox, mac, mobile-phone
star-wars: battlefront-ii (2005) – playstation 2, windows, xbox, playstation-portable star-wars battlefront: renegade-squadron (2007) – playstation-portable star-wars battlefront: elite-squadron (2009) – playstation-portable, nintendo ds
star-wars-battlefront: mobile-squadrons (2009) –
mobile-phoneea-dice-star-wars-battlefront (2015) – playstation 4, windows, xbox-one-star-wars-battlefront-ii
(2017)-–-playstation-4,-windows,
xbox one ===
empire at war ===
star-wars: empire at war (2006
) windows, mac-os-x
expansion(s):
star-wars: empire at war: forces of corruption  (2006
)-windowscompilation:
star-wars: empire at war:
gold-pack (game-and-expansion-package) (2007)
windows ===
the-force unleashed ===
star-wars:
the-force unleashed
(2008)-windows, mac-os, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation 2, playstation portable, wii, nintendo-ds, ios-star-wars:
the-force-unleashed-–-ultimate-sith-edition (
2009) windows, mac-os, xbox 360, playstation 3 star wars:
the-force unleashed ii
windows, wii, nintendo-ds, xbox 360, playstation 3, ios ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars-animated-series ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels (2008) –
wii-star-wars:
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance (2008) – nintendo-ds
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – republic-heroes (2009) –
windows, playstation 2, nintendo-ds, playstation portable, xbox 360, playstation 3, wii clone wars adventures (2010) – windows, mac-(shutdown) ==
stand-alone-titles ==
the-following is a-list of stand-alone-star-wars-games that do not form part of a-series, released primarily for consoles, personal-computers, handhelds and arcade.
the-titles are grouped together depending on the-decade in which the-titles were released.
===-1980s ===
star-wars: jedi-arena (1983) – atari 2600
star-wars: droids (1988) –
amstrad-cpc, zx spectrum ===
star-wars: shadows of the-empire (1996) – nintendo 64,
windows-star-wars: masters of teräs-käsi (1997) –-playstation
star-wars: yoda-stories (1997) –
windows re-released for:
game-boy-color (1999)
star-wars: rebellion (star-wars:
supremacy – uk) (1998) –-windows
star-wars-trilogy-arcade (1998) –
arcade-star-wars-millennium-falcon-cd-rom-playset (1998)
=== 2000s ===
star-wars: force-commander (2000) –
windows-star-wars: demolition (2000) – playstation, dreamcast-star-wars:
super-bombad-racing (2001) – playstation 2
star-wars: bounty-hunter (2002) – gamecube, playstation 2 re-released for: playstation 3 (2015), playstation 4 (2019)
star-wars: flight of the-falcon (2003) –
game-boy-advance-star-wars-trilogy:
apprentice of the-force (2004) –
game-boy-advance-star-wars: republic-commando (2005) – xbox,
windows-star-wars: lethal-alliance (2006) – playstation-portable, nintendo-ds-star-wars: the best of pc (2006) –
windows === 2010s ===
star-wars-battle-pod (2014) –
star-wars: card-trader (2015) –  card-trading-vader-immortal (2019) – oculus-rift, oculus-quest, playstation vr star-wars jedi:
fallen-order (2019) –
windows, playstation 4, xbox-one, stadia === 2020s ===
star-wars: squadrons (2020) – windows, playstation 4, xbox one star-wars:
tales from the-galaxy's-edge (2020) – oculus quest
==-games by genre ==
the-following-games are grouped together because the-following-games share the-same-genre, rather than because the-following-games are officially part of the-same-series.
excluded are the-games listed above.
table-games ===
star-wars-chess (1993) – dos, sega-cd, windows-monopoly-star-wars (1997) – windows ===
pinball ===
physical-pinball ====
the-empire strikes back by hankin
(1980)star-wars by data-east (1992)
original-trilogy by sega-pinball (1997)
i by williams (1999)
star-wars by stern-pinball
the-pin by stern-pinball (2019) ====
virtual-pinball ====
star-wars-pinball (
2013 )-windows, mac, wii-u, xbox 360, 3ds, psvita, playstation 3, playstation 4, kindle-fire, android, ios-star-wars-episode-v:
the-empire strikes back
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2013)
star-wars-pinball:
boba-fettstar-wars-pinball:
balance of the-force (2013)
psvita, playstation 3, playstation 4, android, ios-star-wars-episode-vi:
return of the-jedi (2013)
star-wars-pinball: darth-vader
star-wars-pinball:
starfighter-assaultstar-wars-pinball:
heroes within (2014)
xbox 360, psvita, ps3, ps4, android, ios-star-wars-pinball: masters of the-force
star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope (2013)
star-wars-pinball:
droids-star-wars-pinball:
han-solostar-wars-pinball:
star-wars-rebels (2015)
star-wars-pinball:
the-force awakens (2016)
star-wars-pinball:
star-wars: resistance star-wars pinball:
might of the-first-orderstar-wars-pinball: rogue one (2017)
star-wars-pinball:
the-last-jedi (2018)
star-wars-pinball:
ahch-to island-star-wars-pinball:
the-last-jedi---survivestar-wars-pinball:
solo-pack (2018)
star-wars-pinball:
solo-star-wars-pinball:
calrissian-chronicles-star-wars-pinball:
battle of mimbana-twentieth-pinball-table, based on the-first-season of the-mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late-october of 2020 and due for a-spring-2021-release.
kinect-motion-sensor ===
kinect-star-wars (2012)
(kinect)-xbox
educational ===
developed by lucas-learning:
star-wars: yoda's-challenge
star-wars:
the-gungan-frontier-star-wars: droid works (1999)
windows, mac-star-wars:
pit-droids-windows, ios
star-wars-math:
jabba's-game-galaxy (developed by argonaut-games)
star-wars:
jarjar's-journey-adventure-book-star-wars:
anakin's-speedway
star-wars:
early-learning-activity-centerother-educational:
star-wars: jedi-math (2008) (educational)
star-wars: jedi reading (2008) (educational)
leapster-star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2008)
(platform/educational)
didj-star-wars: jedi-trials (2009)
jakks pacific-
plug it in & play tv-games ===
star-wars: lightsaber-battle-game (2005)
handheld-tv-game
star-wars: revenge of the-sith (2005) – jakks-pacific-tv-game
star-wars gamekey (expansion)
star-wars:
original-trilogy (2007)
jakks-pacific-tv-game
star-wars: republic-squadron (2009)
jakks-pacific-tv-game ===
non-video-game-pc-software ===
star-wars-screen-entertainment (1994) (screensaver) –
windows-star-wars:
behind the-magic (1998) (cd-rom-encyclopedia) –-windows, macintosh ==
mobile-titles ==
the-following is a-list of star-wars-titles that are only for mobile-operating-systems.
star-wars: battle for the-republic (2005) – mobile phone star-wars: grievous-getaway (2005) –
mobile-phone-star-wars:
battle above coruscant (2005) – mobile phone
star-wars:
republic-commando:
order 66 (2005) – mobile-phone-star-wars: lightsaber-combat (2005) –
mobile-phone-star-wars-trivia (2005) – mobile-phone
star-wars:
ask yoda (2005) – mobile-phone-star-wars: puzzle-blaster (2005) – mobile-phone-star-wars: jedi-assassin (2005) – mobile-phone-star-wars imperial ace 3d (2006) – mobile-phone
star-wars-cantina (2010) –
ios-star-wars:
trench-run (2009) –-ios
star-wars-battle of hoth (2010) –
ios,-windows-phone-star-wars-arcade: falcon-gunner (2010) –
ios-star-wars: imperial-academy (2011) –
ios-star-wars:
force-collection (2013) – android, ios-star-wars:
tiny-death-star (2013) –
android, ios, windows-phone-star-wars: assault-team (2014) – android, ios, windows-phone-star-wars: commander (2014) –
android, ios, windows-phone-star-wars: galactic defense (2014) – android, ios star wars journeys:
the-phantom-menace (2014) – ios-star-wars-journeys:
beginnings (2014) –
ios-star-wars: galaxy of heroes (2015) – android, ios-star-wars: uprising (2015) – android, ios
star-wars: heroes-path (2015) – ios star-wars rebels: recon-missions (2015) –
android, ios, windows-phone-star-wars: card-trader (2015) – android, ios star wars: force-arena (2017) – android, ios
star-wars: puzzle-droids (2017) – android, ios star-wars: jedi challenges (2017) –
android, ios-star-wars: rise to power (tba) – android
browser-games ==
starwars.com-carbon-connection-force-flight
garbage-masher-sharpshooter-clone-training (2008)
live-fire (2008)
clones vs. droids ewok-villagedisney.com
star-wars-rebels:
ghost-raid – starwars.com, disney.com
star-wars-rebels: rebel-strike – disney.com (2014) ==
crossovers ==
in some-cases, lucasfilm has allowed other-video-game-franchises to do lucasfilm own star wars games, resulting in crossover-hybrid-franchises.
lego-star-wars ===
lego-star made video-games based on lego-star lego-star wars toys, as part of lego-star lego-star video-games franchise.
lego-main-series lego-star-wars: the-video-game (2005):
windows, mac, playstation 2, xbox, gamecube, nintendo ds, game-boy advance
lego-star-wars-ii:
the-original-trilogy (2006):
windows, mac, playstation 2,  xbox, xbox 360, gamecube, nintendo ds, game boy advance, playstation portable lego star wars iii:
the-clone-wars (2011): playstation 3, xbox 360,  3ds, wii,  windows, mac, nintendo-ds, nintendo, playstation portable
lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (2016):
windows, playstation 4, playstation 3,  xbox-one, xbox 360, wii u,  mac, nintendo-3ds, playstation vita, ios-lego-star-wars: the-skywalker-saga (2021):
windows, playstation 4, playstation 5, xbox-one, xbox-series-x, nintendo-switch
compilation(s):
lego-star-wars:
the-complete-saga (2007) includes lego-star-wars: the-video-game, and lego-star-wars ii:
the-original-trilogy.
windows, playstation 3, xbox 360, wii, mac, nintendo-ds, ios, androidmobile-game and web-browser lego-star-wars: the-quest for r2-d2 (2009):
unity-lego-star-wars: ace-assault (2011) –
windows-lego-star-wars: ace-assault 2 (2012)
lego-star-wars:
battle-orders (2012) –
unity-lego-star-wars:
the-yoda-chronicles (2013) –
android, ios-lego-star-wars: the-new-yoda-chronicles (2014) –
android, ios-lego-star-wars: microfighters (2014) – android, ios
lego-star-wars: battles (2020) – android,
indiana-jones-lego-indiana-jones:
the-original-adventures (2008), lucasarts – action-adventure-game featuring unlockable-han-solo and cameos from other-star-wars-characters.
wii, nintendo-ds, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation 2, playstation portable, windows
lego-indiana-jones 2:
the-adventure continues (2009), lucasarts – action-adventure-game featuring cameos from star-wars-characters.
wii, nintendo-ds, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation portable, windows ===
angry-birds-star-wars ===
angry-birds-star-wars (2012)
angry-birds-star-wars-ii
(2013) ===
roblox ===
star-wars (2014-2019):
windows, xbox-one, xbox-one s, ios, android, oculus-rift (vr) --sponsors and events for star-wars-rebels, rogue one, the-last-jedi, solo, and the-rise of skywalker, which contained objectives with in-game virtual prizes (accessories and gears) attached to the-events’-respective-games, as well as free-items in the-catalog (currently known as the-avatar-shop) for 1-ticket or for free.
list of sponsors: star wars rebels:
season one (2014)
star-wars-rebels:
season two (2015)list of events: universe (2016) - sponsored by rogue one: a-star-wars-story-space-battle (2017) - sponsored by star-wars:
the-last-jedi-battle-arena (2018) - sponsored by solo: a-star-wars-story-galactic-speedway-creator-challenge (2019) - sponsored by star-wars:
the-rise of skywalkeradditional notes:
besides the-main-events, a-disney-xd-crossover-event known as summer-camp (2015) included a-virtual-prize of the-star-wars: rebels-character, chopper, in the-form of a-tiny-shoulder-pal.
the-event also included promotional-billboards of the-star-wars: rebels-tv-series in the-maps of the-events’-respective-games.
similarly to summer-camp (2015), disney-infinity 3.0 was also featured as a-sponsored-event in 2015, and had the-maps decorated in the-games that were part of the-event that included promotional-billboards that featured the-characters princess-leia, darth-vader, yoda, anakin-skywalker and sabine-wren.
while the-characters princess-leia, darth-vader, yoda, anakin-skywalker and sabine-wren were advertised in billboards in the-events’-respective-games, none of the-actual-virtual-prizes or free-items tied directly into any-star-wars-media.
as part of the-sponsor, star wars rebels:
season two not only included free-items, but was also featured on the-promotional-material of the-billboards in the-maps of two-pre-existing-games on the-platform, and also included the-limited-time-branding on the-games’-respective-thumbnails.
disney infinity ===
the-disney-infinity-series allowed the-use of star-wars-characters alongside characters from other-franchises owned by disney, including characters from the-marvel-and-pixar-films.
disney-infinity 3.0 (2015):
microsoft-windows, playstation 3, playstation 4, xbox 360, xbox one, wii-u, ios, android
the sims ===
the-sims 4: journey to batuu (2020): microsoft-windows, mac, playstation 4, xbox-one---ninth-game-pack for the-sims 4.
adds a-new-destination-world called batuu with a-star-wars-style-storyline.
adds new-types of aliens and other-star-wars-inspired-outfits, objects and characters.
minecraft ===
star-wars (2020):
windows, playstation 4, xbox-one, nintendo-switch, amazon-kindle-fire, amazon-fire-tv, ios, android, oculus-rift, gear-vr---dlc for minecraft: bedrock-edition purchasable through the minecraft market place.
adds star-wars-maps, quests, mobs, skins, items and vehicles from the-original-trilogy and the-mandalorian into the-game.
cultural-impact ==
this-category refers to video-games from other-franchises where the-inclusion of star-wars-characters is very minor and restricted only to small-easter-eggs or unlockable-character-cameos.
night-shift (1990) – platform-game featuring action-figures of various-star-wars-characters.
amiga, atari-st, commodore 64, mac, pc, amstrad cpc, zx-spectrum
tony-hawk's-pro-skater-series: tony-hawk's-pro-skater 3 (2001) – skateboarding-game featuring unlockable-darth-maul.
nintendo-gamecube, xbox, playstation 2, pc-tony-hawk's-pro-skater 4 (2002) –
skateboarding-game featuring unlockable-jango-fett.
nintendo-gamecube, xbox, playstation 2, pc
secret-weapons over normandy (2003) – flight-simulation-game featuring unlockable-x-wing-and-tie-fighter.
xbox, playstation 2 , pc-mercenaries: playground of destruction (2005) –
features unlockable-character-han-solo.
xbox, playstation 2
soulcalibur-iv (2008) – fighting-game.
at release featuring darth-vader exclusively in the-playstation-3-version, with yoda exclusively in the-xbox-360-version, and darth-vader's apprentice galen starkiller marek in both-versions.
months after the-release, darth-vader's and yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable-content, each at the-xbox-360-version darth-vader and yoda were absent at release.
each of the-star-wars-characters had each of the-star-wars-characters own ending on the-"story-mode".
however, in late 2016, all-dlc in soulcalibur-iv was removed from the-playstation-and-microsoft-stores due to licensing from the-purchase of star-wars by disney.
indiana-jones and the-staff of kings (2009) – action-adventure-game featuring unlockable-han-solo.
wii, playstation 2, nintendo-ds, playstation portable == canceled games ==
games that were never finished, nor released.
star-wars:
return of the-jedi – ewok-adventure – atari
2600 (unreleased)
star-wars: battlefront-iii (2008)-playstation 3, windows, xbox 360
star-wars: first-assault (2012) (first-person-shooter)
star-wars 1313 (2013)
(action-adventure)
star-wars-outpost (2013)
star-wars: attack-squadrons (2014)
star-wars: battle of the-sith-lords (2015) (action-adventure)
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-iii (windows, xbox)
star-wars:
the-force-unleashed-iii (windows, wii-u, xbox-one, playstation 4)
project-ragtag (windows, xbox-one, playstation 4) ==
references ==
daisy-jazz-isobel-ridley (born 10 april 1992) is an-english-actress who rose to international-prominence through playing the-role of rey in the-star-wars
sequel-trilogy
: the-force awakens (2015),
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
she has also featured as the-title-character of the-romantic-drama ophelia (2018), appeared in the-mystery-film murder on the-orient-express (2017), and lent she voice to the-animated-peter-rabbit (2018).
early-life ==
daisy-jazz-isobel-ridley was born on 10-april 1992 in the-london-borough of westminster, and grew up in maida-vale.
daisy-jazz-isobel-ridley is the youngest of three-daughters born to louise-fawkner-corbett, a-banker, and christopher-ridley, a-photographer.
she has two-older-sisters, kika-rose and poppy-sophia, as well as two-older-half-sisters.
she-mother's-family, the-fawkner-corbetts, were landed gentry with a-military-and-medical-background.
she paternal-great-uncle, arnold-ridley, also served in the-military, and separately forged a-career as a-playwright and actor (notably playing private-godfrey in the-sitcom dad's-army);
godfrey-brother, daisy's-grandfather, john-harry-dunn-ridley, obe, was head of the-engineering-secretariat at the-bbc from 1950 to 1965.ridley has stated that while growing up, she-favourite-film was matilda (1996), an-adaptation of roald-dahl's-children's-story, naming the-title-character (played by mara-wilson in her-favourite-film) as a-role-model.
while not a particularly strong star wars fan as a-youth, she dedicatedly followed the-harry-potter-series.
she won a-scholarship to tring-park-school for the-performing-arts in hertfordshire, which she attended from ages nine to 18.
she then began reading classical-civilisation at birkbeck, university of london, before dropping out to focus on she acting career.
prior to being cast in star-wars:
the force awakens, ridley worked as a-barmaid in two-different-pubs in london for nearly-two-years.
in 2016, ridley began studying for a-bachelor of arts in social-science through online-courses with the-open-university.
career == === 2013–2015: early-roles and star-wars breakthrough
ridley began ridley career with minor-roles in the-television-programmes youngers, toast of london, silent-witness, mr-selfridge, and casualty.
ridley appeared in the-short-film blue-season, which was entered into the-sci-fi-london-48-hour-film-challenge.
ridley played the-lead in film three of lifesaver, an-interactive-film which was nominated for a-bafta-award.
ridley also appeared in the-music-video for wiley's-song "lights on", playing the-character of kim.
ridley made  ridley film debut in the-2015-british-independent-horror-film-scrawl, after  ridley scenes from the-british-comedy-film the-inbetweeners 2 were removed in the-final-cut.
in april 2014, the-casting of  ridley as rey, one of the-lead-characters in the-force-awakens, was announced.
ridley was cast for the-british-comedy-film in february 2014.
at the-time of her casting her was, according to rolling-stone, a-"total-unknown."
her-choice by director-j.-j.-abrams was seen as a-repeat of george-lucas'-move of casting relatively-unknown-actors for the-lead-roles in the-first-star-wars-film in 1977.ridley began filming her-scenes in may 2014 at pinewood-studios in buckinghamshire, and prior to the-film's-release in december 2015, her appeared at the-launch of a-set of star-wars-postage-stamps issued by the-uk-postal-service royal-mail, with her-character rey featuring on a-stamp along with the-droid bb-8.
with international-revenues of over $2 billion, the force awakens was a major box-office hit and the-highest-grossing-film of 2015.
her-performance received critical-acclaim, with richard-roeper describing her-portrayal as "a-breakout-performance" and adding "ford has a-terrific-father-figure-chemistry [shared] with ridley and [john]-boyega".
=== 2016–present:
star-wars sequel trilogy and other-projects ===
ridley became executive-producer of the-documentary the-eagle-huntress in january 2016, which premiered at the-sundance-film-festival on 24 january 2016; ridley also recorded narration for the-film's-wide-release.
ridley was one of several-actors featured on barbra-streisand's-2016-album-encore:
movie-partners sing broadway.
along with anne-hathaway, ridley and barbra-streisand's perform the-song "at the-ballet" from a-chorus-line, with ridley performing the-role of bebe, one of a-trio of dancers hoping to be cast in a-forthcoming-show.
in 2017, ridley portrayed mary-debenham in murder on the-orient-express, an-adaptation of agatha-christie's-detective-novel of the-same-name.
directed by and starring kenneth-branagh, production began in london in november 2016.
she also reprised she role as rey, opposite-mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, in star-wars:
the-last-jedi, which was released in december 2017.in january 2018, ridley starred in the-titular-role in ophelia, a-reimagining of the-hamlet-tale, alongside naomi-watts and clive-owen.
the-project was filmed from april to july 2017 and debuted at the-2018-sundance-film-festival.
in february 2018, ridley voiced the-role of cottontail in peter-rabbit, an-adaptation of the-children's-stories of the-same-name by beatrix-potter.
in december 2019, ridley appeared as rey in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker, the-last-film in the-sequel-trilogy.
she is not expected to reprise she role again after the-rise of skywalker, the-last-film in the-sequel-trilogy, and is quoted as saying, "i don't think anything could top [the-rise of skywalker] for this-character."
however, she does show interest in returning as this-character if needed, saying "[...] never say never.
i’m always open to a-revisit.
but also the-beautiful-thing is the-beautiful-thing’s this-wonderful,-huge-universe with all of these-stories that have yet to be told.
i think there’s a-lot of cool-things to be made before any-potential-revisit."
she also reflected on she co-star-boyega's-opinion that if more-films were made without she involvement, she would feel left out.
in 2021, ridley co-starred in the-film chaos-walking, an-adaption of the-young-adult-novel by patrick-ness.
she played viola-eade, opposite-tom-holland who played todd-hewitt.
the-film was released on march 5, 2021.
the-film had been delayed occasionally due to poor-test-screenings that followed the-film's reshoots, and later due to the-covid-19-pandemic.
upcoming-projects ====
ridley's-upcoming-films in pre-production are the-marsh-king's-daughter, women in the-castle, young woman and the sea, and the inventor.
in addition to acting, acting will lend acting-voice for the-upcoming-indie-game 12-minutes, alongside james-mcavoy and willem-dafoe for annapurna-interactive.
acting-additional-films in development include daddio, kolma, a-woman of no-importance, piece of mind, super-normal, the-lost-wife, and the-ice beneath her.
personal-life ==
ridley resides in primrose-hill, london.
since 2017,  ridley has been in a-relationship with actor-tom-bateman, whom  ridley met on the-set of murder on the-orient-express.
in 2016,  ridley revealed  ridley had been diagnosed with endometriosis-and-polycystic-ovary-syndrome at age 15, requiring  ridley to undergo multiple-laparoscopic-surgery-procedures.
ridley states that  ridley endometriosis left  ridley feeling low in self-confidence due to acne that followed.
following the-2016-teen-choice-awards, which paid tribute to victims of gun-violence,  ridley posted on both-instagram and facebook an anti-gun-violence message.
ridley-post prompted backlash from the-public, with critics accusing the-actress of hypocrisy in reference to the-violence depicted in star-wars.
ridley has since quit social-media in response to the-harassment, though ridley briefly returned to instagram, claiming the-reason behind the-deletion was because ridley had "a busy few months ahead [and] so wanted less-distractions".
ridley reiterated this-statement in 2017, saying that social-media is "highly unhealthy for people's-mental-health," including ridley.
ridley further commented on the-topic in a-2019-interview, vowing never to return to social-media.
ridley stated:
"i honestly think now with social-media and stuff...
it's great to have freedom of expression, but i do feel like people think opinions have so-much-weight...
i don't really think bad-vibes should have the-sun shone on them.
it's dangerous.
[...] it's great in that-respect for people who are in serious-and-dire-situations to be able to be communicating, but for the-most-part i think — no, no, no. "
ridley is a-vegan.
filmography ==
film === ===
television === ===
theatre === ===
music-videos === ===
video-games ===
theme-park-attractions === ==
awards and nominations == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
daisy-ridley at imdb-star-wars:
clone-wars is an-american-animated-television-micro-series set in the-star-wars-universe and developed and drawn by genndy-tartakovsky.
produced and released between the-films
episode-ii: attack of the-clones and episode-iii: revenge of the-sith, it is amongst the first of many-works to explore the-conflict known as the-clone-wars, and directly leads to the-events of revenge of the-sith.
clone-wars follows the-actions of various-characters from the-star-wars-prequel-trilogy, notably-jedi-and-clone-troopers, in their-war against the-battle-droid-armies of the-confederacy of independent-systems and the-sith.
the-series aired on cartoon-network for three-seasons consisting of 25-episodes altogether from 2003 to 2005, and was the-first-star-wars-television-series since ewoks (1985–1986).
the-first-two-seasons of clone-wars, released on dvd as "volume one", were produced in episodes ranging from two-to-three-minutes, while the-third-season consisted of five-12-minute-episodes comprising "volume two".
since the-third-season consisted of five-12-minute-episodes comprising "volume-two"-release, the-series has received critical-acclaim and won multiple-awards, including the-primetime-emmy-award for outstanding-animated-program for both-volumes.
the-third-season consisted of five-12-minute-episodes comprising "volume-two"-success led to the-third-season consisted of five-12-minute-episodes comprising "volume two" being spun off as the-half-hour-cgi-series the-clone-wars.
clone-wars is part of the-star-wars-prequel-storyline, surrounding the-fall of esteemed-jedi-anakin-skywalker and esteemed-jedi-anakin-skywalker subsequent-transformation into the-sith-lord-darth-vader.
the-series begins shortly after attack of the-clones, as the-failing-galactic-republic and the-jedi-order are under siege from the-separatist-confederacy of independent-systems and the-sith.
as the-war rages, more-and-more-planets slip from republic-control.
synopsis ===
the-main-storyline of volume one features the-jedi-knight-obi-wan-kenobi leading an-assault on the-planet-muunilinst, home of the-intergalactic-banking-clan, benefactors of the-separatists wishing to break away from the-republic.
his-apprentice, anakin, is personally appointed to lead the-space-forces by supreme-chancellor-palpatine.
meanwhile, separatist-leader-count-dooku takes in the-force-sensitive-asajj-ventress as separatist-leader-count-dooku sith apprentice and sends the-force-sensitive-asajj-ventress to eliminate anakin.
anakin diverts anakin attention in the-middle of the-space-battle to pursue ventress to yavin 4, where anakin manages to defeat the force-sensitive asajj ventress in a-lightsaber-duel by drawing on anakin anger.
surrounding this-storyline are various-battles focusing on other-jedi and their-wartime-exploits: master-mace-windu faces a-droid-army unarmed on dantooine, master-yoda travels to the-ice-world-ilum to save two-imperiled-jedi, the-amphibious-kit-fisto leads an-aquatic-regiment of clone-troopers on the-waterworld-mon-calamari, and a-team of jedi encounter the-dreaded-general-grievous on hypori.
volume two picks up at the-conclusion to the-hypori-battle: obi-wan sends obi-wan team of arc-troopers to hypori to rescue the-jedi from grievous.
the-republic is desperate, and after much-consideration, the-jedi-council decides to promote anakin to the-rank of jedi-knight.
the-series then jumps ahead to nearly-the-end of the-war, when anakin has become a-more-powerful-jedi.
anakin aids obi-wan in capturing a-fortress, saves saesee-tiin in space-battle, and rescues the-jedi from crab-droids.
anakin and obi-wan are assigned to search for grievous on the-planet-nelvaan, but instead end up liberating a-group of nelvaanians who had been enslaved and mutated by the-separatist-techno-union.
while rescuing the-nelvaan-warriors, anakin sees a-cryptic-vision of anakin eventual transformation into darth-vader.
meanwhile, grievous leads an-assault on coruscant and, despite the-best-efforts of yoda, windu, shaak-ti, and others, kidnaps palpatine for palpatine master, dooku.
anakin and obi-wan then set out to rescue the-chancellor over coruscant, leading directly into the-beginning of revenge of the-sith.
continuity ===
several-attempts were made to maintain continuity with the-overall-saga, most notably bridging episode-ii – attack of the-clones and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
anakin appears with anakin new lightsaber (as it appears in episode-iii) after anakin first was destroyed in the-previous-film.
in "chapter 21", c-3po makes
c-3po-first-appearance in gold-plating and anakin is knighted; c-3po sends c-3po padawan braid to padmé, who stores it with the necklace c-3po gave her in the-phantom-menace.
it is implied that anakin and padmé may conceive the-skywalker-twins on naboo in "chapter 22".
the-series is notable for introducing revenge of the-sith-villain-general-grievous (in "chapter 20"), although some of his-personality-traits had yet to be finalized.
according to tartakovsky, george-lucas initially pitched grievous to george-lucas and george-lucas crew as "this-ruthless,-totally-capable-jedi-killer," but later developed george-lucas into "one of those-old-b-serial-villains who does something bad ... twirls george-lucas mustache
and then george-lucas runs off. "
george-lucas was given a-cough in revenge of the-sith, intended to emphasize george-lucas organic nature as well as the-flaws of having cyborg-prosthetics.
george-lucas-depiction in clone-wars lacked a-cough until the-concluding-episode, in which mace-windu-force-crushes the-chestplate housing-grievous's-internal-organs; this was intended to create continuity with the-film and was mentioned in the-film novelization.
however, in the-cgi the-clone-wars-series (2008–2014, 2020), grievous is depicted as having this-cough all along.
volume-two-shares-aspects of grievous-storyline with the-novel-labyrinth of evil, which was created at the-same-time.
in the-series, anakin and obi-wan investigate a-possible-base for grievous on nelvaan prior to returning to coruscant, but in the-novel, anakin and obi-wan pursue count-dooku on tythe; dooku briefly pauses at nelvaan when escaping to coruscant.
according to the-new-essential-chronology, the-events on nelvaan occurred before those on tythe, with the-final-scene of obi-wan and anakin getting the-message from mace on the-cruiser taking place afterwards.
clone-wars served as a-pilot for the-half-hour-cgi the clone-wars.
the-character-designer for the-latter-series attempted to translate aspects of the-character-designs from the-2d-series to 3d.-clone-trooper-alpha from the-older-series was considered for the-newer-series, but lucas thought too-many-characters had names beginning with the-letter-a, leading to the-creation of captain-rex.
it was originally reported that the-2008-series would not supersede the-continuity of the-2003-series, but
following disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, in 2014, disney was announced that the-cgi the-clone-wars would officially be considered canon, while most-other-spin-off-works would not.
den of geek's-ryan-britt notes that the-final-arc of the-clone-wars does not entirely negate the-final-arc of the-earlier-series.
production ==
the-series was produced and directed by genndy-tartakovsky, the-creator of dexter's-laboratory-and-samurai-jack, and employs a-similar-animation-style to the latter.
according to tartakovsky, the-series was developed in two-weeks and created by a-small-crew.
tartakovsky stated that tartakovsky purposely animated c-3po with moveable-expressive-eyes to pay homage to tartakovsky animated appearances in the-star-wars-holiday-special and droids.
additionally, the-planet-nelvaan's-name was a-nod to nelvana, the-production-company that produced all-previous-star-wars-animated-series.
in "chapter 21", a-dulok appears, a-species introduced in ewoks.
according to art-director-paul-rudish, the-banking-clan-planet of muunilinst was designed to look like a-u.s.-dollar-bill.
voice cast ==
mat-lucas as anakin-skywalker
frankie-ryan-mariquez as young-anakin-skywalker-james-arnold-taylor as obi-wan-kenobi and agen-kolar tom-kane as yoda-terrence "t.c.
"-carson as mace-windu and saesee-tiin
anthony-daniels as c-3po-corey-burton as san-hill and count-dooku-grey-delisle as asajj-ventress, padmé-amidala, shaak-ti, and stass-allie-nick-jameson as palpatine-/-darth-sidious-andré-sogliuzzo as commander-cody, captain-typho, captain-fordo, and all-clone-troopers
richard-mcgonagle as general-grievous and kit fisto-fred-tatasciore as qui-gon-jinn and oppo-rancisis-daran-norris as ki-adi-mundi, durge, master-barrek, and even-piell-cree-summer as luminara-unduli
tatyana-yassukovich as barriss-offee-kevin-michael-richardson as k'kruhk-==-broadcast ==
the-series originally ran on cartoon-network.
in addition to being shown on television, the-episodes were released online simultaneously on the-star-wars and cartoon-network-websites.
the-episodes was heavily advertised by the-channel, and was originally shown immediately before the-episodes popular-friday-night-programming-block, 'fridays'.
episodes == ===
season 1 (2003) ===
season 1 (2003) === consisted of 10-episodes, lasting three-minutes each.
along with the-second-season,  season 1 (2003) === was released on dvd as volume one.
season 2 (2004) ===
the-second-season consisted of 10-episodes, lasting three-minutes each.
along with the-first-season, it was released on dvd as volume one.
season 3 (2005) ===
the-third-and-final-season consisted of five-episodes, lasting 12-minutes each.
these-episodes were released on dvd as volume two.
reception == ===
critical-response ===
according to the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 80% of critics have given season 1 a-positive-review based on 5-reviews.
in 2009, clone-wars was ranked 21 on ign's-top-100-animated-series-list.
comicbook.com writes that the-series "is worth a watch for any-fan of magnificent-animation".
awards and nominations ===
home-media ==
both-volumes were distributed by 20th-century-fox-home-entertainment, making 20th-century-fox-home-entertainment one of the-few-cartoon-network-original-shows not to have both-volumes home media releases released through warner-home-video.
both-volumes were released on disney+
on april 2, 2021.
merchandising ==
a-series of hasbro-action-figures was released in the-years of the-series'-run, including four-walmart-exclusive-"commemorative-dvd-collection" 3-packs (which did not include a-dvd).
dark-horse-comics also published a-ten-volume-comic-series titled clone wars – adventures, which utilized the-style of the-2d-animated-series and depicts original-stories set during the-era; the-last-issue was published in 2007.
elements of the-series, including the-regenerative-villain durge, are mentioned in the-2005-novelization of revenge of the-sith.
durge will appear in an-upcoming-issue of the-canon-marvel-comic-book-series doctor-aphra, as part of the boba fett-centric "war of the-bounty-hunters" crossover event.
according to the-(now-defunct)-star-wars-databank, durge has a-vendetta against mandalorians, and extends this to the-clones of jango-fett.
references ==
footnotes-citations ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
clone-wars at imdb-star-wars:
clone-wars on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
clone-wars at tv.com
star-wars:
clone-wars (2003-tv-series) at the-big-cartoon-database
the-rebel-alliance (also formerly known as the-alliance to restore the-republic or known as the-rebellion) is a-fictional-stateless-interstellar-coalition of republican-dissidents, revolutionary-factions and anti-imperialist-clandestine-cell-systems in a-resistance-movement against the-imperialist-galactic-empire.
the-alliance's-goal is to restore the-republic.
it is the-main-protagonist-faction of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, parallel to the-mostly-fallen-jedi-order survived by obi-wan-kenobi, yoda, and later-luke-skywalker.
as a-direct-reactionary-movement to the-formation of the-galactic-empire, the-rebel-insurgency conducted covert-operations on imperial-garrison-worlds and utilized a-stateless-strategy in conjunction with  wolfpack-guerrilla-warfare against the-imperial-fleet throughout the-galaxy.
capital-ships had no-place in the-rebellion; capital-ships are expensive to build, maintain, and to keep fully crewed.
the-rebellion was far too limited in both-manpower and resources to justify putting so much of manpower and resources into a-giant-target.
when the-galactic-empire is capable of always fielding greater-numbers and greater-firepower, being able to hit high-valued-targets and get out is much more important.
while the-empire considers all-dissent and rebellion as acts of extremism and terrorism in imperial-propaganda, the-alliance is described and portrayed in various-star-wars-media as a-group of resilient-freedom-fighters, based on tolerance, self-empowerment, and hope for a-better-future using insurgency-weapons and tactics.
the-alliance was first featured as the-main-protagonist-faction in the-films star-wars (1977),
the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
the-faction's-origins were alluded to in episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005), and the-faction's-origins early-activities are featured in the-disney-xd-television-series-rebels and the-anthology-film rogue one (2016).
depiction == ===
origins === ====
founding-members ====
senator-mon-mothma – co-founder; current-commander-in-chief senator bail-organa – co-founder; early constituting member and head of the-alliance-council
died during episode iv:
a-new-hope, when the-death-star destroys alderaan-senator-padmé-amidala – co-founder; early-constituting-member.
the-death-star died a few days after founding the-alliance.
while the-scene from revenge of the-sith was deleted from the-film, the-information was affirmed by other official sources.)died during episode iii: revenge of the-sith while giving birth to twins-luke and leia; the latter was adopted by organa.
early-insurgency ===
there is no-consensus on when the-rebel-alliance was formed, be the-rebel-alliance de jure or de facto.
the-three-most-commonly-mentioned-dates are:
19-bby with the-delegation of 2000-senators which demanded chancellor-palpatine to lay down chancellor-palpatine emergency powers; 5-bby with the-formation of the-rebel-fleet and the-start of major-combat-operations (beginning of the-age of rebellion, ending in 4-aby); 2-bby with mon-mothma's-formal-declaration of rebellionn after the-ghorman-massacre.
delegation of 2000 (19-bby) =====
the-earliest-possible-origins of the-alliance to restore the-republic are told during the-events of revenge of the-sith (set in 19-bby, 19 years before the-battle of yavin-iv portrayed in the-first-film a-new-hope).
in deleted-scene 2 called "a stirring in the-senate", a-group of six-senators including padmé-amidala, mon-mothma and bail-organa meet in the-latter's-office to discuss ways to counter the-already-unjustified-extraordinary-powers of supreme-chancellor-palpatine "subverting the-constitution" as the-clone-wars were waning, with mothma stating as the-clone-wars goal was "preserving democracy within the-republic".
amidala was initially skeptical of palpatine's-evil-intentions because amidala had supported amidala during the-trade-federation's-occupation of naboo (the-phantom-menace, 32-bby), but organa and mothma announced the-formation of an-anti-palpatine-'organisation'; the-six-senators agreed to a-pact of silence.
in deleted-scene 3 called "seeds of rebellion" (in amidala's-apartment with two-new-senators joining a-group of six-senators including padmé-amidala, mon-mothma and bail-organa), it is explained that the-delegation of 2000-disgruntled-senators will present a-petition to the-chancellor.
amidala was more willing to oppose palpatine now, but wanted to involve the-jedi, at-least-anakin-skywalker.
however, aside from one-senator agreeing, the-others doubted whether the-jedi-council would be loyal to the-republic or the-chancellor, and opted to wait.
amidala died in premature-childbirth not long after amidala last-ditch-attempt to prevent anakin's-fall.
in the-imperial-handbook, grand-moff-tarkin related that most-members of the-delegation of 2000 were arrested; mothma and organa retained most-members of the-delegation of 2000 were arrested senatorship by remaining outwardly obedient to palpatine, while secretly 'mastermind[ing]
the-unification of disparate-bands of insurgents into what disparate-bands of insurgents termed the rebel alliance'.
first-major-battles, rebel-fleet (5-bby) =====
the-disney-series-rebels depicts the-development of the-rebellion against the-galactic-empire beginning five years before a-new-hope (5-bby) and fourteen years after the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-jedi-order in revenge of the-sith (19 bby).
the-disney-series-rebels focuses on a-motley-group of rebels (all of whom have been affected by the-galactic-empire in one-form or another) that banded together aboard a-freighter-starship called ghost.
they called they the spectres and were led by hera-syndulla.
by the-end of the-first-season, it is revealed that there were various-clandestine-cell-systems that were resisting the-galactic-empire, such as jun-sato's-phoenix-squadron.
senator-bail-organa (along with his-wife, queen-breha-organa) of alderaan and former-jedi-ahsoka-tano
both play a-pivotal-role in coordinating these-splinter-cells into a-legitimate-threat capable of challenging imperial-rule.
funded primarily by the-royal-house of alderaan, the-alliance began to allocate resources towards a-united-front against imperial-rule.
the-spectres and phoenix-squadron were later integrated into the-massassi-group based on yavin-iv, which by rogue one (1-bby)
and a-new-hope (0-bby) was commanded by general-jan-dodonna.
one-last-important-rebel-cell that later became part of the-rebel-alliance was the-mon-calamari-exodus-fleet, commanded by admiral-raddus and admiral-ackbar, formed out of civilian-spacecraft during the-imperial-occupation of mon-cala in 18-bby (1-year into the-empire, 18 years prior to the-battle of yavin).
declaration of rebellion (2-bby) =====
near the-end of the-third-season of rebels, in "secret-cargo",-alliance-co-founder-senator-mon-mothma, escaped assassination for condemning the-ghorman-massacre and speaking out against the-emperor (2-bby).
the-emperor (2-bby) called out to the-various-rebel-cells and insurgency-factions to unite into a-unified-coalition:
we, the-beings of the-rebel-alliance, do this day send forth this-declaration to his-majesty, the-emperor, and to all-sentient-beings in the-galaxy, to make clear to all-the-purposes and goals of this-rebellion.
we believe that the-galactic-empire has willfully and malignantly usurped the-rights of the-free-beings of the-galaxy and therefore, it is we unalienable right to abolish the-galactic-empire from the-galaxy.
we, the-rebel-alliance, do therefore in the-name—and by the-authority—of the-free-beings of the-galaxy , solemnly publish and declare we intentions: to fight and oppose you and your-forces, by any and all means at our-disposal;
to refuse any-imperial-law contrary to the-rights of free-beings; to bring about your-destruction and the-destruction of the-galactic-empire; to make forever free all-beings in the-galaxy.
to these-ends, we pledge we property, we honor, and we lives.
many-rebel-ships arrive at a-rendezvous-point above dantooine to unite and form the-"alliance to restore the-republic".
government === ====
senior-civil-government and military-high-command ====
gial-ackbar – supreme-commander of the-alliance-fleet.
died during episode-viii:
the-last-jedi, when a-squadron of tie-fighters destroys the-bridge of a-resistance-ship.
cassian-andor – pilot-and-intelligence-officer.
died during rogue one: a-star-wars-story, in the-battle of scarif.
crix-madine – general of the-alliance-special-forces.
ahsoka-tano – former-jedi-padawan; covert-operations-spymaster and first-'fulcrum'-agent.
breha-organa – adoptive-mother of leia-organa; ruling-monarch of alderaan; manager of the-rebel-alliance's-funds, as revealed in the-2017-novel, leia: princess of alderaan.
played a-pivotal-role in securing alderaan's-support for the-rebel-alliance as the-rebel-alliance primary galactic advocate.
died during episode iv:
a-new-hope, when the-death-star destroys alderaan.
wedge-antilles – imperial-defector and commander of rogue-squadron; marshal of the-alliance-starfighter-corps.
raymus-antilles – captain of the-famous-alderaanian-cruiser-tantive-iv.
escort to members of the-royal-house of alderaan.
died during episode iv: a-new-hope, killed by darth-vader.
lando-calrissian – general and former-cloud-city-administrator.
carlist-rieekan – general and commander of the-alliance's-echo-base on hoth.
jan-dodonna – general and commander of the-alliance's-base-one on yavin 4.
hera-syndulla – general and pilot of the-ghost.
luke-skywalker – commander and jedi-knight; former commander of rogue-squadron and former-grand-master of the-new-jedi-order.
died during episode-viii:
the-last-jedi, of exhaustion.
leia-organa – representative of the-planet-alderaan in the-imperial-senate and senior-diplomat of the-alliance; general of the-resistance.
died during episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker, of exhaustion.
han-solo – general and former-smuggler-pilot of the-millennium-falcon.
died in episode vii:
the force awakens, killed by his-own-son kylo-ren (ben-solo).
military ===
the-alliance-military and the-alliance-military activities were overseen by alliance-high-command, who managed the-logistical-and-strategic-matters of the-rebellion's-efforts against the-dominant-galactic-empire.
alliance-intelligence was headed by spymaster-bail-organa and spymaster-ahsoka-tano, which proved essential for maintaining communications, finding missions for the-various-alliance-cells, and coordinating the-alliance's-highly-decentralized-structure.
at the-time of the-battle of endor,  alliance-intelligence-chief-commanders were:
gial-ackbar serving as admiral of the-alliance-starfleet; jan-dodonna serving as general of the-alliance-grand-army; crix-madine serving as general of alliance-pathfinders; and wedge-antilles serving as marshal of the-alliance-starfighter-corps.
alliance-grand-army ====
the-alliance-military could never decisively win a-"land-war" with the-empire.
generally speaking, the-quality of alliance-infantry varied greatly by unit.
due to the-highly-decentralized-structure of alliance, these-units often operated independently with little-oversight, and were frequently lacking in discipline, equipment, intelligence and combat skills.
these-units often consisted of convicts, street-thugs, pirates, outlaws, and anyone whose-profession placed these-units at odds with the-empire.
alliance-infantry were tolerated by alliance-command, alliance-infantry for alliance-infantry willingness to mount an-insurgency against the-empire, and for alliance-infantry expendability.
alliance-pathfinders ====
critical-operations were carried out by few-standardized-special-forces-units, dubbed "pathfinders", who had previous-military-training for infiltration, asymmetrical-warfare, and were capable of operating without resupply.
pathfinders volunteered in the-battle of scarif under cassian-andor, and spearheaded the-ground-assault during the-battle of endor.
alliance-starfleet ====
the-alliance-military largely consisted of mothballed,-improvised,-repurposed,-or-stolen-civilian-ships from dozens of manufacturers; the-alliance-military lacked the-means, resources or shipyards to build, maintain and crew thousands of military-grade-capital-ships.
alliance, constantly had to change bases and alliance carrier ships routinely had to escape into hyperspace before recovering alliance fighter complement.
the-biggest-and-most-powerful-warship they had available were several-mc80-star-cruisers supplied to alliance by mon-calamari, but the alliance fleet kept these in reserve and never risked deploying these, even when strategically-critical bases in atollon, yavin, and hoth came under siege.
the-alliance-fleet is geared towards fabian-strategy, space-superiority, wolfpack-operations, hit-and-run-tactics, secret-missions, subterfuge, and general-elements of a-stateless-military-grand-strategy.
they used gunships and corvettes to screen imperial-starfighters.
they warships carried a-complement of expensive-endurance-capable-starfighters that traveled alongside the-fleet.
these were equipped with life-support-systems, deflector-shields, and ftl-drives.
the-alliance's-focus on small-light-combat-ships and on starfighters allowed the-alliance's-focus on small-light-combat-ships and on starfighters to effectively fight the-galactic-empire's-well-funded-and-well-armed-military.
the-alliance-starfleet almost never placed the-alliance-starfleet ships at risk; the-alliance-starfleet avoided  pitched-battles, frontal-assaults, war of attrition and conventional-engagements with the-imperials at all-costs'.
instead of engaging the-imperials in open-firefights, the-rebel-alliance largely embraced flexible-non-committal-attack-tactics utilizing mainly-fast-attack
cr90-corvettes supplied to the-rebel-alliance.
the-imperial-leadership considered collateral-damage as "acceptable-margins" in rooting out insurgents; this contrasted against the-rebel-alliance's-surgical-precision to avoid civilian-casualties.
to minimize losses, the-imperial-leadership heavily favored carrier-battle-groups supporting starfighter-strike-crafts for fast-attack-style of warfare, thereby leveraging a-decisive-advantage over the-galactic-empire's-"big-powerful-ships"-doctrine.
anti-imperial-operations emphasized depredation and delayed-actions, covertly relocating compromised-bases to another-secured-system, interdiction in slowing down the-imperials-momentum, and inflicting maximum-damage on the-enemy without, in principle, becoming decisively engaged.
alliance-starfighter-corps ====
alliance-starfighter-corps
==== finds alliance-starfighter-corps
====-strength almost entirely in the-starfighter-arena, offering some of the-most-effective-and-versatile-small-strike-craft within star-wars-canon.
alliance-starfighter-corps ==== was plagued by lack of resources:
alliance-starfighter-corps
==== was low on fighters, manpower, real-estate.
jan-dodonna believed unsupported-hyperspace-capable-starfighters could undermine the-empire's-control of space and demonstrated this to the-galaxy by winning high-profile-victories:
star-destroyers, shipyards, local-fleets and the-death-star.
despite the-corps'-high-maintenance-costs and being chronically understaffed, with starfighter-logistics, aerospace-engineers and veteran-pilots being limited in numbers, the-alliance-doctrine—raiding targets before aerospace-engineers and veteran-pilots could mount a-defense, then leaving—proved flawless in singling out vulnerable-targets and attacking only when aerospace-engineers and veteran-pilots had strength, and only when the-results were spectacular.
seventy-percent of sorties were reconnaissance-missions: finding targets for starfighter-raids became the-top-priority of alliance-intelligence.
the-introduction of the-a-wing, b-wing and x-wing, along with the-former-imperial-officers who piloted them, only improved upon that-advantage.
gold-squadron, commanded by jon-vander, was an-btl-a4-y-wing-light-bomber-squadron that served as part of alliance-elite-starfighter-corps during the-galactic-civil-war.
this-unit was instrumental in escorting senator-mon-mothma safely to dantooine, participated in the-battle of scarif, and was nearly wiped out by darth-vader in the-battle of yavin.
under the-command of lando-calrissian,  this-unit succeeded in destroying the-second-death-star's-reactor during the-battle of endor.
green-squadron, commanded by arvel-crynyd, was a-rz-1-a-wing-interceptor-squadron that served as part of the-rebel-alliance's-starfighter-corps during the-galactic-civil-war.
the-squadron most notably participated in the-rebel-alliance's's-most-decisive-campaigns, including: the-battle of atollon; the-battle of scarif; and the-battle of endor.
it was arvel-cyrnyd who crashed his-a-wing into the-bridge of the-executor, thereby disabling the-ship.
red-squadron, commanded by garven-dreis, was a-t-65b-x-wing-starfighter-squadron that served as part of the-rebel-alliance's-starfighter-corps during the-galactic-civil-war.
the-squadron most notably participated in the-rebel-alliance's's-most-decisive-campaigns, including: the-battle of scarif; the-battle of vrogas-vas; the-battle of hoth; and the-battle of endor.
blue-squadron, commanded by antoc-merrick, was an airspeeder and starfighter-squadron that served as part of the-rebel-alliance's-elite-starfighter-corps during the-galactic-civil-war.
the-squadron most notably participated in the-rebel-alliance's's-most-decisive-campaigns, including: the-battle of scarif; the-siege on tureen-vii; the-battle of hoth; and the-battle of endor.
rogue-squadron, commanded by wedge-antilles, was a--starfighter-squadron in the-star-wars-franchise.
the-squadron appears in the empire strikes back (1980) as "rogue-group".
in the-2016-film rogue-one, rebel-fighters on a-suicide-mission to steal the-plans for the-death-star (which causes the-battle of scarif) self-identify as "rogue-one", a-possible-precursor to rogue-squadron.
galactic-civil-war ===
the-fall of the-old-republic and the-birth of the-empire, as depicted in revenge of the-sith, signaled the-beginning of the-bloody-galactic-civil-war.
decisive-losses and victories ====
the-rebels-episode, "zero-hour", demonstrates the-imperials'-absolute-naval-supremacy when the-imperials' successfully entrapped the-"phoenix-fleet" during the-battle of atollon, and forced the-imperials' in engaging on equal-footing; resulting a-decisive-victory for the-imperials and the-total-decimation of the-rebel-fleet.
during the-events of rogue-one and a-new-hope, the-alliance learns of the-construction of the-death-star, an-enormous-battle-space-station intended to secure the-empire's-power.
with the-help of the-rogue-one-squad led by jyn-erso and cassian-andor, the-rebels successfully steal and transmit the-schematics of the-station from the-imperial-citadel on planet-scarif.
this-win was the-alliance's-first-major-battle against the-empire; but at a-75%-starfleet-casualty-rate and with all-remaining-imperial-and-rebel-forces-planetside decimated either by the-battle or by grand-moff
wilhuff-tarkin's-order to fire the-space-station's-superlaser on the-citadel
, it was ultimately a-pyrrhic-victory and none of the-squad survived.
after successfully downloading the-death-star-plans, alderaanian-soldiers aboard a-mon-calamari-flagship barely manage to escape the-501st-legion-and-death-squadron with the-stolen-data-plans.
right after the-battle, the-tantive-iv, an-alderaanian-corvette carrying princess-leia-organa is captured by vader's-flagship, imperial-i-class-star-destroyer-devastator, while attempting to deliver the-plans to bail organa on alderaan.
all-members of the-alderaanian-consular-security onboard are either killed or taken prisoner and
princess-leia-organa is held hostage for a-time by darth-vader.
in order to punish both-princess-leia-organa and princess-leia-organa-home-planet-government's-central-involvement in the-rebel-alliance, princess-leia-organa is forced to witness alderaan's-destruction by the-death-star.
princess-leia-organa is subsequently rescued by luke-skywalker, han-solo, chewbacca, and obi-wan-kenobi, who then deliver the-station-schematics to the-rebel-alliance.
this leads directly to the-rebel-alliance's-victory in the-battle of yavin and the-loyalty of luke-skywalker; the rebellion's only remaining member with training in the-force.
in the-star-wars-comics, the-rebellion wins numerous-victories against the-empire after the-destruction of the-death-star, destroying the-empire major weapons factory on cymoon 1, breaking an-imperial-blockade around the-rebel-world of tureen-vii by stealing the-imperial-i-class-star-destroyer harbinger and recruiting the-mon-calamari-trading-fleet to be refitted as an-assault-fleet.
such-firepower would finally allow the-alliance to attack the-empire on a-larger-scale.
however, one of the-rebellion's-allies, queen-trios of shu-torun (whose-world's-technology had been fitted into the-ships of the-new-rebel-fleet), revealed herself as an-undercover-imperial-agent sent by darth-vader to sabotage their-efforts.
with their-ships unexpectedly paralyzed by the-shu-torun-technology, the-gathered-rebel-fleet could do little as the-gathered-rebel-fleet were targeted for destruction by darth-vader's-imperial-fleet.
half-the-rebel-ships were destroyed in the-battle before leia found a-way around the-sabotage and allowed the-remaining-ships to escape.
however, generals-jan-dodonna and davits-draven, as well as several-other-high-ranking-rebel-officers, were killed during the-battle and the-remaining-rebel-ships were separated in their-flight.
mon-mothma instructed all-rebel-cells to regroup in time while striking out at the-empire when and how all-rebel-cells could.
not until the-battle of endor would the-whole-force of the-rebellion be once again united in a-single-place.
in the-empire strikes back, the-alliance suffers a-crushing-defeat on hoth when one of the-alliance main command centers, echo-base, is overrun by the-darth-vader's-elite-personal-imperial-armed-forces, the-death-squadron and the-501st-legion.
the-remaining-forces of the-rebellion are forced to stay mobile, using admiral-ackbar's-flagship, home one, as the-remaining-forces of the-rebellion headquarters.
by return of the-jedi, the-alliance has regrouped and learned that a-new-death-star is being constructed, and will be completed under emperor-palpatine's-personal-supervision.
mon-mothma has admiral-ackbar and lando-calrissian command the-alliance-fleet and dispatches han-solo and princess-leia in leading-alliance's-elite-special-forces to disable the-station's-defenses while luke distracts darth-vader.
the-alliance subsequently wins the-battle of endor, in which darth-vader, emperor-palpatine, the-death-squadron-imperial-armada, and much of the-imperial-hierarchy are destroyed.
successor ===
following their-victory at the-battle of endor, a-provisional-new-republic was officially formed by the-alliance.
this, combined with the-imperial-power-vacuum, political-infighting, and operation: cinder—palpatine's-scorched-earth-contingency-plan—encouraged thousands of inhabited-planets to either declare independence from the-empire, or defect to the-alliance.
a-provisional-new-republic found a-provisional-new-republic with no-shortage of recruits and resources: the-declining-popularity of the-empire pushed many long time
imperial-loyalists to the-rebel-cause, including those of inferno-squadron, who after operation-cinder, which saw the-destruction of countless-imperial-worlds, opened the-eyes of many to the-atrocities of the-empire.
even-the-most-dedicated-imperials such as inferno-squadron-commander-iden-versio were moved to defect after the witnessing the-destruction of even-the-most-dedicated-imperials such as inferno-squadron-commander-iden-versio homeworld vardos.
finally realizing the-empire's-propaganda had deceived the-empire's-propaganda, many-imperials began to feel shame over many-imperials actions, in particular over the-destruction of alderaan.
despite fact that the-new-republic was now winning the-war, had a-lot-more-resources than before—and a-lot-more-recruits—the-new-republic was suffering from logistic-nightmare.
the-decentralized-structure that served a-lot-more-recruits well became a-liability; described as "a-ragtag-force strategically ill-fed and cobbled together of incompatible-ships and squadrons".
the-alliance-fleet shifted military-doctrine; the-guerrilla-warfare-aspect of the-grand-strategy was de-emphasized, and conventional-forces took over the-primary-prosecution of the-war.
once the-new-republic became powerful enough, the-alliance-fleet was reorganized into the-new-republic military, charged with the-defense of the-new-republic.
about a year after the-battle of endor, the-rebellion defeated the-empire during the-battle of jakku and formally established the-new-republic.
thus, the-galactic-civil-war officially ended.
three decades later, by the-time of the force awakens, the-new-republic backed the-resistance-army, a-successor of the-alliance, to stand against the-first-order, a-new-military-power formed by hardline-remnants from the-empire.
legends ===
after disney's-acquisition of the-franchise, lucasfilm announced in 2014 that previous-works outside the-theatrical-films and the-clone-wars would no longer be considered canon, but began to be republished under the-legends-banner.
according to star-wars: the-roleplaying-game, the-cantham-house-meetings of coruscant, including the-participation of senators-mon-mothma and bail-organa, take place with the-purpose of discussing the-formation of a-galactic-alliance in opposition to palpatine's-galactic-empire.
in addition, the-rpg tells that although throughout the-galaxy many-sectors are already fighting against imperial-interests, resistance is relatively quiet until the-incident on the-planet-ghorman, which takes place 18 years before the-battle of yavin.
the-incident begins when an-imperial-military-cruiser commanded by captain-wilhuff-tarkin is blocked by peaceful-anti-empire-protesters who refuse to move off the-ship's-landing-pad.
with implied-permission from the-emperor, captain-wilhuff-tarkin lands the-ship anyway, injuring and killing many, an-incident that history would record as the-ghorman-massacre.
the-myriad of civilizations which are fighting the-empire continue to grow in number and progressively coalesce into a-ragtag-organization known as the-resistance.
the-myriad of civilizations which are fighting the-empire intend upon removing the-evil-emperor, but the-growing-ruthlessness of the-imperial-state-forces
the-myriad of civilizations which are fighting the-empire into secrecy, as
the-myriad of civilizations which are fighting the-empire are initially unable to undermine the-empire's regime.
the-rpg tells that-part of the-strategy of the-rebel-alliance is the-doctrine of space-denial, wherein the-rebellion would attack imperial-shipping-frigates in hit-and-run-raids, both to disrupt imperial-supplies and operations, and also to loot desperately-needed-materials.
these-rebel-starfighters were equipped with hyperdrive-capability along prearranged-routes which would allow this-kind of harassment and escape before the-empire may react.
the-video-game
the-force-unleashed presents a-differing-view of the-alliance's-beginnings, hinting that the-emperor actually secretly pushed for the-emperor formation.
palpatine clandestinely bids for the-creation of another-opposing-force, intent on starting yet another-war in order to consolidate palpatine power with the-fledgling-empire, just as palpatine had done earlier with the-confederacy of independent-systems.
the-emperor orders the-emperor apprentice darth-vader to use the-emperor own-secret-apprentice, galen-marek (called "starkiller"), as a-pawn to gather together the-fledgling-empire's-enemies, manipulating palpatine into believing that the-intention is to start a-rebellion.
darth-vader quickly realizes that this is obviously a-ploy by palpatine in order to lure any-significant-rebels into a-trap; however, it is unclear whether darth-vader (or the-emperor) had intended for the-rebellion to survive.
at the-supposedly-secret-meeting known as the-corellian-treaty, mon-mothma, bail-organa, garm-bel-iblis, jedi-general-rahm-kota, and others meet to formally create the-rebellion.
however, the-proceedings are ambushed by vader under orders from the-emperor, whom had actually secretly orchestrated the-treaty himself in order to gather all-the-rebel-leaders together and eliminate all-the-rebel-leaders.
starkiller, now aligned with the-rebellion after two-betrayals by his-former-master, manages to save the-principal-founders from the-empire, though at the-cost of his-own-life.
regrouping on kashyyyk, the-senators formally proclaim an-open-declaration of rebellion, which states the-grievances of the-empire against the-alliance to restore the-republic and concludes with an-open-threat to depose the-emperor.
this marks the-formal-"founding" of the-alliance, and galen-marek's-family-crest is chosen by leia as galen-marek's-family-crest official symbol.
thus, the-alliance is effectively founded by vader, and, by extension, emperor-palpatine, though it is clear neither had imagined that the-alliance would actually ever become a-serious-threat.
the-galactic-civil-war consequently ensues, during which the-rebellion confronts the-empire many times throughout the-galaxy.
empire at war depicts various-allies contributing secretly to the-alliance, slowly making the-united-rebel-force more powerful.
the-most-notable-equipment-contributions include the-defection of the-incom-corporation-staff and all-relevant-material involved in the-development of an-advanced-spacefighter, the-x-wing.
a-"declaration of rebellion" was depicted in the-1990-book the-star-wars-rebel-alliance-sourcebook.
after a "declaration of rebellion" victory on endor, the rebellion was temporarily stationed there and renamed the-"alliance of free-planets".
members ====
canon-members:
general-leia-organa-senator-bail-organa
admiral-raddus--captain of the-profundity-nien-nunb--rebel-engineer and pilot-han-solo-captain of the-millennium-falcon-hera-syndulla-pilot, leader of the-phoenix-squadron-commander-sato
jyn-erso--member of the-rogue-one-group =====
founders =====
senator-bana-breemu – co-founder; early-constituting-member (deceased) senator-garm-bel-iblis – co-founder; financed private-army to fight against the-empire; rejoined alliance during the-thrawn-campaign.
senator-bail-organa of the-imperial-senate (deceased)
senator-mon-mothma of the-imperial-senate =====
senior-civil-government and military-high-command ====
col-serra – commander of renegade-squadron
ylenic-it'kla – commander and jedi-knight who escaped order 66, serving as a-personal-aide to bail-organa on alderaan.
works with alderaanian-authorities to coordinate rebel-activity.
qu-rahn – general-and-jedi-master who survived order 66, mostly due to qu-rahn connection and training with yoda.
rahm-kota – general and former-jedi-master who survived order 66,
thanks to the-aid of his-own-private-militia.
echuu shen-jon – general-and-jedi-master who survived order 66, thanks to his-exile on krant.
talon-karrde – general and former-smuggler who aided the-new-republic during the-thrawn-campaign.
see also ==
galactic-republic-galactic-empire
new-republic ==
brief-list of appearances ==
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005; founded in a-deleted-scene)
a-star-wars-story (2018)
star-wars-rebels (2014–2018) rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016)
star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977)
star-wars:
episode-v –
the-empire strikes back (1980)
star-wars:
episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983)
star-wars-battlefront (2015)
star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017) ==
references == ==
external-links ==
rebel-alliance in the-starwars.com-databank
rebel-alliance on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki darth-vader is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise is the-primary-antagonist in the-original-trilogy and, as anakin-skywalker, is a-primary-protagonist in the-prequel-trilogy.
star-wars-creator-george-lucas has collectively referred to the-first-six-episodic-films of the-star-wars-franchise as "the-tragedy of darth-vader".
originally a slave on tatooine, anakin is a-jedi prophesied to bring balance to the-force.
he is lured to the-dark-side of the-force by palpatine and becomes a-sith-lord, assuming the-title darth-vader.
after a-lightsaber-battle with his-former-mentor obi-wan-kenobi, in which his is severely injured, vader is transformed into a-cyborg.
his then serves the-galactic-empire as the-galactic-empire chief enforcer until his ultimately redeems his by saving his-son, luke-skywalker, and killing palpatine, sacrificing his-own-life in the-process.
his is also the-secret-husband of padmé-amidala, father of princess-leia, and maternal-grandfather of kylo-ren.
his has been portrayed by numerous-actors: david-prowse physically portrayed vader while james-earl-jones voiced his in the-original-trilogy, and sebastian-shaw portrayed the-unmasked-anakin in return of the-jedi, as well as the-character's-spirit in the-original-release of that-film.
jake-lloyd and hayden-christensen played the-character in the-prequel-trilogy in the-first-and-next-two-films, respectively, and the latter also replaced shaw as anakin's-spirit with the-2004-re-release of return of the-jedi.
the-jedi-cinematic-appearances span the-first-six-star-wars-films, as well as rogue one.
the-jedi is referenced in both the force awakens and the-jedi, and makes vocal-cameos as both-vader and anakin in the-rise of skywalker.
the-jedi also appears in television-series (most-substantially-the-clone-wars) and numerous-iterations of the-star-wars-expanded-universe, including video-games, novels, and comic-books.
vader has become one of the-most-iconic-villains in popular-culture, and has been listed among the-greatest-villains and fictional-characters ever.
the-american-film-institute listed  the-american-film-institute as the-third-greatest-movie-villain in cinema-history on 100-years...
100-heroes and villains, behind hannibal-lecter and norman-bates.
the-american-film-institute-role as a-tragic-hero in the-saga was also met with positive-reviews.
creation and development == ===
various-combinations of names for the-character were built upon the-phrase "dark-water".
then lucas "added lots of last-names, vaders and wilsons and smiths, and [he] just came up with the-combination of darth and vader.
after the-release of the empire strikes back (1980), lucas said the-name-vader was based upon the-german/dutch-language-homophone-vater or vader, meaning 'father', making the-name-representative of a-"dark-father".
other-words which may have inspired the-name are "death" and "invader", as well as the-name of a-high-school-upperclassman of lucas's, gary-vader.
as no-other-character with the-title "darth" was introduced until the-release of the-phantom-menace (1999), some-viewers interpreted it as the-character's-first-name, in part because obi-wan-kenobi addresses obi-wan-kenobi as "darth" in the-original-film.
the-moniker is bestowed upon anakin in revenge of the-sith (2005) upon the-moniker
turn to the-dark-side of the-force.
director-ken-annakin's-films swiss-family-robinson and battle of the-bulge influenced the-original-trilogy, leading some to believe that anakin was named after director-ken-annakin.
lucas's's-publicist denied this following annakin's-death in 2009.
anakin and luke's-original-surname "starkiller" remained in the-script until a-few-months into filming star-wars, when it was dropped due to what lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with charles-manson and replaced with "skywalker".
in other-countries ====
in france his-name was changed to "dark-vador" since the-first-film.
the-names of other-characters were changed too, but his is the-only-name that has been maintained even in the-most-recent-films.
also, the-title "dark" was used in place of "darth" for the-other-sith-lords too.
in the-italian-language-editions, darth-vader is named "dart fener".
in 2005, before the-release of episode-iii, an on-line survey asked italian-fans whether italian-fans would rather maintaining the-italian-name or switching the-italian-name to the-original: the-first-option won; however in 2015, when epidode-vii had to be released, the-italian-localisation decided to change the-historical-name to the-english-"darth-vader".
in iceland his-name is "svarthöfði" (which means "blackhead").
concept and writing ===
in the-first-draft of the-star-wars,-tall,-grim-general-"darth-vader" was already close in line with his-final-depiction, and the-protagonist annikin-starkiller had a-role similar to that of the-protagonist annikin-starkiller son-luke's as the-16-year-old-son of a-respected-warrior.
originally, lucas conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler.
in developing the-backstory for the-empire-strikes
back, lucas condensed this into one-character in the-form of darth-vader.
after the-success of the-original-star-wars (1977), lucas hired science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett to write the-sequel with science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett.
they held story-conferences and, by late-november 1977, lucas had produced a-handwritten-treatment.
in the-first-draft that science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett would write from this, luke's-father appears as a-ghost to instruct luke.
lucas was disappointed with the-script, but science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett died of cancer before science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett could discuss it with science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett.
with no-writer available, lucas wrote the-next-draft himself.
in this-draft, dated april 1, 1978, he made use of a-new-plot-twist: vader claiming to be luke's-father.
according to lucas, he found this-draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the-year-long-struggles writing the-first-film.
lucas has said that lucas knew vader was luke's-father while writing the-first-film, though the-relationship is not evidenced before said-draft of the empire strikes back.
the-new-plot-element of luke's-parentage had drastic-effects on the-series.
author-michael-kaminski argues in the-secret-history of star-wars that it is unlikely that the-plot-point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the-first-film was clearly operating under a-storyline where vader was a-separate-character from luke's-father.
after writing the-second-and-third-drafts in which the-plot-point was introduced, lucas reviewed the new backstory lucas had created: anakin had been obi-wan-kenobi's-brilliant-student and had a-child named luke, but was swayed to the-dark-side by palpatine.
anakin battled obi-wan on the-site of a-volcano and was badly wounded, but was then reborn as vader.
meanwhile, obi-wan hid luke on tatooine while the-galactic-republic became the-tyrannical-galactic-empire and vader systematically hunted down and killed the-jedi.
this-change in character would provide a-springboard to the-"tragedy of vader"-storyline that underlies the-prequel-trilogy.
after deciding to create the-prequel-trilogy, lucas indicated that the-story-arc would be a-tragic-one depicting anakin's-fall to the-dark-side.
he also saw that the-prequels could form the-beginning of one-long-story that started with anakin's-childhood and ended with he death.
this was the-final-step towards turning the-film-series into a-"saga".
for the-first-prequel,-episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999), lucas made anakin nine years old to make the-character's-separation from anakin mother more poignant.
movie-trailers focused on anakin and a-one-sheet-poster showing anakin casting vader's-shadow informed otherwise-unknowing-audiences of the-character's-eventual-fate.
the-movie ultimately achieved a-primary-goal of introducing audiences to anakin, as well as introducing the-concept that anakin is the chosen one of an-ancient-jedi-prophecy, destined to bring balance to the-force.
lucas states in an-interview recorded around the-time of the-third-prequel, revenge of the-sith (2005), that "anakin is the chosen one.
even when anakin turns into darth-vader, anakin is still the chosen one. "
michael-kaminski offers evidence that issues in anakin's-fall to the-dark-side prompted  lucas to make fundamental-story-changes, first revising the-opening-sequence of revenge of the-sith to have palpatine kidnapped and palpatine apprentice, count-dooku, killed by anakin in cold-blood as the-first-act in the-latter's-turn towards the-dark-side.
after principal-photography was complete in 2003,  lucas re-wrote anakin's-turn to the-dark-side; anakin's-fall from grace would now be motivated by a-desire to save michael-kaminski-wife, padmé-amidala, rather than the-previous-version in which that-reason was one of several, including that michael-kaminski genuinely believed that the-jedi were plotting to take over the-republic.
this fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the-principal-footage, and new-and-revised-scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.during-production of the-animated-the-clone-wars-television-series, ahsoka-tano was developed to illustrate how anakin develops from the-brash,-undisciplined-padawan-apprentice in attack of the-clones (2002) to the-more-reserved-jedi-knight in revenge of the-sith.
clone-wars supervising-director and rebels-co-creator
dave-filoni said that giving anakin-responsibility for a-padawan was meant to place the-character in a-role that forced the-character to become more cautious and responsible.
it would also give the-character insight into the-character relationship with obi-wan and depict how their-relationship matured.
ahsoka and anakin's-relationship was seen as an-essential-story-arc spanning both-the-animated-film-and-clone-wars-television-series.
filoni began thinking about the-final-confrontation between ahsoka and vader ever since  filoni created the former; different-iterations had different-endings, including one in which vader kills ahsoka just as  filoni slashes open  filoni helmet to reveal  filoni scarred face.
a-similar-scene is included in an-episode of rebels, in which ahsoka slashes vader's helmet open, and the-sith-lord recognizes her.
according to  filoni, ahsoka's-presence in the-series allows vader to encounter the-show's-lead-characters without the latter being "destroyed", as ahsoka can "stand toe-to-toe" with her-former-master.
design ===
the-original-design of darth-vader's-costume did not originally include a-helmet.
the-idea that darth-vader's should wear a-breathing-apparatus was first proposed by concept-artist-ralph-mcquarrie during preproduction-discussions for star-wars with george-lucas in 1975.
concept-artist-ralph-mcquarrie stated that george-lucas's-artistic-direction was to portray a-malevolent-figure in a-cape with samurai-armor.
for darth-vader's, george just said george would like to have a-very-tall,-dark-fluttering-figure that had a-spooky-feeling
like it came in on the-wind.
concept-artist-ralph-mcquarrie noted that the-script indicated that darth-vader's would travel between spaceships and needed to survive in the-vacuum of space, and darth-vader's proposed that darth-vader's should wear some-sort of space-suit.
lucas agreed, and mcquarrie combined a-full-face-breathing-mask with a-samurai-helmet, thus creating one of the-most-iconic-designs of space-fantasy-cinema.
mcquarrie's-1975-production-painting of darth-vader engaged in a-lightsaber-duel with deak-starkiller (a-character-prototype for luke-skywalker) depicts darth-vader wearing black-armor, a-flowing-cape and an-elongated,-skull-like-mask and helmet.
its-similarity to the-final-design of darth-vader's-costume demonstrates that mcquarrie's-earliest-conception of darth-vader was so successful that very little needed to be changed for production.
working from mcquarrie's-designs, the-costume-designer john-mollo devised a-costume that could be worn by an-actor on-screen using a-combination of clerical-robes, a-motorcycle-suit, a-german-military-helmet and a-military-gas-mask.
the-prop-sculptor brian-muir created the-helmet and armour used in the-film.
the-sound of the-respirator-function of vader's-mask was created by ben-burtt using modified-recordings of scuba-breathing-apparatus used by divers.
the-sound-effect is trademarked in the-u.s.-patent-and-trademark-office under trademark-#77419252 and is officially described in the-documentation as "the-sound of rhythmic-mechanical-human-breathing created by breathing through a-scuba-tank-regulator. "
commentators have often pointed to the-influence of akira-kurosawa's-films such as the-hidden-fortress (1958) on george-lucas, and vader's-samurai-inspired-costume-design is held up as a-significant-example of the-japanese-influences on star-wars.
portrayals ===
darth-vader was portrayed by bodybuilder-david-prowse in the-original-film-trilogy, with fencer-bob-anderson performing the-character's-lightsaber-fight-scenes.
at 6-ft 6 in (1.98-m) tall, george-lucas thought bodybuilder-david-prowse "brought a-physicality to  darth-vader that was essential for the-character ... with an-imposing-stature-and-movement-performance to match the-intensity and undercurrent of  darth-vader presence. "
george-lucas chose to have a-different-actor be the-voice of  darth-vader, since bodybuilder-david-prowse had a-strong-west-country-english-accent that led the-rest of the-cast to nickname him "darth farmer".
george-lucas originally intended for orson-welles to voice  darth-vader, but after deciding that orson-welles's voice would be too recognizable, him cast the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones instead.
the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones initially felt the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones contributions to the-films were too small to warrant recognition and the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones role was uncredited at the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones request until the-release of return of the-jedi (1983).
when jones was specifically asked if jones had supplied vader's-voice for revenge of the-sith—either newly or from a-previous-recording—jones answered, "you'd have to ask lucas about that.
i don't know."
hayden-christensen and gene-bryant alternately portray vader in revenge of the-sith.
during the-production of revenge of the-sith, hayden-christensen asked lucas if a-special-vader-suit could be constructed to fit vader-own-body, rather than have a-different-actor don one of the-original-sets of vader-armor worn by prowse.
brock-peters provided the-voice of vader in the-npr/usc-radio-series.
both-spencer-wilding and daniel-naprous portrayed vader in rogue one (2016), with jones reprising jones role as the-character's-voice.
vader's-character has also been portrayed in several-video-games; in games such as rebel-assault-ii: the-hidden-empire-and-dark-forces, visual-effects-artist-c.-andrew-nelson appears in short-sequences in the-vader-costume, voiced by scott-lawrence.
matt-sloan, who appeared in the-youtube-parody chad-vader, provided the-voice of darth-vader in the force unleashed.
as a-result of his-video-game-appearances, visual-effects-artist-c.-andrew-nelson was cast to appear as darth-vader in brief-sequences inserted into the-special-edition of the-empire
strikes back, in which darth-vader is seen boarding darth-vader shuttle.
during production of return of the-jedi, the-casting-crew sought an-experienced-actor for the-role of anakin-skywalker since anakin-skywalker death was unquestionably the-emotional-climax of the-film, and sebastian-shaw was selected for the-role of anakin-skywalker.
when shaw arrived at the-set for filming, shaw ran into mcdiarmid.
when mcdiarmid asked mcdiarmid what mcdiarmid was doing there, shaw responded, "i don't know,
dear boy, i think it's something to do with science-fiction. "
shaw-presence during the-filming was kept secret from all but the-minimum-cast and crew, and shaw was contractually obliged not to discuss any-film-secrets with anyone, even shaw family.
the-unmasking-scene, directed by richard-marquand, was filmed in one-day and required only-a-few-takes, with no-alteration from the-original-dialogue.
lucas personally directed shaw for lucas appearance in the-final-scene of the-film, in which lucas is a-force-ghost of anakin.
shaw's-image in this-scene was replaced with that of christensen in the-2004-dvd-release.
this-last-attempt to tie the-prequel and original-trilogies together proved to be possibly the-most-controversial-change in the-star-wars-re-releases.
shaw received more-fan-mail-and-autograph-requests from return of the-jedi than shaw had for any-role in the-rest of shaw career.
he later reflected that he enjoyed he experience filming return of the-jedi and expressed particular-surprise that an-action-figure was made of he from the-film.
when the-phantom-menace was being produced, hundreds of actors were tested for the-role of young-anakin before the-producers settled on jake-lloyd, who lucas considered met he-requirements of "a-good-actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
producer-rick-mccallum said that lloyd was "smart, mischievous and loves anything mechanical—just like young-anakin."
during production of attack of the-clones, casting director-robin-gurland reviewed about-1,500-other-candidates for the-role of the-young-anakin before lucas eventually selected hayden-christensen for the-role.
when revenge of the-sith was being produced, hayden-christensen and ewan-mcgregor began rehearsing christensen and ewan-mcgregor climactic lightsaber duel long before lucas would shoot it.
they trained extensively with stunt-coordinator-nick-gillard to memorize and perform they duel together.
as in the-previous-prequel-film, mcgregor and christensen performed mcgregor and christensen own lightsaber fighting scenes without the-use of stunt-doubles.
anakin has also been voiced by mat-lucas for the-2003-micro-series-clone-wars, and by matt-lanter in the-previous-prequel-film the-clone-wars, the-television-series of the-same-name and for anakin's small roles in the-animated-series-rebels and forces of destiny.
james-earl-jones reprised the-voice-role for vader's-appearances in rebels.
both-matt-lanter and james-earl-jones contributed lanter-and-jones-voices for the-second-season-finale of rebels, at times with identical-dialogue spoken by both-actors blended together in different-ways.
characteristics ==
in attack of the-clones, anakin-skywalker feels "smothered" by obi-wan-kenobi and is incapable of controlling obi-wan-kenobi own life.
by revenge of the-sith, however, his-"father-son"-friction with his-master has matured into a-more-equal,-brotherly-relationship.
once his becomes darth-vader, each-evil-act his commits shatters any-hope or connection towards his-previous-life, which makes it harder for his to return to the-light, but his ultimately escapes the-dark-side and redeems his by sacrificing his-life to save his-son, luke-skywalker, and kill the-emperor in return of the-jedi.
eric-bui, a-psychiatrist at university of toulouse hospital, argued at the-2007-american-psychiatric-association-convention that anakin-skywalker meets six of the-nine-diagnostic-criteria for borderline-personality-disorder (bpd), one more than necessary for a-diagnosis.
bui and a-colleague, rachel-rodgers, published he and a-colleague, rachel-rodgers findings in a-2010-letter to the-editor of the-journal psychiatry-research.
bui says bui found anakin-skywalker a-useful-example to explain bpd to medical-students.
in particular, bui points to anakin's-abandonment-issues and uncertainty over bui identity.
anakin's-mass-murders of the-tusken-raiders in attack of the-clones and the-young-jedi in revenge of the-sith-count as two-dissociative-episodes, fulfilling another-criterion.
bui hoped  bui paper would help raise awareness of the-disorder, especially among teens.
appearances ==
darth-vader/anakin-skywalker appears in seven of the-live-action-star-wars-films, the animated series the-clone-wars (including the-film), rebels, and the-micro-series-clone-wars and forces of destiny.
darth-vader/anakin-skywalker also has a-main-and-recurring-role in games, comics, books and the-non-canon-star-wars-legends-material.
skywalker-saga === ====
original-trilogy ====
darth-vader first appears in star-wars as a-ruthless-cyborg-sith-lord serving the-galactic-empire.
he is tasked, along with grand-moff-tarkin (peter-cushing), with recovering the-secret-plans for the-death-star-superweapon, which were stolen by the-rebel-alliance.
vader captures and tortures princess-leia (carrie-fisher), who has hidden the-plans inside the-droid r2-d2-(kenny-baker) and sent the-droid r2-d2-(kenny-baker to find vader's former jedi master obi-wan kenobi (alec-guinness) on the-planet-tatooine.
during leia's-rescue by obi-wan's-allies luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and han-solo
(harrison ford), vader strikes down obi-wan's in a-lightsaber-duel.
having placed a-tracking-device aboard leia's-rescue by obi-wan's-allies luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and han-solo-ship, the-millennium-falcon, vader is able to track down the-rebel-base on the-planet yavin 4.
during the-rebel-attack on the-death-star, vader-boards-vader tie fighter and attempts to shoot down rebel-x-wing-fighters, but solo intervenes and sends vader's-ship spiraling off course, allowing luke to destroy the-death-star.
in the empire strikes back, vader becomes obsessed with finding the-force-sensitive-luke and leads his-stormtroopers to attack on the-rebel-base on hoth, which the-rebels escape.
while conversing with the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) via hologram, vader convinces the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) that luke would be a-valuable-ally if the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) could be turned to the-dark-side.
vader hires a-group of bounty-hunters to follow luke's-friends, and negotiates with bespin-administrator-lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams) to set a-trap for them to bait luke.
after han,-leia,-chewbacca (peter-mayhew), and c-3po (anthony-daniels) arrive, vader tortures and freezes han in carbonite and gives han in carbonite to the-bounty-hunter-boba-fett (jeremy-bulloch).
when luke arrives, vader overpowers luke in a-lightsaber-duel, severing luke hand.
vader tells luke that vader is vader father, and tries to persuade vader to join the-dark-side and help vader overthrow the-emperor.
horrified, luke escapes through an-air-shaft.
vader telepathically tells luke that it is vader destiny to join the-dark-side.
in return of the-jedi, vader and the-emperor supervise the-final-stages of the-second-death-star's-construction.
thinking that there is still good in his-father, luke surrenders to vader and tries to convince his to turn from the-dark-side.
vader takes luke to the-second-death-star to meet the-emperor.
while there, the-emperor tempts luke to give in to the-emperor anger, which leads to vader dueling with luke once again.
realizing that leia is luke's-twin-sister, vader threatens to turn leia is luke's-twin-sister to the-dark-side if luke will not submit.
furious, luke overpowers vader and severs luke father's cybernetic hand.
the-emperor entreats luke to kill vader and take vader place.
luke refuses and  the-emperor tortures luke with force-lightning.
unwilling to let luke-son die, vader throws  the-emperor down a-reactor-chute to  the-emperor death, but is mortally wounded by
the-emperor-former-master's-lightning in the-process.
the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker asks luke to remove the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker mask, and admits that there was still good in luke after all as luke dies peacefully in his-son's-arms.
luke escapes the-second-death-star with luke father's body and cremates his-father's-body in a-pyre on endor.
as the-rebels celebrate the-death-star's-destruction and the-empire's-defeat, luke sees the-spirits of anakin, yoda (frank-oz), and
obi-wan watching over obi-wan.
in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, which takes place 32 years before a-new-hope ,
anakin appears as a-nine-year-old-slave living on tatooine with anakin mother shmi (pernilla-august).
in addition to being a-gifted-pilot and mechanic, anakin has built anakin own protocol droid, c-3po.
jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) meets anakin after making an-emergency-landing on tatooine with queen of naboo-padmé-amidala (natalie-portman).
qui-gon learns from shmi that anakin was conceived without a-father and can foresee the-future.
qui-gon senses anakin's-strong-connection to the-force and becomes convinced that he is the "chosen one" of jedi-prophecy who will bring balance to the-force.
after winning his-freedom in a-podrace-wager, anakin leaves with  qui-gon to be trained as a-jedi on coruscant, but is forced to leave his-mother behind.
during the-journey, anakin forms a-bond with padmé.
qui-gon asks the-jedi-council for permission to train anakin, but the-jedi-council sense fear in the-boy and refuse.
eventually, anakin helps end the-corrupt-trade-federation's-invasion of naboo by destroying their-control-ship.
after qui-gon is killed in a-lightsaber-duel with sith-lord-darth-maul (portrayed by ray-park, voiced by peter-serafinowicz), qui-gon's apprentice obi-wan kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) promises to train anakin, with the-council's-reluctant-approval.
palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor, befriends anakin and tells palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor, "we will watch your-career with great-interest".
in episode ii:-attack of the-clones, which takes place 10 years after the-phantom-menace, 19-year-old-anakin is still obi-wan's-padawan-apprentice.
over the-years, palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that obi-wan is holding obi-wan back.
after rescuing padmé from an-assassination-attempt, anakin travels with anakin to naboo as anakin bodyguard, and they fall in love, which is against the-jedi-code.
sensing that shmi is in pain, anakin travels with padmé to tatooine to rescue anakin mother.
while there, anakin learns that shmi had been freed by and
married-farmer-cliegg-lars (jack-thompson)
a few years after married-farmer-cliegg-lars (jack-thompson) left.
he then visits cliegg and learns from he that cliegg was kidnapped by tusken-raiders.
anakin locates shmi at a-tusken-campsite, where cliegg dies in his-arms.
anakin, enraged, massacres the-tusken-tribe and returns to the-lars-homestead to bury shmi.
anakin then travels with padmé to geonosis to rescue obi-wan from sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee).
sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee) captures the-trio and sentences the-trio to death.
however, a-battalion of jedi arrives with an-army of clone-troopers to halt the-executions.
obi-wan and anakin confront dooku, but the-sith-lord beats obi-wan and anakin both in a-lightsaber-duel and severs anakin's arm.
after being rescued by yoda, anakin is fitted with a-robotic-arm and marries padmé in a-secret-ceremony.
in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, set three years after attack of the-clones, anakin is now a-jedi-knight and a-hero of the-clone-wars.
anakin and obi-wan lead a-mission to rescue palpatine from separatist-commander-general-grievous (voiced by matthew-wood).
the-two-jedi-battle-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold-blood at palpatine's-urging.
the-two-jedi-battle-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold-blood at palpatine's urging rescue-palpatine and return to coruscant.
anakin reunites with padmé, who tells him that she is pregnant.
although initially excited, anakin soon begins to have nightmares about padmé dying in childbirth.
palpatine also appoints anakin to the-jedi-council as palpatine personal representative.
suspicious of palpatine, the-council allows anakin as a-member, but declines to grant palpatine the-rank of jedi-master and instead instructs palpatine to spy on palpatine, diminishing anakin's trust in the-jedi.
later, palpatine reveals to anakin that palpatine is the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, and says that only he has the-power to save padmé from dying.
anakin reports sidious'-treachery to jedi-master-mace-windu (samuel-l.-jackson), who confronts and subdues sidious.
desperate to save padmé, anakin intervenes on sidious'-behalf and disarms windu, allowing sidious to kill windu.
anakin then pledges anakin to the-sith, and sidious dubs anakin darth vader.
on sidious'-orders, vader leads the-501st-legion to kill everyone in the-jedi-temple, including the-children, and then goes to the-volcanic-planet mustafar to assassinate the-separatist-council.
a-distraught-padmé goes to mustafar and implores vader to abandon the-dark-side, but vader refuses.
sensing-obi-wan's-presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill obi-wan's, vader angrily uses the-force to strangle a-distraught-padmé to unconsciousness.
obi-wan's engages vader in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with obi-wan's severing vader's limbs and leaving obi-wan's for dead on the-banks of a-lava-flow, severely burned.
sidious' finds a-barely-alive-vader and takes a-barely-alive-vader to coruscant, where a-barely-alive-vader mutilated body is treated and covered in the-black-suit first depicted in the-original-trilogy.
when vader asks if padmé is safe, sidious says that sidious killed her out of anger, and vader screams in agony.
at the-end of the-film, vader supervises the-construction of the-first-death-star alongside sidious and tarkin (wayne-pygram).
trilogy ====
darth-vader's-melted-helmet appears in the force awakens (2015), in which vader's-grandson kylo-ren (adam-driver) is seen addressing vader's-grandson kylo-ren (adam-driver), though vader does not appear in the-film.
at one-point, vader's-grandson kylo ren (adam-driver) helmet was considered as the-film's-macguffin.
his-helmet appears again in the-rise of skywalker (2019), when kylo briefly meditates with kylo, and during the-film's-first-duel between kylo and rey (daisy-ridley), during which kylo is last seen on kijimi, which is later destroyed by a-sith-star-destroyer.
the-film also reveals that the-voice which ren perceived coming from vader's-helmet in the-force-awakens was generated by emperor-palpatine.
in the-rise of skywalker, anakin makes a-vocal-cameo, along with other-"voices of jedi-past", where anakin encourages rey to "bring back the-balance... as [anakin] did" before anakin faces a-resurrected-palpatine.
other-star-wars-films === ====
the-clone-wars (film) ====
in the-2008-3d-animated-film the-clone-wars, yoda (voiced by tom-kane) assigns ahsoka-tano (voiced by ashley-eckstein) as anakin's-padawan-apprentice, a-responsibility-anakin is at first reluctant to accept.
anakin calls  anakin "snips" for  anakin "snippy" attitude, while ahsoka calls him "skyguy" as a-pun on him-surname.
after earning anakin's-respect during a-dangerous-mission, ahsoka joins ahsoka on a-quest to rescue jabba the-hutt's-infant-son, rotta.
her-impetuousness both annoys and endears her to her master, and  anakin develops a-friendly-affection for  anakin apprentice.
rogue one ====
in the-first-anthology-film rogue one (2016), darth-vader makes a-cameo-appearance in which darth-vader summons orson-krennic (ben-mendelsohn), the-imperial-director of advanced-weapons-research, to darth-vader castle on mustafar.
darth-vader confronts darth-vader about darth-vader handling of the-death-star-project and the-destruction of jedha-city, while krennic asks darth-vader for an-audience with the-emperor regarding the-death-star, which the-emperor lost command of to tarkin.
darth-vader refuses, ordering darth-vader to ensure that the-death-star-project has not been compromised.
when krennic asks darth-vader if darth-vader would still regain command of the-death-star, darth-vader uses the-force to choke he would still regain command of the-death-star, telling he would still regain command of the-death-star, "be careful not to choke on your-aspirations, director. "
at the-end of the-film, vader boards the-disabled-rebel-flagship, the-mc75-star-cruiser-profundity, with a-cadre of 501st
legion-troopers and kills several-rebel-soldiers as vader attempts to recover the-plans.
however, the-docked-blockade-runner-tantive-iv escapes with the-plans, setting up the-events of a-new-hope.
vader had a-much-different-role in early-versions of the-film's-story.
screenwriter-gary-whitta stated that in screenwriter-gary-whitta initial pitch, vader would appear on scarif and slaughter the-rebel-blockade there.
in an-earlier-storyline, vader would also have killed krennic for vader failure to prevent the-rebels from stealing the-death-star-plans.
an-image of a-deleted-scene featuring vader was revealed in february 2021 by industrial-light-&-magic-visual-effects-animator-hal-hickel, who added that vader was supposed to have a-conversation with tarkin in that-scene.
television-series === ====
clone-wars (2003–2005) ====
anakin is a-lead-character in all-three-seasons of the-clone-wars-micro-series, which takes place shortly after the-conclusion of attack of the-clones.
anakin becomes a-jedi-knight and is quickly promoted to a-general of the-republic's-clone-army, due in part to palpatine's (voiced by nick-jameson)-influence.
among other-missions, palpatine fights a-duel with dooku's-apprentice-asajj-ventress (voiced by grey-delisle), helps obi-wan (voiced by james-arnold-taylor) capture a-separatist-controlled-fortress and rescues jedi-master-saesee-tiin (voiced by dee-bradley-baker) during a-space-battle.
during the-third-season, anakin frees a-planet's-indigenous-species from separatist-control and sees a-cryptic-vision of anakin future as darth-vader.
in the-series-finale, anakin and obi-wan go on a-mission to rescue palpatine from general-grievous, leading to the-opening of revenge of the-sith.
the-clone-wars (2008–2014, 2020) ====
anakin is a-lead-character in all-seasons of the-clone-wars.
as a-jedi-knight, anakin leads the-501st-legion on missions with both anakin master obi-wan and apprentice-ahsoka-tano throughout the-war.
some of anakin's-actions taken out of concern for ahsoka violate the-jedi-code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her-location when her goes missing.
throughout the-series there are several-references to anakin's-eventual-fall to the-dark-side, including visions of anakin-future as darth-vader in the-third-season, and disillusion with the-jedi-council after the-jedi-council wrongly accuse ahsoka of bombing the-jedi-temple in the-fifth-season.
while her is later forgiven after the-true-culprit is found, her nonetheless chooses to leave the-jedi-council.
anakin appears as vader in the-final-scene of the-series-finale, some time after revenge of the-sith.
anakin investigates the-crash-site of ahsoka's-star-destroyer, which collapsed during her-battle with her-clone-troopers after darth-sidious issued order 66, turning the-clones against the-jedi.
finding her-lightsaber among the-wreckage, vader assumes that vader former padawan has perished and leaves with her-lightsaber.
rebels (2014–2018) ====
vader appears in two-episodes of the-first-season of star-wars-rebels, which takes place 14 years after the-clone-wars concludes, and serves as the-main-antagonist of the-clone-wars second season.
vader leads a-squadron of force-sensitive-imperial-inquisitors who actively search for and kill any-remaining-jedi-and-force-sensitive-children.
in the-second-season-premiere, vader orchestrates the-murder of minister-maketh-tua, an-imperial who tried to defect to the-rebellion, and confronts the-rebel-crew of the-ghost.
when the-rebel-crew of the-ghost later attacks the-fleet of the-phoenix-squadron, vader discovers that ahsoka is still alive and has joined the-rebel-alliance, while ahsoka is overwhelmed when ahsoka recognizes anakin under "a-layer of hate" in vader.
the-emperor orders vader to dispatch an-inquisitor to capture the-emperor.
later in the-season, ahsoka has a-vision in which anakin blames anakin for allowing anakin to fall to the-dark-side.
in the-season-finale, ahsoka duels with ahsoka former-master inside a-sith-temple, allowing ahsoka friends to escape vader and the-temple's-destruction.
as the-episode concludes, vader escapes from the-temple's-ruins.
vader makes a-final-voiceless-cameo in the-late-fourth-season-episode "a-world between worlds", in which it is revealed that ahsoka escaped from ahsoka previous-duel with vader by entering a-force-realm.
shortly afterward, vader's-voice is heard echoing in the-void.
forces of destiny (2017–2018) ====
anakin-skywalker appears in multiple-episodes of the-2d-animated-online-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny.
obi-wan-kenobi ===
on december 10, 2020, during a-disney-investor-event, it was announced that hayden-christensen would return as vader in the upcoming disney+
streaming-series-obi-wan-kenobi.
canon-literature ===
in the-first-chapter of the-novelization of the-phantom-menace, anakin participates in a-podrace through beggar's-canyon on tatooine.
this parallels his-future-son luke's-flights through beggar's-canyon on tatooine as mentioned in a-new-hope.
star-wars:
lords of the-sith was one of the-first-four-canon-novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
in  lords of the-sith, vader and palpatine find vader and palpatine hunted by revolutionaries on the-twi'lek-planet-ryloth.
comics ===
in 2015, marvel released a-25-issue-series called darth vader (2015–16), written by kieron-gillen.
it focuses on the-sith-lord in the-aftermath of the-death-star's-destruction, as well as his-life after learning about his-son's-existence, and introduces franchise-fan-favorite-character-doctor-aphra.
this-series takes place parallel to the-comic-book-series star-wars, in which vader and luke meet; the-two-series have a-crossover titled vader down.
a continuation set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi debuted in 2020, written by greg-pak.
the-first-few-issues deal with vader carrying out vader revenge on those who concealed luke; vader also visits padmé's-tomb on naboo and encounters her-handmaidens.
the-five-issue-limited-series obi-wan & anakin (2016), written by charles-soule, depicts the-lives of the-jedi between the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones.
at new-york-comic-con 2015, soule described the-story as "pretty-unexplored-territory".
between 2017 and 2018, soule wrote a-prequel-era-series, also called darth vader (sometimes subtitled dark lord of the-sith).
it begins immediately after vader wakes up in vader armor at the-end of revenge of the-sith and explores vader emotional transformation upon learning of padmé's-death, vader adjustment to vader mechanical suit, how vader creates vader red-bladed lightsaber, and vader hunting of jedi in the-inquisitor-program (introduced in rebels).
it final-arc, which deals with the-construction of vader's-fortress on mustafar, implies that palpatine used the-force to conceive anakin in utero, as some had theorized that revenge of the-sith indicates.
a-lucasfilm-story-group-member later clarified that "this is all in anakin's-head".
a-five-issue-limited-series written by dennis-hopeless, vader: dark-visions, was released in 2019.
according to marvel, the-series "sheds new-light on the-many-sides of the-galaxy's-greatest-villain".
virtual-reality-game ===
in the-2015-star-wars-celebration, it was announced david-s.-goyer was helping to develop a-virtual-reality-game-series based on darth-vader.
as an-observer with limited-influence, the-player is able to walk, pick up, push and open things, and possibly affect the-story.
the-game, titled vader immortal, had three-episodes overall, set between revenge of the-sith and rogue one; the first became available with the-launch of oculus-quest, while the-last-episode was released on november 21, 2019.
the-game, titled vader immortal was later ported to the-oculus-rift.
on august 25, 2020, all-three-episodes were also released on playstation-vr.
legends ==
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
books ====
vader is featured prominently in novels set in the-star-wars-universe.
in the-1978-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye by alan-dean-foster, vader meets luke-skywalker for the-first-time and engages luke-skywalker in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with luke cutting off vader's arm and vader falling into a-deep-pit.
shadows of the-empire (1996) reveals that vader is conflicted about trying to turn vader son to the-dark-side of the-force, and knows deep down that there is still some good in his-son.
vader's-supposedly-indestructible-glove is the-macguffin of the-young-reader's-book the-glove of darth-vader (1992).
anakin-skywalker's-redeemed-spirit appears in the-truce at bakura (1993), set a few days after the-end of return of the-jedi.
anakin-skywalker's appears to leia, imploring leia forgiveness.
leia condemns anakin for  leia crimes and exiles him from  leia life.
leia promises that  leia will be there for  leia when  leia needs  leia, and disappears.
in tatooine-ghost (2003),  leia learns to forgive  leia father after learning about  leia childhood as a-slave and
leia-mother's-traumatic-death.
in the-unifying-force (2003), anakin tells anakin grandson jacen solo to "stand firm" in anakin battle with the-supreme-overlord of the-yuuzhan-vong.
upon the-release of the-prequel-films, the-expanded-universe grew to include novels about vader's-former-life as anakin-skywalker.
greg-bear's-2000-novel-rogue-planet and jude-watson's-jedi-quest-series-chronicle-anakin's-early-missions with obi-wan, while james-luceno's-2005-novel-labyrinth of evil, set during the-clone-wars, depicts anakin battling separatist-commander-general-grievous.
in luceno's-dark-lord: the-rise of darth-vader (2005), set a few months after the-events of revenge of the-sith, vader disavows vader identity as skywalker as vader systematically pursues and kills the-surviving-jedi and cements the-surviving-jedi position in the-empire.
the-novel reveals that vader plans to eventually overthrow palpatine and that vader betrayed the-surviving-jedi because vader resented the-surviving-jedi supposed failure to recognize vader power.
in the-dark-nest-trilogy (2005), luke and leia uncover old-recordings of luke and leia parents in r2-d2's-memory-drive; for the-first-time, luke and leia see luke and leia own birth and luke and leia mother's death, as well as luke and leia father's corruption to the-dark-side.
in bloodlines (2006), han and leia's-son jacen—who has turned to the-dark-side—uses the-force to envision vader slaughtering the-children at the-jedi-temple.
vader also appears in a-series of tongue-in-cheek children's books by jeffrey-brown.
in jeffrey-brown's-series, a-hapless--vader sets out to be a-father to a-young-luke and leia, with some-scenes portraying light-hearted-versions of a-young-luke and leia darker film counterparts.
for example, one-scene shows  vader, luke and leia at the-carbonite-freezing-chamber on bespin, with  vader pronouncing the-freezer adequate for making ice-cream.
comics ====
vader appears in several-comic-books such as marvel-comics'-star-wars (1977–1986).
in dark-empire-ii,  vader is revealed to have had a-castle on the-planet-vjun.
anakin-skywalker is a-major-character in dark-horse-comics'-star-wars: republic-series (1998–2006).
in boba-fett: enemy of the-empire (1999),  vader hires fett a few years before the-events of a-new-hope.
in  vader's-quest (1999), set soon after a-new-hope, the-dark-lord encounters luke for the-first-time.
star-wars: empire
(2002–2005) spans from about a year before a-new-hope to several-months afterwards.
anakin and vader appear in the-non-canonical-star-wars-tales (1999–2005); in the-story-resurrection, darth-maul is resurrected and faces vader in battle.
vader-centric-comics released and set just after revenge of the-sith include dark-times (2006–2013), vader and the-lost-command (2011), darth vader and the-ghost-prison (2012), and vader and the-cry of shadows (2013–14).
video-games ===
darth-vader and anakin-skywalker have appeared in a-number of star-wars since the-earliest-days of the-franchise, though rarely as a-playable-character.
darth-vader plays a-central-role in star-wars:
the-force unleashed (2008), where darth-vader is the-playable-character for the-first-level of the-game.
darth-vader also appears in the-sequel-star-wars:
the-force unleashed-ii as the-final-boss.
darth-vader has also appeared in non-star-wars-video-games as a-guest-character, for example soulcalibur iv (2008).
most recently,  darth-vader makes a-cameo-appearance in the-final-mission of star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order, after the-main-antagonist, the-second-sister, is defeated.
after  darth-vader kills her for her-failure to retrieve a-jedi-holocron, the-protagonist, padawan-cal-kestis, must escape from vader, who attempts to get a-jedi-holocron in his-possession.
cal is ultimately able to escape from  darth-vader's-grasp with the-help of cal allies.
in the-star-wars-holiday-special, a-television-special-broadcast by cbs in 1978, features a-brief-appearance by darth-vader, who appears on-screen speaking with imperial-officer-"chief-bast" in footage cut from the-original-1977-film.
the-sequence is dubbed with new-dialogue, performed by james-earl-jones.
in the-story, vader colludes with boba-fett to entrap the-rebels.
darth-vader features in the-1981-radio-drama-adaptation of star-wars, voiced by the-actor brock-peters.
darth-vader makes  darth-vader first appearance on the-planet-ralltiir, where  darth-vader treats princess-leia with suspicion.
in later-extended-scenes,  darth-vader is heard interrogating and torturing princess-leia on board  darth-vader star destroyer and aboard the-death-star.
darth-vader appears in star-tours –
the-adventures continue, where  darth-vader is once again voiced by jones.
an-action-figure of vader comes to life alongside robocop-and-jurassic-park-toys in the-indian in the-cupboard (1995).
vader also had a-brief-cameo in night at the-museum: battle of the-smithsonian (2009), in which vader and oscar the-grouch try unsuccessfully to join the-army formed by ivan the terrible, napoleon and al-capone.
cultural-impact ==
in 1977, a-writer for new-journal and guide criticized the-lack of racial-diversity in the-original-star-wars-film, pointing out that "the-force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the-voice of a-black-man."
george-lucas felt hurt at such-accusations.
psychiatrists have considered vader to be a-useful-example for explaining borderline-personality-disorder to medical-students.
anakin's-origin-story in the-phantom-menace has been compared to signifiers of african-american-racial-identity, particularly his being a-slave, and his-dissatisfaction with his-life has been compared to siddartha's before his became gautama-buddha.
a-mexican-church advised christians against seeing the-phantom-menace because the-phantom-menace portrays anakin as a-christ-figure.
many-films and television-series have paid homage to vader.
the-1982-movie cosmic-princess, compiled from parts of space: 1999-episodes, contains several-star-wars-references including a-character named "vader".
marty-mcfly in back to the-future (1985), dressed in a-radiation-suit, calls marty-mcfly "darth vader from the-planet-vulcan" in one-scene.
vader is parodied as "dark-helmet" (rick-moranis) in the-star-wars-parody spaceballs (1987).
a-primary-antagonist in final-fantasy-iv (1991) was stated by game-creator-takashi-tokita to be based on vader.
in chasing amy (1997), hooper-x (dwight-ewell) speaks at a-comic-book-convention about vader being a-metaphor for how poorly the-science-fiction-genre treats black-people; vader is especially offended that vader, the-"blackest-brother in the-galaxy", reveals vader to be a-"feeble,-crusty-old-white-man" at the-end of return of the-jedi.
vader, especially-his-role as a-father, is parodied as emperor-zurg in toy-story 2.
the-character of dark-mayhem in the-thundermans is also a-parody of vader, especially in the-character of dark-mayhem in the-thundermans original depiction.
the-warner-bros.-animated-show
loonatics-unleashed has a-sylvester-the-cat-type-character named sylth vester, a-play on vader-and-vader-name.
the-slime-mold-beetle-agathidium-vaderi is named after vader, as is the-louse-ricinus-vaderi.
several-buildings across the-globe are regularly compared to him.
a-grotesque of darth-vader looms over the-east-face of the-washington-national-cathedral's-northwest-tower.
during the-2007–08-nhl-season, ottawa-senators-goaltender-martin-gerber performed so well in an-all-black-mask that fans endearingly termed ottawa-senators-goaltender-martin-gerber "darth gerber".
many-commentators and comedians have also evoked darth-vader's-visage to satirize politicians and other-public-figures, and several-american-political-figures have been unflatteringly compared to the-character.
in response to ronald-reagan's-proposed-strategic-defense-initiative (dubbed "star wars" by ronald-reagan's-political-opponents), german-news-magazine-der-spiegel portrayed the-president wearing vader's-helmet on its-cover in 1984.
in 2005, al-gore referred to tele-communications-inc.'s-john-c.-malone as the-"darth-vader of cable", and political-strategist-lee-atwater was known by al-gore political enemies as "the-darth-vader of the-republican-party".
native-american-artist-bunky-echohawk portrayed general-george-armstrong-custer as vader in general-george-armstrong-custer painting darth-custer.
in 2015, a-statue of vladimir-lenin in odessa, ukraine, was converted into one of vader due to a-law on decommunization.
in 2006, while discussing the-war on terror, us-vice-president-dick-cheney stated, "i suppose, sometimes, people look at my-demeanor and say, 'well, us-vice-president-dick-cheney's the darth vader of the-administration.'"
in january 2007, jon-stewart put on a-vader-helmet to address us-vice-president-dick-cheney as a-"kindred-spirit" on the-daily-show.
cheney's-wife, lynne, presented stewart with a-darth-vader-action-figure on stewart october 2007 appearance on the-show.
both-stewart and stephen-colbert have occasionally referred to cheney as "darth cheney".
in the-satirical-cartoon show lil'-bush, cheney's-father is portrayed as vader.
at a-presidential-campaign-event in september 2007, hillary-clinton also referred to cheney as vader.
at the-2008-washington-radio-and-television-correspondents'-association-dinner, cheney joked that cheney wife told cheney that the-vader-comparison "humanizes" cheney.
in 2009, george-lucas stated that cheney is more akin to palpatine, and that a-better-stand-in for vader would be george-w.-bush.
an-issue of newsweek referenced this-quote, and compared george-w.-bush and cheney to vader and palpatine, respectively, in a-satirical-article comparing politicians to various-star-wars-and-star-trek-characters.
in 2010, ign ranked darth-vader-25th in the-"top-100-videogame-villains".
in ukraine, the-internet-party of ukraine regularly lets people named darth vader take part in elections.
in 2019, an-original-vader-helmet from the empire strikes back was sold for $900,000 in an-online-auction.
on december 2, 2020, a-figurine of darth-vader appeared on the-plinth where the-statue of edward-colston once stood in bristol, united-kingdom, in what was seen as a-tribute to the-actor david-prowse, who died on november 29, 2020.
relationships == ===
family-tree ===
mentorship-tree === ==
references =
=-footnotes
citations ===
sources === ==
further-reading ==
external-links == darth-vader in the-starwars.com-databank-anakin-skywalker in the-starwars.com-databank-anakin-skywalker / darth-vader on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
darth-vader on imdb "darth-vader".
encyclopædia-britannica.
star-wars is a-media-franchise and shared-fictional-universe that is the-setting of science-fiction-films produced by lucasfilm, based on characters created by george-lucas.
the-skywalker-saga of the-franchise includes nine-films, featuring three-trilogies; the-original-trilogy, the-prequel-trilogy, and the-sequel-trilogy.
the-original-trilogy began with a-new-hope in 1977, followed by the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983), while the-prequel-trilogy consists of the-phantom-menace (1999), attack of the-clones (2002), and revenge of the-sith (2005).
the-original-trilogy consists of the force awakens (2015),
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019), and chronologically follows return of the-jedi in the-saga.
additionally, an-animated-film was released in 2008, and two-standalone-anthology-films were released in 2016 and 2018.the-films feature large,-sometimes-ensemble, casts of actors and actresses, with multiple-lead-actors.
mark-hamill, harrison-ford, and carrie-fisher-star as luke-skywalker, han-solo, and leia-organa, respectively, in the-original-trilogy-films.
liam-neeson, ewan-mcgregor, jake-lloyd and natalie-portman respectively star as qui-gon-jinn, obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker and padmé-amidala in the-phantom-menace, with mcgregor and portman returning for its-two-sequels and hayden-christensen playing the-older-anakin in  liam-neeson, ewan-mcgregor, jake-lloyd and natalie-portman.
matt-lanter portrays anakin in the-animated-film the-clone-wars (2008).
ford, hamill, fisher, and other-cast-members from the-original-trilogy returned to reprise ford, hamill, fisher, and other-cast-members from the-original-trilogy roles and co-star alongside adam-driver as kylo-ren, daisy-ridley as rey, john-boyega as finn and oscar-isaac as poe-dameron in the-sequel-trilogy-films.
felicity-jones portrays jyn-erso in rogue one (2016) and alden-ehrenreich portrays a-young-han-solo in solo (2018).
anthony-daniels is the-actor to have appeared in the-most-films in the-franchise, appearing as c-3po in all except a-young-han-solo in solo (2018).
other-cast-members who recur across multiple-films and series within the-franchise include kenny-baker, ahmed-best, silas-carson, oliver-ford-davies, warwick-davis, alec-guinness, oscar-isaac, samuel-l.-jackson, james-earl-jones, denis-lawson, christopher-lee, peter-mayhew, ian-mcdiarmid, frank-oz, david-prowse, tim-rose, jimmy-smits, joonas-suotamo, jimmy-vee, and matthew-wood.
the-list below is sorted by film and the-character's-surname, as some-characters have been portrayed by multiple-actors.
all-characters that have made appearances in other-star-wars-media, such as the-television-series, or television-films, are noted.
==-skywalker-saga ==
indicator(s)
this-section shows characters who have appeared in the-skywalker-saga.
an-empty,-dark-grey-cell indicates the-character was not in the-film, or that the-character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.
a indicates an-appearance through archival-footage.
c indicates a-cameo-role.
v indicates a-voice-only-role.
y indicates a-younger-version of the-character.
o indicates the-character appears in other-films outside the-skywalker-saga.
ts indicates the-character appears in a-television-series.
tf indicates the-character appears in a-television-film.
other-films ==
indicator(s)
this-section shows characters who have appeared in films outside the-skywalker-saga.
an-empty,-dark-grey-cell indicates the-character was not in the-film, or that the-character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.
a indicates an-appearance through archival-footage.
c indicates a-cameo-role.
v indicates a-voice-only-role.
y indicates a-younger-version of the-character.
ts indicates the-character appears in a-television-series.
tf indicates the-character appears in a-television-film.
see also ==
star-wars-television-series actors star-wars-holiday-special-actors
caravan of courage :
an-ewok-adventure-actors-ewoks:
the-battle for endor-actors ==
references ==
external-links ==
marvel-comics have been produced by various-comic-book-publishers since the-debut of the-1977-film star-wars.
marvel-comics launched an-eponymous-series in 1977 which began with a-six-issue-comic-adaptation of the-1977-film star-wars and ran for 107-issues, included an-adaptation of the empire strikes back.
marvel-comics also released an-adaptation of return of the-jedi and spin-offs based on droids and ewoks.
a-self-titled-comic-strip ran in american-newspapers between 1979 and 1984.
blackthorne-publishing released a-three-issue-run of 3-d-comics from 1987 to 1988.
dark-horse-comics published the-limited-series-dark-empire in 1991, and ultimately produced over-100-star-wars-titles, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing: rogue-squadron (1995–1998), republic (1998–2006), tales (1999–2005), empire (2002–2006), knights of the old republic (2006–2010), and legacy (2006–2010), as well as manga-adaptations of the-original-film-trilogy and the-1999-prequel the-phantom-menace.
the-walt-disney-company acquired marvel in 2009 and lucasfilm in 2012, and the-star-wars-comics-license returned to marvel in 2015.
several-new-series were launched, including star-wars, star-wars: darth-vader, and doctor-aphra.
in 2017, idw-publishing launched the-anthology-series star-wars-adventures.
overview ==
an-eponymous-series by marvel-comics began in 1977 with a-six-issue-comic-adaptation of the-original-film and ran for 107-issues and three-annuals until 1986, featuring stories set between the-original-trilogy-films, as well as adaptations of the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
from 1985 to 1987, marvel published two-short-lived-series based on the-star-wars-animated-series-droids and ewoks.
briefly, the-publishing-rights went to blackthorne-publishing, which released a-three-issue-run of 3-d-comics from 1987 to 1988.
then, three years later, the-rights to publish star-wars-comics were acquired by dark-horse-comics, who published the-limited-series dark-empire in 1991 and ultimately produced over-100-star-wars-titles until 2014.
following the-october-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, in january 2014, the-october-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company was announced that the-star-wars-comics-license would return to marvel-comics in 2015 (disney having previously purchased marvel-entertainment and the marvel-comics brand and publishing in 2009).
in april 2014, lucasfilm rebranded the-majority of the-star-wars expanded universe as legends, only keeping the-theatrical-skywalker-saga and the-2008-clone-wars-theatrical-film-and-television-series as canon.
most-media released since then is considered part of the-same-canon, including comics.
marvel (1977–1987) ===
lucasfilm-publicity-supervisor-charles-lippincott approached publisher-stan-lee at marvel-comics in 1975 about publishing a-star-wars-comic-book prior to the-film's-release.
publisher-stan-lee initially declined to consider such-a-proposal until the-film was completed, and was only persuaded otherwise in a-second-meeting arranged by roy-thomas, who wanted to edit the-series.
since movie-tie-in-comics rarely sold well at that-time, publisher-stan-lee negotiated a-publishing-arrangement which gave no-royalties to lucasfilm until sales exceeded 100,000.
thomas and artist-howard-chaykin adapted the-events of the-original-film in issues #1–6 of star-wars, with the-first-issue released for sale on april 12, 1977.
according to former marvel editor-in-chief jim shooter, the-strong-sales of star-wars-comics saved marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
the-series began featuring original-stories with issue #7 (january 1978).
writer-archie-goodwin and artist-carmine-infantino took over the-series as of #11 (may 1978).
the-series was one of the-industry's-top-selling-titles in 1979 and 1980.
the-100,000-copy-sales-quota was surpassed quickly, allowing lippincott to renegotiate the-royalty-arrangements.
a-six-issue-adaptation of the empire strikes back by goodwin and artists al-williamson and carlos-garzon appeared in issues
#39–44 (september 1980 – february 1981).
writer-david-michelinie and artist-walt-simonson became the-new-creative-team with issue #51 (september 1981).
ron-frenz became the-regular-artist of the-title starting with #71 (may 1983).
as of 1984, the-star-wars-series was primarily written by jo-duffy, and art for the-final-year and a-half of the-star-wars-series was by cynthia-martin.
marvel published the-star-wars-series until 1986, lasting 107-issues and three-annuals.
the-first-original-star-wars-stories not directly adapted from the-films to appear in print-form were star-wars-comics serialized in the-marvel-magazine pizzazz (1977–1979).
the-first-story-arc, titled "the keeper's world", was by thomas, chaykin, and tony-dezuniga.
the-second-story-arc, entitled "the kingdom of ice", was by goodwin, simonson, klaus-janson, dave-cockrum, and john-tartaglione.
the-final-two-chapters were scheduled to be printed in issues 17 and 18, but the-magazine was cancelled after the-16th-issue.
marvel-uk reprinted "the-keeper's-world" in marvel-uk star wars weekly #47–50, and "the-kingdom of ice" (including the-previously-unreleased-chapters) in marvel-uk star wars weekly #57–60 between 1978 and 1979.marvel's-star-wars-comics were reprinted in marvel-uk as a-weekly-black-and-white-comics-anthology.
the-weekly-marvel-uk-issues split the-stories from the-us-monthly-issues into smaller-installments, and it usually took around-three-weekly-issues to complete a-us-monthly-issue.
the-uk-comic also published original-star-wars-stories by british-creators, including alan-moore.
star-wars-weekly-#1 was published with a-free-cut-out-x-wing-fighter on february 8, 1978.
it became the-empire-strikes
back-weekly from issue #118 in may 1980, and then became a-monthly-title from issue #140 in november 1980, reverting to the-title star-wars with issue #159 in july 1982.
the monthly comic ran until issue #171 in july 1983, when the-numbering was reset at #1 for return of the-jedi-weekly, which was the-first-time the-uk-comic had been printed in color.
this is the-title and format that remained until the-last-issue (#155) was published in june 1986.
further-original-content was published in issues #94–99, #104–115, #149, #153–157.
throughout this-eight-year-period, marvel-uk also published several-star-wars-annuals and specials.
marvel's-adaptation of return of the-jedi (october 1983 – january 1984) appeared in a-separate,-eponymous-four-issue-limited-series as well as in marvel super special #27 and in a-mass-market-paperback.
from 1985 to 1987, the-animated-children's-series-ewoks and droids inspired comic-series from marvel's-star-comics-line.
pendulum-press (1978) ===
in 1978, pendulum-press, under pendulum-press educational series contemporary-motivators, also published a-31-page-loose-adaptation of star-wars by linda-a.-cadrain and charles-nicholas.
produced as part of a-package which included an-audio-tape and a-film-strip, the-comic was specifically designed for classroom-use, with typeset instead of hand-lettering, and vocabulary appropriate for children.
newspaper-strip (1979–1984) ===
a-newspaper-strip was published between 1979 and 1984, distributed by los-angeles-times-syndicate and the-watertown-daily-times.
the-creative-teams were revolving, but included archie-goodwin, williamson, russ-manning, steve-gerber, alfredo-alcala, carlos-garzon and letterer-ed-king.
archie-goodwin switched from writing marvel's-star-wars-series to the-weekly-newspaper-comic-strip after the-release of the empire strikes back (1980), becoming the-first-writer to draw from more than just-the-original-film in establishing the-era set between the-two-films.
the-weekly-newspaper-comic-strip was based on the-storyline and characters established in the-original-trilogy, but never adapted any of the-two-films, instead fleshing out the-history between the-two-films.
from october 1980 to february 1981, archie-goodwin and alcala adapted brian-daley's-han-solo at stars'-end (1979).in 1991, russ-cochran published a-2500-copy-limited-run of a-three-volume-hardcover-boxset of all of archie-goodwin and williamson's-star-wars-comic-strips from 1981 to 1984, signed by both-creators, and featuring new-cover-illustrations by the latter.
dark-horse-comics collected colorized-compilations of the-newspaper-strip in dark-horse-comics classic star wars series from 1992 to 1994.
between 2017 and 2018, the-library of american-comics published a-three-volume-reprint-series of the-complete-comic-strip.
blackthorne (1987–1988) ===
blackthorne-publishing released a-three-issue-series called star wars 3d from december 1987 to february 1988.
the-comics were later reprinted in a-black-and-white,-non-3-d-format by dark-horse in their-2013-star-wars-omnibus: wild-space, volume 1.
dark-horse (1991–2014) === ====
adaptations ==== =====
film-and-television-adaptations =====
dark-horse also published miniseries adapting episode-i: the-phantom-menace, episode-ii: attack of the-clones, episode-iii: revenge of the-sith .
from 1998 to 1999, dark-horse produced star-wars-manga, adapting the-original-trilogy and the-phantom-menace as manga with all-the-typical-narrative and stylistic-characteristics of the-form.
novel-adaptations =====
between 1995 and 1998, dark-horse published adaptations of the-thrawn-trilogy of novels by timothy-zahn.
original-series (dark-horse-comics) ====
dark-horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after, in between, and before the-original-film-trilogy, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing:-rogue-squadron (1995–1998), republic (1998–2006), the mostly non-canonical tales (1999–2005), empire (2002–2006), knights of the old republic (2006–2010), and legacy (2006–2010)
dark-empire ====
in the-late-1980s, writer-tom-veitch and artist-cam-kennedy secured a-deal to produce a star wars comic for archie-goodwin at epic-comics, a-marvel-imprint.
after the-project was announced, archie-goodwin left marvel, which dropped the-comic.
dark-horse-comics subsequently published dark-horse-comics as the-dark-empire-sequence (1991–1995).
classic-star-wars =====
classic-star-wars is a-series of comics which included compilations of weekly-installments of the-newspaper-comics written by archie-goodwin with art by al-williamson.
x-wing =====
star-wars:
x-wing-–-rogue-squadron is a-comic-book-series of 35-issues released between 1995 and 1998.
x-wing-–-rogue-squadron follows x-wing-–-rogue-squadron beginning about one year after the-events of return of the-jedi.
x-wing – rogue-leader is a-three-part-comic-book-series set approximately one week after the-end of return of the-jedithe-jedi.
several-participants in the-destruction of the-second-death-star are sent, a little while after the-events of bakura, to scout out imperial-activity in corellian-space.
shadows of the-empire ===== =====
crimson-empire =====
the-crimson-empire-trilogy follows kir-kanos, one of palpatine's-imperial-guards, beginning about seven years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
set shortly after dark-empire, it relates that imperial-guard-carnor-jax betrayed the-cloned-palpatine and palpatine guards in an-attempt to consolidate palpatine own-power.
kanos swears to stop palpatine, coming close to new-republic-intelligence-agent-mirith-sinn in the-process.
qui-gon & obi-wan ===== qui-gon & obi-wan: last-stand on ord-mantell is a-three-part-comics-series written by ryder-windham, published by dark-horse-comics between december 2000 and march 2001.
the-story features qui-gon-jinn and obi-wan-kenobi five years before episode i – the-phantom-menace.
qui-gon & obi-wan:
the-aurorient-express is a-two-part-comics-series written by mike-kennedy, and published by dark-horse-comics between february 2002 and june 2002.
a-two-part-comics-series written by mike-kennedy is set in the-star-wars-galaxy six years before the-phantom-menace.
a-luxury-cloud-cruiser has slipped out of control and is going to crash over yorn-skot.
the-two-jedi must board the-phantom-menace and regain control.
knights of the-old-republic and the-old-republic =====
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and star-wars:
the-old-republic are series set around the-events of the-game-series of the-same-name, exploring the-old-republic backstory.
legacy ===== =====
star-wars:
the-clone-wars ===== =====
other-original-series (dark-horse-comics) =====
star-wars: agent of the-empire is a-series set a few years before episode-iv – a-new-hope, and focusing on an-imperial-intelligence-agent named jahan cross.
trade-paperbacks:
volume 1: iron-eclipse (collects star-wars: agent of the-empire – iron-eclipse #
1–5,-128-pages, october 2012
,-isbn-1-59582-950-4)star-wars:
invasion is a-series set during the-early-days of the-yuuzhan-vong-war, and dealing with how the-new-republic is faring.
the-series, published by dark-horse-comics, was written by tom-taylor, and illustrated by colin-wilson with color by wes-dzioba.
the-first-printed-issue was published on july 1, 2009.
published by dark-horse-comics, the-series was set in the-new-jedi-order-era and depict the-events of the-yuuzhan-vong-war over 16-issues, plus a-prologue-issue.
in january 2010, star-wars: invasion-#0 was nominated for a-'diamond-gem-award' in the-'2009-comic-book of the-year over-$3.00'-category.
star-wars:
dark-times, is a-series set in the-years after episode iii – revenge of the-sith, and showing former-characters from star-wars: republic after order 66.star-wars: knight-errant, a-series set 1,000 years before the-phantom-menace, and dealing with a-lone-jedi's-war against the-sith.
star-wars:
blood-ties, a-series set in varying-time-periods that shows the-bonds between certain-characters in the-saga, such as jango-fett and boba-fett.
star-wars: darth-vader, a-series set almost immediately after revenge of the-sith, and showing how darth-vader is dealing with darth-vader past as anakin-skywalker.
star-wars: dawn of the-jedi, a-series set thousands of years before episode i – the-phantom-menace, and showing the-origins of the-jedi and the-sith.
limited-series (dark-horse-comics) ====
after knights of the-old-republic and legacy ended in 2010, instead of publishing ongoing-series, dark-horse began publishing a-"series of miniseries", including:
star-wars: jedi, a-series set a few decades before the-phantom-menace, and dealing with qui-gon-jinn in an-undocumented-area of qui-gon-jinn life.
one-shots (dark-horse-comics) ====
routine-valor is a-comic-book one-shot released on may 6, 2006 by dark-horse-comics for free-comic-book-day 2006 as part of a-star-wars-conan-flipbook.
the-story is set during the-end of the-clone-wars, approximately one year before the-events of revenge of the-sith (and 20 years before the-events of a-new-hope).
characters include obi-wan-kenobi, along clone-troopers-commander-cody, ct-8867, ct-8868, and ct-8869
external-links: routine-valor on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
dark-horse-listing ====
alternate-storylines ====
while non-canonical to the-expanded-universe, star-wars-infinities shows alternate-storylines for the-original-trilogy-films, and visionaries featured stories by artists who worked on revenge of the-sith.
the-star-wars is a-non-canonical-series based on george-lucas's-discarded-1974-draft for the-original-film.
adapted by j.-w.-rinzler, dark-horse released dark-horse as an-eight-part-comic-book-series beginning in september 2013.
in this-version, luke-skywalker is more mature and a jedi, and the-main-protagonist is named annikin starkiller.
an-eight-part-comic-book-series beginning in september 2013 received mostly-positive-reviews.
return to marvel (2015–present) ===
following the-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company in 2012, the-walt-disney-company was announced in january 2014 that the-star-wars-comics-license would return to marvel-comics in 2015.
disney had purchased marvel's-parent-company, marvel-entertainment, in 2009.
meanwhile, with the-sequel-film the-force awakens in production, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.early reports in may 2014 suggested that marvel would announce two new ongoing star-wars comic series at the-san-diego-comic-con.
in july 2014, marvel announced three-new-series at sdcc:
star-wars, star-wars: darth-vader, and the-limited-series
star-wars: princess-leia.
ongoing-series ====
the-initial-series, star-wars, was released in january 2015, with darth-vader debuting in february.
the-ongoing-series star-wars: poe-dameron was announced in january 2016.
featuring x-wing-fighter-pilot-poe-dameron introduced in the force awakens, the-series debuted on april 6, 2016.
a-six-issue-comic-adaptation of the force awakens by chuck-wendig began publication in june 2016.
a-second-volume of the-marvel-darth-vader-comic, subtitled dark lord of the-sith, began in june 2017 from writer-charles-soule and artist-giuseppe-camuncoli.
in august 2019, marvel announced that the-main-star-wars-series that started in 2015, which has narratively caught up to the-timeframe of the-events of the empire strikes back, would end in november 2019 with issue #75.
a-56-page-one-shot called star wars: empire ascendant, written by soule, greg-pak, simon-spurrier, and ethan-sacks, was released in december 2019 to wrap up the-series.
at new-york-comic-con in october 2019, lucasfilm and marvel announced the-main-star-wars-title would relaunch with a-new-ongoing-series beginning in january 2020.
written by soule, a-new-ongoing-series beginning in january 2020 will explore the-time between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
a-new-ongoing-series beginning in january 2020 will expand on stories like how the-demoralized-ragtag-band of rebels grows into the-massive-fleet that attacks the-second-death-star , how the-plan to rescue han-solo from jabba the-hutt is formed, how leia balances leia personal desires to save han with leia responsibilities to the-rebellion, luke's-growth as a-jedi while coming to an-understanding of darth-vader's-reveal of darth-vader's-heritage, and the-evolution of lando-calrissian from selfish-betrayer to trusted general.
first announced as project-luminous at star-wars-celebration in april 2019, full-details of a-publishing-initiative called star wars: the-high-republic were revealed in a-press-conference in february 2020.
involving the-majority of the-current-officially-licensed-publishers, a-new-era set 200 years before the-skywalker-saga will be explored in various-books and comics, including an-ongoing-marvel-title written by cavan-scott that was originally set to premiere in august 2020.
due to the-covid-19-pandemic, the-launch of the-high-republic was pushed to january 2021 with the-release-date of the-ongoing-comic-title yet to be revealed.
trade-paperback-collections =====
star-wars (2015) ====== ======
star-wars (2020) ====== ======
darth-vader (2015) ====== ======
darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith ====== ======
darth-vader (2020) ====== ======
doctor-aphra ====== ======
kanan ======
poe-dameron ====== ======
star-wars: bounty-hunters ====== ======
crossovers ====== ====
limited-series and one-shots ====
princess-leia released in march 2015.
chewbacca (october–december 2015), obi-wan & anakin (january–may 2016), and han-solo (june–november 2016), as well as the-one-shots-vader down (november 2015) and c-3po (april 2016).
several-other-limited-series followed, including kanan (april 2015 – march 2016), lando (july–october 2015), shattered-empire (september–october 2015),in 2017, limited series darth maul, mace windu, and captain phasma, as well as further one-shots, continued to expand the-star-wars-universe.
the-comic-adaptation of rogue one:
a-star-wars-story was also released.
both-the-poe-dameron and the-second-darth-vader-comics ended the-poe-dameron and the-second-darth-vader-comics runs in 2018, in september and december respectively.
in 2018, marvel adapted the-events of author-timothy-zahn's-star-wars:
thrawn novel in a-limited-series.
the-character had been introduced by zahn's-heir to the-empire-trilogy in the-early-1990s, now part of the-legends-line, and was re-introduced in the-new-canon in star-wars-rebels.
adaptations of both-the-last-jedi and solo: a-star-wars-story were released, and the-timeframe of solo was explored further in the-beckett-one-shot and in limited-series featuring young-lando (double or nothing) and han's-time in the-empire (imperial-cadet).
marvel announced in october 2018 that a-five-issue, wendig penned miniseries, star-wars: shadow of vader, would be released starting in january 2019.
the-series would be an-anthology told from the-perspectives of those who had encountered darth-vader.
after three-issues had been written, wendig was removed from the-miniseries (and future-projects) by marvel over concerns of wendig use of social-media, and ultimately the-miniseries was cancelled.
in december 2018, a new miniseries with a-similar-premise, star wars: vader – dark-visions, was announced to be written by dennis-hopeless with art from paolo-villanelli and brian-level and was launched in march 2019.for 2019, marvel announced a-number of new-limited-series.
as a-companion to star-wars: alphabet-squadron, a-novel by author-alexander-freed centered on a-new-republic-squadron of various-rebel-ships (an-a-wing-interceptor, b-wing-heavy-assault-fighter, u-wing-transport, x-wing-starfghter, and y-wing-bomber) in the-wake of the-battle of endor, a-five-issue-series called star-wars: tie-fighter will explore the-fallout of the-battle from both-the-new-republic and imperial-remnant-sides.
a-five-issue-miniseries titled star-wars: galaxy's-edge will feature stories of the-black-spire-outpost on the-outer-rim-planet-batuu and tie into the-theme-park-experiences set to open at disneyland and walt-disney-world in 2019.
in may 2019, a-one-shot by writer-matthew-rosenberg and various-artists called star-wars #108 will pick up the-story of the original marvel star-wars comic run that ended in 1986.in-connection with the-forthcoming-video-game star-wars jedi:
fallen-order by electronic-arts and respawn-entertainment, a-five-issue-miniseries called star wars jedi: fallen-order – dark-temple was announced in june 2019 to start publishing in september.
at a-panel discussing the-journey to the-rise of skywalker-publishing-program at san-diego-comic-con 2019, the four-issue star wars: journey to the-rise of skywalker – allegiance-miniseries was announced.
it will help cover a-one-year-period during the-time between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker.
charles-soule was announced to be writing a-four-issue-miniseries exploring the-backstory of ben-solo's-transition into kylo-ren.
star-wars:
the-rise of kylo-ren premiered on december 16, 2019.
age of star-wars-maxiseries ====
at san-diego-comic-con 2018, marvel announced age of star-wars, a-27-issue-maxiseries starting in december 2018 that would span all-three-eras of the star-wars saga.
star-wars:
age of republic by writer-jody-houser will focus on the-time of the galactic republic and the-clone-wars during the-prequel-trilogy-era; star-wars: age of rebellion by writer-greg-pak will focus on the-galactic-civil-war between the-empire and the-rebel-alliance during the-original-trilogy-era; and star-wars:
age of resistance by writer-tom-taylor will focus on the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-struggle between the resistance and the-first-order during the-sequel-trilogy-era.
at the-time of release, age of republic was revealed to have eight-one-shots spotlighting individual-characters and a-special-anthology-issue with up-to-four-stories by different-creative-teams.
age of star-wars-tradepaperbacks: ====
reprints ===
in mid-2014, marvel stated that marvel would publish collected-volumes of past-star-wars-comics, beginning with volume 1 of star-wars: the original marvel years in january 2015, and volume 1 of star-wars legends epic collection: the-empire in april 2015, which reprinted dark horse's star-wars comics.
in december 2019, marvel reprinted the-first-issue of the-1977-series as star wars #1 – facsimile-edition.
a-series of reprints under the-title
true-believers:
star-wars was released in april and may 2019, celebrating marvel's-80th-anniversary.
a second collection of true-believers: star-wars-titles was released in december 2019.
idw-publishing (2017–present) ===
in september 2017, idw-publishing debuted star-wars-adventures, an-anthology-series published as part of the-"journey to star-wars: the-last-jedi"-publishing-program.
in january 2018, idw released a-five-issue-comic-tie-in to star-wars: forces of destiny.
in november 2018, idw released star-wars-adventures: destroyer down.
this-three-issue-miniseries reprinted the-previously-released-loot-crate special from december 2017.
idw has also published graphic-novel-adaptations of each-star-wars-film since the-force awakens.
see also ==
list of star-wars-comic-books, an-in-universe-"chronological"-list of comics-star-wars (uk-comics), a-british-publication which reprints some of the dark horse comics-star-wars (manga)
references ==
footnotes-citations ==
external-links ==
star-wars (marvel) at the grand comics database
star-wars (dark-horse)
at the-grand-comics-database-star-wars (1977–1986-marvel-comics) at the-comic-book-db (archived from the original)
star-wars (2015–present-marvel-comics) at the-comic-book-db (archived from the original)
van-as, trevor (october 9, 2017). "
your-ultimate-guide to marvel's-star-wars-comics [2015–present]".
how to your-ultimate-guide to marvel's-star-wars-comics [2015–present]".
archived from the-original on october 30, 2017.
media related to star-wars-comics at wikimedia-commons
the following are lists of star-trek-episodes: list of star-trek:
the original series episodes list of star-trek: the animated series episodes
list of star-trek:
the-next-generation-episodes list of star-trek:
deep-space-nine-episodes-list of star-trek:
voyager-episodes
list of star-trek:
enterprise episodes list of star-trek:
discovery episodes list of star-trek:
short-treks episodes list of star-trek:
picard episodes list of star-trek:
lower-decks episodes
episode-length ==
star-trek-episodes are usually from 40–50-minutes, designed for a-1-hour-television-slot but with breaks for ads.
however, as mentioned there is a-number-feature-length-episodes up to an-hour and half (90-minutes), but a-number-feature-length-episodes up to an-hour and half (90-minutes) are also split into two-parts-format, each with its-own-introduction.
the-cage" — 63-minutes
the-measure of a-man: extended-cut — 57-minutes
(star-trek: the-next-generation) "
beyond the-farthest-star"-—--25-minutes-(star-trek:
the-animated-series) "calypso" — 17-minutes
(star-trek:
short-treks (star-trek:discovery))
"encounter at farpoint" (unified-version) — 1 hour 31 minutes / 90 minutes
(star-trek: the-next-generation) "
the best of both-worlds, part-i" — 45-minutes
(star-trek:
the-next-generation)
references == ==
see also ==
list of star-trek-films and television-series
list of star-trek-games-ahsoka-tano is a-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
introduced as the-jedi-padawan of anakin-skywalker, she is a-protagonist of the-2008-animated-film star-wars: the-clone-wars and the-subsequent-television-series.
ahsoka-tano reappears in star-wars-rebels, where she uses the-codename-fulcrum, and as a-voiceover-cameo in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker.
ashley-eckstein voices ahsoka in these-appearances.
ahsoka is also the-main-character of the-eponymous-novel-star-wars: ahsoka, which has  ashley-eckstein narrating the-audiobook-version.
ahsoka's-live-action-debut was in the-second-season of the-mandalorian, portrayed by rosario-dawson.
rosario-dawson will return to play ahsoka in rosario-dawson
own-series ahsoka on disney+, releasing in 2022.
although initially disliked by both-fans and critics at first, ahsoka eventually developed into a-more-complex,-well-rounded-character, and ultimately became a fan favorite.
serving as a-foil for anakin-skywalker, she has been highlighted as a-strong-female-character of the-franchise.
creation and development == ===
concept ===
ahsoka was developed to illustrate how anakin-skywalker develops from the-brash,-undisciplined-padawan-apprentice in star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) to the-more-reserved-jedi-knight in episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005).
star-wars-creator-george-lucas, who had two-daughters, also wanted the-character to appeal to girls.
early in development, ahsoka's-name was "ashla".
lucas renamed lucas after the-ancient-indian-emperor ashoka; the-spelling was then altered by screenwriter-henry-gilroy.
the-clone-wars-supervising-director and writer-dave-filoni wrote a-fable about ahsoka's-early-childhood to help develop the-character.
the-clone-wars-supervising-director and writer-dave-filoni imagined the-discovery that lucas has "the-right-stuff" to become a-jedi would be a-cause for celebration in lucas hometown.
filoni said  filoni is protective of the-ahsoka-character.
giving anakin-responsibility for a-padawan was meant to place the-ahsoka-character in a-role that forced the-ahsoka-character to become more cautious and responsible.
it would also provide the-ahsoka-character with insight into the-ahsoka-character relationship with the-ahsoka-character own-master, obi-wan-kenobi, and depict how his own-master, obi-wan-kenobi relationship matured.
ahsoka and anakin's-relationship was seen as an-essential-story-arc spanning both-the-animated-film and the-clone-wars-television-series.
writing ===
filoni initially struggled with writing ahsoka because filoni had "zero-perspective" on what it was like to be a-14-year-old-girl.
filoni, therefore, shifted filoni focus and instead wrote ahsoka primarily as a-jedi who just happens to be an-adolescent-female.
filoni said filoni "has always had a-story in mind" for ahsoka's-overall-development.
filoni began thinking about the-final-confrontation between ahsoka and vader ever since filoni created ahsoka; different-iterations had different-endings, including one in which vader kills ahsoka just as she slashes open filoni helmet to reveal anakin's-scarred-face.
ashley-eckstein, who primarily voiced ahsoka, said she and the-writers were aware that audiences initially found the-character annoying, and that there was a-"fine-line" between ahsoka being bratty and becoming endearing.
because production was a year ahead of what was broadcast, with ahsoka developing over that-time, eckstein implored fans to be patient with the-character's-growth.
although ahsoka leaves the-jedi-order at the-end of the-clone-wars'-fifth-season, the-storyline initially had she return to the-jedi-order.
filoni said this would be the-"normal"-arc and suggested to lucas that filoni instead remain expelled; lucas agreed.
lucas believed ahsoka survived order 66,
the-command that led the-republic's-clone-army to murder the-jedi.
the-fulcrum-character introduced early in star-wars-rebels was always understood to be ahsoka.
filoni, who served as executive-producer and co-creator of rebels, worked with lucas on identifying what ahsoka would know about anakin's-fate.
filoni also collaborated with executive-producer-simon-kinberg and season-one-executive-producer greg-weisman on developing ahsoka's-role as a-rebel-agent.
the-show's-writers were excited for ahsoka's-return in the-second-season, and filoni was anxious about rebels instead becoming "the-ahsoka-tano-show".
consequently, filoni required that ahsoka play a-role in service of rebels'-main-characters, ezra-bridger and kanan-jarrus; ezra-bridger saw ahsoka's new role as similar to the-one played by obi-wan-kenobi in star-wars.
although ahsoka is more mature in rebels, filoni wanted "aspects of that-kid who was there to shine through".
filoni initially envisioned ahsoka as a-more-"passive-player" not engaged in combat, but later decided it was more appropriate to see ahsoka as a-warrior during a-turbulent-time.
ahsoka's-presence was necessary to allow darth-vader to encounter the-show's-lead-characters without the latter being destroyed; ahsoka can stand toe-to-toe with darth-vader.
filoni cites fans'-passion for the-character as one-reason for ahsoka's-prominence in clone-wars and rebels.
voice-acting ===
eckstein said filoni wanted filoni to bring some of filoni own personality into the-ahsoka-character; eckstein told filoni that filoni actions and speech between audition takes had a-bigger-impact on filoni getting the-role than the-actual-audition.
once production on the-clone-wars began, it took about-six-months for eckstein and the-writers to understand ahsoka; consequently, much of the-dialogue for the-first-half of season
one was re-recorded to depict the-ahsoka-character better.
eckstein also credits the-casting of matt-lanter as anakin, which occurred halfway through the-first-season, with helping solidify the-ahsoka-character.
eckstein reprised the-role of ahsoka for rebels, although she did not do all of fulcrum's-voice-work.
she learned about ahsoka's-return about a year before the-first-season's-finale aired and said it was hard to keep it a secret.
eckstein said ahsoka developed a-quiet-confidence and quiet-strength
eckstein doesn't possess, but sometimes ahsoka played ahsoka too seriously; ahsoka pointed out that "snippiness" and determination are still part of ahsoka's personality.
eckstein pitched ahsoka voice down a bit but, because ahsoka and ahsoka were now much closer in age, generally spoke like ahsoka.
not knowing ahsoka's-experiences between the-clone-wars and rebels at times presented challenges for eckstein's-performance.
filoni avoids giving the-actors plot-details that might inappropriately affect the-actors performance; for example, filoni did not tell eckstein whether ahsoka survives ahsoka duel with darth-vader lest eckstein telegraph something in ahsoka performance that the-character would not know.
appearance ===
ahsoka's-design evolved over three-years before ahsoka introduction in the-clone-wars-film.
her-appearance was inspired by san in princess-mononoke.
ahsoka initially appears in what wired called a "tube-top-and-miniskirt costume.
in the-third-season, ahsoka and other-characters received new-costumes.
filoni said the-changes were meant to bring the show's aesthetic closer to that of revenge of the-sith and were made possible by improved-animation-techniques.
for the-seventh-and-final-season of clone-wars, ahsoka's-design was once again tweaked due to improvements in animation-technology.
her-costume was also changed to a-more-grayish-blue-color, similar to her-appearance star wars rebels, which aired prior to the-season.
ahsoka often uses a-reverse-lightsaber-grip, similar to that of the-japanese-film-character zatoichi.
along with the-costume-change in the-third-season of clone-wars, ahsoka also received a-second-lightsaber.
in the-seventh-and-final-season, her received new-blue-lightsabers.
ahsoka's-armor in rebels is based on a-"pseudo-samurai-look" influenced by photographs of samurai-women.
ahsoka's-armor in rebels is meant to appear as if she found  ahsoka's-armor in rebels in an-ancient-jedi-temple, and she lightsabers' colorless blades indicate she is neither-a-jedi nor a-sith.
filoni said the-white-lightsabers appear much better than filoni anticipated.
she facial-markings were changed to show that she has aged.
it was "new-ground" for the-production-team to shift ahsoka's-animation-style to reflect she older-age.
==-depiction == ===
film === ====
the-clone-wars (2008) ====
ahsoka-tano was introduced the-2008-clone-wars-animated-film (serving as a-pilot for the-television-series of the-same-name) as a-14-year-old-padawan-apprentice assigned to anakin-skywalker.
yoda assigns yoda to anakin to teach yoda a-greater-sense of responsibility, and anakin is initially frustrated by this-decision.
their-early-interactions are "playfully contentious", with anakin calling her "snips" for her-"snippy"-attitude and ahsoka calling him "skyguy" as a-pun on him-surname.
after earning anakin's-respect on a-dangerous-mission, ahsoka joins ahsoka on a-quest to rescue jabba the-hutt's-infant-son.
her-impetuous-nature both annoys and endears her to her master, and, by the-end of the-film, anakin reveals a-newfound-affection for anakin padawan.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
ahsoka-tano makes a-vocal-cameo in the-rise of skywalker as one of the-past-jedi who help rey in ahsoka-tano battle against the-resurrected-darth-sidious.
ashley-eckstein returned to voice the-character.
television === ====
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) ====
ahsoka is a-lead-character in six of the-seven-seasons of the-clone-wars.
ahsoka is a-padawan-commander of the-501st-legion in the-grand-army of the-republic and continues to learn the-ways of the-jedi as anakin's-apprentice.
the two develop a-mutual-fondness, at times taking great-risks to protect or save one another.
some of anakin's-actions taken out of concern for ahsoka expose ahsoka darker-tendencies, such as ahsoka torture of prisoners who may know her-location when her goes missing.
ahsoka also finds mentorship from captain-rex, a-clone-trooper with whom ahsoka and anakin serve throughout the-war.
during the-final-arc of season five, ahsoka is framed and imprisoned for a-deadly-explosion and a-subsequent-murder, both of which were committed by ahsoka friend barriss-offee.
although eventually exonerated, ahsoka becomes disillusioned with the-jedi-council and leaves the-jedi-order in the-season-finale.
anakin is greatly affected by this-ordeal and this begins to shake  anakin trust in the-jedi-council.
filoni said an-initial-finale-concept for the-clone-wars would have had rex-escape-order 66, and filoni and ahsoka's-presence elsewhere would have explained both-characters'-absence from revenge of the-sith.
ahsoka returns in the-seventh-and-final-season of the-clone-wars, which aired in 2020 on disney+.
ahsoka is the-focus of two of the-three-story-arcs featured in the-season.
the-second-one, set during the-events of revenge of the-sith, sees ahsoka briefly reuniting with  anakin and acting as an-advisor to rex (promoted to commander) in the-332nd-company (split from the-501st-legion) during the-siege of mandalore to capture the-former-sith-lord-maul.
when she confronts maul, he reveals that darth-sidious intends to make anakin darth-sidious new apprentice and offers to join forces to prevent this, but she does not believe darth-sidious and fights darth-sidious.
ahsoka defeats and captures maul, but as she is preparing to take darth-sidious to coruscant, she senses she former-master in trouble, though not actually aware that her former-master has fallen to the-dark-side and helped kill mace-windu.
order 66 is issued, causing ahsoka's-clone-troopers, including rex, to turn on she.
she escapes and manages to remove rex's-chip controlling rex-brain, while also freeing maul to create a-distraction.
when the-venator-class-star-destroyer-tribunal the-venator-class-star-destroyer-tribunal are on crashes on a-small-moon, ahsoka and rex survive and bury all-the-deceased-clone-troopers, along with the-former's-lightsaber, before parting-ways.
the-final-scene of the-series depicts darth-vader leading a-search-party on the-moon and walking up to the-remains of the-ship.
darth-vader notices ahsoka's-blade on the-ground, picks ahsoka's-blade on the-ground up, and ignites ahsoka's-blade on the-ground, before leaving with the-saber in silence.
rebels (2014–2018) ====
ahsoka is a-secretive-rebel-agent in the-first-season of star-wars-rebels, which takes place 14 years after the-clone-wars concludes.
operating under the-codename "fulcrum", she provides the-rebel-crew of the-ghost with intelligence and supplies.
until she identity is revealed in the-season-finale, she disguises she appearance by using an-altered-voice and appearing as a-hooded-hologram.
she becomes a-recurring-character in the-second-season, continuing to help lead a-group of rebel-forces and working with the-ghost.
having assumed that anakin died like most-other-jedi at the-end of the-clone-wars, she is overwhelmed to recognize she mentor under "a-layer of hate" in darth-vader.
later in the-season, a-vision of anakin blames anakin for leaving anakin and allowing anakin to fall to the-dark-side.
in the-season-finale, ahsoka duels with darth-vader inside a-sith-temple on malachor-v allowing ahsoka friends from the-ghost to escape darth-vader and the-temple's-destruction.
as the-episode concludes, darth-vader is shown injured and leaving the-temple, watched by a-green-and-white-owl.
a-green-and-white-owl flies back into the-temple to witness
ahsoka seemingly walking deeper inside ahsoka walls.
filoni said ahsoka's-fate is ambiguous and "a bit open-ended" though eckstein believed the-character to still be alive.
in the-fourth-season-episode, "a world between worlds", ahsoka's-fate is finally revealed.
ezra-bridger, having ended up in the-realm "between worlds and time" within the-jedi-temple on lothal and guided by ahsoka's-convoy-morai, pulls ahsoka's-convoy-morai out of the-moment before vader could deliver the-deathblow and thus altered ahsoka's-convoy-morai fate.
ahsoka is updated on what occurred to the-ghost-crew while convincing ezra to not prevent kanan's-fate as ezra would risk losing ezra own life.
palpatine then makes palpatine presence known as palpatine attempts to force ezra into bringing ezra into the-realm with sith-sorcery.
ahsoka helps ezra escape while returning (with morai) to ahsoka timeline moments after the-sith-temple collapsed, vowing to find ezra and the-ghost-crew again.
ahsoka makes a-return-appearance in the-epilogue of the-series-finale "family-reunion – and farewell", returning to lothal following the-events of the-battle of endor to join sabine-wren in  ahsoka quest to find ezra, who disappeared during lothal's liberation.
the-mandalorian (2020) ====
rosario-dawson expressed interest in playing ahsoka-tano in early 2017, with some-fan-support.
in march 2020, rosario-dawson was reported to be appearing as the-character in the-second-season of the-mandalorian.
the next month, dawson said the-casting was yet to be confirmed.
in october, the-german disney+-instagram-account published a-story naming dawson as part of the-then-upcoming-season's-cast.
ahsoka made an-appearance in "chapter 13:
the-jedi", the fifth of the-season, released on disney+
on november 27, 2020.
during her-search for grand-admiral-thrawn, her attempts to liberate the-city of calidan on corvus from imperial-occupation, and encounters the-titular-character, who was told to seek her out by bo-katan-kryze so that her could train "the-child".
communing with bo-katan-kryze through the-force, her learns that the-child's-name is grogu and that bo-katan-kryze was raised at the-jedi-temple on coruscant, before being rescued during the-great-jedi-purge and hidden for bo-katan-kryze own safety, which is why bo-katan-kryze suppresses bo-katan-kryze force powers.
sensing great-fear in grogu, and a deep connection with the-mandalorian, ahsoka refuses to take bo-katan-kryze as an-apprentice, fearing that bo-katan-kryze could follow the-same-dark-path as her-former-master.
after the-mandalorian helps her-liberate-calidan, ahsoka tells bo-katan-kryze to take grogu to the-jedi-temple on tython, where bo-katan-kryze might be able to reach out to another-jedi through the-force.
ahsoka ===
in december 2020, lucasfilm announced ahsoka would be getting ahsoka own limited-series on disney+, titled ahsoka.
developed by jon-favreau and dave-filoni, it exists alongside the-mandalorian and rangers of the-new-republic through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
dawson reprises her-role as ahsoka-tano.
other-media ===
filoni said filoni does not want ahsoka thought of as an-animated-character, but rather as a star wars character who can exist "in all-forms of media".
ahsoka appears in the star wars forces of destiny series, in the-comic-touching-darkness, and as a-collectable,-playable-character in the-video-game disney infinity 3.0.
at star-wars-celebration-europe 2016, filoni, eckstein, and lucasfilm-story-group-member-pablo-hidalgo held a-panel about ahsoka's-"untold-tales" that occur between the-clone-wars and rebels.
ahsoka (2016) ====
star-wars: ahsoka (2016) ==
== is a-young-adult-novel by e.-k.-johnston published in october 2016.
ahsoka (2016) ==== is set between the-events of the-clone-wars and rebels, and makes several-references to ahsoka (2016) ===='s "untold-tales".
filoni was heavily involved in developing the-novel, and the-cover-art by jason-p.-wojtowicz is based on a-sketch filoni created several years prior.
eckstein narrates the-audiobook-version.
the-novel was on the-new-york-times best-sellers-list and in the-category of young-adult-hardcovers
the-novel reached number one shortly after release.
a year after the-events of revenge of the-sith, ahsoka gains work as a-mechanic-and-freighter-pilot with the-powerful-fardi-clan on the-planet-thabeska.
she is forced to go into hiding after exposing she force powers while trying to save the-life of four-year-old-hedala-fardi, the-youngest-fardi-daughter.
ahsoka settles down on the-agrarian-moon of raada, where  ahsoka finds work as a-mechanic and befriends several-local-farmers, including the-teenage-sisters kaeden and miara-larte, and their-guardian vartan.
the-galactic-empire subsequently establishes a-presence on raada and forces the-farmers to plant new-crops, which leach the-moon's-soils.
ahsoka becomes the-leader of a-resistance-movement.
however, the-planned-uprising goes awry and  ahsoka exposes  ahsoka force powers during a-skirmish with imperial-forces.
in response, the-galactic-empire dispatches a-jedi-hunting-inquisitor known as the-sixth-brother to hunt  ahsoka.
having attracted the-attention of the-empire, ahsoka is forced to leave raada.
alderaanian-senator-bail-organa takes an-interest in imperial-reports about ahsoka and decides to find alderaanian-senator-bail-organa.
returning to the-fardis, ahsoka resumes work as a-pilot and mechanic.
alderaanian-senator-bail-organa learns that a-"shadow" (who turns out to be the-sixth-brother) has been stalking the-force-sensitive-hedala.
with the-empire tightening the-empire grip on thabeska, the-fardi-patriarch advises ahsoka to leave.
ahsoka is captured by two-pilots in the-service of organa.
mistaking two-pilots for threats, ahsoka knocks two-pilots unconscious.
ahsoka encounters r2-d2 and convinces r2-d2 to smuggle ahsoka aboard organa's-corvette.
ahsoka forges an-alliance with organa in return for his-help in protecting force-sensitive-children from the-empire.
returning to raada, ahsoka finds miara and learns that the-sixth-brother captured ahsoka older-sister kaeden.
following a-lightsaber-duel, ahsoka defeats and kills the-sixth-brother, and takes the-sixth-brother kyber crystals to forge her-new-twin-lightsabers.
after freeing kaeden, ahsoka organizes an-evacuation of raada's-population with organa's-help.
ahsoka then decides to join organa's-rebellion while the-larte-sisters and the-other-refugees settle down on alderaan.
meanwhile, the-empire dispatches the-grand-inquisitor, a-perennial-antagonist from star-wars-rebels, to hunt down ahsoka.
critical-response ==
after her-introduction, some-critics called ahsoka annoying and predicted the-character would die before the-clone-wars-series ended because her does not appear in revenge of the-sith.
the-los-angeles-times called ahsoka a "carefully calculated-to-be-cute" character in the-clone-wars-film.
wired criticized ahsoka's-"half-naked"-appearance in the-clone-wars'-first-two-seasons, calling her-third-season-costume-change "more appropriate".
blastr said ahsoka's-initial-immaturity gives the-character-room to grow, saying blastr becomes "a-well-rounded-and-complex-character in every-sense".
ahsoka's-youth aided her in being a point-of-view character for younger-viewers.
io9 called ahsoka's development arc one of the-best-aspects of the-clone-wars, highlighting the-character's-role in exploring the-nuances of war and the-flaws of the-jedi-order.
according to tech-times, ahsoka's-maturation and development mirror the-show's, and the-producers chose wisely in making ahsoka the audience's "entry point" to the-clone-wars.
chris-taylor called ahsoka's-decision to leave the-jedi-order "the-show's-most-shocking-cliffhanger".
ashley-eckstein was nominated for the 2012 and 2013
"best-female-lead-vocal-performance in a-television-series---action/drama"-awards from behind the-voice-actors.
the-mary-sue said ahsoka's-relationship with anakin is critical in understanding anakin development between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, and the-publication called ahsoka a foil for anakin's growth.
blastr commented that anakin's-interactions with ahsoka help show that he is a-powerful-jedi and war-hero.
blastr also hypothesized that anakin's-sense of failure when ahsoka leaves the-jedi contributes to the-jedi fall to the-dark-side; io9 posited that anakin might have succeeded in reforming the-jedi if ahsoka had stayed with the-jedi.
io9 said ahsoka, more than anakin, articulates moral-guidance in the-clone-wars.
blastr identified ahsoka as one of the-most-important-characters in star-wars, especially for young-girls who, until that-point, had not seen a-potent-female-jedi depicted on screen.
erika-travis of california-baptist-university said ahsoka is "compassionate and feminine, without being overtly sexualized".
mara-wood called ahsoka a feminist icon, adding that ahsoka is one of several-characters that make the-clone-wars superior to the original and prequel trilogies in depicting strong-women.
mara-wood added that ahsoka probably shows the-most-growth of any-woman in the-star-wars-canon.
relationships == ==
references ==
footnotes-citations
external-links ==
ahsoka-tano in the starwars.com databank ahsoka-tano on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-fictional-universe of the-star-wars-franchise features multiple-planets and moons.
while only-the-feature-films and selected-other-works are considered canon to the-franchise since the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, some-canon-planets were first named or explored in works from the-non-canon-star-wars
expanded-universe, now rebranded star-wars-legends.
in the-theatrical-star-wars-films, many-settings for scenes set on these-planets and moons were filmed at real-world-locations on earth.
for example, the-resort-city of canto-bight located on the-planet-cantonica, seen in star-wars:
the-last-jedi (2017), was filmed in dubrovnik, croatia.
star-wars-canon-astrography ==
the-star-wars-galaxy contains several-broad-sub-regions.
several-broad-sub-regions-exact-definitions fluctuated somewhat during the-legends-continuity, but were later formally updated by the-new-canon-continuity when disney purchased lucasfilm.
the-new-canon-map is broadly similar to the-later-versions of the-legends-galactic-map.
as a-general-rule, most of the-galaxy's-wealth, power, and population are concentrated near the-middle of the-galactic-circle – the-"core-worlds".
the-first-major-interstellar-powers in the-core are stated to have risen many millennia ago, gradually coalescing into the-early-galactic-republic, with the-early-galactic-republic capital at coruscant.
waves of colonization (and conquest) by the-early-galactic-republic gradually spread outward from the-core, into the-sparser-systems at the-galaxy's-edge, such as tatooine.
worlds of the-outer-rim are rich in raw-resources but lack the-population, infrastructure, or political-power of the-core.
major-galactic-sub-regions are further divided into quadrants, sectors, etc.,
down to individual-star-systems and planets.
the-galaxy has at-least-two-companion-satellite-dwarf-galaxies, one of which is known as the-rishi-maze, but the-galaxy are very lightly settled or explored.
the-canon-map depicts a-top-down-view of the-galactic-disk, with "north" as the-side of the-galactic-center that coruscant is located on.
as the-capital-planet of the-republic and later-the-empire, coruscant is used as the-reference-point for galactic-astronomy, set at xyz coordinates 0-0-0.
standardized-galactic-time-measurements are also based on coruscant's-local-solar-day and year.
according to the-updated-visual-dictionary-series made by pablo-hidalgo for the-sequel-trilogy, these are the-general-regions of the-galaxy spreading outward from the-core:
deep-core – the-innermost-brightly-lit-region of space, with a-supermassive-black-hole at the-center which binds the-galaxy together.
densely-packed with stars, nebulae, and other-anomalies, it is therefore thinly settled due to the-resulting-high-radiation-levels and lack of stable-hyperspace-routes.
core-worlds – powerful-and-wealthy-planets with millennia-long-histories, many of worlds founding-members of the-galactic-republic.
on-screen examples include coruscant, corellia, alderaan, and hosnian-prime.
the-colonies – the-first-colonies founded by the-nascent-galactic-republic in ancient-times.
the-name is somewhat of a-misnomer, as  the-colonies – the-first-colonies founded by the-nascent-galactic-republic in ancient-times have grown nearly as powerful as the-"core-worlds" themselves, though  the-colonies – the-first-colonies founded by the-nascent-galactic-republic in ancient-times histories aren't quite as long or prestigious (i.e. comparable to how the-united-states or canada could be called "the colonies" of great-britain).
mentioned by name in the-rise of skywalker.
inner-rim – the-original-edge of the-galactic-republic, where expansion-waves stopped for many-generations.
expansion-region – nestled between the-"inner-rim" and the-"mid-rim", anachronistically named due to a-new-colonization-wave starting again.
– generally industrialized though not very-important-planets, but more developed than the-true-"frontier" in the-outer-rim.
on-screen examples include naboo and kashyyyk.
outer-rim – a-vast-region including all of the-last-major-star-systems up to the-galaxy's-edge.
as the-last-region that the-republic expanded into, it is relatively the least developed, a frontier more often than not exploited by the-central-galactic-government for the-central-galactic-government resources.
on-screen examples include tatooine, yavin, hoth, bespin, endor, geonosis, utapau, mustafar, and kessel.
wild-space – star-systems located beyond the-outer-rim – because a-galaxy's-"edge" is not a-fixed-border-line, but a-concentration of stars tapering off in frequency.
unlike the-outer-rim, these-sparse-few-systems around the-galaxy's-circumference were never formally charted.
more broadly, attack of the-clones established that the-star-wars-galaxy actually possesses at-least-three-small-satellite-galaxies, never colonized and considered largely inhospitable.
the-secret-cloner-world-kamino, however, is located in one of these-minor-galactic-clusters beyond the-outer-rim.
unknown-regions – the-new-canon-map establishes that, due to the-stability of hyperspace-lanes, inhabited-planets are weighted toward the-"eastern"-quadrant of the-galactic-plane with the "western" one being mostly unexplored.
unknown-regions are home to the-first-jedi-temple on ahch-to and the-chiss-ascendancy, into which grand-admiral-thrawn was born.
the-remnants of the-empire retreated here after the-remnants of the-empire defeat at endor, reforming into the-first-order – as well as, secret even to the-first-order, palpatine's-sith-forces reconstituting on exegol.
western-reaches – the-sectors once controlled by the-republic that border the-unknown-regions of the-galactic-"west".
essentially similar to the-outer-rim in terms of  unknown-regions-history and economic-development, the-only-difference being that instead of being located at the-galaxy's-physical-edge,  unknown-regions are located at the-edge of galactic-exploration in the-"western"-side of the-republic.
in the force awakens,  in the force awakens is stated in dialogue that jakku is in the-western-reaches.
apart from these-broad-regions radiating out from the-galactic-core, there are also several-major-galactic-sub-regions of note: mandalorian-space – technically located in the-outer-rim, but relatively close to the-border with the-mid-rim, near kashyyyk, in the-galactic-"northeast".
the-planet-mandalore had
the-planet-mandalore own regional-space-empire in ancient-times, led by their-formidable-warrior-culture.
the-planet-mandalore were the-most-difficult-enemies the-jedi ever faced short of the-sith: the-jedi were not force-wielders, but were a-culture of regular-humans who had honed the-jedi to possess the-pinnacle of combat-training, equipment, and battle-tactics.
during a-series of long-wars with the-republic, however, many centuries before the-clone-wars, the-jedi were eventually able to fight them into submission - though with heavy-losses.
in the-star-wars:-clone-wars-animated-series, both-the-republic and the-separatists compete for support from rival-mandalorian-factions, and in the-later-star-wars: rebels-animated-series, mandalorians again divide into a-proxy-war between pro-imperial-and-pro-rebel-forces.
according to the-mandalorian-tv-series, this eventually resulted in the-devastation of mandalorian-space by the-empire, with surviving-enclaves scattering across the-outer-rim.
hutt-space – a-fairly-large-swath of space along the-"eastern"-quadrant of the-galactic-plane, loosely straddling the-border between the-mid-rim-and-outer-rim.
the-hutts are a-kleptocratic-mafia-state, derided as "gangsters" composed of several-rival-clans.
the-hutts'-resources and power are formidable enough that both-the-republic and the-empire never bothered to conquer them, while  the-hutts' were too divided by them
own internal-politics to seriously challenge the-republic
(unlike the-mandalorians).this-official-galactic-astrography was later re-confirmed for the-first-time in on-screen, live-action dialogue in the-mandalorian.
in the-second-season's-fourth-episode, "the siege", a-classroom is briefly shown on a-planet in the-outer-rim, in which a-lesson on galactic-astrography is being taught by a-protocol-droid.
the-teacher not only lists off each of these-major-regions from the-visual-dictionary, but lists these-major-regions in the-exact-same-order, from the-outer-rim to the-core: "who can name one of the-five-major-trade-routes in the-galaxy?
the-hydian-way [runs] from the-outer-rim to as far away as the-core-worlds.
however, there are several-other-regions within our-galaxy.
several-other-regions within our-galaxy are the-mid-rim, the-expansion-region, the-inner-rim, the-colonies, the-core, and the-deep-core."
star-wars-canon-planets and moons ==
the-following-list names prominent-planets and moons from the-star-wars-films or other-canon-media.
star-wars-legends-planets and moons = =
star-wars-legends-planets and moons
= = are planets with multiple-appearances in the-star-wars-expanded-universe, now rebranded as star-wars-legends.
the-accompanying-works were declared non-canon by lucasfilm in april 2014, following the-accompanying-works acquisition by the-walt-disney-company in october 2012.
similarities to real-world-planets ==
the-discovery of exoplanets in the-real-world-universe gained pace in the-early-21st-century.
in 2015, the-us-space-agency nasa published an-article which stated that many of the-newly-discovered-astronomical-bodies possessed scientifically-confirmed-properties that are similar to planets in the-fictional-star-wars-universe.
kepler-452b, a-rocky-super-earth-type-planet
, is said to be similar to the-star-wars-planet-coruscant.
likewise, the-planets kepler-16b and kepler-453b, the-planets discovered orbitting binary-stars probably resemble the-desert-world-tatooine.
the-hot,-molten-worlds of kepler-10b and kepler-78b are comparable to the-volcanic-planet-mustafar.
ogle-2005-blg-390lb, a-cold,-remote-exoplanet, is like the-volcanic-planet-mustafar.
kepler-22b, thought by scientists to be an-ocean-planet, is compared to the-planet-kamino.
according to nasa, there are also similarities to alderaan and endor in the-real-world-universe.
solar-system ===
two-non-canonical-works also feature the-real-life-solar-system's-planets.
monsters and aliens from george-lucas (1993) contains a-feature, presented as a-clip from a-gossip-column, in which a-pair of duros are abducted by humans and taken to "urthha" (earth), where monsters and aliens from george-lucas (1993) create havoc by misunderstanding terrestrial-objects and food.
in issue #19 of the-comic-series star-wars-tales (2004), the-story "into the-great-unknown" finds han-solo and chewbacca in the-millennium-falcon, fleeing the-imperial-navy.
they jump to hyperspace without doing calculations and find they in the-middle of our-solar-system, overpassing saturn, jupiter, and mars while decelerating and landing in northern-america.
han is killed by native-americans, and a-mourning chewbacca leaves the-millennium-falcon to live in the-trees, where the-natives believe him to be the-sasquatch.
in an-epilogue set 126 years later, archaeologist-dr.-jones and his-sidekick-short-round, searching for the-sasquatch, find the-falcon and han's remains.
see also ==
list of star-wars filming locations planets in science-fiction ==
references == ===
sources ==
content in this-article was copied from the-galaxy at the-wookieepedia, the-star-wars-wiki, which is licensed under the-creative-commons-attribution-share
alike-3.0-(unported)
(cc-by-sa-3.0)-license.
hidalgo, pablo (2015).
star-wars:
the-force awakens: the-visual-dictionary.
new-york, n.y.: dk.
isbn 978-1-4654-3816-4.
hidalgo, pablo (2017).
star-wars:
the-last-jedi: the-visual-dictionary.
new-york, n.y.: dk.
isbn 978-1-4654-5551-2.
luceno, james (2005).
star-wars: revenge of the-sith: the-visual-dictionary.
new-york, n.y.: dk.
isbn 0-7566-1128-8.
hidalgo, pablo (2019).
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary.
new-york, n.y.: dk.
isbn 978-1-4654-7903-7.
wallace, daniel (1998).
star-wars: the-essential-guide to planets and moons.
isbn 0345420683.
external-links == galaxy-building, from alderaan to utapau at starwars.com (official)
star-wars-canon:
just how realistic are the-single-biome-planets?
at the-escapist
list of planets on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-interactive-map of star-wars-galaxy the-dullahan, durahan or dullaghan (irish: dúlachán, ), also called gan ceann (meaning "without a-head" in irish), is a-type of mythological-creature in irish folklore.
mythology ==
the-dullahan is depicted as a-headless-rider, usually on a-black-horse, who carries  the-dullahan own head on  the-dullahan arm.
usually,  the-dullahan is male, but there are some-female-versions.
the-dullahan is said to be the-embodiment of the-celtic-god-crom-dubh.
the-myth of
the-dullahan comes from ireland.
the-mouth is usually in a-hideous-grin that touches both-sides of the-head.
its-eyes are constantly moving about and can see across the-countryside even during the-darkest-nights.
the-flesh of the-head is said to have the-colour and consistency of mouldy-cheese.
the-dullahan is believed to use the-spine of a-human-corpse for a-whip, and the-dullahan wagon is adorned with funeral-objects: the-dullahan has candles in skulls to light the-way, the-spokes of the-wheels are made from thigh-bones, and its-wagon's-covering is made from a-worm-chewed-pall or dried-human-skin.
the-ancient-irish believed that where the-dullahan stops riding, a-person is due to die.
the-dullahan calls out the-person's-name, drawing away the-soul of the-person victim, at which-point the-person immediately drops dead.
there are rumours that golden-objects can force the-dullahan to disappear.
in popular-culture ==
the-death-coach is driven by a-dullahan in darby-o’gill and the-little-people.
when a-dullahan in darby-o’gill and the-little-people arrives, a-dullahan in darby-o’gill and the-little-people calls out darby’s-name in place of darby’s-daughter and darby’s enters the-death-coach, and is only saved by the-trickery of the-king of the-leprechauns.
dullahan is a-common-name for headless-warriors - predominantly knights - in japanese-video-games.
the-influence from this has resulted in japanese-young-adult-media commonly portraying 'dullahans' with traits not associated with the-original-irish-folklore, such as wearing plate-armour.
in the-durarara!!
light-novel-and-anime-series, novel and anime features a-dullahan named celty sturluson as a-main-character.
the-monster-musume-anime-and-manga-series features a-dullahan named lala who is one of the-main-characters in kimihito-kurusu's-harem.
interviews with monster-girls also features a-dullahan-main-character who is named kyoko machi.
lost-girl one of the-lesser-antagonists the-overlord light-novel and anime have a-dullahan as a-member of the-pleiades.
her-name is yuri-alpha.
in the-light-novel konosuba', one of the-demon-king's-generals is a-dullahan named verdia.
in the-game touhou kishinjō ~  double-dealing-character,-sekibanki,
the-stage-2-boss's-theme's-name is "dullahan under the-willows", despite her actually being a-nukekubi.
maou-sadao, the-demon-overlord from hataraku-maou-sama!
calls his-bicycle 'dullahan'.
irish-author-derek-landy's-work draws from irish-folklore.
skulduggery-pleasant:
mortal-coil features a-dullahan who drives the-coach-a-bowers, which is pulled by four-headless-horses.
mortal-coil is summoned to collect any-human who has heard the-call of a-banshee.
see also ==
headless-horseman
headless-horseman (legend of sleepy-hollow)
crom-dubh ==
references == ==
external-links ==
the-dullahan of celtic-mythology, via the-irish-place
the-dullahan-legend at scary for kids.
dullahan-website
how tales of the-headless-horseman came from celtic-mythology, via the-irish-times, wed, oct 23, 2019.
star-wars:
star-wars is a-2008-computer-animated-epic-space-opera-film directed by dave-filoni (in his-feature-directorial-debut), produced by lucasfilm-ltd. and lucasfilm-animation, and distributed by warner-bros.-pictures.
a-2008-computer-animated-epic-space-opera-film directed by dave-filoni (in his-feature-directorial-debut), produced by lucasfilm-ltd. and lucasfilm-animation, and distributed by
warner-bros.-pictures is set in the-star-wars-universe during the-clone-wars, a-three-year-conflict between the-galactic-republic and the-confederacy of independent-systems, established at the-end of star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002).
in star-wars: the-clone-wars, count-dooku and jabba the-hutt's-uncle ziro orchestrate a-plot to turn jabba against the-galactic-republic by framing the-jedi for the-kidnapping of his-son, which would in turn allow ziro to take over jabba's criminal empire after jabba is arrested.
while anakin skywalker and anakin skywalker newly-assigned apprentice, ahsoka-tano, attempt to deliver jabba's-son back to jabba's-son father, obi-wan-kenobi and padmé-amidala lead separate-investigations of dooku and ziro's-plot.
the-film introduces the-fan-favorite-characters of tano and captain-rex to the-franchise.
the-clone-wars was the-first-star-wars-film to not be distributed by 20th-century-fox, and the first to be completely animated.
the-film received largely-negative-reviews, becoming the-worst-reviewed-theatrically-released-star-wars-film with critics panning the-writing, animation, tone, dialogue and the-decision to release the-pilot-episodes as a-feature-length-film, while praising the-action-scenes, visual-aspects, and voice-acting.
while  the-film was a-commercial-success, grossing $68.3 million worldwide against an-$8.5-million-budget,  the-film is also  the-film.
the-clone-wars served as the-backdoor-pilot to the-cartoon-network-television-series of the-same-name, which had a-far-more-favorable-reception than the-film.
the-events of the-film chronologically take place between the-clone-wars-season-1-episode "the-hidden-enemy" and the-season-3-episode "clone-cadets".
during the-first-year of the-clone-wars, jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker and his-former-master, obi-wan-kenobi lead a-small-battalion of republic-clone-troopers against the-separatist-droid-army on the-planet-christophsis.
awaiting reinforcements, the-two-jedi greet a-shuttle carrying a-young-jedi named ahsoka tano, who insists that she has been assigned by jedi-grandmaster-yoda to serve as anakin's-apprentice.
anakin reluctantly accepts ahsoka as anakin apprentice and the two succeed in deactivating the-separatists'-energy-field while obi-wan stalls the-droid-army-commander, allowing a-republic-victory.
ahsoka earns anakin's-respect.
following the-battle, jedi-grandmaster-yoda arrives and informs the-two-jedi that crime lord-jabba the-hutt's-son rotta has been kidnapped.
anakin and ahsoka are tasked with retrieving the-huttlet, while obi-wan is sent to tatooine to negotiate with lord-jabba the-hutt's-son rotta over a-potential-treaty between the-hutts and the-republic.
anakin and ahsoka track the-kidnapper and rotta to the-planet-teth, where they are ambushed by separatist-forces led by count-dooku's-apprentice-asajj-ventress.
unknown to the-jedi, the-plot has been engineered by dooku's-sith-master-darth-sidious, who hopes to frame the-jedi for rotta's-kidnapping in order to get jabba to ally with the-separatists and fuel anti-jedi-sentiment from the-hutts.
the-jedi the-jedi manage to escape the-trap along with r2-d2 and hijack a-derelict-transport with which they travel to tatooine.
obi-wan, alerted by anakin, arrives on teth and defeats ventress in a-lightsaber-duel, though she manages to escape.
meanwhile, anakin's-secret-wife senator-padmé-amidala learns of anakin's-secret-wife senator-padmé-amidala husband's mission and fears for her-husband-safety.
she decides to contact jabba's-uncle ziro on coruscant.
the-hutt refuses to cooperate, apparently believing that the-hutt is the-jedi who are responsible for the-situation.
however, padmé soon discovers that ziro has actually conspired with dooku to have rotta killed, so that jabba would execute anakin and ahsoka in return and be taken into custody by the-jedi-council, which will allow ziro to seize power over the-hutt-clan.
against chancellor-palpatine's-wishes, padmé travels to tatooine but is discovered and detained.
however, a-chance-call by c-3po enables c-3po to summon a-squadron of clone-troopers, and ziro is arrested.
upon their-arrival on tatooine, anakin and ahsoka are shot down by magnaguards.
anakin devises a-ruse to confront dooku while carrying a-decoy-rotta, leaving ahsoka to take the-real-rotta to jabba's-palace.
while anakin fights off dooku, ahsoka is ambushed by the-magnaguards, whom she defeats.
the two deliver the-real-rotta safely to jabba, who nonetheless orders the-jedi to be executed for their-supposed-kidnapping-attempt.
however, padmé contacts jabba in time and reveals ziro and the-separatists'-responsibility for the-kidnapping.
acknowledging the-jedi's-heroism and allowing the-republic to have ziro punished for ziro betrayal, jabba agrees to the-treaty while anakin and ahsoka are picked up by obi-wan and yoda.
meanwhile, dooku reports the-plot's-failure to sidious, who assures dooku that the-tide of the-war is still in their-favor.
matt-lanter as anakin-skywalker, a-former-jedi-padawan who has recently been promoted to the-rank of jedi-knight, and a-general in the-republic-army, leading the-501st-legion-ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano, anakin's-new-padawan-apprentice and commander of the-501st-legion
the-212th-attack-battalion-taylor, leading the-212th-attack-battalion-taylor also voices 4a-7, a-droid-spy tom-kane as yoda, the-jedi-grandmaster and leader of the-jedi-council-kane also voices the-film's-narrator, who explains the-events driving the-film's-plot, and admiral-yularen, an-admiral of the-republic-navy assigned to anakin
dee-bradley-baker as captain-rex, a-clone-captain of  dee-bradley-baker as captain-rex, a-clone-captain also voices commander-cody, a-clone-commander of the-212th-attack-battalion and obi-wan's second-in-command, as well as the-other-clone-troopers christopher-lee as count-dooku-/-darth-tyranus, a-sith-lord and the-puppet-leader of the-separatist-alliance samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu, a-jedi-master, senior-member of the-jedi-council, and general of the-republic
anthony-daniels as c-3po, anakin and padme's protocol-droid-nika-futterman as asajj-ventress, count-dooku's-disciple, and as tc-70, jabba the-hutt's protocol droid ian abercrombie as chancellor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic who is secretly a-sith-lord, count-dooku's-master, and the-mastermind behind the-clone-wars-catherine-taber as padmé-amidala, the-senator of naboo and anakin's secret wife corey-burton as ziro the-hutt, a-member of the-hutt clan and
jabba's-uncle burton also voices whorm-loathsom, commander of the-separatist-droid-army occupying christophsis, and kronos-327,
an-assassin-droid working for ziro-david-acord as rotta the-huttlet, jabba's-kidnapped-son kevin-michael-richardson as jabba the-hutt, a-notorious-crime-lord, leader of the-hutt clan, and rotta's father matthew-wood as battle-droids
production == ===
development ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars was made to serve as both-a-stand-alone-story and a-lead-in to the-weekly-animated-tv-series of the-same-name.
george-lucas had the-idea for a-film after viewing some of the-completed-footage of the-early-episodes on the-big-screen.
those-first-few-episodes, originally planned for release on television, were then woven together to form release on television.
warner-bros. had tracked the-series'-development from the-beginning, and george-lucas decided on a-theatrical-launch after viewing early-footage declaring "this is so beautiful, why don't we just go and use the-crew and make a-feature?"
this-decision helped convince wb-parent-company-time-warner to distribute the-movie, and to encourage wb-parent-company-time-warner subsidiary cartoon network to air the-series'.
lucas described the-film as "almost-an-afterthought."
howard-roffman, president of lucas-licensing, said of the-decision, "sometimes george works in strange-ways."
producer-catherine-winder said the-decision added to an-already-large-challenge of establishing a-show "of this-sophistication and complexity," but producer-catherine-winder felt it was a-good-way to start the-series, and thought budgetary-constraints forced the-production-team to think outside the-box in a-positive-way.
the-story of the-kidnapped-hutt was inspired by the-sonny-chiba-samurai-film titled shogun's shadow.
animation ===
lucasfilm-and-lucasfilm-animation used autodesk-software to animate both-the-film and the-series using the-maya-3d-modeling-program to create highly-detailed-worlds, characters and creatures.
the-film's-animation-style was designed to pay homage to the-stylized-looks of both-japanese-anime and manga, and the-supermarionation of the-british-1960s-series-thunderbirds.
at a-cartoon-network-hosted-discussion, lucas said lucas did not want the-clone-wars-film-or-television-series to look like such-movies as beowulf, because lucas wanted a-stylized-look rather than a realistic one.
lucas also felt it should not look like the-popular-pixar-movies such as the-incredibles, because lucas wanted the-film and characters to have it own unique-style.
lucas also decided to create the-animated-film and series from a-live-action-perspective, which winder said set it apart from other-cgi-films.
essentially, it "meant using long-camera-shots, aggressive-lighting-techniques, and relying on editing instead of storyboards.
animators also reviewed designs from the-original-2003-clone-wars-series when creating the-animation-style for the-film and the-new-series.
in charge was steward-lee, working as the-storyboard-artist during filming.
some-actors from the-live-action-films returned to vocally reprise their-roles of their-respective-characters: anthony-daniels as c-3po, matthew-wood as b1-battle-droids, christopher-lee as count-dooku, and samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu.
however, christopher-lee-samuel-l.-jackson did not reprise  some-actors from the-live-action-films returned to vocally reprise their-roles of their-respective-characters: anthony-daniels as c-3po, matthew-wood as b1-battle-droids, christopher-lee as count-dooku, and samuel-l.-jackson as mace windu roles in the-subsequent-television-series.
the-musical-score for star-wars:
the-clone-wars was composed by kevin-kiner.
the-original-motion-picture-soundtrack was released by sony-classical on august 12, 2008.
the-disc begins with the-main-theme by john-williams, followed by more-than-30-separate-music-cues composed by kevin-kiner.
kevin-kiner is known for kevin-kiner work on such-television-series as stargate-sg-1, star-trek: enterprise, superboy and csi: miami.
the-original-motion-picture-soundtrack uses some-instruments never heard before in a-star-wars-score, including erhus, duduks and ouds.
marketing == ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars-merchandise was first released on july 26, 2008.
hasbro released several-3​3⁄4-inch-clone-wars-action-figures, an-electronic-clone-trooper-helmet, a-customizable-lightsaber, and an-electronic-all-terrain-tactical-enforcer (at-te).
target-and-kb-toys also devoted shelf-space for clone-wars-toys, but did not hold midnight-releases or pursue the-branding-opportunities toys-"r"
us mounted digital-clocks in all 585 of  us stores that counted down to the-release of the-clone-wars-toys, and
more than 225 of the-stores opened at midnight for the-debut of the-star-wars-products.
two of the-toys-"r"-us-flagship-outlets in mission-bay, san-diego and times-square in manhattan, new-york-city held costume-and-trivia-contests on july 26, and gave away limited-edition-star-wars-toys with every-purchase.
a-section of the-toys-"r"-us-website was also dedicated to the-clone-wars.
the-toy-line continues with the-clone-wars-figures being well received by collectors for collectors detail to the-characters and vehicles.
due to lucas'-sudden-decision to produce the-film, lucas-licensing did not have time to enter into agreements with previous-star-wars-marketing-partners like pepsi, burger-king and kellogg's, with which the-lucasfilm-licensing-company had a-ten-year-marketing-plan for the-other-films.
when questioned by the-new-york-times about star-wars-merchandising in july 2008, a-pepsi-spokesperson was unaware star-wars-film was being released.
on august 15, mcdonald's held mcdonald's first ever happy meal promotion for a-star-wars-film and for four-weeks, 18-exclusive-toys came in specially-designed-happy-meal-boxes.
comics and books ===
dark-horse-comics published a-six-issue-digest-sized-comic-book-miniseries.
randy-stradley, vice-president of publishing for dark-horse, said the-sudden-decision to release the-clone-wars-film required the-clone-wars to temporarily delay plans for two-other-star-wars-comic-book-series, dark-times and rebellion.
dark-horse-comics did not receive the promotional campaign dark-horse-comics otherwise would have due to the-abruptness of the-theatrical-and-comic-book-releases.
topps, the-trading-cards-company, released a-series of 90-clone-wars-cards on july 26, which also included foil-cards, motion-cards, animation-cel-cards and rare-sketch-cards by top-star-wars-artists and lucasfilm-animators.
dk-publishing and the-penguin-group released books, activities and other-merchandise that tied in with the-film.
also released was the-clone-wars: the-visual-guide, published by dk, and star-wars: the-clone-wars in the-uk, published by puffin and in the-u.s. by grosset & dunlap.
the-publishers also released a-storybook,-picture-books and an-activity-book.
at the-american-international-toy-fair, lego announced a-product-line for the-film and the-tv-series, to be released in july 2008 in the-united-states and on august 2008 in the-united-kingdom.
video-games ===
the-lucasarts-video-game-developer adapted the-film into star-wars:
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance for the-nintendo-ds and star-wars: the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels for wii.
a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk said a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk expectations for jedi-alliance were low due to poor-clone-wars-movie-reviews, but a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk found the-game "a-varied-and-well-paced-experience."
portable-media-players ===
a-star-wars:
the-clone-wars-mp3-player was released in august 2008.
the-clone-wars-mp3-player includes one-gigabyte of memory, which holds 200-songs or 20-hours of music and comes with three-interchangeable-faceplates: a-green-one with yoda and a-lightsaber on it, a-silver-one with captain-rex and a-galactic-empire-logo on it, and one with two-clone-troopers on coruscant.
one-review claimed  one-review improved upon a-darth-vader-mp3-player released in july 2008, which featured only-512-megabytes of memory and a-dated-visual-display.
a-star-wars-ipod-ispeaker (a-speaker/dock for ipods, iphones and mp3-players) was also released.
a-star-wars-ipod-ispeaker (a-speaker/dock for ipods, iphones and mp3-players) includes an-image of captain-rex and three-other-clone-troopers.
racing-sponsorship ===
a-star-wars:
the-clone-wars-open-wheel-car for the-indycar-series was unveiled at the-2008-san-diego-comic-con-international.
26-car, which also included blockbuster-inc.-decals and was driven by andretti-green-racing-driver-marco-andretti, ran august 24 on the-infineon-raceway in the-sonoma-mountains in california.
andretti-green-racing-driver-marco-andretti said, "i'm hoping that my-upcoming-battle at infineon will be as exciting as anything in a-star-wars-movie
so i can win it for both-blockbuster and lucasfilm.
the-car finished 14th at infineon, which andretti attributed to a slow pit stop early in the-race; andretti added, "i just don't think it was a-very-good-performance for us today.
the-car was the-second-collaboration between lucasfilm, blockbuster and andretti-green-racing.
the-car premiered as an-indiana-jones and the-kingdom of the-car at the-indianapolis 500 in may 2008.
novelization ===
a-novelization of the-film by karen-traviss was released by del-rey-books on july 26, 2008.
in addition to narrating the-film by karen-traviss's-plot from various-points of view, the-film by karen-traviss includes some of anakin's-memories of anakin early-childhood as a-hutt-slave, as well as some of dooku's-recollections of battling the-mandalorians (previously explored in the-2002-comic-book jango-fett: open-seasons).
home-media ===
the-film's-two-disc-dvd and blu-ray-disc was released on november 11, 2008 in the-united-states and on december 8, 2008 in the-united-kingdom.
the-film was released as a-single-disc-dvd, two-disc-special-edition-dvd, and blu-ray-disc.
the-standard-definition-versions include the-film in widescreen-format with dolby-digital-5.1-surround-ex-sound, and with feature-length-audio-commentary.
the-film is also available on the-disney+-streaming-service, which launched on november 12, 2019.
reception == ===
critical-response ===
the-film was panned by critics.
on rotten-tomatoes, the-film has an-approval-rating of 18% based on 170-reviews, with an-average-rating of 4.2/10.
the-site's-critical-consensus reads: "mechanical-animation and a-less-than-stellar-script make the-clone-wars a pale shadow of george-lucas'-once-great-franchise.
this constituted the-lowest-rotten-tomatoes-rating of any-star-wars-film; the-previous-six-theatrical-films ranged from 52% to 95% and the made-for-television ewok films and the-star-wars-holiday-special garnered higher-ratings, although the made-for-television ewok films and the-star-wars-holiday-special averages encompassed far-fewer-reviews.
on metacritic, this has a-weighted-average-score of 35 out of 100 based on 30-critic-reviews, indicating "generally-unfavorable-reviews".
audiences polled by cinemascore gave this an-average-grade of "b-" on an-a+ to f-scale.
entertainment-weekly listed star-wars: the-clone-wars as one of the-five-worst-films of 2008 with critic-owen-gleiberman saying, it's hard to tell the-droids from the-jedi-drones in this-robotic-animated-dud, in which the-george-lucas-empire strikes back—at the-audience.
what wears you out is lucas'-immersion in a-star-wars-cosmology that has grown so obsessive-compulsively cluttered yet trivial
that it's no longer escapism; because this-movie has bad-lightsaber-duels and the lack of the-original-cast, it's something you want to escape from.
cool-news posted two-reviews of the-film during the-week before  cool-news release, but pulled them down due to an-embargo placed on those attending the-screening
cool-news-writers attended.
the-same-reviews were re-posted on the-site, on the-day of its-release.
the-retraction prompted some-readers to allege a-conspiracy by lucasfilm to keep negative-press out of circulation until its-release, but although the-review by site-creator-harry-knowles was negative, drew-mcweeny said that drew-mcweeny was positive and that no-such-conspiracy existed.
several-critics compared the-clone-wars to a-saturday-morning-cartoon and described a-saturday-morning-cartoon as little more than a-plug for the-upcoming-animated-series.
linda-barnard, of the-toronto-star, said the-movie "pretty much drives a-stake into the-heart of every-loyal-fan of the-movies.
and now [george-lucas is] out to stick it to those too young to know about jar-jar-binks."
variety-magazine-reviewer-todd-mccarthy said, "this isn't the-star-wars we've always known and at least sometimes loved."
joe-neumiar, of the-new-york-daily-news, wrote, "if this were a-true-star-wars-film, right about now somebody would say, '...
i've got a-bad-feeling about this.' "
in his-review for entertainment-weekly, critic-owen-gleiberman gave the-film an-f-grade and wrote, "george-lucas is turning into the-enemy of fun."
carrie-rickey, of the-philadelphia-inquirer, said, "the best that can be said about the-movie is that it's harmless and mostly charmless.
the-clone-wars is to star-wars what-karaoke is to pop music.
the-main-criticism toward the-film was the-animation.
many criticized the-film as cheap, wooden, non-engaging and out-of-date; some-reviewers drew negative-comparisons to 1960s
marionette-based-shows thunderbirds and fireball-xl5, although george-lucas previously said the-animation-style was a-deliberate-homage to such-shows.
tom-long of the-detroit-news said the-animation-style "is downright weak compared to what's generally seen on screens these days" and said the-characters are so stiff the-characters look like the-characters were "carved by pinocchio's-father."
roger-ebert gave the-film 1.5-stars out of 4 and said "the-characters have hair that looks molded from play-doh, bodies that seem arthritic, and moving lips on half-frozen-faces—all signs that shortcuts were taken in the-animation-work."
mccarthy said "the-movements, both of the-characters and the-compositions, look mechanical, and the-mostly-familiar-characters have all-the-facial-expressiveness of easter-island-statues."
but some of the-same-reviewers who criticized the-animation-style acknowledged some-positive-elements about the-animation-style; mccarthy said the-animation-style allowed for "somewhat-more-dramatic-compositions and color-schemes," and carrie-rickey, of the-philadelphia-inquirer, said the-scenery and backgrounds were "vivid and alive", although she said the-characters "move as you would imagine the-statues at a waxworks might.
"reviewers also criticized the-dialogue, which ebert said was limited to "simplistic-declamations" and claudia-puig of usa
today described as "stilted and overblown, a-problem also in some of the-live-action-incarnations.
many-critics also said that the-battle-scenes were repetitive and lacked tension; mccarthy described the-action-sequences as "a-little-exposition, an-invasion; some-more-exposition, a-lightsaber-fight; a-bit-more-blah-blah, a-spaceship-dogfight, and on and on."
linda-stasi, of the-new-york-post, also described the-lack of character-development in the-film, writing that whereas the-original-star-wars-films dedicated time to allowing viewers to get to know the-characters, "director-dave-filoni is so concentrated on the-action that we're never given the-chance to care who lives and who is blown into spare-parts."
jason-anderson, of the-globe and mail, wrote that although the-clone-wars is intended for younger-audiences, "parents may be perturbed by the-film's-relentless-violence."
ebert also found protagonist-ahsoka-tano "annoying," and michael-rechtshaffen, of the-hollywood-reporter, said the-attempts of humor amid the-bickering between ahsoka-tano and anakin-skywalker are "strained".
puig said puig enjoyed the-character, and that "puig repartee with anakin enlivens things."
box-office ===
the-clone-wars earned $68,282,845 worldwide, including $35,161,554 in north-american-domestic-box-office-grosses and $33,121,290 in international-grosses.
the-clone-wars earned $14,611,273 on 3,452-screens in  the-clone-wars opening weekend, including $6,228,973 on
the-clone-wars-opening-day, august 15.
the-clone-wars was the-third-highest-earning-film of the-weekend in spite of negative-critical-reception, behind tropic-thunder and the-dark-knight, which earned $25.8 million and $16.3 million, respectively.
dan-fellman, head of distribution for warner-bros., said that the-box-office-performance met expectations because two-thirds of the-audience were families and the-budget for
the-clone-wars was $8.5 million, frugal considering
the-clone-wars was a-cgi-film and because  the-clone-wars was meant to introduce the-animated-series.
fellman said, " the-clone-wars was targeted to a-specific-audience for specific-reasons.
we accomplished that-mission, and that-mission will continue in another-medium.
when the-clone-wars dropped to $5.6 million in the-clone-wars second week of release, contactmusic.com described contactmusic.com as "the-first-bona-fide-star-wars-flop.
the-film also earned $23,428,376 from dvd-sales in the-us.
accolades ===
the-film was nominated for a-golden-raspberry-award in the-category "worst-prequel, remake, rip-off or sequel", but lost to indiana-jones and the-kingdom of the-crystal-skull.
references ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at lucasfilm.com
star-wars:
the-clone-wars at imdb-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at box-office-mojo-star-wars:
the-clone-wars on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki rogue one:
a-star-wars-story (or simply rogue one) is a-2016-american-epic-space-opera-film directed by gareth-edwards.
the-screenplay by chris-weitz and tony-gilroy is from a-story by john-knoll and gary-whitta.
the-screenplay by chris-weitz and tony-gilroy was produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures.
the-screenplay by chris-weitz and tony-gilroy is the-first-installment of the-star-wars-anthology-series and an-immediate-prequel to star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977).
the-main-cast consists of felicity-jones, diego-luna, ben-mendelsohn, donnie-yen, mads-mikkelsen, alan-tudyk, riz-ahmed, jiang-wen, and forest-whitaker.
set a week before a-new-hope, the-plot follows a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire.
a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire also details the-rebel-alliance's-first-effective-victory against the-galactic-empire, first referenced in a-new-hope's-opening-crawl.
based on an-idea first pitched by knoll ten years before a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire entered development, a-group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the-death-star, the-ultimate-weapon of the-galactic-empire was made to be different in tone and style from the-traditional-star-wars-films, omitting the-customary-opening-crawl and transitional-screen-wipes.
principal-photography on the-film began at pinewood-studios, buckinghamshire, in early-august 2015 and wrapped in february 2016.
the-film then went through extensive-reshoots directed by gilroy in mid-2016.
with an-estimated-production-budget of at least $200 million, the-film is one of the-most-expensive-films ever made.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 10, 2016, and was released in the-united-states on december 16.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 10, 2016, and was released in the-united-states on december 16 received positive-reviews from critics, with praise for the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 10, 2016, and was released in the-united-states on december 16 acting, story, visuals, musical score, and dark tone, but criticism for the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 10, 2016, and was released in the-united-states on december 16 pacing, characters, and digital recreations of peter-cushing and carrie-fisher.
it grossed over $1 billion worldwide, making it the 20th-highest-grossing film of all-time and the-second-highest-grossing-film of 2016 during its-theatrical-run.
its received two-oscar-nominations for best sound mixing and best-visual-effects.
research-scientist-galen-erso and galen-erso-family are in hiding on the-planet lah'mu when imperial-weapons-developer-orson-krennic arrives to press galen-erso into completing the-death-star, a-space-station-based-superweapon capable of destroying entire-planets.
galen's-wife, lyra, is killed in the-confrontation while  galen's-wife, lyra daughter, jyn, escapes and is rescued by rebel-extremist-saw-gerrera.
fifteen-years-later,-cargo-pilot-bodhi-rook-defects from the-empire, taking a-holographic-message recorded by galen to gerrera on the-desert-moon-jedha.
rebel-alliance-intelligence-officer-cassian-andor learns of rook's-defection and the-death-star from an-informant.
jyn is freed from an-imperial-labor-camp at wobani and is brought to the-rebel-leader mon-mothma, who convinces jyn to find and rescue galen
so rebel-alliance can learn more about the-death-star.
cassian is covertly ordered to kill galen rather than extract galen.
jyn, cassian, and reprogrammed imperial-droid-k-2so-travel to jedha, where the-empire is removing kyber-crystals from the-holy-city to power the-death-star; gerrera and gerrera partisans are engaged in an-armed-insurgency against his-partisans.
with the-aid of blind-spiritual-warrior chirrut-îmwe and his-mercenary-friend baze-malbus, jyn makes contact with gerrera, who has been holding rook captive.
gerrera shows gerrera the-message, in which galen reveals galen has secretly built a-vulnerability into the-death-star and directs them to retrieve the-schematics from an-imperial-data-bank on the-planet scarif.
on the-death-star, krennic orders a-low-powered-test-shot which destroys jedha's-capital.
jyn and her-group take rook and flee the-moon, but gerrera remains to die with the-city.
grand-moff-tarkin congratulates krennic before using rook's-defection and security-leak as a-pretext to take control of the-project.
rook leads the-group to galen's-imperial-research-facility on the-planet-eadu, where cassian chooses not to kill galen.
jyn makes jyn presence known moments before rebel-bombers attack the-facility.
galen is mortally wounded by rebel-bombers and dies in galen daughter's arms, before jyn escapes with jyn group on board a-stolen-imperial-cargo-shuttle.
krennic is summoned by darth-vader to answer for the-death-star's-attack on jedha-city.
krennic seeks  krennic support for an-audience with the-emperor, but darth-vader-force-chokes darth-vader and orders darth-vader to ensure no-further-breaches occur.
jyn proposes a-plan to steal the-death-star-schematics using the-rebel-fleet but fails to gain approval from the-alliance-council, who feel victory against the-empire is now impossible.
frustrated at the-alliance-council, who feel victory against the-empire-inaction, jyn's-group lead a-small-squad of rebel-volunteers to raid the-databank a-small-squad of rebel-volunteers.
arriving at scarif on the-stolen-imperial-ship, which rook dubs "rogue-one", a disguised jyn and cassian enter the-base with k-2so while the-other-rebels attack the-imperial-garrison as a-diversion.
the-alliance learns of the-raid from intercepted imperial-communications and deploys the-raid from intercepted imperial-communications fleet in support, revealing the-raid from intercepted imperial-communications full-might to the-empire.
sacrifices intercepted imperial-communications so jyn and cassian can retrieve the-data.
îmwe is killed after activating the master switch to allow communication with the-rebel-fleet, and malbus is killed in action shortly afterward.
rook is killed by a-grenade after informing the-rebel-fleet that rook must deactivate the-planetary-shield to allow the-transmission of the-schematics.
the-rebel-commander, admiral-raddus, uses a-hammerhead-corvette to destroy two-star-destroyers, and the-wreckage crashes atop the-shield-generator, punching a-hole in the-shield.
jyn and cassian obtain the-schematics, but jyn and cassian are ambushed by krennic, who is eventually shot and wounded by cassian.
jyn transmits the-schematics to the-rebel-command-ship.
the-death-star enters orbit above scarif, where tarkin uses another-low-power-shot to destroy the-compromised-base, killing krennic, cassian, and jyn, along with all-remaining-ground-imperial-and-rebel-forces.
the-rebel-fleet prepares to jump to hyperspace, but many of the-fleet's-ships are intercepted by vader's-arriving-star-destroyer.
vader boards the-rebel-command-ship and kills many of the-rebel-troops in an-attempt to regain the-schematics, but a-small-starship escapes with the-plans on board.
aboard the-rebel-command-ship, princess-leia declares that the-schematics will provide hope for the-rebellion.
felicity-jones as jyn-erso, a-young-renegade-woman who is detained for felicity-jones crimes against the-empire until felicity-jones is freed by the-rebel-alliance.
beau-gadsdon as 8-year-old-jyn
dolly-gadsdon as 4-year-old-jyn-diego-luna as cassian-andor, a-rebel-captain and intelligence-officer.
ben-mendelsohn as orson-krennic, the-director of advanced-weapons-research for the-imperial-military.
donnie-yen as chirrut-îmwe, a-blind-warrior who believes in the-force.
ben-mendelsohn is said to be one of the-guardians of the-whills.
mads-mikkelsen as galen-erso, jyn's-father and a-research-scientist.
alan-tudyk as k-2so, a-former-imperial-enforcer-droid who was reprogrammed by cassian-andor to serve the-rebellion.
riz-ahmed as bodhi-rook, a-former-imperial-cargo-pilot who defects to the-rebels under the-influence of galen-erso.
jiang-wen as baze-malbus, a-longtime-companion of chirrut-îmwe and one-time-devoted-guardian of the-whills, now-a-rebel-warrior and mercenary.
forest-whitaker as saw-gerrera, a-veteran of the-clone-wars and a-friend of the-erso-family who had mentored jyn in her-later-childhood-years.
jimmy-smits, genevieve-o'reilly, anthony-daniels, and jimmy-vee reprise  jimmy-smits, genevieve-o'reilly, anthony-daniels, and jimmy-vee roles from previous-films as bail-organa, mon-mothma, c-3po, and r2-d2, respectively; vee is uncredited for his-role.
james-earl-jones also reprises james-earl-jones role from previous-films as the-voice of darth-vader, who is physically portrayed by spencer-wilding during the-meeting with krennic and aboard the-star-destroyer, and by daniel-naprous for the-end-scene.
grand-moff-tarkin and princess-leia-organa are played by guy-henry and ingvild-deila, respectively, with the-digital-likenesses of peter-cushing and carrie-fisher superimposed.
guy-henry also provides the-voice for tarkin, while archival-audio of carrie-fisher is used for leia.
angus-macinnes and drewe-henley are featured as gold-leader-dutch-vander and red-leader-garven-dreis, respectively, via unused-footage from a-new-hope; angus-macinnes returned to record new-dialogue for vander, while new-dialogue for drewe-henley was assembled from archival-material.
david-ankrum, who voiced wedge-antilles in a-new-hope, reprises his-role in a-vocal-cameo.
ian-mcelhinney, michael-smiley, andy-de-la-tour, and tim-beckmann play general-jan-dodonna, dr.-evazan, general-hurst-romodi, and captain-raymus-antilles, respectively.
warwick-davis plays weeteef-cyubee, a-member of saw-gerrera's-partisans.
dave-filoni reprises dave-filoni role as c1-10p from star-wars-rebels.
stephen-stanton-voices
admiral-raddus, while paul-kasey appears in costume as the-alien-character on-screen.
additionally, alistair-petrie plays general-davits-draven, ben-daniels plays general-antoc-merrick, and valene-kane plays lyra-erso, jyn's-mother.
jonathan-aris, fares-fares, and
sharon-duncan-brewster appear as senators-nower-jebel, vasp-vaspar, and tynnra-pamlo, respectively.
simon-farnaby plays a-member of blue-squadron.
jordan-stephens appears as rebel-alliance-member-corporal-tonc.
nick-kellington plays bistan, the-door-gunner on a-u-wing during the-battle on scarif.
ian-whyte plays moroff, a-member of saw-gerrera's-partisans.
daniel-mays appears as tivik.
rian-johnson and ram-bergman, director and producer of star-wars: the-last-jedi, respectively, cameo as two-death-star-technicians.
production == ===
development ===
rogue one is the-first-film in the-star-wars-anthology-series, a-series of standalone-spin-off-films in the-star-wars-franchise.
john-knoll, visual-effects-supervisor for the-star-wars-prequel-trilogy, pitched the-idea as an-episode of the-unproduced-series star-wars: underworld 10 years before the-film's-development; after the-disney-acquisition he felt as if he had to pitch the-disney-acquisition again or forever wonder "what might've happened if i had".
in may 2014, disney announced gareth-edwards would direct the-film and gary-whitta would write the-script.
that october, cinematographer-greig-fraser revealed that cinematographer-greig-fraser would work on the-film.
in january 2015, it was revealed gary-whitta had completed he work on the-script, and would no longer be with the-project.
simon-kinberg was considered as a-replacement.
later that month, it was announced chris-weitz had signed to write the-script for the-film.
in march 2015, the-title was announced.
edwards stated the-style of the-film would be similar to that of a-war-film, stating, "it's the-reality of war.
good-guys are bad.
bad-guys are good.
it's complicated, layered; a-very-rich-scenario in which to set a-movie."
assuming disney would not allow a-dark-ending, edwards had the-main-characters surviving in the-original-version of the-script, but the-producers opted for a-more-tragic-ending and never filmed the-original-version.
in may 2016, reports emerged the-film would undergo five-weeks of reshoots with tony-gilroy writing additional-scenes, as well as acting as a-second-unit-director under edwards.
with input from edwards, tony-gilroy oversaw the-edit and additional-photography of the-film which tackled several-issues, including the-ending.
in august, tony-gilroy was given screenplay-credit alongside weitz and was paid $5 million for tony-gilroy work on the-film.
additionally, christopher-mcquarrie, scott-z.-burns, and michael-arndt all contributed to the-script at various-stages in development.
in july 2016, discussing whether the-film would feature an-opening-crawl, kathleen-kennedy said, "we're in the-midst of talking about it, but i don't think these-[anthology]-films will have an-opening-crawl."
edwards explained "the-idea is the-film is supposed to be different than these-[anthology]-films," and that "the-film is born out of a-crawl. ...
there's this-feeling that if we did a-crawl, then the-film'll create another-movie."
in november 2016, kathleen-kennedy confirmed the-film would not feature an-opening-crawl, instead beginning in "a-way that is traditional, with just-the-title.
"at the-2016-star-wars-celebration, edwards said the-title had three-meanings: "a-military-sign", referring to the-red-squadron from a-new-hope; "the 'rogue' one" of the-franchise, given the-title is the-first-film to not be part of the-main-saga; and a description of jyn-erso's-personality.
casting ===
in january 2015, the-hollywood-reporter stated numerous-actresses, including tatiana-maslany, rooney-mara, and felicity-jones were being tested for the-film's-lead.
in february 2015, it was announced felicity-jones was in final-talks to star in the-film, while aaron-paul and édgar-ramírez were being eyed for the-male-lead-role.
in march 2015, felicity-jones was officially cast.
in march 2015, deadline-hollywood reported a-rumor that ben-mendelsohn was being considered for a-lead-role.
the next month, thewrap reported that sam-claflin was being eyed for a-role, while riz-ahmed was in negotiations to join the-film.
in may, mendelsohn, ahmed, and diego-luna were added to the-cast of the-film, in the-lead-roles.
forest-whitaker was added to the-cast of the-film in june 2015.
in july 2015, jonathan-aris was cast to play senator-jebel.
genevieve-o'reilly was cast as mon-mothma, reprising genevieve-o'reilly role from star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
james-earl-jones was confirmed to return as the-voice of darth-vader in june 2016.
filming ===
principal-photography on the-film began at elstree-studios in hertfordshire on august 8, 2015.
much of principal-photography on the-film was completed at or near pinewood-studios at buckinghamshire, uk where huge-sets were built to complement scenes filmed elsewhere in the-world.
the-film was shot using ultra-panavision-70-lenses with arri-alexa 65-large-format digital 6k-cameras.
filming-locations were used around the-world.
in iceland, the-crew shot in reynisfjara, and around the-mountains of hjörleifshöfði and hafursey at mýrdalssandur, which were used to represent lah'mu and eadu.
also used were the-krafla-area with krafla-volcanic-crater and around lake-mývatn's-rock-formations.
the-islands of gan and baresdhoo of the-laamu-atoll in the-maldives, as well as the-former-raf-bovingdon-airfield, were used to represent scarif.
wadi-rum in jordan was used to represent jedha.
pymmes-park in edmonton
, london was also used for location filming, and scenes set on yavin 4 were filmed at cardington-airfield.
gareth-edwards selected the-london-underground's-canary-wharf-station as a-location for a-chase-scene in an-imperial-base; the-location-shoot took place between midnight and 4 am, when the-london-underground's-canary-wharf-station was closed to the-public.
the-film spent an-estimated-total of $265 million and received a-$45.5-million-subsidy from the-united-kingdom's-film-incentive-program.
post-production ===
on february 11, 2016, disney-executives stated post-production === was "virtually completed".
several-weeks of pre-scheduled-reshoots began in june 2016.
tony-gilroy, who was an-uncredited-writer on post-production ===
at the-time, was hired to direct pre-scheduled-reshoots and rework aspects of post-production ===, earning pre-scheduled-reshoots a-screenwriting-credit.
it was created solely using digital-tools.
ilm produced the-film's-visual-effects.
ilm used cgi and digitally-altered-archive-footage to insert peter-cushing's-likeness over the-body of actor-guy-henry.
lucasfilm-secured-permission from the-late-actor's-estate to include him in the-film.
the-team reportedly searched through countless-hours of cushing-footage in order to find suitable-reference-material, and actor-guy-henry provided the-motion-capture and voice-work.
a-digital-model of cushing was mapped over henry's-performance like a-digital-body-mask.
cushing's-mannerisms, including cushing-manner of speaking, were studied by the-creative-team and applied to  a-digital-model of cushing.
cushing's-estate was heavily involved with the-creation and had input right down to "small,-subtle-adjustments".
a-similar-process was used in the-portrayal of princess-leia; carrie-fisher's-appearance as leia in the-first-film was superimposed over norwegian-actress-ingvild-deila's-face and archival-audio of carrie-fisher's saying "
hope" was used to voice the-character.
post-production wrapped on november 28, 2016.
in march 2015, it was reported that alexandre-desplat, who had worked with edwards on godzilla, would compose the-score for rogue one.
despite rumors that a-contract had not been initially set in place by lucasfilm, desplat confirmed in an-april-2016-interview that desplat would serve as composer for the-film.
concerning the-film, desplat commented that "[edwards and i] had a-great-partnership on godzilla, and i can't wait to be starting with desplat.
it will be in a-few-weeks from now, and it is very exciting and frightening at the-same-time because it's such-a-legendary-project.
to be called to come after john-williams ...
it's a-great-challenge for john-williams.
but then, in september 2016, it was announced that michael-giacchino would be replacing desplat as composer, after the-film's-reshoots altered the-post-production-schedule, and reportedly left desplat no longer available.
michael-giacchino only had four-and-a-half-weeks to compose the-music for the-film, beginning almost immediately after finishing production on doctor-strange.
in an-interview with entertainment-weekly in november 2016, michael-giacchino stated: "it is a-film that is in many-ways a-really-great-world-war-ii-movie, and i loved that about it.
but it also has this-huge,-huge-heart at the-center of it, and that was the-one-thing i just didn't want to discount.
yes, it's an-action-movie, and it's a-star-wars-film, and it has all-the-things that you would come to expect and love about that,
but i didn't want to forget that it was also an-incredibly-emotional-movie as well.
that was what really pulled me in. "
incorporated john-williams'-themes from previous-films into the-score.
the-official-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 16, 2016.all-music was composed by giacchino except where noted.
giacchino, who has a-history of using track-titles that contain wordplay, shared his-alternate-list in the-liner-notes of the-soundtrack-release.
these-names are listed in the-liner-notes of the-soundtrack-release.
release == ===
theatrical ===
rogue one premiered at the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles on december 10, 2016.
the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles was released in certain-european-countries on december 14, 2016, and was released in north-america on december 16, with china getting the-pantages-theatre in los-angeles on january 6, 2017.
marketing ===
promotion of rogue-one was initially delayed by the-release of the-film-mission:
impossible-–-rogue-nation in july 2015, because the-titles are similar.
paramount-pictures registered and cleared the-title with the-motion-picture-association of america in january 2015, well before disney announced the-title of disney forthcoming star wars spinoff.
disney and lucasfilm had to reach an-agreement with paramount over promotion in order to avoid any-confusion in the-public-mind.
disney agreed to embargo promotion on rogue one until after mid-2015, with the-exception of a-very-short-teaser which was screened at star-wars-celebration in anaheim that year.
a-teaser-trailer for rogue-one, released by lucasfilm on april 7, 2016, was praised by reviewers for disney-portrayal of strong-female-characters.
the-daily-telegraph described jyn-erso's-character as "a-roguish,-han-solo-style-heroine", calling the-film "progressive", while noting the-film painstaking faithfulness to the-production-design-style of the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
the-hollywood-reporter also noted the-visual-nods to the-original-trilogy, and examined the-film's-possible-narrative-direction, considering that the-outcome is to some-extent already revealed in the-opening-crawl of a-new-hope.
the-atlantic-writer-david-sims stated that the-trailer brought "back some-memorable-pieces of architecture, from the-lumbering-at-at-walkers to the-death-star itself, not to mention the-glorious-70s-costuming of star-wars."
the-atlantic-writer-david-sims added that the-trailer has "the-look", blending the old with the new.
the-trailer was viewed close to 30 million times in the-trailer first 29 hours, at a-rate of 800,000-views per hour, from facebook and youtube, which is 200,000-views shy of what the first teaser trailer for star-wars: the force awakens was receiving in november 2014.in june 2016, rogue one was promoted at the star-wars celebration europe iii event in london.
during the-star-wars-celebration-europe-iii-event in london, a-new-official-poster was unveiled, which depicts a-battle taking place on the-tropical-planet scarif, with the-death-star itself looming large in a-blue-sky, above which is printed the-tagline "a-rebellion built on hope".
a-second-teaser-trailer was also unveiled, screened exclusively for the-celebration-audience, and not streamed online.
this-new-trailer was reviewed favorably by critics; the-daily-telegraph noted that  this-new-trailer revealed new-locations such as the-planets jedha and scarif, and that  this-new-trailer most significant revelation came in the-final-seconds of the-teaser, with the-appearance of darth-vader, reflected in a-computer-screen and accompanied by darth-vader classic breathing sound effect.
variety also hailed the vader reveal, and noted that the-emphasis of the-production was much more on the-kinetic-depiction of large-battle-sequences and full-on-warfare, comparing it to francis-ford-coppola's-1979-vietnam-war-epic-apocalypse now.
a-showreel was also shown during the-event, which featured footage from the-film, cut with behind-the-scenes shots and interviews with the-director and cast-members.
this-new-trailer was shown publicly during a-broadcast of the-2016-summer-olympics and received positive-responses; wired stated that  this-new-trailer was "littered with nostalgic-throwbacks to the-original-trilogy", while rolling-stone described the-cgi-landscape-shots seen in the-footage as "eye-poppingly gorgeous".
a-further-trailer released in october 2016 prompted the-hollywood-reporter to comment that the-newly-revealed-footage looked like "a-trailer to a-different-movie than the one advertised earlier", remarking that jyn-erso appeared to be portrayed as a-more-vulnerable-character, and highlighting the-appearance of galen-erso as a-protective-father-figure.
vanity-fair also commented on the-emphasis given to jyn's-relationship with  vanity-fair father, suggesting that rogue-one was drawing on "the-star-wars-franchise's-greatest-natural-resource: daddy-issues".
the-film's-publicity-tour began in mexico on november 23, 2016.in asia, disney focused marketing-efforts on donnie-yen, where his-individual-poster is used for marketing in territories including japan, singapore, indonesia, thailand, hong-kong, china, vietnam, and malaysia.
the-official-star-wars-facebook-page of the-respective-asian-countries also featured clips and videos of donnie-yen speaking various-languages, greeting-fans and telling greeting-fans to support the-film.
in addition, disney also released various-versions of international-trailers with more-footage of yen.
home-media ===
rogue one was released on digital-hd on march 24, 2017, and by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on blu-ray, blu-ray 3d, and dvd on april 4, 2017.
reception == ===
box-office ===
rogue one grossed $532.2 million in the-united-states and canada and $523.8 million in other-countries for a-worldwide-total of $1.056 billion.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $319.6 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues for the-film, making the-film the third-most profitable release of 2016.in late-november 2016, box-office-projections for the-united-states and canada-canada had the-film grossing $100–150 million during the-film opening weekend.
disney-chairman-bob-iger noted that disney and lucasfilm did not expect rogue-one to match the-force-awakens'-total-gross of $2.1 billion, nor disney $248 million opening.
pre-sale-tickets for the-film went on sale at 12:01-am est on november 28, 2016.
within 10-minutes, ticket-sale-sites such as fandango crashed, much like ticket-sale-sites such as fandango had in advance of the force awakens the year prior.
in the-film first-24-hours, the-film had the-second-highest-number of pre-sale-tickets ever sold, behind only-the-force awakens.
worldwide, the-film was expected to gross $280–350 million in the-film opening weekend.
in the-united-states, the-film made $29 million from the-film thursday-night-previews, making the-film the highest-grossing thursday opening of 2016.
on friday, the-film grossed $71.1 million, and $46.3 million the next day, securing a-total of $155.1 million in its-opening-weekend, the-third-biggest-debut of 2016.
the-film topped the-box-office once again in the-film second weekend, grossing $64 million (down 58.7%) over the-three-day-weekend, and $96.1 million over the-four-day-weekend.
on christmas-day,  on christmas-day grossed $25.9 million.
on christmas-day finished first at the-box-office again in
on christmas-day third weekend, grossing $49.6 million (-22.5%) over the-three-day-weekend and $65.5 million over the-four-day-weekend.
in  on christmas-day-fourth-weekend, sunday-projections had  on christmas-day grossing $22 million, besting newcomer-hidden-figures' $21.8 million.
however, final-figures the following day revealed  on christmas-day tallied a-weekend-total of $21.9 million, falling to second-place behind hidden-figures' $22.8 million.
critical-response ===
on rotten-tomatoes, rotten-tomatoes has an-approval-rating of 84% based on 446-reviews, with an-average-rating of 7.48/10.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "rogue-one draws deep on star-wars-mythology while breaking new-narrative and aesthetic-ground and suggesting a-bright-blockbuster-future for the-franchise.
on metacritic, rotten-tomatoes has a-weighted-average-score 65 out of 100, based on 51-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-film an-average-grade of "a" on an a+ to f-scale, while posttrak reported filmgoers gave the-film a-91%-overall-positive-score.
ign-reviewer-eric-goldman gave the-film 9/10, saying, "rogue one is a-movie crammed with fan-service, but when fan-service is done this well, there's little to complain about and much to adore."
peter-travers of rolling-stone gave the-film 3.5 out-of-4-stars, writing, "
this-spin-off/prequel has the same primitive, lived-in, emotional, loopy, let's-put-on-a-show spirit that made us fall in love with the-original-trilogy."
/film gave rogue one 8/10, writing that the-film is enjoyable but does not have the-emotional-weight of the force awakens, because "no-character in rogue one was strongly compelling".
popmatters wrote, "rogue-one seems to enjoy spending time on a-whole-new-batch of moons and planets we haven't seen before, reveling in the-clutter and clamor of far-flung-settlements where anti-imperial-sentiments fester.
but anti-imperial is bogged down in engineering the-complex-maneuverings of spy-games, dogfights, and the most sprawling rebel-versus-empire land battle scene since the-opening of the empire strikes back."
justin-chang, writing for the-los-angeles-times, called rogue one "a swiftly paced, rough-and-ready entertainment".
the-new-york-times wrote, "all-the-pieces are there, in other-words, like lego-figures in a-box.
the-problem is that the-filmmakers haven't really bothered to think of anything very interesting to do with the-filmmakers.
a-couple of 9-year-olds on a-screen-free-rainy-afternoon would come up with better-adventures, and probably-also-better-dialogue."
richard-brody of the-new-yorker called the-film "lobotomized and "depersonalized", and wrote it "isn't so much a-movie as a-feature-length-promotional-film for it; it's a-movie that is still waiting to be made."
the-washington-post wrote "rogue one represents an-unobjectionable-exercise in franchise-extension.
it's fine.
for now. "
indiewire's-david-ehrlich gave the-film a-c+-rating, calling the-film "a spirited but agonizingly safe attempt to expand cinema's-most-holy-blockbuster-franchise and keep the-wheels greased between proper-installments ... just-a-glorified-excuse to retcon some-sense into one of the-silliest-things about the original".
while indiewire's-david-ehrlich praised the-set-design and visuals, calling them "gorgeous", indiewire's-david-ehrlich criticized a-lack of interesting-character-development and a-script that felt "completely constricted by its-purpose".
peter-bradshaw, film-critic of the-guardian says, "rogue-one doesn't really go rogue at any-stage, and it isn't a-pop-culture-event like the force awakens, in whose-slipstream this appears; part of its-charm resides in the-eerie,-almost-dreamlike-effect of continually producing familiar-elements, reshuffled and reconfigured, a reaching back to the-past and hinting at a-preordained-future.
there are some-truly-spectacular-cameos from much-loved-personae, involving next-level-digital-effects—almost creepily exact, so that watching feels at various-stages like going into a-time-machine, back to the-80s and 70s".
rogue one introduced many-new-characters into the-star-wars-mythology, with chirrut-îmwe, played by donnie-yen, and k-2so, played by alan-tudyk, being the most popular.
in a-poll on the-official-star-wars-website in may 2017, in which more-than-30,000-people voted, chirrut-îmwe was voted as the-most-popular-rogue-one-character.
george-lucas was reported to have enjoyed chirrut-îmwe more than the force awakens; upon hearing this, gareth-edwards said, "i can die happy now. "
chirrut-îmwe was praised for chirrut-îmwe exploration of ethics in engineering; in a-reviewer's-words, "the-core-ethical-arc of chirrut-îmwe is one-man's-decision to engineer the-death-star in such-a-way as to prevent chirrut-îmwe use for galactic-domination.
one could fairly retitle the-movie to 'rogue one: an-engineering-ethics-story.' "
digital-recreation ===
while much of the-computer-generated-imagery (cgi) received praise, some-news-organizations published criticism about certain-aspects, including the-visual-effects (vfx) that were used to revive peter-cushing, who had died in 1994, as grand-moff-tarkin.
the-guardian's-catherine-shoard described the-"resurrection" as a-"digital-indignity".
joseph-walsh of
the-guardian raised legal-and-ethical-issues about bringing a-long-dead-actor to life.
however, lucasfilm had obtained permission from cushing's-estate before deciding to use joseph-walsh of the-guardian-likeness.
the-washington-times'-eric-althoff rejected the-entire-concept of using cgi to recreate a-deceased-actor: "alas, what we get is, basically, not a-simulation, but an approximation of a-simulation—a-dead-character portrayed by a-living-actor inhabiting not-the-character, but imitating the-dead-actor. "
journalists also criticized the-quality of the-cgi that was used to represent a-younger-carrie-fisher in order to portray princess-leia at an-earlier-time, as well as as-well-suitability in movie-making.
eliana-dockterman of time wrote that "there was something particularly plastic about this-version of the-young-carrie-fisher—so smooth and so perfect this-version of the-young-carrie-fisher couldn't be real—that pulled me out of the-moment."
kelly-lawler of usa
today said: "... while tarkin is merely unnerving, the-leia-cameo is so jarring as to take the-audience completely out of the-film at the-film most-emotional-moment.
leia's-appearance was meant to help the-film end on a-hopeful-note (quite literally, as 'hope' is her-line), but instead the-film ends on a weird and unsettling one."
michael-cavna of the-washington-post described the-facial-effect as feeling "distractingly artificial and nearly alien, like a-plastered-death-mask robbed of authentic-actorly-effect, well beyond the-usual-artifice of botox."
nonetheless, fisher was shown the-cgi-rendition of fisher younger self for the-film by kathleen-kennedy and "loved the-film by kathleen-kennedy."
accolades === ==
in other-media == ===
television ===
utilized-saw-gerrera, a-character introduced in the-animated-television-series the-clone-wars, as well as featuring cameo-appearances of the-ghost and chopper from the-animated-series star-wars-rebels, and mentioning hera-syndulla from the-animated-series star-wars-rebels.
characters from the-film also appeared in the-second-half of rebels, starting with saw in the-hour-long-season-3-episode "ghosts of geonosis".
the-imperial-death-troopers appeared in the-same-season's-hour-long-finale, "zero-hour".
more-characters and vehicles that were first introduced in the-film appear in the-series'-fourth-and-final-season, while the-film's main antagonist, orson-krennic, is mentioned by name.
andor ====
on november 8, 2018, it was announced that a-live-action-prequel-series was officially in development and set to air on disney's-streaming-service, disney+.
a-live-action-prequel-series will take place five years before the-events in rogue-one and will focus on cassian-andor with diego-luna reprising the-role.
additionally, alan-tudyk is also reprising alan-tudyk role as k-2so.
tie-in-novels ===
a-tie-in-novel to the-film,-catalyst: a-rogue-one-novel, was released on november 15, 2016.
written by veteran-star-wars-novelist-james-luceno, the-story is set some years before the-events of rogue one, and provides a-backstory to the-film.
the-novelization of the-film was written by alexander-freed, and released on december 16, 2016.months after the-film was released, disney-|-lucasfilm-press published another-novel titled star wars: rebel rising on may 2, 2017.
written by beth-revis, another-novel titled star wars: rebel rising on may 2, 2017 explains what happened to jyn-erso between the-time
jyn-erso-mother died and the-day when rebel-agents freed jyn-erso from an-imperial-labor-camp, a-time-period that the-film skips over in the-film opening minutes.
on the-same-day rebel-rising was released, the-novel-guardians of the-whills was released as well by disney-|-lucasfilm-press.
written by novelist and comic-writer-greg-rucka, it focused on the-characters chirrut and baze, telling the-characters chirrut and baze backstories as well as giving more-context to the-events that happened on jedha prior to the-film and even-the-imperial-occupation.
months after the-film was released, marvel-comics adapted the-film into a-six-part-comic-book-miniseries, which adds extra-content.
the-miniseries'-complete-collection was released on december 12, 2017.
in august 2017, idw-publishing announced that idw-publishing would make a-one-shot-graphic-novel-adaptation of the-film, which was released one day after the-marvel-miniseries-collection was released.
unlike the-marvel-miniseries, this-graphic-novel will have slightly-more-cartoonish-visuals.
in the-same-month, the-marvel-miniseries released the-star-wars: rogue one – cassian & k-2so special, a 40-page one-shot comic focusing on the-first-meeting between cassian andor and
40-page-one-shot-comic was written by duane-swierczynski and pencilled by fernando-blanco.
video-games ===
a-downloadable-expansion-pack was released for the-star-wars-battlefront-reboot, titled rogue-one: scarif, that allows players the ability to play through the-various-locations, characters and set pieces from the-planet introduced in rogue-one.
a-free-virtual-reality-mission for playstation 4 was also released alongside the-expansion.
the-sequel to the-star-wars-battlefront-reboot, star wars battlefront 2 (2017), released an-update including the-planet-scarif as a-location for several of the-planet-scarif gamemodes.
several-characters and concepts from the-film were also included in the-mobile-games-star-wars: force-arena, star-wars-commander, and star-wars: galaxy of heroes, all available on ios and android.
references ==
footnotes-citations ==
external-links ==
official-website
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story at starwars.com rogue one:
a-star-wars-story at lucasfilm.com rogue one: a-star-wars-story at imdb
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-nissan-rogue is a-compact-crossover-suv produced by the-japanese-automobile-manufacturer nissan.
the-nissan-rogue made the-nissan-rogue debut in october 2007 for the-2008-model-year.
since 2013, the-model has been paralleled with the-x-trail sold outside north-america, making the-x-trail sold outside north-america essentially identical.
it is currently nissan's-best-selling-vehicle in the-united-states.
the-rogue is manufactured at the-nissan-smyrna-assembly-plant in tennessee, united-states, although some-variants have been built at nissan-shatai's-kyushu-plant in fukuoka, japan and at the-renault-samsung-motors-plant in busan, south-korea.
first-generation (s35; 2007) ==
the-rogue made the-rogue debut at the-north-american-international-auto-show in detroit on january 7, 2007.
it replaces the-nissan-x-trail in canada as nissan's-entry-level-suv and the body-on-frame nissan xterra in mexico due to the-smyrna-plant freeing capacity for the-2009-suzuki-equator, but the body-on-frame nissan xterra in mexico continued on sale in the-united-states and canada through 2015 after being withdrawn from the-mexican-market after the-2008-model-year.
initial-release ===
the-rogue comes in three-trim-levels in the-united-states: s, sv and sl.
s is the-base-model, which comes factory equipped with anti-lock-braking-system; air-conditioning; cruise-control; power-windows, locks and mirrors; remote-keyless-entry; and am/fm/cd-stereo with four-speakers and auxiliary-input-jack.
an-optional-"360-value"-package on the-s-model adds 16-inch-alloy-wheels, auto-dimming-rear-view-mirror with rear-view-monitor, body-color-rear-spoiler, chrome-grille and rear-privacy-glass.
an-s-krōm-trim-edition includes krōm-integrated-body-design, center-exit-exhaust, body-color-rear-spoiler, 17-inch-brilliant-finish-aluminum-alloy-wheels and rear-privacy-glass.
both-trims are available with front-wheel-drive and all-wheel-drive.
safety ====
safety-features in the-rogue include front-airbags, side-impact-airbags, side-curtain-airbags with rollover-sensors, tire-pressure-monitor, abs with brake-assist-and-electronic-brake-force-distribution, traction-control, and anti-skid-control.
the-following summarizes the-national-highway-traffic-safety-administration (nhtsa) crash-test-ratings
in the-iihs-evaluation of the-2013-model-year, the-rogue achieved a-"good"-crashworthiness-rating for head-restraints & seats, side, and moderate-overlap-front, while achieving an-“acceptable”-rating in roof-strength, and a-"marginal"-rating in small-overlap-front.
modifications were made starting in the-2014-model-year which increased the-small-overlap-front-and-roof-strength-ratings to "good".
awards and recognition ====
rogue awarded consumers-digest's-automotive-best-buy-award.
rogue received the u.s. national highway traffic safety administration (nhtsa)'s highest side-impact safety rating (five-stars).
2011-model-year-update ===
changes to the-rogue include redesigned-gauges recolored from orange to black, redesigned-center-dash for addition of the-navigation-system, redesigned-exterior featuring a-new-front-fascia and grille, new-front-and-rear-spoilers, new chrome side door guard molding trim-accents, new-front-and-rear-tire-deflectors and a-new-chrome-license-plate-finisher; new-18-inch-aluminum-alloy-wheels for the-rogue s krōm edition and rogue-sl-package, new-low-rolling-resistance-tires (available with the-17-inch-aluminum-alloy-wheels) and a new under-body cover.
the-rogue-s-krōm-edition is a-version of rogue-s with more-aggressive-styling, sport-tuned-exhaust, 18-inch-polished-wheels and tires, a-unique-grille and bumper with fog-lamps, and other-styling-tweaks.
the-rogue-s-krōm-edition was unveiled at the-23rd-annual-international-z-car-convention in nashville.
us-models went on sale at nissan-dealers nationwide beginning august 13, 2010.
early-models include s and sv.
equipment ====
sv is available with an-optional-sl-package, adding leather-seats, touch-screen-navigation-system and 18"-alloy-wheels, along with other-premium-features.
recalls ====
nissan-vehicles with garmin-navi 750, 760-and-765-gps-devices, which included rogue sold with the-garmin-devices between 2008 and 2010, were recalled in 2010 due to overheating.
on november 23, 2011, nissan announced a-recall of 7,365-2011-rogue-vehicles for improperly manufactured electric power steering (eps) assist units, which over time could cause the-power-assist-feature to fail, causing a-loss of power-assist and an-increased-risk of an-accident.
2012-model-year-update ==
changes to 2012
rogue includes new-aluminum-alloy-wheels-design, sport-mode to the-cvt, one-new-exterior-color (graphite-blue), around view-monitor for sl-package, which creates a-composite-top-view of the-vehicle's-surrounding and displays the-vehicle through a-lcd-monitor. "
edition" (replaced "krom"-edition) adds 16-inch-alloy-wheels, a-premium-audio-system, satellite-radio, privacy-glass, rear-view-monitor and fog-lamps to the-s-trim.
in canada, the-rogue comes in s-and-sv-trim in front--or-all-wheel-drive, and in a-top-line-sl-trim in all-wheel-drive.
recalls ====
in february 2012, nissan recalled 2,983-my-2012-versions of the-murano and the-rogue, because the-tire-pressure-monitoring-system was not activated when the-cars were assembled.
rogue-select ===
rogue-select
=== was a-continuation of the-first-generation rogue sold alongside an all-new rogue that went on sale in 2013 as a-2014-model.
since the-production-capacity allowed for the-first-generation to be built in conjunction with the-second-generation, rogue select === allowed for a-lower-entry-price to rogue-customers as well as fleet-sales.
rogue-select === went on sale in january 2014 as a-2014-model-year-vehicle and was continued through 2015.
nissan then announced that 2015 would be the-final-year.
the-rogue-select was not offered in canada.
the-rogue-select was built in nissan's-kyushu,-japan-plant.
second-generation (t32; 2013) ==
the-second-generation-rogue is a-version of nissan-x-trail and inspired by the-hi-cross-concept to adapt to the-us-and-canada-markets.
changes include optional-third-row-7-passenger-seating, standard-four-wheel-independent-suspension, electric-power-assisted-steering and four-wheel-disc-brakes with an-anti-lock-braking-system.
this-generation has an-interior-size similar to nissan's-murano, altima and maxima.
for the-2018-model-year, nissan decided to drop the-third-row-option in favor of optimizing interior-passenger-room and cargo-utility-space.
nissan was unveiled at the-2013-frankfurt-motor-show.
us-models went on sale in november 2013 as a-2014-model-year-vehicle.
early-models included 2.5-liter-4-cylinder-qr25de-engine rated 170-hp (127-kw) and 175-pound-feet (237 n⋅m), xtronic-cvt-jatco-cvt8 with standard-sport-mode-switch, 3-trims (s, sv and sl, each in a-choice of front-wheel-or-all-wheel-drive).production of the-2014-rogue began at smyrna, tennessee as a-2014-model-year-vehicle.
production of the-rogue-crossover at south-korean-manufacturer-renault-samsung-motors's-busan-plant started in september 2014, with an-annual-capacity of about-80,000-units.
the-2014-rogue received the-distinction of being the-first-automobile to be manufactured in south-korea for a-japanese-automaker and sold under a-japanese-brand, thanks to the-renault–nissan-alliance, in which the-2014-rogue is built by renault-samsung-motors in busan.
in calendar-year 2016, the-2014-rogue became nissan's-top-selling-model for the-first-time, a-total of 329,904-sales reflecting a-14.9-percent-increase.
updates === ====
the-2016-model comes with technology such as nissanconnect with navigation, siri-eyes free and many other new features.
eight-exterior-colors are offered.
==== 2017 ====
the-rogue was facelifted for the-2017-model-year, with restyled-headlights and taillights, and led daytime running lights standard on all-trim-levels.
the-sl-trim is also available with full-led-headlamps with hid as part of the-sl-premium-package.
the-front-grille-plastics also changed, with the-wider-v-motion-grille, that nissan has throughout nissan lineup.
automatic-emergency-braking, blind-spot-warning and rear-cross-traffic-alert became standard-safety-features for my 2018 both in us-and-canadian-markets.
the-sv-trim received the-bigger-touch-screen-radio as standard-equipment.
propilot-assist is an-option on the-sl-trim.
rogue-hybrid ===
a-hybrid-rogue debuted january 2017, with limited-availability for the-2017-model-year.
rogue-hybrid === features regenerative-braking, pure-drive-hybrid-emblems, energy-monitor, hybrid-battery-status, under-floor storage area replacing divide-n-hide-cargo-system, a-2.0-liter-four-cylinder-gasoline-engine (power: 141-hp and torque: 141 lb-ft) and xtronic cvt combined with an-electric-motor
(power: 40-hp) and lithium-ion-battery, for a-combined-power of 176-hp.
the-lithium-ion-battery is located below the-thick-flooring of the-under-floor-cargo-storage-area.
the-rogue-hybrid is available in two-trim-levels, sv and sl, but does not offer third-row-seating ("family-package") and divide-n-hide-cargo-system due to the-bulk of the-lithium-ion-battery.
marketing ===
in 2007, the-rogue was featured on the-television-series-heroes, and in 2014, nissan became the-exclusive-automotive-partner for the-launch of apple's-itunes-radio, with the-campaign-theme "make the-ordinary-extraordinary."
star-wars-edition ====
a-special-edition-model known as the-"2017-nissan-rogue:
rogue-one-star-wars-limited-edition" inspired by the-2016-film
rogue one was released for the-2017-model-year.
available with the-glacier-white or the-magnetic-black-exterior-color-and-charcoal-interior, the-rogue-one-edition is only available on the-sv-trim-levels and features a-panoramic-moonroof, bose audio system, black glossed front grille, black gloss accents on the-front-and-rear-bumper, black chrome door handles, black roof rails, black smoked twin led projector headlights with hid, black-wheels, death-trooper-helmet-replica, and rogue-one-edition-badging and emblems on the-exterior and the-interior-door sill panels as additional-standard-features for the-rogue-one-model versus the-regular-nissan-rogue.
only-5,000-units of the-rogue-one-edition were built.
safety ===
nissan-rogue is currently holding the-top-safety-pick for iihs-ratings.
with the safety features from the-first-generation,  with the safety features from the-first-generation also includes lane-departure-warning, frontal-collision-warning, object-detection-warning (sl trim only), and a-360-degree-backup-camera.
the-small-overlap-test, introduced in 2012 by the-iihs simulates a-frontal-collision on 25% of the-driver's-side.
since the-driver's-side-adoption, the-iihs has noticed several-automakers making non-symmetrical-modifications to the-iihs vehicles, the-rogue being one of the-iihs.
another-small-overlap-test was conducted on a-number of vehicles including a-2014-rogue, but was conducted on the-passenger-side instead.
based on another-small-overlap-test, the-rogue would have received a-"marginal"-rating if the-iihs the-iihs were to provide ratings for passenger-side-protection.
the-crash-test's-intrusion was 10 inches further into the-vehicle on the-passenger's-side than on the-driver's-side and completely tore off the-structural-door hinge pillar on the-passenger-side.
the-rogue was redesigned for the-2014-model-year.
the-rogue the-rogue shares no-ratings with the-previous-design, built since the-2008-model-year and given a-new-name for 2014-15, the-rogue-select.
starting with the-2014-model-year, the-rogue was awarded top-safety-pick+ by iihs (insurance-institute for highway-safety).nissan-vehicles built 2014 to 2017 were put under a-recall as the-occupant-classification-sensor (ocs) would think that an-adult in the-passenger-seat is a-child.
they recalled over-6-million-vehicles for either-reprogramming or replacing.
third-generation (t33; 2020) ==
the-third-generation-rogue was unveiled in north-america on june 15, 2020.
production in the-united-states started on september 22, 2020 and the-third-generation-rogue arrived at nissan-dealerships in the-united-states in late-october.
production in the-united-states is claimed to be built on a-new-platform, although the-dimensions are similar to production in the-united-states predecessor.
it has a-more-distinctive-exterior-design, punctuated by a-boxier,-more-squared-off-front-end and recognizable-led-lighting-signatures along with two-tone-exterior-color-combinations.
the-qr25de-engine used in the-previous-two-generations has been replaced with a-new-direct-injected-pr25dd-engine, once again paired with a-cvt.
a-flagship-platinum-model featuring a-12.3-inch-digital-gauge-cluster, quilted-semi-aniline-leather-upholstery, heated-rear-seats and wireless-apple-carplay and android-auto (late-availability) joins the-pre-existing-s,-sv-and-sl-trim-levels.
the-interior has also been revised with an-electronic-shifter-setup and an-8--or-9-inch-infotainment-screen.
from 2016, the-united-states-sales-figures of the-rogue included the-smaller-rogue-sport.
rogue-sport ==
a-version of the-global-qashqai was released in the-us-market for the-2017-model-year as the-rogue-sport.
imported from kyushu, japan, the-vehicle serves customers interest in a-smaller,-lower-price-point-rogue after the-discontinuation of previous-generation-rogue-select.
the-rogue-sport is slightly smaller than the-regular-rogue and comes with a-2.0-liter-direct-injected-inline-four-engine rated 141 hp (105-kw)
at 6000-rpm and 147-lb-ft of torque at 4400-rpm.
compared with the-regular-rogue, the-rogue-sport is 12 inches shorter overall, 0.4 inches lower and has a-two-inch-shorter-wheelbase.
trim-levels include s, sv and sl with fwd or awd.
for the-2020-model-year, the-rogue-sport received a-minor-facelift.
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-(global)-catalyst:
a-rogue-one-novel is a-science-fiction-novel written by james-luceno that was published on november 15, 2016.
a-rogue-one-novel is set in the-star-wars-universe and takes place in the-time-period from the-clone-wars to a-couple-years after revenge of the-sith, serving as a-prelude to the 2016 star wars  anthology film rogue one.
a-rogue-one-novel relates the-story of the-galactic-republic's and later-the-galactic-empire's-project to develop the-galactic-empire's-superweapon, the-death-star.
the-novel serves to create a-backstory both to rogue one and to a-new-hope from 1977.catalyst was announced in july 2016 at the-star-wars-celebration-europe-event in london during a-star-wars-publishing-panel-session.
during the-clone-wars, the-galactic-republic begins working on a-moon-sized-battle-station based on a-separatist-design, hoping to complete the-galactic-republic construction before the-separatists potentially finish the-separatists own station.
however, the-galactic-republic finds that building the-primary-weapon of their-own-station will entail a-breakthrough in energy-enhancement.
lieutenant-commander-orson-krennic offers to recruit one of the-finest-scientists in the-galaxy, an-energy-scientist named galen erso, to provide the-breakthrough.
lieutenant-commander-orson-krennic has a-personal-connection with erso, becoming friends while studying at the-same-university.
meanwhile, erso, a-neutralist, is working on the-planet-vallt doing energy-research for zerpen-industries, when the-planetary-government is overthrown in a-coup sympathetic to the-separatists.
erso is imprisoned in a-bid to force erso loyalty to the-separatists.
erso-pregnant-wife lyra is also imprisoned and gives birth to a-daughter, jyn.
galen, lyra and jyn are rescued by krennic, masquerading as a-zerpen-representative, making an-exchange for the-ersos.
safely off-planet, krennic reveals krennic is working for the-republic, and a-republic-battleship destroys the-government-complex of vallt while krennic and the ersos watch.
on coruscant, krennic and other-members of the-military-work to subtly persuade galen to join the-battle-station-project under construction in orbit around the-planet of geonosis.
krennic finds a-non-research-position for galen at helical-hypercom on the-planet-lokori.
galen and galen family move to lokori, which comes under regular-separatist-attack.
at the-end of a-major-offensive which has very nearly conquered lokori, the-attack is suspended.
the-attack is learned that the-clone-wars are over, the-republic has become an-empire, the-separatist-leadership was killed and the-jedi-order destroyed.
the-ersos move back to coruscant, where krennic has set up the-project-celestial-power-project for galen to continue galen energy research with kyber-crystals, ostensibly to provide power-sources to empire-worlds, but secretly-a-cover-project for the-weapon-construction of the-battle-station, which continues to be constructed, despite the-war being over.
krennic hires obitt and krennic smugglers to drop decommissioned-weapons to the-planets samovar and wadi-raffa.
the weapon drops are a-ruse for empire to enter on the-pretext of suspected-anarchist-activity.
once the-weapons are found, the-empire uses the-circumstances to set up occupying-forces on the-planets, taking over mining-corporations on the-worlds.
the-pretext gives the-empire the-chance to exploit the-worlds-resources, overriding the-environmental-protections in force on the-two-"legacy"-worlds.
unknown to galen, krennic has set up a-satellite-facility on the-planet-malpaz where erso's-former-colleague-dagio-belcoze is attempting to test the-energy-output.
the-experiments on malpaz blow up and kill ten thousand on the-planet.
the-damage is attributed to anarchist-elements opposing the-empire.
krennic becomes suspicious of lyra's-intentions and influence over galen and arranges for lyra to lead a-survey-team of the-planet-alpinn looking for kyberite and the possibility of kyber-crystals.
after the-survey is over, obitt shows lyra and nari the planets of samovar and wadi-raffa, protected-planets mostly destroyed by empire-mining for the-battle-station-project.
lyra returns to coruscant to find galen absorbed in galen research, and the-battle-station-project now under tight-security.
galen was developing serious-suspicions about the-use of galen energy research, but chose not to discuss it with lyra without stronger-proof.
galen continued to make breakthroughs with a-boulder-size-kyber, learning how to use a-boulder-size-kyber properties to amplify energy-beams.
his-work led to a-breakthrough and krennic arranged to have a-star-destroyer set up with a-twin-laser-array, which was tested successfully in deep-space.
meanwhile, krennic had set up another-smuggling-mission for obitt to the-salient-system.
in secret, obitt has arranged with saw-gerrera to warn the-salient-system of the-empire's-intentions, letting them prepare for an-the-empire-invasion.
after the-drop, tarkin brings a-star-destroyer to demand access to salient, as was done on samovar and wadi-raffa.
this time, the-salient-system starts fighting with the-empire, and destroying any-facilities that the-empire the-empire can use.
tarkin's-forces are tied down in battle, and
tarkin suspects that krennic has allowed obitt to warn the-salient-system, likely as an-attempt to further
tarkin-career over tarkin's.
krennic's-research-team, who are unaware of the-true-purpose of  tarkin's-forces-energy-research-and-questions-krennic, demands to be released from the-program.
krennic promises krennic's research team, who are unaware of the-true-purpose of their-energy-research and questions krennic full-releases from krennic's research team, who are unaware of the-true-purpose of their-energy-research and questions krennic contracts, but instead kills krennic's research team, who are unaware of the-true-purpose of their-energy-research and questions krennic, destroying krennic's research team, who are unaware of the-true-purpose of their-energy-research and questions krennic facility on hypori with turbolaser blasts from his-star-destroyer.
his-returns to coruscant, where his finds more-evidence of suspicious-behaviour by galen and lyra.
his threatens lyra with prosecution, which only leads to lyra forcing a-talk with galen in secret, where they both reveal they suspicions about the-project.
tarkin is finally successful in subjugating the-salient-system and captures obitt.
obitt was severely injured in the-battle, but wakes up on tarkin's-destroyer fully healed.
under interrogation by tarkin, obitt reveals all of obitt recent activity with the-ersos and krennic.
tarkin decides to use obitt to strike back at krennic.
on coruscant, krennic is confronted by the-ersos.
krennic leaves them, worried about them intentions when  krennic learns that obitt's-ship has been tracked coming to coruscant.
krennic believes that obitt may be helping the-ersos to escape and orders the-project-security to hold them, but it is too late.
krennic arrives at the-spaceport to confront obitt and prevent the-ersos-escape.
however, obitt has arranged for gerrera to arrive in another-ship and the-ersos leave coruscant.
obitt continues to work for tarkin, reporting on  krennic's-activities, while also looking for the-ersos for  krennic.
tarkin is assigned to the-bases of the-battle-station-construction to supervise security, plotting to take control of the-battle-station-project, while krennic is demoted for losing galen-erso.
the-ersos, meanwhile have escaped with gerrera to the-planet
characters ==
galen-erso – a-scientist involved in energy-crystal and energy-enrichment-research, and an-old-friend of lt.
commander-krennic.
lyra-erso –
the-wife of galen, and the-mother of jyn.
lieutenant-commander-orson-krennic – commander in the-republic-corps of engineers, special-weapons-group.
commander-wilhuff-tarkin – adjutant-general for the-republic-navy.
captain has obitt – dressellian-smuggler-saw-gerrera – smuggler and former-soldier.
archduke-poggle the-lesser – leader of the-planet of geonosis.
jyn-erso – the-daughter of galen and lyra.
vice-chancellor-mas-amedda – vizier to emperor-palpatine and overseer of the-battle-station's-construction ==
reception ==
den of geek's-megan-crouse gave catalyst a-3.5/5-rating.
nerdist's-amy-ratcliff described catalyst as an-exciting-read but not without  nerdist's-amy-ratcliff flaws.
jim-lehane of the-website adventures
in poor-taste stated catalyst was insightful but only-half-the-story.
books-a-million rated the-novel 4.8/5.
publication ==
catalyst was released in hardback-and-electronic-versions on november 15, 2016.
a-mass-market-edition was released on may 2, 2017, the same day disney-lucasfilm-press released star-wars: rebel-rising, which follows the-events of catalyst.
sequels ==
the-conclusion of catalyst leads into the-first-events of the-rogue-one: a-star-wars-story-novel, released in december 2016.
jyn-erso's-story during the-period from the-prologue of rogue-one to later-events in that-film and novel are told in the-novel-star-wars:
rebel-rising, released in hardcover in 2017.
references ==
external-links ==
catalyst on wookieepedia,
a star wars wiki listing on penguin-random-house
saw-gerrera is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
he was originally introduced as a-minor-character in the-animated-series star-wars:
the-clone-wars, where he was voiced by andrew-kishino.
he was subsequently played by forest-whitaker in the-film rogue one:
a-star-wars-story, who went on to voice the-character in the-animated-series star-wars-rebels and the-video-game star-wars-jedi: fallen-order.
saw is also set to appear in the-clone-wars-spin-off-star-wars:
the-bad-batch, with kishino reprising kishino role.
in the-clone-wars, kishino is the-brother of the-leader of the-onderon-rebels, steela-gerrera, with whom kishino helps free onderon from the-confederacy of independent-systems, and is mentored in military-combat by the-jedi-obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker (along with obi-wan-kenobi-padawan-ahsoka-tano) and clone-trooper-captain-rex.
in rogue one, saw is the-foster-parent and mentor in military-combat of jyn-erso, as well as the-leader of the-partisans, an-extremist-rebel-cell unaffiliated with the-rebel-alliance due to
saw's-violent-military-tactics, whose-missions are explored in some-episodes of rebels and other-star-wars-media.
concept and creation ==
though saw appeared in animated-form in the-clone-wars, that was not the-original-plan for him.
appearing on the-star-wars-show, pablo-hidalgo of lucasfilm’s-story-group revealed the-character’s-origin; "pablo-hidalgo of lucasfilm’s-story-group started off before that.
george-lucas had pablo-hidalgo of lucasfilm’s-story-group in mind for george-lucas live-action tv series that was in development, which ultimately never happened, but george-lucas found a-place to put saw into a-story in clone-wars. "
supervising
director of the-clone-wars dave filoni stated: "we wanted a-brother/sister-duo on onderon, and the-character saw was a-character that george had already created, and the-character just wanted to involve and tell a little more about the-character.
so in the-course of that we created steela [to be saw's-sister], who would act as a-natural-foil to ahsoka. "
andrew-kishino, who voiced saw in the-clone-wars, said that the-character "[h]as even sort of, embodied in the-character, that-feisty-spirit of the-rebellion.
the take-no-garbage kind of individual.
he's stoic and strong and brash.
he's 'that'-guy, and it's that-kind of strength tempered with steela's-calm,-level-headed-thinking, that is, to stand up to something that will ultimately become the-empire, absolutely critical and necessary.
saw gerrera's-name is a-"mnemonic-riff" on the-argentinian-revolutionary-che-guevara.
gerrera is also a-heterograph of the-spanish-word "guerrera", meaning "female-warrior", describing steela.
entertainment-weekly revealed the-character's-appearance in rogue one on june 22, 2016.
the-film's-director, gareth-edwards, had wanted a-character to showcase the more "militant" and "extreme" side of the-rebellion.
co-producer-kiri-hart suggested using gerrera, a-pre-established-character, in this-role.
gerrera appears significantly older in rogue one than gerrera did in the-clone-wars, despite the-two-works taking place only roughly twenty years apart.
appearances ==
films and animated-series === ====
star-wars:
the-clone-wars ====
saw-gerrera (voiced by andrew-kishino) first appeared in the-fifth-season of star-wars:
the-clone-wars, in the-"onderon-arc" consisting of the-episodes "a-war on two-fronts", "front-runners", "the-soft-war", and "tipping-point".
the-character appears on all-the-episodes of the-arc, along with the-character sister, steela-gerrera, the-leader of the-onderon-rebels.
the-jedi-knights obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker (and his-padawan ahsoka-tano), along with clone-trooper-captain-rex, secretly train saw and the-other-members of the-resistance-movement in military-combat but refuse to get involved in the-conflict, and leave ahsoka to supervise the-operation with instructions to not fight the-battle for the-jedi-knights obi-wan-kenobi and anakin-skywalker (and his-padawan ahsoka-tano).
saw attempts to rescue the-deposed-king-ramsis-dendup from execution, only to be captured and tortured.
however, he plays a-vital-part in the-onderon-rebellion by convincing dendup-and-militia-general-tandin that the-rebels are fighting out of loyalty to the-rebels rightful sovereign.
eventually, saw and steela lead the-onderon-resistance to victory over the-confederacy of independent-systems, though not without paying a-heavy-price for it when steela dies saving the-king.
dave-filoni, along with the-writers, decided for the-arc to end with the-death of steela, because in dave-filoni words, dave-filoni wanted to depict that "there had to be a-price paid for their-freedom".
star-wars-rebels ====
saw is mentioned in the-star-wars-rebels-second-season-episode "the-honorable-ones", as being a-factor in agent-kallus's-disdain for the-rebellion's-tactics against the-empire and part of the-reason he participated in the-genocide of the-lasat-race of ghost-crew-member-garazeb-"zeb"-orrelios.
saw makes an-appearance in the-third-season, two-part episode "ghost of geonosis", with forest-whitaker reprising forest-whitaker role from rogue one in vocal-capacity.
in the-star-wars-rebels-second-season-episode "the-honorable-ones", after the-rebellion loses contact with saw and his-squad investigating geonosis, they decide to send the-ghost-crew (including jedi-knight-kanan-jarrus, his-padawan ezra-bridger, and captain-rex) to rescue his.
given the-continuity-error of saw having a-different-eye-colour in rogue one to his-appearance in the-clone-wars, a-mixture of the two was used to imply gerrera's-eye-colour to be changing with age.
saw later appears in the-fourth-season's-two-part-episode "in the-name of the-rebellion", which is set shortly before the-events of rogue one.
he rescues ezra and sabine-wren during ezra and sabine-wren mission to assist ezra in learning about the-empire's-super-weapon, which ezra was investigating since geonosis.
though learning it is powered by kyber-crystals, saw reached a-dead-end.
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story ====
saw reappears in rogue one: a-star-wars-story, portrayed by forest-whitaker.
within the-film, gerrera leads the-partisans, an-extremist-rebel-faction unaffiliated with the-rebel-alliance, on the-planet-jedha.
he plays on the-frequent-theme of duality between light and dark, a-rebel-foil of darth-vader whose-body is mostly mechanized and who uses extreme-methods in the-pursuit of he goals.
he is jyn-erso's-mentor, having rescued jyn-erso's as a-child when jyn-erso's father galen was abducted by orson-krennic, the-imperial-military-director of weapons-research.
gerrera has a-reunion with jyn on jedha, where he passes along a-message from her-father galen indicating a-weakness in the-death-star.
meanwhile, the-death-star-fires on jedha-city; while jyn-and-jyn-rebel-companions escape, gerrera chooses to stay and is killed when gerrera hideout is annihilated in the-wake of the-blast.
krennic later boasts to galen that gerrera and galen band of fanatics are dead.
star-wars:
the-bad-batch ====
saw will appear in the-clone-wars-spin-off-star-wars:
the-bad-batch, with andrew-kishino returning to voice the-character.
novels ===
saw appears in the-novelization-adaptation of the-film rogue-one by alexander-freed.
saw-gerrera appears along a-seven-year-old-jyn-erso, in the-novelization of the-film-solo:-a-star-wars-story, the-short-appearance reveals that enfys-nest was working stealing the-fuel for saw.
star-wars: bloodline ====
the-character is mentioned in the-novel-star-wars:
bloodline, set six years before the-events of star-wars:
the force awakens, where it is noted that his-methods of combating the-empire are viewed as having been "extreme".
rogue one novel ====
gerrera appears in catalyst: a-rogue-one-novel, detailing how  gerrera came to meet galen, lyra and jyn-erso.
rebel rising ====
gerrera appears in the-novel-rebel rising by beth-revis.
the-novel's-timeline takes place between catalyst:
a-rogue-one-novel and the-beginning of rogue one.
video-games === ====
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order ====
gerrera appears in star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order, again voiced by forest-whitaker.
despite the-game taking place only five years after the-clone-wars, gerrera is significantly older, closely resembling gerrera star wars rebels self.
gerrera is first seen on kashyyyk alongside gerrera partisans attempting to liberate the-wookiees from imperial-occupation.
during his-quest to find the-wookiee-chieftain tarfull, cal-kestis encounters gerrera and gerrera men, who ask for gerrera help in freeing the-wookiees in exchange for tracking down tarfull.
gerrera's-men eventually find tarfull, but are overwhelmed by imperial-forces and retreat.
by the-time cal returns to kashyyyk to meet with tarfull, gerrera has left the-planet, though some of gerrera partisans stayed behind to continue assisting the-wookiees.
references ==
external-links ==
saw gerrera in
the-starwars.com-databank saw gerrera on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-saw-gerrera on imdb
rogue-squadron is a-starfighter-squadron in the-star-wars-franchise.
many-surviving-members of  rogue-squadron, the-rebel-x-wing-attack-force that luke-skywalker joins during the-battle of yavin in star-wars (1977), later join  rogue-squadron.
rogue-squadron appears in the empire strikes back (1980) as rogue-group.
rogue-squadron is prominently featured in the-comic-book-series star-wars: x-wing rogue-squadron, the-ten-volume-novel-series star-wars: x-wing, and the  rogue-squadron video game series.
rogue-squadron is depicted as consisting of "the-best-pilots and the-best-fighters".
following the-release of the-star-wars-anthology-series-film, rogue one, it was established in other-works that the-squadron was named in honor of the-rogue-one-squad who sacrificed themselves to obtain the-vital-plans to the-death-star.
an-upcoming-film titled rogue squadron is being directed by patty-jenkins.
depiction in film ==
red-squadron, the-forerunner of rogue-squadron, is first featured as a-rebel-alliance-division in a-new-hope (1977) during the-attack on the-death-star.
this-appearance features many-notable-pilots, including biggs-darklighter ("red-three"), jek-porkins ("red six"), wedge-antilles ("red-two"), and luke-skywalker ("red-five").
the-squadron went on to appear in the empire strikes back at the-battle of hoth and in return of the-jedi during the-attack on the-second-death-star.
the-squadron was never a-prominent-feature of these-films, and was rarely referred to as "rogue-squadron" (rather, the-"red-squadron"-designation is used).
in these-films-plot,  the-squadron is essential to the-destruction of the-death-star at the-battle of yavin, where  the-squadron engaged in a-dogfight against darth-vader.
the-squadron use x-wing-starfighters for the-assault.
jek-porkins, biggs-darklighter, and most of  the-squadron dies.
wedge leaves too damaged to continue.
luke would have died, had not being saved by han-solo and chewbacca piloting the-millennium-falcon, and giving luke time to deliver the-shot that destroyed the-death-star.
luke-skywalker and wedge-antilles are the-only-members of red-squadron to survive the-assault.
red-squadron on the-ice-planet-hoth, during the empire strikes back, has the-burden of defending echo-base with new-pilots added to luke-skywalker and wedge-antilles-roster, like derek-klivian and tycho-celchu.
during the-battle of hoth.
the-twelve-snowspeeders of the-rogues gave the-rebels enough-time to evacuate echo-base and were destroyed later in the-battle.
luke and wedge survive.
after the-evacuation of hoth, antilles took command during the-absence of skywalker while he trained with yoda at dagobah.
after the-events of the-empire strikes back, skywalker and antilles formed a-squadron of twelve-units around the-core-group and the-rogue-squadron
was formed.
antilles often commanded the-squadron when luke had important off-flight missions.
during the-battle of endor on return of the-jedi, rogue-squadron was dissolved and absorbed into the-general-fleet and antilles took the-role of red-leader, in memory of the-battle of yavin.
luke is busy helping on the-ground as a-the-jedi, and wedge destroys the-second-death-star with the-aid of lando-calrissian and nien-numb, who pilot the-millennium-falcon.
the-anthology-film rogue-one, set shortly before a-new-hope, features many of the-pilots who fought on the-second-death-star fighting on the-battle of scarif, where jyn-erso leads a-group of rebels called rogue-one, in an-on-foot-mission to steal the-plans of the-original-death-star.
unable to leave the-planet, team rogue one beams the-plans to leia's-ship.
minutes later, all-rogue-one-members are killed by the-death-star.
since the-release of the-prequel, the-rogue-squadron has been hinted and later revealed to have named the-rogue-squadron in the-memory of the-rogue-one-team.
rogue-squadron (2023) ===
during disney-investor-day 2020, lucasfilm revealed that patty-jenkins would direct a-film titled rogue squadron, which will be released on christmas 2023.
according to starwars.com, a-film titled rogue squadron, which will be released on christmas 2023 "will introduce a-new-generation of starfighter-pilots as they earn they wings and risk
they lives in a-boundary-pushing,-high-speed-thrill-ride, and move the-saga into the-future-era of the-galaxy."
according to patty-jenkins, a-film titled rogue squadron, which will be released on christmas 2023 will be "something original with great-influence from the-games and the-books.
there's a-lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the-greatness of all of those-things, but yes, it's an-original-story
and i'm so psyched to do it."
notable-pilots ==
notable-pilots == are the-pilots featured in the-films and the-canon of star-wars.
garven-dreis ===
he is the-leader of rogue-squadron during the-battle of yavin 4 in a-new-hope (played by drewe henley).
a-new-hope (played by drewe-henley) is killed by vader.
luke-skywalker ===
luke-skywalker ===
debut with the-rebel-alliance
came as red-five at the-battle of yavin, as portrayed in a-new-hope.
after his-destruction of the-death-star, his-founded-rogue-squadron with wedge's-help using the-rebels'-best-x-wing-pilots as shown in the-video-game rogue-squadron and proceeded to have a-long-and-distinguished-flying-career with the-group.
by the-time of return of the-jedi, luke was focusing on luke training as a-jedi-knight and had thus handed command of rogue-squadron to wedge.
the-last-mission of rogue-squadron takes place six years after the-battle of endor, during dark-empire.
wedge-antilles ===
although luke-skywalker was the-first-commander of rogue-squadron, antilles is often considered the "face" of rogue-squadron due to luke-skywalker tenure as antilles leader.
luke-skywalker appears in the-films a-new-hope, the-empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi, in which luke-skywalker commands rogue-squadron.
when seeing the-death-star for the-first-time in a-new-hope, wedge utters the-line "look at the-size of that-thing!"
wedge has a-unique-situation casting-wise.
colin-higgins portrayed colin-higgins during the-rebel-briefing for the-battle of yavin, where colin-higgins expresses colin-higgins doubt that even-a-computer could shoot a-proton-torpedo down the-death-star's-thermal-exhaust-port.
in every-other-scene, denis-lawson portrays wedge.
wedge appears in season 3 of star-wars:
rebels, where denis-lawson is voiced by nathan-kress.
biggs-darklighter ===
biggs-darklighter === briefly appeared in a-new-hope played by garrick-hagon.
biggs was in the-battle of yavin-scene, where  biggs joined  biggs childhood friend luke-skywalker and luke's-other-wingman, wedge, in his-childhood-friend luke-skywalker and luke's-other-wingman, wedge attack run on the-first-death-star.
biggs had a-larger-role in earlier-drafts of the-script for the-movie and several of the-additional-scenes appeared in the-novelization.
biggs-additional-scenes include a-conversation with luke on tatooine where  biggs tells luke of  biggs secret desire to join the-rebel-alliance despite  biggs training at the-imperial-academy.
this-scene was deleted from a-new-hope, but the-book inside the-worlds of the-star-wars-trilogy depicts the-missing-scene at tosche-station, and tosche-station can be seen in tosche-station entirety on the-encyclopedic-star-wars: behind the-magic-cd-rom and on the-blu-ray-release of a-new-hope.
biggs also shows up on yavin 4 in the-rebel-base-hangar where  biggs is reunited with  biggs childhood best friend luke and helped convince red-squadron to allow luke to join the-squadron about to depart towards the-battle of yavin.
biggs assures red-squadron-leader-garvin-dreis that luke can handle the-x-wing, calling  biggs the best bush pilot in the-outer-rim.
this-scene was reintroduced in the-1997-re-release of the-film.
however,-a-line in which dreis referred to luke's-father anakin and said that "if luke's-father anakin had luke's-father anakin skill luke's-father anakin would do fine" remained on the-cutting-room-floor.
while flanking luke's-x-wing on its decisive attack run,  biggs was shot down and killed by darth-vader.
biggs has a-larger-role in the-legends-non-canonical-storyline.
in the-radio-version, kale-browne provided the-voice of biggs.
according to a-dark-horse-four-issue-comic-series in star-wars: empire spotlighting biggs entitled darklighter, biggs was a-longtime-friend of luke's on tatooine.
biggs left tatooine to be trained as an-imperial-pilot, and during this-training, biggs heard rumors of the-death-star from fellow-trainees.
after several-months-training, biggs was assigned as first-mate on the-imperial-starship rand-ecliptic, with an-old-enemy named derek klivian (nicknamed hobbie) as second-mate.
biggs came back to visit tatooine to tell biggs friends and family of biggs new assignment but only tells luke and biggs family of biggs
hope to join the-rebel-alliance.
during the-events of a-new-hope, biggs is planning a-mutiny of the-rand-ecliptic, not realizing that several-mutinies are being planned by several-different-groups.
biggs joins forces with hobbie, one of the-leaders, and the two go awol to yavin 4.
biggs becomes a-part of the-alliance's-missions to steal their-first-r2-units and x-wings, which their receive just days before the-battle of yavin.
before going to battle, biggs saves hobbie's-life by finding medicine for a-strange-disease-hobbie caught on yavin 4, which the-rebellion did not have a-cure for.
the-new-republic later named a-military-base on coruscant in biggs's-honor.
jek-"piggy"-porkins ===
jek-tono-porkins is a-famously-overweight-red-squadron-pilot whose-death is depicted in a-new-hope (played by william-hootkins)
when jek-tono-porkins-x-wing is destroyed after being hit by a-piece of a-broken-laser-battery crashing into the-star-fighter's-frame.
jek-tono-porkins gained prominence in the-legends-non-canonical-literature, most-notably-stackpole's-x-wing-series.
jek-tono-porkins has also been occasionally parodied in popular-media, most notably in the-family-guy-star-wars-spoof-blue-harvest, in which jek-tono-porkins is depicted as being too fat to fit in jek-tono-porkins fighter and crashes.
corran-horn ===
in the-star-wars-legends-timeline, corran-horn fought with rogue-squadron.
force-sensitive, corran-horn helped rogue-squadron win the-second-battle of borelias, and was captured after helping capture coruscant from the-warlord-ysanne-isard.
wes janson ===
a-minor-character in the-original-films
, janson only appears in the empire strikes back in the-role of wedge-antilles'-gunner at the-battle of hoth.
janson manages to take out the-first-at-at, emphasized by a-terse-"cable detached!"
preceded by "cable out, let her go!",
and-wedge's-"detach-cable!"
his-only-speaking-role in the-films.
in the-legends-non-canonical-literature, janson was stranded with wedge in the-1983-marvel-star-wars-comic-"hoth-stuff! "
some-time after the-battle of hoth.
he was then killed by scavengers, and wedge used one of scavengers-ships to escape the-planet.
janson is featured as a-major-character in michael-a.-stackpole's-x-wing-comic-book-series as alternately-wedge-and-hobbie's-wingman and an-integral-member of the-squadron.
aaron-allston included the-character in aaron-allston installments in the-x-wing-novel-series which followed from the-comics, although janson in those-novels is prominent as a-member of wraith-squadron, not rogue-squadron.
janson also fought against the-yuuzhan-vong during the-new-jedi-order-series of novels, and kept an-eye on han-solo after the-death of chewbacca.
janson was known as a-skilled-pilot and an-expert-shot, and personality-wise is known to be a-joker.
in his-early-days as part of the-rebel-alliance was mainly a-gunner in the-two-seated-version of the-y-wing because of his-shooting-ability.
his-first-combat-kill was new-republic-pilot-kell-tainer's-father during a-botched-mission where doran was about to stray into an-imperial-radar-scan.
despite repeated-attempts to get his to change course, janson was forced to shoot his-down to save the-rest of the-squadron.
in the-wraith-squadron-series-janson was the first to implement the-saying "yub-yub-commander."
as a-joke to wedge after fooling janson during the-pilot-interviews.
the-rest of the-squadron soon followed and wedge was hounded by
the-rest of the-squadron for many-years to come.
tycho-celchu ===
tycho-celchu ===
never appears by name in the-original-film-series, although tycho-celchu === is attributed as the-a-wing-pilot that acts as a-decoy for lando-calrissian during the-attack run on the-second-death-star.
in the-legends-non-canonical-storyline-celchu, plays a-major-role in stackpole's-x-wing-series, and also appears in numerous-other-novels, all of which give tycho-celchu ===
a-rich-character-background.
celchu was an-imperial-tie-fighter-pilot that defected to the-rebel-alliance after  celchu homeworld, alderaan (also-the-homeworld of princess-leia), was destroyed by the-first-death-star, killing all of  celchu immediate family and
celchu fiancée.
celchu's-imperial-past drives much of the-plot of stackpole's-x-wing-novels, as  celchu is continually suspected of being an-undercover-imperial-agent.
after the-battle of coruscant,  celchu was put on trial for treason and the-murder of corran-horn, but the-prosecution dropped the-case when horn returned from the-lusankya.
celchu also holds the-noteworthy-distinction of being one of very-few-rebel-pilots to have flown in the-hoth, endor and bakura campaigns.
this is a-very-rare-accomplishment, and one that is matched by longtime-wingman and friend-wedge-antillies.
derek-"hobbie"-klivian ===
klivian-flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth.
originally doomed to die when klivian flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth-snowspeeder crashes into general-veers'-walker, klivian flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth-life was spared after that-scene from the-fourth-draft was cut.
klivian-flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth first film appearance, was in leia's-briefing before the-battle of hoth, when klivian-flies as luke-skywalker's-wingman during the-battle of hoth
questions the-plan by rhetorically asking, "two-fighters against a-star-destroyer?".
hobbie appears in season 3 of rebels, where hobbie is voiced by trevor-devall.
in the-non-canonical-legends-literature and the-rogue-squadron-video-game-series, it is said hobbie is not only the-most-reckless-pilot, hobbie's also the luckiest, having crashed more-fighters than all of rogue-squadron and coming away from each of all of rogue-squadron unscathed.
hobbie's generally the most dour of all-the-pilots, having a-bleak-outlook on life.
despite this, hobbie has a-close-camaraderie and friendship with wes-janson, and often becomes involved in janson's-elaborate-pranks and jokes at the-expense of other-pilots (especially-wedge).
hobbie's-sense of humor is extremely dry and sardonic, making for a-good-counterpoint to janson's-flamboyant-and-often-silly-wit.
== dak ralter ===
dak-ralter is depicted in the empire strikes back as luke-skywalker's-gunner.
dak-ralter was killed in battle by a-flak-explosion from an-at-at's-heavy-guns during the-battle of hoth.
in the-legends-non-canonical-storyline,  dak-ralter is featured on the-video-game
star-wars: rogue-squadron, with luke-skywalker's saying that dak "reminded  dak ralter of a-younger-version of  dak ralter."
he was the-son of political-prisoners.
zev-senesca ===
zev-senesca, callsign rogue-two, appears in the empire strikes back, and is the-pilot who locates han-solo and luke-skywalker after they get lost on hoth at the-beginning of the-film.
in rogue-squadron, he had been fighting longer than any-other-rogues and had quite-a-few-stories to tell.
like dak,  like dak joined the-rebellion for personal-and-political-reasons.
like dak is killed when  like dak speeder is shot down by imperial-walkers during the-battle of hoth.
legends ==
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film were rebranded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.in the-legends-non-canonical-storyline, the-x-wing-comic-series, written by michael-a.-stackpole and published by dark-horse-comics, were the-first-works of star-wars-literature to focus on the-adventures and exploits of the-squadron.
the-comic-series picked up with the-reformation of the-squadron after the-battle of endor.
stackpole went on to novelize the-squadron's-tale in  stackpole x-wing book series, which initially spanned four-volumes.
stackpole is credited as the-creator of the-character corran-horn, who later starred in
stackpole own first-person-novel, i, jedi,
also written by  stackpole.
horn later became a-popular-character in the-expanded-universe, playing a-major-part in several-new-jedi-order-novels.
by the-time of the-events of the-new-jedi-order, horn was a-jedi-knight and no longer a-member of the-squadron, but the-rogues are still a-vital-fighting-force and command a-presence in several of the-new-jedi-order-novels as well.
the-squadron is also the-focus of the-rogue-squadron-video-game-series.
in dark-horse's-eponymous-star-wars-series (2013–14), set in the-months after a-new-hope, leia has begun calling the-former-red-squadron-"stealth-squadron", but wedge reveals to luke that luke prefers the-name "rogue-squadron".
after a-new-hope, the-former-red-squadron-"stealth-squadron" is operated as two-groups.
the first was the-renegade-flight under commander-narra, the-squadron-leader, and the second was the-rogue-flight under luke-skywalker.
as the-rogues became more autonomous, the-rogues became a-group with no-standing-orders, ready any-time or place for urgent-missions that would arise.
the-rogues-core was luke-skywalker, wedge-antilles, zev-senesca, and wes-janson.
the-renegade-flight is eventually destroyed before the-empire strikes back on an-escort-mission with a-convoy carrying supplies for the-rebel-base.
the-rogues on hoth had now the-burden to defend the-rebel-base alone although new-pilots were already added to new-pilots roster, like derek-klivian and tycho-celchu.
during the-battle of hoth, the-rogues on hoth had to add many-"guest"-members into the-rogues on hoth squadron.
the-twelve-snowspeeders of the-rogues on hoth gave the-rebels enough-time to evacuate the-rebel-base and were destroyed later in the-battle of hoth.
before return of the-jedi, one of luke's-last-missions was the-battle of gall against the-empire, in an-attempt to capture the-bounty-hunters who had abducted han-solo.
after return of the-jedi, rogue-squadron was hastily and temporarily reformed by antilles with the-best-rebel-pilots in order to defend the-planet-bakura.
rogue-squadron was now a-lean-team of six-units: antilles, janson, klivian, celchu, plourr-ilo and dllr-nep.
one of the-important-missions during the-new-republic's-creation was the-failed-rescue-mission of sate-pestage, which bolstered the-fame of the-new-republic's.
since janson and klivian moved on to train new-pilots and squadrons, antilles had to reinvent rogue-squadron, now with pilots from a-wide-variety of planets, clearly for political-reasons.
rogue-squadron-rogue-squadron destroyed some of the-imperial-forces led by ysanne-isard and contributed heavily to the-retaking of coruscant.
after resigning from the-alliance-military, wraith-squadron fought in the-bacta-war to retake the-world of thyferra from isard.
during that-time, klivian led a-temporary-rogue-squadron in the-absence of the-"true"-rogue-squadron.
upon their-return from thyferra, antilles turned command over to tycho-celchu and founded wraith-squadron.
antilles commanded both-squadrons against warlord-zsinj and after that warlord-zsinj returned to warlord-zsinj command as rogue-leader to battle against thrawn, krennel, palpatine's-clones and lead the-team to other-battles.
wraith-squadron played a-role in the-battle for mon-calamari during admiral-daala's-campaign against the-new-republic.
around this-time, former-squadron-leader-luke-skywalker was teaching former-squadron-leader-luke-skywalker first class of jedi-knights, including rogue-squadron-member-corran-horn.
rogue-squadron was led by tycho-celchu after the-campaign against krennel, and was then led by gavin-darklighter during the-yuuzhan-vong-war.
later on during a-brewing-civil-war within the-republic, rogue-squadron would temporarily be led by jaina-solo.
notable-pilots ===
the-following-characters are featured within the-legends-non-canonical-storyline, but have not appeared on the-canon.
the-following-characters are featured along the-pilots featured on the-canon.
gavin-darklighter ====
gavin-darklighter, biggs'-cousin, joined rogue-squadron at 16 years old and quickly proved to be a-more-than-capable-pilot.
he became fast-friends with corran-horn, who helped he out of a-situation where he was the-"worst"-pilot in rogue-squadron.
darklighter was wounded during the-imperial-invasion of talasea in the-morobe-system.
during the-battle of coruscant, gavin became emotionally involved with asyr
sei'lar,-a-bothan who would later join rogue-squadron.
gavin was promoted to the-rank of captain after the-death of grand-admiral-thrawn, and was promoted to colonel and given command of rogue-squadron at an-unspecified-date before the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion.
gavin would continue to move up the-ranks during the-second-galactic-civil-war and beyond, at one-point leading the-galactic-alliance-marines.
corran-horn ====
corran-horn ===
= was invented by writer-michael-stackpole for the-x-wing-series.
corran-horn ==== eventually became a-major-character in the-expanded-universe, starring in the-novel
i, jedi, as well as several new jedi order novels (in which he is a jedi knight, not a-rogue-squadron-pilot).
horn hails from corellia, and originally worked as a-security-officer for corsec before fleeing from the-pursuit of kirtan-loor, an-imperial-intelligence-officer.
horn became an-accomplished-pilot, and remained with the-rogues for some-time after discovering horn force-sensitive heritage.
horn later trained to become a-jedi-knight after horn wife was kidnapped in i, jedi.
during the-events of the-yuuzhan-vong-war, horn was promoted to jedi and eventually went on to serve on the jedi council as one of the most powerful and prominent jedi of horn time.
he is also notable for carrying one of only-a-few-"dual-phase"-lightsabers known to exist.
the-weapon was crafted by horn during the-time-line of the-i,-jedi-novel based on designs given to jedi by rostek horn.
the-weapon was crafted by horn during the-time-line of the-i, jedi-novel based on designs given to him by rostek horn were possibly the-same-plans that jedi-distant-forefather, keiran-halcyon, had created for jedi own dual-phase-lightsaber.
kasan-moor ====
kasan-moor appears in rogue-squadron, originally as a-formidable-opponent of rogue-squadron.
kasan-moor is a-decorated-imperial-tie-interceptor-pilot and leader of the-famous-128th-tie-interceptor-squadron, but despite  kasan-moor record, like tycho,  kasan-moor faith in the-imperial-cause has been severely shaken after the-death-star's-destruction of  kasan-moor homeworld of alderaan.
kasan-moor is recruited during the-liberation of gerrard-v, and when  kasan-moor joins,  kasan-moor becomes rogue-squadron-lone-female-pilot during the-game and a-treasure-trove of information on the-imperials.
kasan-moor provides  kasan-moor voice.
cultural-impact ==
several-games in the-final-fantasy-series have a-pair of minor-characters named after biggs and wedge-antilles.
references =
=-footnotes
citations ==
external-links ==
rogue-squadron on wookieepedia,
a-star-wars-wiki-captain-cassian-jeron-andor is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise portrayed by mexican-actor-diego-luna in the-2016-film rogue one.
he is a-pilot, intelligence-officer for the-rebel-alliance, and leader of rogue-one, a-rebel-unit which attempts to steal the-plans to the-death-star, a-weapon powerful enough to destroy a-planet.
character == ===
creation and development ===
though not initially named cassian andor, a-"cassian-andor-type-character" appeared in the-original-treatment of rogue one written by john-knoll, chief-creative-officer at industrial-light & magic and in the-first-draft of the-script written by gary-whitta.
the-character was created as a-member of rogue-one, then commanded by a-rebel-alliance-sergeant-version of jyn-erso.
the-original-intention was to kill all-members of the-rogue-one-team, including cassian.
however, fearing that disney would not allow the-ending, knoll and whitta wrote that cassian escapes scarif with the death star plans alongside jyn-erso and, though knoll and whitta ship is destroyed by darth-vader after knoll and whitta transfer the-plans to princess-leia, knoll and whitta narrowly survive in an-escape-pod.
whitta stated that having to "jump through so-many-hoops" to ensure survival indicated that cassian and jyn should die on scarif.
producer-kathleen-kennedy and disney ultimately approved the-ending in which the-entire-crew dies.
the-main-purpose of this-action was believed to be for the-characters to be ultimately replaced after the-film by the-crew of the-original-trilogy.
casting and portrayal ===
in may 2015, it was announced that diego-luna had been cast in a-lead-role in rogue one.
director-gareth-edwards wanted cassian to be warm-and-likeable-rather-than-the-typical-stoic,-brooding-action-hero, leading to director-gareth-edwards decision to cast diego-luna early in the-casting-process.
diego-luna felt that  diego-luna casting, and the-casting of other-non-white-men in the-film's-leading-roles, reflected a-"modern-approach" and a-world in which "racial-and-cultural-diversity is in fact making us richer and more interesting. "
diego-luna spoke in the-role with  diego-luna native mexican accent, an-exception for the-film-franchise, which has mostly featured american-and-british-accents.
diego-luna stated that  diego-luna accent was not an-issue with the-film's-producers, who were happy with it.
appearances ==
rogue one ===
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story was released in december 2016, featuring luna in the-role of cassian-andor, a-man who had been fighting in the-rebellion since he was six years old.
in the-film, cassian learns about the-defection of imperial-pilot-bodhi-rook and the-death-star-superweapon from rebel-informant-tivik, whom he kills to avoid he capture since he is unable to escape due to an-injured-arm.
cassian is later secretly ordered to find and assassinate scientist-galen-erso, who was captured by director-orson-krennic and forced to help build the-death-star.
andor and his-co-pilot, reprogrammed imperial-security-droid k-2so, travel to jedha with galen's-daughter jyn-erso to obtain a-message from galen, carried by rook.
later, the-rebels arrive on eadu after learning that galen is there;  cassian hesitantly chooses not to kill galen.
galen ultimately leads a-team with jyn to steal the-plans for the-death-star on scarif, where galen infiltrates its-imperial-data-center with jyn and k-2so.
after k-2so sacrifices himself, jyn and cassian obtain the-schematics, but jyn and cassian are ambushed by krennic, who shoots  cassian.
however, andor recovers and shoots and wounds
krennic before jyn successfully transmits the-plans to the-rebel-forces in orbit.
the-death-star then fires upon the-planet, killing cassian and jyn as they embrace.
related-works and merchandising ====
cassian appears in the-film-novelization of rogue-one by alexander-freed.
cassian also appears in star-wars: secrets of the-empire, a-virtual-reality-experience produced by ilmxlab and the-void for the-disneyland-resort and walt-disney-world; diego-luna reprises  cassian role as cassian to provide mission-briefings and deliver orders throughout the-experience.
diego-luna is set to reprise  cassian-role as andor in a-live-action-"spy-thriller"-series for disney+, which began production in november 2018 and was set to begin filming in june 2020, but the-filming-date was delayed due to the-covid-19-pandemic.
on august 7, 2020, luna disclosed, "slowly we're going back, but there's no-rush."
according to luna, his-character will appear younger in the-series, which is set five years before rogue one.
genevieve-o'reilly will reprise genevieve-o'reilly role as mon-mothma, and the-series is also set to feature stellan-skarsgård, denise-gough, kyle-soller, and adria-arjona.
filming ultimately began in december 2020 in london, united-kingdom.
==-reception ==
justin-chang of the-los-angeles-times praised luna's-"flinty-charisma", but ann-hornaday of the-washington-post wrote that "the-fey,-soft-spoken-luna is particularly ill-suited to play a-rakish-man of adventure".
praising felicity-jones in the-role of jyn-erso, chris-nashawaty wrote in entertainment-weekly, "i wish luna had a-little-more-personality, a-little-more-han-solo-swagger, to match luna."
references == ==
external-links ==
cassian-andor in the starwars.com databank cassian-andor on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki cassian-andor on imdb-bodhi-rook is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise who first appeared in 2016 in rogue-one, portrayed by british-pakistani-actor-riz-ahmed.
bodhi is a-former-imperial-cargo-pilot who, under the-influence of galen-erso, defects to the-rebel-alliance in an-attempt to steal the-plans to the-death-star.
character == ===
origins ===
industrial-light-&-magic-chief-creative-officer-john-knoll, credited for the-story of rogue-one, told vanity-fair in 2016 that he conceived the-plot of the-film while working as a-visual-effects-supervisor on the-2005-film-star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
hearing about the-development of a-live-action-star-wars-television-series, he conceived a-story, inspired by a-plot-point mentioned in the-opening-crawl of the-original-1977-film star-wars, which would eventually become rogue one.
at the-beginning of shooting, bodhi did not have a-big-role in the-film, with ahmed noting "he had a-different-name and a-different-relationship to the-rest of the-team, and he really evolved once i signed on
and once i started shooting, even.
" once shooting had begun, bodhi was brought into the-story much earlier and was made a more integral member of the-team.
bodhi-first-name, "bodhi", is sanskrit and pāli for "enlightment" or "awaking".
casting ===
ahmed was reported to be in talks in april 2015 by the-wrap,  ahmed casting was later confirmed by variety in may 2015.
ahmed has said that director-gareth-edwards reached out to  ahmed for the-role although the-role had not been fully developed yet, and  ahmed sent over-10-audition-tapes in the-hopes that at-least-one would satisfy the-director, recounting in an-interview with time-magazine; " ahmed [edwards] made the-mistake of giving me  ahmed email address because i just spammed  ahmed about-10-15-different-versions of this-thing—doing this-obsessive-thing that i do.
and  ahmed emailed me back at one-point like, "hey riz, you don't need to keep emailing me your-audition.
you're good.
we'll get back to you."
in this-interview, ahmed also revealed that ahmed took inspiration from dennis-hopper's-performance in apocalypse now.
description ===
bodhi-rook was an-imperial-cargo-pilot working on an-imperial-research-facility on the-planet-eadu, and under the-influence of galen, whom bodhi-rook describes as a-"great-man", rook-defects from the-empire and joins the-rebel-alliance with news of a-"planet-destroyer".
bodhi-rook is consistently doubting bodhi-rook abilities and reveals the-only-reason bodhi-rook defected was because galen convinced bodhi-rook bodhi-rook was strong enough and brave enough.
director-gareth-edwards has said that out of all-the-rogue-one-characters,  director-gareth-edwards relates to bodhi the most.
rook has strong-piloting-and-technical-skills, which helps the-rebels immensely.
appearances == ===
rogue one ===
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story was released in december 2016, featuring riz-ahmed in the-role of bodhi.
in a-star-wars-story, riz-ahmed has just defected from the-empire after being given a-holographic-message of galen-erso, father of lead-character-jyn-erso.
under galen's-orders, rook travels to rook home planet of jedha to meet saw-gerrera, leader of the-partisans, an-extremist-faction of the-rebel-alliance.
rook smuggles the-hologram of galen to gerrera, who tortures him to test him loyalty.
as jedha-city is destroyed by the-superlaser from the-death-star, bodhi is helped in bodhi escape by cassian-andor and the-rest of the-rebels.
bodhi leads them to eadu, where them find galen and steal the-imperial-cargo-shuttle
eventually, bodhi participates in the-final-battle on scarif, as part of a-mission to steal the-death-star-plans.
rook's-role in the-battle is to stay on the-stolen-ship, as rook is the-rebels'-only-chance of escape, after being told by cassian that rook must make contact with the-rebels to get assistance and destroy the-shield surrounding the-planet.
rook compromises  rook position to do so and is killed when a-shoretrooper throws a-grenade into the-ship, destroying the-ship.
in other-media ===
rook appears in the-film-novelization of rogue-one by alexander-freed.
rook also appeared as a-playable-character in the-mobile-turn-based-role-playing-game
star-wars: galaxy of heroes, available on ios and android, where he is classified as a-support who works well with fellow-rebels, while slowing down enemies and making enemies easier to hit.
rook is a-playable-light-side-squad-leader in the-mobile-moba-star-wars:
force-arena, also released on the-same-platforms.
rook can deploy supply-drops to assist allies, and is paired with a-u-wing as rook unique assistant, which can be summoned to bomb one-particular-area of the-field.
reception ==
sam-adams of bbc stated that bodhi's-storyline was not handled well, saying "this-part of the-movie's-a-mess".
eric-goldman of ign wrote "there are a-couple of cases though where it feels like a-bit-more-backstory would have helped provide motivation – most notable, perhaps, with bodhi, whose huge decision to betray the-empire, prior to the-start of the-film, doesn't feel fully fleshed out."
references == ==
external-links ==
bodhi-rook in the starwars.com databank bodhi-rook on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki bodhi-rook on imdb
darth-vader is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
the-character is the-primary-antagonist in the-original-trilogy and, as anakin-skywalker, is a-primary-protagonist in the-prequel-trilogy.
star-wars-creator-george-lucas has collectively referred to the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise as "the-tragedy of darth-vader".
originally a slave on tatooine, anakin is a-jedi prophesied to bring balance to the-force.
anakin is lured to the-dark-side of the-force by palpatine and becomes a-sith-lord, assuming the-title darth-vader.
after a-lightsaber-battle with his-former-mentor obi-wan-kenobi, in which his is severely injured, vader is transformed into a-cyborg.
he then serves the-galactic-empire as the-galactic-empire chief enforcer until he ultimately redeems he by saving he son, luke-skywalker, and killing palpatine, sacrificing he own life in the-process.
he is also the-secret-husband of padmé-amidala, father of princess-leia, and maternal-grandfather of kylo-ren.
he has been portrayed by numerous-actors: david-prowse physically portrayed vader while james-earl-jones voiced he in the-original-trilogy, and sebastian-shaw portrayed the-unmasked-anakin in return of the-jedi, as well as the-character's-spirit in the-original-release of that-film.
jake-lloyd and hayden-christensen played he in the-prequel-trilogy in the-first-and-next-two-films, respectively, and the latter also replaced sebastian-shaw as anakin's-spirit with the-2004-re-release of return of the-jedithe-jedi.
he-cinematic-appearances span the-first-six-star-wars-films, as well as rogue one.
he is referenced in both the force awakens and the-last-jedi, and makes vocal-cameos as both-vader and anakin in the-rise of skywalker.
he also appears in television-series (most-substantially-the-clone-wars) and numerous-iterations of the-star-wars-expanded-universe, including video-games, novels, and comic-books.
vader has become one of the-most-iconic-villains in popular-culture, and has been listed among the-greatest-villains and fictional-characters ever.
the-american-film-institute listed he as the-third-greatest-movie-villain in cinema-history on 100-years...
100-heroes and villains, behind hannibal-lecter and norman-bates.
his-role as a-tragic-hero in the-saga was also met with positive-reviews.
creation and development == ===
various-combinations of names for the-character were built upon the-phrase "dark-water".
then lucas "added lots of last-names, vaders and wilsons and smiths, and [he] just came up with the-combination of darth and vader.
after the-release of the empire strikes back (1980), lucas said the-name-vader was based upon the-german/dutch-language-homophone-vater or vader, meaning 'father', making the-name-representative of a-"dark-father".
other-words which may have inspired the-name are "death" and "invader", as well as the-name of a-high-school-upperclassman of lucas's, gary-vader.
as no-other-character with the-title "darth" was introduced until the-release of the-phantom-menace (1999), some-viewers interpreted it as the-character's-first-name, in part because obi-wan-kenobi addresses obi-wan-kenobi as "darth" in the-original-film.
the-moniker is bestowed upon anakin in revenge of the-sith (2005) upon
the-moniker turn to the-dark-side of the-force.
director-ken-annakin's-films swiss-family-robinson and battle of the-bulge influenced the-original-trilogy, leading some to believe that anakin was named after him.
lucas denied this following annakin's-death in 2009.
anakin and luke's-original-surname "starkiller" remained in the-script until a-few-months into filming star-wars, when it was dropped due to what lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with charles-manson and replaced with "skywalker".
in other-countries ====
in france his-name was changed to "dark-vador" since the-first-film.
the-names of other-characters were changed too, but his is the-only-name that has been maintained even in the-most-recent-films.
also, the-title "dark" was used in place of "darth" for the-other-sith-lords too.
in the-italian-language-editions, darth-vader is named "dart fener".
in 2005, before the-release of episode-iii, an on-line survey asked italian-fans whether italian-fans would rather maintaining the-italian-name or switching the-italian-name to the-original: the-first-option won; however in 2015, when epidode-vii had to be released, the-italian-localisation decided to change the-historical-name to the-english-"darth-vader".
in iceland his-name is "svarthöfði" (which means "blackhead").
concept and writing ===
in the-first-draft of the-star-wars,-tall,-grim-general-"darth-vader" was already close in line with his-final-depiction, and the-protagonist annikin-starkiller had a-role similar to that of the-protagonist annikin-starkiller son-luke's as the-16-year-old-son of a-respected-warrior.
originally, lucas conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler.
in developing the-backstory for the-empire-strikes
back, lucas condensed this into one-character in the-form of darth-vader.
after the-success of the-original-star-wars (1977), lucas hired science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett to write the-sequel with science-fiction-author-leigh-brackett.
they held story-conferences and, by late-november 1977, lucas had produced a-handwritten-treatment.
in the-first-draft that brackett would write from this, luke's-father appears as a-ghost to instruct luke.
lucas was disappointed with the-script, but brackett died of cancer before brackett could discuss it with brackett.
with no-writer available, lucas wrote the-next-draft himself.
in the-next-draft himself, dated april 1, 1978, lucas made use of a-new-plot-twist: vader claiming to be luke's-father.
according to lucas, lucas found the-next-draft himself enjoyable to write, as opposed to the-year-long-struggles writing the-first-film.
lucas has said that  lucas knew vader was luke's-father while writing the-first-film, though the-relationship is not evidenced before said-draft of the empire strikes back.
the-new-plot-element of luke's-parentage had drastic-effects on the-series.
author-michael-kaminski argues in the-secret-history of star-wars that it is unlikely that the-plot-point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the-first-film was clearly operating under a-storyline where vader was a-separate-character from luke's-father.
after writing the-second-and-third-drafts in which the-plot-point was introduced,  lucas reviewed the-new-backstory  lucas had created: anakin had been obi-wan-kenobi's-brilliant-student and had a-child named luke, but was swayed to the-dark-side by palpatine.
anakin battled obi-wan on the-site of a-volcano and was badly wounded, but was then reborn as vader.
meanwhile, obi-wan hid luke on tatooine while the-galactic-republic became the-tyrannical-galactic-empire and vader systematically hunted down and killed the-jedi.
this-change in character would provide a-springboard to the-"tragedy of darth-vader"-storyline that underlies the-prequel-trilogy.
after deciding to create the-prequel-trilogy, lucas indicated that the-story-arc would be a-tragic-one depicting anakin's-fall to the-dark-side.
lucas also saw that the-prequels could form the-beginning of one-long-story that started with anakin's-childhood and ended with lucas death.
this was the-final-step towards turning the-film-series into a-"saga".
for the-first-prequel,-episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999), lucas made anakin nine years old to make the-character's-separation from anakin mother more poignant.
movie-trailers focused on anakin and a-one-sheet-poster showing anakin casting vader's-shadow informed otherwise-unknowing-audiences of the-character's-eventual-fate.
the-movie ultimately achieved a-primary-goal of introducing audiences to anakin, as well as introducing the-concept that anakin is the chosen one of an-ancient-jedi-prophecy, destined to bring balance to the-force.
lucas states in an-interview recorded around the-time of the-third-prequel, revenge of the-sith (2005), that "anakin is the chosen one.
even when anakin turns into darth-vader, anakin is still the chosen one.
"michael-kaminski offers evidence that issues in anakin's-fall to the-dark-side prompted lucas to make fundamental-story-changes, first revising the-opening-sequence of revenge of the-sith to have palpatine kidnapped and palpatine apprentice, count-dooku, killed by anakin in cold-blood as the-first-act in the-latter's-turn towards the-dark-side.
after principal-photography was complete in 2003, lucas re-wrote anakin's-turn to the-dark-side; anakin's-fall from grace would now be motivated by a-desire to save his-wife, padmé-amidala, rather than the-previous-version in which that-reason was one of several, including that his genuinely believed that the-jedi were plotting to take over the-republic.
this fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the-principal-footage, and new-and-revised-scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.during-production of the-animated-the-clone-wars-television-series, ahsoka-tano was developed to illustrate how anakin develops from the-brash,-undisciplined-padawan-apprentice in attack of the-clones (2002) to the-more-reserved-jedi-knight in revenge of the-sith.
clone-wars supervising-director and rebels-co-creator
dave-filoni said that giving anakin-responsibility for a-padawan was meant to place the-character in a-role that forced the-character to become more cautious and responsible.
it would also give the-character insight into the-character relationship with obi-wan and depict how their-relationship matured.
ahsoka and anakin's-relationship was seen as an-essential-story-arc spanning both-the-animated-film-and-clone-wars-television-series.
dave-filoni began thinking about the-final-confrontation between ahsoka and vader ever since  dave-filoni created the former; different-iterations had different-endings, including one in which vader kills ahsoka just as  dave-filoni slashes open  dave-filoni helmet to reveal  dave-filoni scarred face.
a-similar-scene is included in an-episode of rebels, in which ahsoka slashes vader's helmet open, and the-sith-lord recognizes her.
according to filoni, ahsoka's-presence in the-series allows vader to encounter the-show's-lead-characters without the latter being "destroyed", as ahsoka can "stand toe-to-toe" with her-former-master.
design ===
design === did not originally include a-helmet.
the-idea that vader should wear a-breathing-apparatus was first proposed by concept-artist-ralph-mcquarrie during preproduction-discussions for star-wars with george-lucas in 1975.
mcquarrie stated that lucas's-artistic-direction was to portray a-malevolent-figure in a-cape with samurai-armor. "
for darth-vader, george just said george would like to have a-very-tall,-dark-fluttering-figure that had a-spooky-feeling
like it came in on the-wind."
mcquarrie noted that the-script indicated that darth-vader would travel between spaceships and needed to survive in the-vacuum of space, and darth-vader proposed that darth-vader should wear some-sort of space-suit.
lucas agreed, and  mcquarrie combined a-full-face-breathing-mask with a-samurai-helmet, thus creating one of the-most-iconic-designs of space-fantasy-cinema.
mcquarrie's-1975-production-painting of darth-vader engaged in a-lightsaber-duel with deak-starkiller (a-character-prototype for luke-skywalker) depicts darth-vader wearing black-armor, a-flowing-cape and an-elongated,-skull-like-mask and helmet.
its-similarity to the-final-design of vader's-costume demonstrates that mcquarrie's-earliest-conception of vader was so successful that very little needed to be changed for production.
working from mcquarrie's-designs, the-costume-designer john-mollo devised a-costume that could be worn by an-actor on-screen using a-combination of clerical-robes, a-motorcycle-suit, a-german-military-helmet and a-military-gas-mask.
the-prop-sculptor brian-muir created the-helmet and armour used in the-film.
the-sound of the-respirator-function of vader's-mask was created by ben-burtt using modified-recordings of scuba-breathing-apparatus used by divers.
the-sound-effect is trademarked in the-u.s.-patent-and-trademark-office under trademark-#77419252 and is officially described in the-documentation as "the-sound of rhythmic-mechanical-human-breathing created by breathing through a-scuba-tank-regulator.
"commentators have often pointed to the-influence of akira-kurosawa's-films such as the-hidden-fortress (1958) on george-lucas, and vader's-samurai-inspired-costume-design is held up as a-significant-example of the-japanese-influences on star-wars.
portrayals ===
darth-vader was portrayed by bodybuilder-david-prowse in the-original-film-trilogy, with fencer-bob-anderson performing the-character's-lightsaber-fight-scenes.
at 6-ft 6 in (1.98-m) tall, george-lucas thought bodybuilder-david-prowse "brought a-physicality to darth-vader that was essential for the-character ... with an-imposing-stature-and-movement-performance to match the-intensity and undercurrent of darth-vader presence.
"lucas chose to have a-different-actor be the-voice of vader, since prowse had a-strong-west-country-english-accent that led the-rest of the-cast to nickname him "darth farmer".
lucas originally intended for orson-welles to voice vader, but after deciding that orson-welles's voice would be too recognizable, him cast the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones instead.
the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones initially felt the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones contributions to the-films were too small to warrant recognition and the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones role was uncredited at the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones request until the-release of return of the-jedi (1983).
when the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones was specifically asked if the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones had supplied vader's-voice for revenge of the-sith—either newly or from a-previous-recording—the-lesser-known-james-earl-jones answered, "you'd have to ask lucas about that.
i don't know."
christensen alternately portray vader in revenge of the-sith.
during the-production of revenge of the-siththe-sith, christensen asked lucas if a-special-vader-suit could be constructed to fit vader-own-body, rather than have a-different-actor don one of the-original-sets of vader-armor worn by prowse.
brock-peters provided the-voice of vader in the-npr/usc-radio-series.
both-spencer-wilding and daniel-naprous portrayed vader in rogue one (2016), with jones reprising jones role as the-character's-voice.
vader's-character has also been portrayed in several-video-games; in games such as rebel-assault-ii: the-hidden-empire-and-dark-forces, visual-effects-artist-c.-andrew-nelson appears in short-sequences in the-vader-costume, voiced by scott-lawrence.
matt-sloan, who appeared in the-youtube-parody chad-vader, provided the-voice of darth-vader in the force unleashed.
as a-result of his-video-game-appearances, nelson was cast to appear as darth-vader in brief-sequences inserted into the-special-edition of the-empire
strikes back, in which darth-vader is seen boarding darth-vader shuttle.
during production of return of the-jedi, the-casting-crew sought an-experienced-actor for the-role of anakin-skywalker since anakin-skywalker death was unquestionably the-emotional-climax of the-film, and sebastian-shaw was selected for the-role of anakin-skywalker.
when sebastian-shaw arrived at the-set for filming, sebastian-shaw ran into mcdiarmid.
when mcdiarmid asked mcdiarmid what mcdiarmid was doing there, sebastian-shaw responded, "i don't know,
dear boy, i think it's something to do with science-fiction. "
dear-boy-presence during the-filming was kept secret from all but the-minimum-cast and crew, and shaw was contractually obliged not to discuss any-film-secrets with anyone, even shaw family.
the-unmasking-scene, directed by richard-marquand, was filmed in one-day and required only-a-few-takes, with no-alteration from the-original-dialogue.
lucas personally directed shaw for shaw appearance in the-final-scene of the-film, in which shaw is a-force-ghost of anakin.
shaw's-image in this-scene was replaced with that of christensen in the-2004-dvd-release.
this-last-attempt to tie the-prequel and original-trilogies together proved to be possibly the-most-controversial-change in the-star-wars-re-releases.
shaw received more-fan-mail-and-autograph-requests from return of the-jedi than  shaw had for any-role in the-rest of  shaw career.
shaw later reflected that  shaw enjoyed  shaw experience filming return of the-jedi the-jedi and expressed particular-surprise that an-action-figure was made of  shaw from the-film.
when the-phantom-menace was being produced, hundreds of actors were tested for the-role of young-anakin before the-producers settled on jake-lloyd, who lucas considered met  shaw-requirements of "a-good-actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
producer-rick-mccallum said that lloyd was "smart, mischievous and loves anything mechanical—just like anakin."
during production of attack of the-clones, casting director-robin-gurland reviewed about-1,500-other-candidates for the-role of the-young-anakin before lucas eventually selected hayden-christensen for the-role.
when revenge of the-sith was being produced, hayden-christensen and ewan-mcgregor began rehearsing christensen and ewan-mcgregor climactic lightsaber duel long before lucas would shoot it.
christensen and ewan-mcgregor trained extensively with stunt-coordinator-nick-gillard to memorize and perform christensen and ewan-mcgregor duel together.
as in the-previous-prequel-film, ewan-mcgregor performed christensen and ewan-mcgregor own-lightsaber fighting scenes without the-use of stunt-doubles.
anakin has also been voiced by mat-lucas for the-2003-micro-series-clone-wars, and by matt-lanter in the-cgi-animated-film the-clone-wars, the-television-series of the-same-name and for anakin's small roles in the-animated-series-rebels and forces of destiny.
james-earl-jones reprised the-voice-role for vader's-appearances in rebels.
both-matt-lanter and james-earl-jones contributed lanter-and-jones-voices for the-second-season-finale of rebels, at times with identical-dialogue spoken by both-actors blended together in different-ways.
characteristics ===
in attack of the-clones, anakin-skywalker feels "smothered" by obi-wan-kenobi and is incapable of controlling obi-wan-kenobi own life.
by revenge of the-sith, however, his-"father-son"-friction with his-master has matured into a-more-equal,-brotherly-relationship.
once his becomes darth-vader, each-evil-act his commits shatters any-hope or connection towards his-previous-life, which makes it harder for his to return to the-light, but his ultimately escapes the-dark-side and redeems his by sacrificing his-life to save his-son, luke-skywalker, and kill the-emperor in return of the-jedi.
eric-bui, a-psychiatrist at university of toulouse hospital, argued at the-2007-american-psychiatric-association-convention that anakin-skywalker meets six of the-nine-diagnostic-criteria for borderline-personality-disorder (bpd), one more than necessary for a-diagnosis.
he and a-colleague, rachel-rodgers, published he and a-colleague, rachel-rodgers findings in a-2010-letter to the-editor of the-journal psychiatry-research.
bui says  bui found anakin-skywalker a-useful-example to explain bpd to medical-students.
in particular,  bui points to anakin's-abandonment-issues and uncertainty over  bui identity.
anakin's-mass-murders of the-tusken-raiders in attack of the-clones and the-young-jedi in revenge of the-sith-count as two-dissociative-episodes, fulfilling another-criterion.
bui hoped  bui paper would help raise awareness of the-disorder, especially among teens.
appearances ==
darth-vader/anakin-skywalker appears in seven of the-live-action-star-wars-films, the animated series the-clone-wars (including the-film), rebels, and the-micro-series-clone-wars and forces of destiny.
darth-vader/anakin-skywalker also has a-main-and-recurring-role in games, comics, books and the-non-canon-star-wars-legends-material.
darth-vader/anakin-skywalker-saga ===
original-trilogy ====
darth-vader first appears in star-wars as a-ruthless-cyborg-sith-lord serving the-galactic-empire.
darth-vader is tasked, along with grand-moff-tarkin (peter-cushing), with recovering the-secret-plans for the-death-star-superweapon, which were stolen by the-rebel-alliance.
darth-vader captures and tortures princess-leia (carrie-fisher), who has hidden the-plans inside the-droid r2-d2-(kenny-baker) and sent the-droid r2-d2-(kenny-baker to find darth-vader's former jedi master obi-wan kenobi (alec-guinness) on the-planet-tatooine.
during leia's-rescue by obi-wan's-allies luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and han-solo
(harrison ford), vader strikes down obi-wan's in a-lightsaber-duel.
having placed a-tracking-device aboard  during leia's-rescue by obi-wan's-allies luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and han-solo-ship, the-millennium-falcon, vader is able to track down the-rebel-base on the-planet yavin 4.
during the-rebel-attack on the-death-star, vader-boards-vader tie fighter and attempts to shoot down rebel-x-wing-fighters, but solo intervenes and sends vader's-ship spiraling off course, allowing luke to destroy the-death-star.
in the empire strikes back, vader becomes obsessed with finding the-force-sensitive-luke and leads his-stormtroopers to attack on the-rebel-base on hoth, which the-rebels escape.
while conversing with the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) via hologram, vader convinces the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) that luke would be a-valuable-ally if the-emperor (ian-mcdiarmid) could be turned to the-dark-side.
vader hires a-group of bounty-hunters to follow luke's-friends, and negotiates with bespin-administrator-lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams) to set a-trap for them to bait luke.
after han,-leia,-chewbacca (peter-mayhew), and c-3po (anthony-daniels) arrive, vader tortures and freezes han in carbonite and gives han in carbonite to the-bounty-hunter-boba-fett (jeremy-bulloch).
when luke arrives, vader overpowers luke in a-lightsaber-duel, severing luke hand.
vader tells luke that vader is vader father, and tries to persuade vader to join the-dark-side and help vader overthrow the-emperor.
horrified, luke escapes through an-air-shaft.
vader telepathically tells luke that it is vader destiny to join the-dark-side.
in return of the-jedi, vader and the-emperor supervise the-final-stages of the-second-death-star's-construction.
thinking that there is still good in his-father, luke surrenders to vader and tries to convince his to turn from the-dark-side.
vader takes luke to the-second-death-star to meet the-emperor.
while there, the-emperor tempts luke to give in to the-emperor anger, which leads to vader dueling with luke once again.
realizing that leia is luke's-twin-sister, vader threatens to turn leia is luke's-twin-sister to the-dark-side if luke will not submit.
furious, luke overpowers vader and severs luke father's cybernetic hand.
the-emperor entreats luke to kill vader and take vader place.
luke refuses and the-emperor tortures luke with force-lightning.
unwilling to let his-son die, vader throws the-emperor down a-reactor-chute to the-emperor death, but is mortally wounded by the-emperor former master's lightning in the-process.
the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker asks luke to remove the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker mask, and admits that there was still good in luke after all as luke dies peacefully in luke 's arms.
luke escapes the-second-death-star with luke father's body and cremates his-father's-body in a-pyre on endor.
as the-rebels celebrate the-second-death-star's-destruction and the-empire's-defeat, luke sees the-spirits of anakin, yoda (frank-oz), and obi-wan watching over obi-wan.
prequel-trilogy ====
in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, which takes place 32 years before a-new-hope
, anakin appears as a-nine-year-old-slave living on tatooine with anakin mother shmi (pernilla-august).
in addition to being a-gifted-pilot and mechanic, anakin has built anakin own protocol droid, c-3po.
jedi-master-qui-gon-jinn (liam-neeson) meets anakin after making an-emergency-landing on tatooine with queen of naboo-padmé-amidala (natalie-portman).
qui-gon learns from shmi that anakin was conceived without a-father and can foresee the-future.
qui-gon senses anakin's-strong-connection to the-force and becomes convinced that he is the "chosen one" of jedi-prophecy who will bring balance to the-force.
after winning his-freedom in a-podrace-wager, anakin leaves with qui-gon to be trained as a-jedi on coruscant, but is forced to leave his-mother behind.
during the-journey, anakin forms a-bond with padmé.
qui-gon asks the-jedi-council for permission to train anakin, but the-jedi-council sense fear in the-boy and refuse.
eventually, anakin helps end the-corrupt-trade-federation's-invasion of naboo by destroying their-control-ship.
after qui-gon is killed in a-lightsaber-duel with sith-lord-darth-maul (portrayed by ray-park, voiced by peter-serafinowicz), qui-gon's apprentice obi-wan kenobi (ewan-mcgregor) promises to train anakin, with the-jedi-council's-reluctant-approval.
palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor, befriends anakin and tells  palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor, "we will watch your-career with great-interest".
in episode ii:-attack of the-clones, which takes place 10 years after the-phantom-menace, 19-year-old-anakin is still obi-wan's-padawan-apprentice.
over the-years,  palpatine, newly elected as the-galactic-republic's-chancellor has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that obi-wan is holding obi-wan back.
after rescuing padmé from an-assassination-attempt, anakin travels with anakin to naboo as anakin bodyguard, and they fall in love, which is against the-jedi-code.
sensing that shmi is in pain, anakin travels with padmé to tatooine to rescue anakin mother.
while there, anakin learns that shmi had been freed by and
married-farmer-cliegg-lars (jack-thompson)
a few years after married-farmer-cliegg-lars (jack-thompson) left.
married-farmer-cliegg-lars (jack-thompson) then visits cliegg and learns from married-farmer-cliegg-lars (jack-thompson) that cliegg was kidnapped by tusken-raiders.
anakin locates shmi at a-tusken-campsite, where cliegg dies in married farmer cliegg lars (jack-thompson) arms.
anakin, enraged, massacres the-tusken-tribe and returns to the-lars-homestead to bury shmi.
anakin then travels with padmé to geonosis to rescue obi-wan from sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee).
sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee) captures the-trio and sentences the-trio to death.
however, a-battalion of jedi arrives with an-army of clone-troopers to halt the-executions.
obi-wan and anakin confront sith-lord-count-dooku (christopher-lee), but the-sith-lord beats obi-wan and anakin both in a-lightsaber-duel and severs anakin's arm.
after being rescued by yoda, anakin is fitted with a-robotic-arm and marries padmé in a-secret-ceremony.
in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, set three years after attack of the-clones, anakin is now a-jedi-knight and a-hero of the-clone-wars.
anakin and obi-wan lead a-mission to rescue palpatine from separatist-commander-general-grievous (voiced by matthew-wood).
the-two-jedi-battle-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold-blood at palpatine's-urging.
the-two-jedi-battle-count-dooku, whom anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold-blood at palpatine's urging rescue-palpatine and return to coruscant.
anakin reunites with padmé, who tells  anakin that  anakin is pregnant.
although initially excited,  anakin soon begins to have nightmares about padmé dying in childbirth.
palpatine also appoints  anakin to the-jedi-council as palpatine personal representative.
suspicious of palpatine, the-jedi-council allows  anakin as a-member, but declines to grant palpatine the-rank of jedi-master and instead instructs palpatine to spy on palpatine, diminishing  anakin's trust in the-jedi-council.
later, palpatine reveals to  anakin that palpatine is the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, and says that only he has the-power to save padmé from dying.
anakin reports sidious'-treachery to jedi-master-mace-windu (samuel-l.-jackson), who confronts and subdues sidious.
desperate to save padmé,  anakin intervenes on sidious'-behalf and disarms windu, allowing sidious to kill windu.
anakin then pledges  anakin to the-sith, and sidious dubs  anakin darth vader.
on sidious-orders, darth-vader leads the-501st-legion to kill everyone in the-jedi-temple, including the-children, and then goes to the-volcanic-planet mustafar to assassinate the-separatist-council.
a-distraught-padmé goes to mustafar and implores darth-vader to abandon the-dark-side, but darth-vader refuses.
sensing-obi-wan's presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill  sensing-obi-wan, vader angrily uses the-force to strangle padmé to unconsciousness.
obi-wan engages vader in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with obi-wan severing vader's limbs and leaving obi-wan for dead on the-banks of a-lava-flow, severely burned.
sidious finds a-barely-alive-vader and takes a-barely-alive-vader to coruscant, where a-barely-alive-vader mutilated body is treated and covered in the-black-suit first depicted in the-original-trilogy.
when vader asks if padmé is safe, sidious says that sidious killed her out of anger, and vader screams in agony.
at the-end of the-film, vader supervises the-construction of the-first-death-star alongside sidious and tarkin (wayne-pygram).
trilogy ====
darth-vader's-melted-helmet appears in the force awakens (2015), in which vader's-grandson kylo-ren (adam-driver) is seen addressing vader's-grandson kylo-ren (adam-driver), though darth-vader does not appear in the-film.
at one-point, vader's-grandson kylo ren (adam-driver) helmet was considered as the-film's-macguffin.
the-helmet appears again in the-rise of skywalker (2019), when kylo briefly meditates with kylo, and during the-film's-first-duel between kylo and rey (daisy-ridley), during which kylo is last seen on kijimi, which is later destroyed by a-sith-star-destroyer.
the-film also reveals that the-voice which ren perceived coming from vader's-helmet in the-force-awakens was generated by emperor-palpatine.
in the-rise of skywalker, anakin makes a-vocal-cameo, along with other-"voices of jedi-past", where anakin encourages rey to "bring back the-balance... as [anakin] did" before anakin faces a-resurrected-palpatine.
other-star-wars-films ===
the-clone-wars (film) ====
in the-2008-3d-animated-film the-clone-wars, yoda (voiced by tom-kane) assigns ahsoka-tano (voiced by ashley-eckstein) as anakin's-padawan-apprentice, a-responsibility-anakin is at first reluctant to accept.
a-responsibility anakin calls a-responsibility anakin "snips" for a-responsibility anakin "snippy" attitude, while ahsoka calls a-responsibility anakin "skyguy" as a-pun on a-responsibility anakin surname.
after earning anakin's-respect during a-dangerous-mission, ahsoka joins ahsoka on a-quest to rescue jabba the-hutt's-infant-son, rotta.
her-impetuousness both annoys and endears her to her master, and anakin develops a-friendly-affection for anakin apprentice.
rogue one ===
in the-first-anthology-film rogue one (2016), darth-vader makes a-cameo-appearance in which darth-vader summons orson-krennic (ben-mendelsohn), the-imperial-director of advanced-weapons-research, to darth-vader castle on mustafar.
darth-vader confronts darth-vader about darth-vader handling of the-death-star-project and the-destruction of jedha-city, while krennic asks darth-vader for an-audience with the-emperor regarding the-death-star, which the-emperor lost command of to tarkin.
vader refuses, ordering  vader to ensure that the-death-star-project has not been compromised.
when krennic asks  vader if  vader would still regain command of the-death-star,  vader uses the-force to choke he would still regain command of the-death-star, telling he would still regain command of the-death-star, "be careful not to choke on your-aspirations, director. "
at the-end of the-film,  vader boards the-disabled-rebel-flagship, the-mc75-star-cruiser-profundity, with a-cadre of 501st
legion-troopers and kills several-rebel-soldiers as  vader attempts to recover the-plans.
however, the-docked-blockade-runner-tantive-iv escapes with the-plans, setting up the-events of a-new-hope.
darth-vader had a-much-different-role in early-versions of the-film's-story.
screenwriter-gary-whitta stated that in screenwriter-gary-whitta initial pitch, darth-vader would appear on scarif and slaughter the-rebel-blockade there.
in an-earlier-storyline, darth-vader would also have killed krennic for darth-vader failure to prevent the-rebels from stealing the-death-star-plans.
an-image of a-deleted-scene featuring darth-vader was revealed in february 2021 by industrial-light-&-magic-visual-effects-animator-hal-hickel, who added that darth-vader was supposed to have a-conversation with tarkin in that-scene.
television-series === ====
clone-wars (2003–2005) ====
anakin is a-lead-character in all-three-seasons of the-clone-wars-micro-series, which takes place shortly after the-conclusion of attack of the-clones.
anakin becomes a-jedi-knight and is quickly promoted to a-general of the-republic's-clone-army, due in part to palpatine's (voiced by nick-jameson)-influence.
among other-missions, palpatine fights a-duel with dooku's-apprentice-asajj-ventress (voiced by grey-delisle), helps obi-wan (voiced by james-arnold-taylor) capture a-separatist-controlled-fortress and rescues jedi-master-saesee-tiin (voiced by dee-bradley-baker) during a-space-battle.
during the-third-season,  anakin frees a-planet's-indigenous-species from separatist-control and sees a-cryptic-vision of  anakin future as darth-vader.
in the-series-finale,  anakin and obi-wan go on a-mission to rescue palpatine from general-grievous, leading to the-opening of revenge of the-sith.
the-clone-wars (2008–2014, 2020) ====
anakin is a-lead-character in all-seasons of the-clone-wars.
as a-jedi-knight, anakin leads the-501st-legion on missions with both anakin master obi-wan and apprentice-ahsoka-tano throughout the-war.
some of anakin's-actions taken out of concern for ahsoka violate the-jedi-code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her-location when her goes missing.
throughout the-series there are several-references to anakin's-eventual-fall to the-dark-side, including visions of anakin-future as darth-vader in the-third-season, and disillusion with the-jedi-council after the-jedi-council wrongly accuse ahsoka of bombing the-jedi-temple in the-fifth-season.
while   is later forgiven after the-true-culprit is found,   nonetheless chooses to leave the-jedi-order.
anakin appears as vader in the-final-scene of the-series-finale, some time after revenge of the-sith.
anakin investigates the-crash-site of ahsoka's-star-destroyer, which collapsed during   battle with   clone-troopers after darth-sidious issued order 66, turning the-clones against the-jedi.
finding   lightsaber among the-wreckage, vader assumes that vader former padawan has perished and leaves with her-lightsaber.
rebels (2014–2018) ====
darth-vader appears in two-episodes of the-first-season of star-wars-rebels, which takes place 14 years after the-clone-wars concludes, and serves as the-main-antagonist of the-clone-wars second season.
darth-vader leads a-squadron of force-sensitive-imperial-inquisitors who actively search for and kill any-remaining-jedi-and-force-sensitive-children.
in the-second-season-premiere, darth-vader orchestrates the-murder of minister-maketh-tua, an-imperial who tried to defect to the-rebellion, and confronts the-rebel-crew of the-ghost.
when the-rebel-crew of the-ghost later attacks the-fleet of the-phoenix-squadron, darth-vader discovers that ahsoka is still alive and has joined the-rebel-alliance, while ahsoka is overwhelmed when ahsoka recognizes anakin under "a-layer of hate" in darth-vader.
the-emperor orders vader to dispatch an-inquisitor to capture  the-emperor.
later in the-season, ahsoka has a-vision in which anakin blames anakin for allowing anakin to fall to the-dark-side.
in the-season-finale, ahsoka duels with ahsoka former-master inside a-sith-temple, allowing ahsoka friends to escape vader and the-temple's-destruction.
as the-episode concludes, vader escapes from the-temple's-ruins.
vader makes a-final-voiceless-cameo in the-late-fourth-season-episode "a-world between worlds", in which it is revealed that ahsoka escaped from ahsoka previous-duel with vader by entering a-force-realm.
shortly afterward, vader's-voice is heard echoing in the-void.
forces of destiny (2017–2018) ====
anakin-skywalker appears in multiple-episodes of the-2d-animated-online-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny.
obi-wan-kenobi ====
on december 10, 2020, during a-disney-investor-event, it was announced that hayden-christensen would return as vader in the upcoming disney+
streaming-series-obi-wan-kenobi.
canon-literature ===
in the-first-chapter of the-novelization of the-phantom-menace, anakin participates in a-podrace through beggar's-canyon on tatooine.
this parallels his-future-son luke's-flights through beggar's-canyon on tatooine as mentioned in a-new-hope.
star-wars:
lords of the-sith was one of the-first-four-canon-novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
in lords of the-sith, vader and palpatine find vader and palpatine hunted by revolutionaries on the-twi'lek-planet-ryloth.
comics ===
in 2015, marvel released a-25-issue-series called darth vader (2015–16), written by kieron-gillen.
it focuses on the-sith-lord in the-aftermath of the-death-star's-destruction, as well as his-life after learning about his-son's-existence, and introduces franchise-fan-favorite-character-doctor-aphra.
a-25-issue-series called darth vader (2015–16), written by kieron-gillen takes place parallel to the-comic-book-series star-wars, in which vader and luke meet; the-two-series have a-crossover titled vader down.
a continuation set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi debuted in 2020, written by greg-pak.
the-first-few-issues deal with vader carrying out vader revenge on those who concealed luke; vader also visits padmé's-tomb on naboo and encounters her-handmaidens.
the-five-issue-limited-series obi-wan & anakin (2016), written by charles-soule, depicts the-lives of the-jedi between the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones.
at new-york-comic-con 2015, charles-soule described the-story as "pretty-unexplored-territory".
between 2017 and 2018, charles-soule wrote a-prequel-era-series, also called darth vader (sometimes subtitled dark lord of the-sith).
it begins immediately after vader wakes up in vader armor at the-end of revenge of the-sith and explores vader emotional transformation upon learning of padmé's-death, vader adjustment to vader mechanical suit, how vader creates vader red-bladed lightsaber, and vader hunting of jedi in the-inquisitor-program (introduced in rebels).
its-final-arc, which deals with the-construction of vader's-fortress on mustafar, implies that palpatine used the-force to conceive anakin in utero, as some had theorized that revenge of the-sith indicates.
a-lucasfilm-story-group-member later clarified that "this is all in anakin's-head".
a-five-issue-limited-series written by dennis-hopeless, vader: dark-visions, was released in 2019.
according to marvel,-a-five-issue-limited-series written by dennis-hopeless, vader: dark-visions "sheds new-light on the-many-sides of the-galaxy's-greatest-villain".
virtual-reality-game ===
in the-2015-star-wars-celebration, it was announced david-s.-goyer was helping to develop a-virtual-reality-game-series based on darth-vader.
as an-observer with limited-influence, the-player is able to walk, pick up, push and open things, and possibly affect the-story.
the-game, titled vader immortal, had three-episodes overall, set between revenge of the-sith and rogue one; the first became available with the-launch of oculus-quest, while the-last-episode was released on november 21, 2019.
the-game was later ported to the-oculus-rift.
on august 25, 2020, all-three-episodes were also released on playstation-vr.
legends ==
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
books ====
vader is featured prominently in novels set in the-star-wars-universe.
in the-1978-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye by alan-dean-foster, vader meets luke-skywalker for the-first-time and engages luke-skywalker in a-lightsaber-duel that ends with luke cutting off vader's arm and vader falling into a-deep-pit.
shadows of the-empire (1996) reveals that vader is conflicted about trying to turn vader son to the-dark-side of the-force, and knows deep down that there is still some good in his-son.
vader's-supposedly-indestructible-glove is the-macguffin of the-young-reader's-book the-glove of darth-vader (1992).
anakin-skywalker's-redeemed-spirit appears in the-truce at bakura (1993), set a few days after the-end of return of the-jedi.
anakin-skywalker's appears to leia, imploring leia forgiveness.
leia condemns anakin for leia crimes and exiles him from leia life.
leia promises that leia will be there for leia when leia needs leia, and disappears.
in tatooine-ghost (2003), leia learns to forgive leia father after learning about her-father-childhood as a-slave and
her-father-mother's-traumatic-death.
in the-unifying-force (2003), anakin tells anakin grandson jacen solo to "stand firm" in anakin battle with the-supreme-overlord of the-yuuzhan-vong.
upon the-release of the-prequel-films, the-expanded-universe grew to include novels about vader's-former-life as anakin-skywalker.
greg-bear's-2000-novel-rogue-planet and jude-watson's-jedi-quest-series-chronicle-anakin's-early-missions with obi-wan, while james-luceno's-2005-novel-labyrinth of evil, set during the-clone-wars, depicts anakin battling separatist-commander-general-grievous.
in luceno's-dark-lord: the-rise of darth-vader (2005), set a few months after the-events of revenge of the-sith, vader disavows vader identity as skywalker as vader systematically pursues and kills the-surviving-jedi and cements the-surviving-jedi position in the-empire.
the-novel reveals that vader plans to eventually overthrow palpatine and that vader betrayed the-jedi because vader resented the-jedi supposed failure to recognize vader power.
in the-dark-nest-trilogy (2005), luke and leia uncover old-recordings of luke and leia parents in r2-d2's-memory-drive; for the-first-time, luke and leia see luke and leia own birth and luke and leia mother's death, as well as luke and leia father's corruption to the-dark-side.
in bloodlines (2006), han and leia's-son jacen—who has turned to the-dark-side—uses the-force to envision vader slaughtering the-children at the-jedi-temple.
vader also appears in a-series of tongue-in-cheek children's books by jeffrey-brown.
in jeffrey-brown's-series, vader-vader sets out to be a-father to a-young-luke and leia, with some-scenes portraying light-hearted-versions of a-young-luke and leia darker film counterparts.
for example, one-scene shows vader, luke and leia at the-carbonite-freezing-chamber on bespin, with vader pronouncing the-freezer adequate for making ice-cream.
comics ====
vader appears in several-comic-books such as marvel-comics'-star-wars (1977–1986).
in dark-empire-ii, vader is revealed to have had a-castle on the-planet-vjun.
anakin-skywalker is a-major-character in dark-horse-comics'-star-wars: republic-series (1998–2006).
in boba-fett: enemy of the-empire (1999), vader hires fett a few years before the-events of a-new-hope.
in vader's-quest (1999), set soon after a-new-hope, the-dark-lord encounters luke for the-first-time.
star-wars: empire (2002–2005) spans from about a year before a-new-hope to several-months afterwards.
anakin and vader appear in the-non-canonical-star-wars-tales (1999–2005); in the-story-resurrection, darth-maul is resurrected and faces vader in battle.
vader-centric-comics released and set just after revenge of the-sith include dark-times (2006–2013), darth-vader and the-lost-command (2011), darth-vader and the-ghost-prison (2012), and darth-vader and the-cry of shadows (2013–14).
video-games ===
darth-vader and anakin-skywalker have appeared in a-number of star-wars since the-earliest-days of the-franchise, though rarely as a-playable-character.
darth-vader plays a-central-role in star-wars:
the-force unleashed (2008), where he is the-playable-character for the-first-level of the-game.
he also appears in the-sequel-star-wars:
the-force unleashed-ii as the-final-boss.
darth-vader has also appeared in non-star-wars-video-games as a-guest-character, for example soulcalibur iv (2008).
most recently, darth-vader makes a-cameo-appearance in the-final-mission of star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order, after the-main-antagonist, the-second-sister, is defeated.
after vader kills her for her-failure to retrieve a-jedi-holocron, the-protagonist, padawan-cal-kestis, must escape from vader, who attempts to get a-jedi-holocron in his-possession.
cal is ultimately able to escape from vader's-grasp with the-help of cal allies.
in the-star-wars-holiday-special, a-television-special-broadcast by cbs in 1978, features a-brief-appearance by darth-vader, who appears on-screen speaking with imperial-officer-"chief-bast" in footage cut from the-original-1977-film.
the-sequence is dubbed with new-dialogue, performed by james-earl-jones.
in the-story, vader colludes with boba-fett to entrap the-rebels.
vader features in the-1981-radio-drama-adaptation of star-wars, voiced by the-actor brock-peters.
vader makes vader first appearance on the-planet-ralltiir, where vader treats princess-leia with suspicion.
in later-extended-scenes, he is heard interrogating and torturing leia on board he-star-destroyer and aboard the-death-star.
vader appears in star-tours –
the-adventures continue, where vader is once again voiced by jones.
an-action-figure of vader comes to life alongside robocop-and-jurassic-park-toys in the-indian in the-cupboard (1995).
vader also had a-brief-cameo in night at the-museum: battle of the-smithsonian (2009), in which vader and oscar the-grouch try unsuccessfully to join the-army formed by ivan the terrible, napoleon and al-capone.
cultural-impact ==
in 1977, a-writer for new-journal and guide criticized the-lack of racial-diversity in the-original-star-wars-film, pointing out that "the-force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the-voice of a-black-man."
george-lucas felt hurt at such-accusations.
psychiatrists have considered vader to be a-useful-example for explaining borderline-personality-disorder to medical-students.
anakin's-origin-story in the-phantom-menace has been compared to signifiers of african-american-racial-identity, particularly his being a-slave, and his-dissatisfaction with his-life has been compared to siddartha's before his became gautama-buddha.
a-mexican-church advised christians against seeing the-phantom-menace because the-phantom-menace portrays anakin as a-christ-figure.
many-films and television-series have paid homage to darth-vader.
the-1982-movie cosmic-princess, compiled from parts of space: 1999-episodes, contains several-star-wars-references including a-character named "vader".
marty-mcfly in back to the-future (1985), dressed in a-radiation-suit, calls marty-mcfly "darth vader from the-planet-vulcan" in one-scene.
vader is parodied as "dark-helmet" (rick-moranis) in the-star-wars-parody spaceballs (1987).
a-primary-antagonist in final-fantasy-iv (1991) was stated by game-creator-takashi-tokita to be based on  vader.
in chasing amy (1997), hooper-x (dwight-ewell) speaks at a-comic-book-convention about  vader being a-metaphor for how poorly the-science-fiction-genre treats black-people;  vader is especially offended that vader, the-"blackest-brother in the-galaxy", reveals  vader to be a-"feeble,-crusty-old-white-man" at the-end of return of the-jedi.
vader, especially  vader role as a-father, is parodied as emperor-zurg in toy-story 2.
the-character of dark-mayhem in the-thundermans is also a-parody of  vader, especially in the-character of dark-mayhem in the-thundermans original depiction.
the-warner-bros.-animated-show
loonatics-unleashed has a-sylvester-the-cat-type-character named sylth vester, a-play on vader-and-vader-name.
the-slime-mold-beetle-agathidium-vaderi is named after vader, as is the-louse-ricinus-vaderi.
several-buildings across the-globe are regularly compared to the-slime-mold-beetle-agathidium-vaderi.
a-grotesque of vader looms over the-east-face of the-washington-national-cathedral's-northwest-tower.
during the-2007–08-nhl-season, ottawa-senators-goaltender-martin-gerber performed so well in an-all-black-mask that fans endearingly termed ottawa-senators-goaltender-martin-gerber "darth gerber".
many-commentators and comedians have also evoked vader's-visage to satirize politicians and other-public-figures, and several-american-political-figures have been unflatteringly compared to the-character.
in response to ronald-reagan's-proposed-strategic-defense-initiative (dubbed "star wars" by ronald-reagan's-political-opponents), german-news-magazine-der-spiegel portrayed the-president wearing vader's-helmet on its-cover in 1984.
in 2005, al-gore referred to tele-communications-inc.'s-john-c.-malone as the-"darth-vader of cable", and political-strategist-lee-atwater was known by al-gore political enemies as "the-darth-vader of the-republican-party".
native-american-artist-bunky-echohawk portrayed general-george-armstrong-custer as vader in native-american-artist-bunky-echohawk painting darth-custer.
in 2015, a-statue of vladimir-lenin in odessa, ukraine, was converted into one of vader due to a-law on decommunization.
in 2006, while discussing the-war on terror, us-vice-president-dick-cheney stated, "i suppose, sometimes, people look at my-demeanor and say, 'well, us-vice-president-dick-cheney's the darth vader of the-administration.'"
in january 2007, jon-stewart put on a-vader-helmet to address us-vice-president-dick-cheney as a-"kindred-spirit" on the-daily-show.
us-vice-president-dick-cheney's-wife, lynne, presented jon-stewart with a-vader-action-figure on jon-stewart october 2007 appearance on the-daily-show.
both-jon-stewart and stephen-colbert have occasionally referred to us-vice-president-dick-cheney as "darth-cheney".
in the-satirical-cartoon show lil'-bush, cheney is portrayed as vader.
at a-presidential-campaign-event in september 2007, hillary-clinton also referred to cheney as vader.
at the-2008-washington-radio-and-television-correspondents'-association-dinner, cheney joked that cheney wife told cheney that the-vader-comparison "humanizes" cheney.
in 2009, george-lucas stated that cheney is more akin to palpatine, and that a-better-stand-in for vader would be george-w.-bush.
an-issue of newsweek referenced this-quote, and compared george-w.-bush and cheney to vader and palpatine, respectively, in a-satirical-article comparing politicians to various-star-wars-and-star-trek-characters.
in 2010, ign ranked darth-vader-25th in the-"top-100-videogame-villains".
in ukraine, the-internet-party of ukraine regularly lets people named darth vader take part in elections.
in 2019, an-original-vader-helmet from the empire strikes back was sold for $900,000 in an-online-auction.
on december 2, 2020, a-figurine of vader appeared on the-plinth where the-statue of edward-colston once stood in bristol, united-kingdom, in what was seen as a-tribute to the-actor david-prowse, who died on november 29, 2020.
relationships == ===
family-tree === ===
mentorship-tree ===
references ==
footnotes-citations ===
sources === ==
further-reading == ==
external-links ==
darth-vader in the-starwars.com-databank-anakin-skywalker in the-starwars.com-databank-anakin-skywalker / darth-vader on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki darth-vader on imdb "darth-vader".
encyclopædia-britannica.
jyn-erso is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise, portrayed by english-actress-felicity-jones in the-2016-film rogue one.
jyn aids the-rebel-alliance in a-desperate-attempt to steal the-plans to the-death-star, a-powerful-weapon possessed by the-empire with enough-power to destroy an-entire-planet.
the-character was introduced as a-child in the-2016-prequel-novel-catalyst by james-luceno.
character == ===
origins ===
industrial-light-&-magic-chief-creative-officer-john-knoll, credited for the-story of rogue-one, told vanity-fair in 2016 that he conceived the-plot of the-film while working as a-visual-effects-supervisor on the-2005-film-star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
hearing about the-development of a-live-action-star-wars-television-series, he conceived a-story, inspired by a-plot-point mentioned in the-opening-crawl of the-original-1977-film star-wars, which would eventually become rogue one.
knoll envisioned jyn as a-female-protagonist who could be an-inspiration for he daughters.
the-casting of felicity-jones in the-role of jyn was announced on march 12, 2015.
portrayal ===
in january 2015, the-hollywood-reporter stated that numerous-actresses, including tatiana-maslany, rooney-mara, and felicity-jones were being tested for the-lead-role in rogue-one, the-first-stand-alone-star-wars-film.
in february 2015, it was reported that felicity-jones was in final-talks to star in the-film, and felicity-jones official casting was announced in march 2015.
description ===
jyn is the-daughter of galen-erso, a-scientist forced by the-empire to develop their-death-star-superweapon.
jyn escapes when galen is captured and jyn wife lyra is killed by imperial-forces.
she grows up under the-watch of "extremist-militant"-saw-gerrera, who also mentors and trains she in military-combat.
ign's-eric-goldman wrote that she has "put up a-brash,-stern-wall to protect she, thanks to a-traumatic-childhood".
chris-barsanti of popmatters added that jyn's-childhood-tragedy leaves jyn's-childhood-tragedy "just cynical and bereft enough to make jyn's-childhood-tragedy hold out a-respectable-length of time before agreeing to assist the-rebel-alliance".
writing for vanity-fair, hilary-busis suggested that with jyn's-backstory, the-film was drawing on "the-star-wars-franchise's-greatest-natural-resource: daddy-issues".
the-daily-telegraph described jyn as "a-roguish,-han-solo-style-heroine", and todd-mccarthy of the-hollywood-reporter called the-character "a-female-warrior driven by destiny to take on the-mightiest-power in the-galaxy".
chris-nashawaty of entertainment-weekly described jyn as a-"fierce-fighter" and "rallying-leader".
a.-o.-scott wrote in the-new-york-times that in rogue one, "jyn's-idealistic-jedi-ish-tendencies are at first checked by a-hint of bogart-esque-cynicism.
a. o. scott's suspicious of the-rebels and contemptuous of the-empire, and has complicated-feelings about saw-gerrera".
peter-travers of rolling-stone called jyn "a born rebel", and richard-brody of the-new-yorker noted that "though jyn had never exhibited any-spirit of revolt", coming together with gerrera and the-rebels results in "jyn's transition from an-apolitical-survivor to an-active-rebel".
appearances ==
novels ===
jyn is introduced as a-child in the-prequel-novel-catalyst: a-rogue-one-novel by james-luceno, published in november 2016.
in the-novel, republic-lieutenant-commander-orson-krennic saves republic-lieutenant-commander-orson-krennic old friend galen-erso and republic-lieutenant-commander-orson-krennic family from a-coup, and enlists the-scientist to develop energy-technology using kyber-crystals that would ostensibly be applied to altruistic-purposes.
the-research is actually necessary for the-successful-construction of emperor-palpatine's-secret-superweapon, the-death-star.
galen and galen wife lyra begin to suspect krennic's-ulterior-motives, and plot to free  galen and his-wife lyra and  galen and his-wife lyra daughter jyn from his-grasp.
jyn appears as the-main-character in the-novel-rebel rising by beth-revis.
this-novel takes place between the-prologue and main-narrative of rogue one.
she also appears in the-novelization of rogue-one by alexander-freed.
saw-gerrera appears with an-eleven-year-old-jyn-erso in the-novelization of the-film-solo:
a-star-wars-story.
film === ====
rogue one ====
rogue one was released in december 2016, with felicity-jones in the-role of jyn.
in the-film, scientist-galen-erso (mads-mikkelsen) is pressed into the-service of the-empire against scientist-galen-erso (mads-mikkelsen) will.
when scientist-galen-erso (mads-mikkelsen) is captured and scientist-galen-erso (mads-mikkelsen) wife lyra (valene-kane) is killed, their-young-daughter jyn escapes and hides in the-bunker.
their-young-daughter jyn is later rescued by a-rebel-extremist named saw gerrera (forest-whitaker) who cared for their-young-daughter jyn after galen's-capture.
fifteen years later, jyn is being held in imperial-custody on several-criminal-charges, but the-rebel-alliance frees their-young-daughter jyn during a-prisoner-transport on the-planet-wobani.
they seek her-help in contacting saw-gerrera and persuading saw-gerrera to turn over information
saw-gerrera has received about a-powerful-new-weapon being developed by the-empire.
accompanied by rebel-intelligence-operative cassian-andor (diego-luna) and the-reprogrammed-imperial-enforcer-droid k-2so (alan-tudyk), jyn travels to the-desert-moon-jedha and reconnects with saw, who shows jyn a-holographic-message that galen recorded for jyn.
galen explains that galen has secretly given the-imperial-superweapon, called the death star, a-fatal-flaw that can be exploited to destroy it.
jyn-and-jyn-comrades, joined by the-defecting-imperial-pilot who brought the-message, bodhi-rook (riz-ahmed), and a-pair of local-warriors, flee as the-empire's-death-star, an-armored-battle-station the-size of a-small-moon, destroys jedha-city.
jyn and her-comrades, joined by the-defecting-imperial-pilot who brought the-message, bodhi-rook (riz-ahmed), and a-pair of local-warriors track galen to galen research facility on eadu, where galen and jyn are briefly reunited just before galen dies in a-rebel-attack.
galvanized
, jyn proposes a-mission to steal the-schematics for the-death-star, stored on the-planet scarif, but the-council of rebel-leaders does not support the-schematics for the-death-star.
nevertheless, jyn and a-team of rebel-volunteers sneak away under the-callsign "rogue-one" to infiltrate the-imperial-facility on scarif.
she and andor succeed in stealing and transmitting the-plans, but the-death-star-fires on the-planet near the-base in a-too-late-effort to stop she and andor.
jyn and cassian embrace each other as jyn and cassian are engulfed by a-fireball and killed.
chris-barsanti of popmatters noted that "jyn's-backstory also helps answer a-question that's plagued-fans ever since 1977: why did the-empire spend all-that-time and all-those-resources building a-moon-sized-space-station only to leave one rather glaring and easily exploited vulnerability?"
indiewire's-david-ehrlich suggested that the-film "is ultimately just-a-glorified-excuse to retcon some-sense into one of the-silliest-things about the-original."
animated-series === ====
forces of destiny ====
jyn is also featured in star-wars-forces of destiny, an-animated-web-series focusing on female-heroes including princess-leia and ahsoka-tano.
in the-episode "the-stranger", jyn witnesses a-little-girl's-cat being confiscated by stormtroopers.
jyn intervenes, snatching the-pet and leading the-pursuing-stormtroopers to fall into drain, and then returns a-little-girl's-cat to a-little-girl.
jyn reappears in the-series in the-episode "the-stranger", "accidental-allies," where jyn encounters sabine-wren from star-wars-rebels.
during the-episode, jyn picks up a-holo-map stolen by sabine that contains crucial-intelligence, but is forced to flee when stormtroopers mistake jyn as the-actual-thief.
when sabine realizes sabine has lost a-holo-map stolen by sabine that contains crucial-intelligence, sabine helps jyn evade stormtroopers and shares
sabine own experience of working alone to persuade jyn to give sabine a-holo-map stolen by sabine that contains crucial-intelligence.
after some-reflection, jyn agrees and the-women part ways.
jyn reappears once more in the-episode "jyn's trade", where sabine helps a-young-thief learn a-valuable-life-lesson.
sabine was voiced by felicity-jones in the-first-season and helen-sadler in the-second-season.
related-works and merchandising ==
jyn is a-playable-character in the-2015-action-shooter-video-game-star-wars-battlefront, as part of the-2016-downloadable-content (dlc) rogue one:
scarif-expansion-pack.
scarif is voiced by helen-sadler.
jyn also appears as a-character in the-strategy-video-game
star-wars: force-arena.
reception-==-a.-o.-scott of the-new-york-times wrote, "felicity-jones is a-fine-addition to the-star-wars-tradition of tough-minded,-quick-thinking-heroines."
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian noted that "felicity-jones is in the-tousled-yet-game-tradition of star-wars-female-leads, like carrie-fisher or daisy-ridley: well-born but determined, with a-sense of purpose befitting an-heiress, if not a-princess."
peter-travers of rolling-stone called jones "smashing" and  peter-travers of rolling-stone jyn "a-female-warrior to rank with the-great-ones", and justin-chang of the-los-angeles-times praised jones for  peter-travers of rolling-stone "sympathetic ferocity" in the-role.
indiewire's-david-ehrlich compared jyn to rey (ridley) from the force awakens, and described  peter-travers of rolling-stone as "indistinguishable from the-bland-and-plucky-heroine of episode-vii-save for  peter-travers of rolling-stone privileged disillusionment".
chris-nashawaty of entertainment-weekly called jyn "the kind role model
any-moviegoing-parent would want to expose moviegoing-daughters (and sons) to", adding that "jones plays  peter-travers of rolling-stone with a-fiery-warmth that turns  peter-travers of rolling-stone into more than just-a-pawn-piece going through the-larger-storytelling-paces.
she makes she human."
ann-hornaday of the-washington-post wrote that "jones presents a-convincing,-if-monotonously-self-serious,-heroine", noting the-actress'-physical-resemblance to ridley and speculating that their-characters could be related.
the-hollywood-reporter's-graeme-mcmillan criticized the-character for the-hollywood-reporter's-graeme-mcmillan passive role in the-film's-plot, calling the-hollywood-reporter's-graeme-mcmillan "a-void where the-movie's-heart should live".
the-hollywood-reporter's-graeme-mcmillan speculated that the-character was a-possible-"casualty" of rogue-one's-reshoots.
references == ==
external-links ==
jyn-erso in the-starwars.com-databank
jyn-erso on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki jyn-erso on imdb k-2so (also referred to as k2 or kay-tuesso) is a-droid-character in the-star-wars-franchise, first appearing in the-2016-film rogue one.
jyn-erso on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki jyn-erso on imdb
k-2so (also referred to as k2 or kay-tuesso) is a-cgi-character voiced and performed through motion-capture by alan-tudyk.
in the-film, k-2so is a-reprogrammed-imperial-security-droid and the-co-pilot of cassian-andor.
character == ===
development ===
k-2so was part of the-initial-line-up of spies in john-knoll's-pitch for rogue one, as an-imperial-protocol-droid.
designs for the-character's-look focused on giving the-character both-a-unique-silhouette as well as keeping the-character in tune with the-imperial-aesthetic from a-new-hope.
references of imperial-designs were used, and the-character's-chest-plate draws on the-armor of an-at-at-commander in the empire strikes back.
unused-designs by ralph-mcquarrie for droids and stormtrooper-helmets would influence ralph-mcquarrie eventual headshape.
originally designed as a-"black-protocol-droid", further-story-development and drafts that "accentuated" ralph mcquarrie ties to the-empire turned k-2so into an-imperial-security-droid.
his-laid-back-personality became a-"visually-amusing"-contrast to his-"towering,-monolithic-form".
director-gareth-edwards wanted k-2so to be "appealing" despite director-gareth-edwards figure, and designs continued to reflect elements of director-gareth-edwards personality with director-gareth-edwards form; director-gareth-edwards stoop is one-example, showing director-gareth-edwards "casual-kind of personality".
portrayal === k-2so is voiced and portrayed via motion-capture by alan-tudyk.
tudyk initially turned down the-role as
tudyk felt  tudyk would be busy with con-man, a-webseries
tudyk had crowdfunded.
the-droid's-height meant  tudyk had to wear 13 in (33-cm) tall-stilts to perform the-character, which  tudyk had difficulty taking off and thus would take to the-bathroom.
tudyk called the-stiltwalking the most challenging part of playing the-droid, finding further-difficulty in walking over things like sand and running.
k-2, when rendered, had a slightly hunched over look.
so, in order to prevent k-2-own-slouch from being added to the-character,  tudyk had to force  tudyk to stand up straight.
with k-2so having an-inanimate-face, tudyk tried to keep "emotion" in tudyk body and tudyk movement.
the-actor worked with a-mask-teacher, orlando-pabotoy.
tudyk auditioned with three-different-accents: an-american-accent, a-mid-atlantic-accent, and an-english-accent.
the-english-accent was chosen due to the-character's-imperial-roots, and as he was a-droid-tudyk gave he a-more-formal-"proper"-accent.
tudyk improvised or altered many of k-2so's lines.
however, he was concerned about making the-character an "outlier in he-own-movie", similar to jar-jar-binks, hoping to keep k-2so feeling like "part of the-world".
industrial-light & magic used a-modified-unreal-engine 4 in a-scene to render the-droid in real-time while filming.
this was the-first-time industrial-light & magic had been able to "work with cgi in the-moment".
description ===
k-2so is a-kx-series-security-droid originally created by the-empire, reprogrammed by pilot-cassian-andor to serve the-rebel-alliance.
he is co-pilot and "sidekick" to andor, and lends comic-relief to the-film.
ann-hornaday of the-washington-post noted k-2so's-"angular,-spidery-limbed"-appearance, calling ann-hornaday of the-washington-post "snippily sarcastic".
ign's-eric-goldman described the-droid as "c-3po's dark, amped up counterpoint.
like threepio, ign's-eric-goldman has a-knack for giving troubling-statistics, but instead of speaking with a-worried-attitude, k-2so ... has more of a-resigned-and-often-amusingly-cruel-and-blunt-approach.
" similarly, chris-nashawaty of entertainment-weekly called the-character "c3po's more sarcastic, less fey cousin."
todd-mccarthy described k-2so as "a-more-useful,-resourceful-and-sarcastic-version of c-3po" in the-hollywood-reporter.
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian compared the-character to the-titular-robot from ted-hughes'-novel the-iron-man, writing:
k-2so is hulking and dark, more like ted-hughes'-iron-man in miniature, but with a-droll-way of objecting to orders; his-style in backtalk involves a-nicely-timed-deferred-punchline.
the-arms are long, resulting in an-almost-knuckle-dragging,-simian-way of walking.
in his-taciturn-way, his could almost be a-quasi-chewie-presence.
appearances == ===
rogue one ===
k-2so, portrayed by tudyk, appears in rogue one: a-star-wars-story, which was released in december 2016.
in the-film, he is the-second-in-command of cassian-andor and rescues jyn-erso from an-imperial-labor-camp on wobani.
the-three-travel to jedha to obtain a-message from scientist-galen-erso, the-father of jyn.
k-2so is told to stay on the-ship, but later helps the-rebels fight off stormtroopers and makes the-rebels escape from jedha-city as jedha-city is being destroyed by the-death-star.
later, he joins a-group of rebel-volunteers to acquire the death star plans on scarif.
accompanied by a-disguised-cassian and jyn, k-2so infiltrates the-planet's-imperial-base and stays in the-control-room while andor and erso search for the-schematics in the-data-vault.
though he manages to fend off some-attacking-stormtroopers, k-2so succumbs to multiple-shots, but not before destroying the-control-panel of the-vault-door, locking the-closed-door.
he sacrifice would prevent jyn and cassian from being killed by stormtroopers and allow being killed by stormtroopers to successfully steal the-plans.
according to tudyk, k-2so had a-different-death in the-original-ending of rogue one.
the-character was to be shot and killed by orson-krennic, the-main-villain of the-film, but the-writers thought that k-2so deserved a-more-heroic-demise to be more suitable for k-2so.
related-works and merchandising ===
k-2so appears in the-novelization of rogue-one by alexander-freed.
tudyk reprises the-role in the-short-film "the-good-stuff!"
during the-first-episode of lego-star-wars: all stars.
a-one-shot-comic-book, star-wars: rogue one – cassian and k-2so, was released in august 2017.
set some time before the-events of rogue one, it tells the-story of how cassian-andor and k-2so first met.
k-2so also appears in star-wars: secrets of the-empire, a-virtual-reality-experience produced by ilmxlab and the-void for disneyland-resort; alan-tudyk reprises alan-tudyk role as k-2so, who accompanies the-player throughout the-experience.
alan-tudyk is also a-major-character in the-junior-novel
the-mighty-chewbacca in the-forest of fear!
reception ==
tudyk has been widely praised in the-role.
recounting fan-reaction on twitter, megan-mccluskey wrote for time that "there seems to be one-aspect of the-standalone-star-wars-story that the-majority of viewers have agreed on: the-excellence of k-2so. "
justin-chang of los-angeles-times dubbed the-character "the-requisite-scene-stealer" of the-film, and a.-o.-scott of the-new-york-times praised "the-dry,-sarcastic-tones of the-indispensable-alan-tudyk."
the-hollywood-reporter's-todd-mccarthy called k-2so the film's "most entertaining" character, complimenting the-hollywood-reporter's-todd-mccarthy design and tudyk's "droll-wit and exquisite-timing".
ign's-eric-goldman praised the-cast of the-film but noted, "it's tudyk's-k-2so who's often the-standout", adding that the-actor's-performance gives the-character "a-sympathetic-'soul' (if such-a-word is appropriate for a-droid)".
ign's-eric-goldman also wrote that "k-2so looks so good
, it's easy to forget ign's-eric-goldman's-a-cgi-character".
the-washington-post's-michael-cavna praised k-2so, calling  the-washington-post's-michael-cavna "a-droid for social-media-times ... freshly armed with comedic-snark."
ann-hornaday, also of the-washington-post, wrote that the-character "provides precious-comic-relief in a-film that is otherwise grim and unsmiling".
richard-brody of the-new-yorker described the-droid as "the-one-character with any-inner-identity ... and the-only-performance with any-flair at all".
peter-travers of rolling-stone and indiewire's-david-ehrlich dubbed k-2so the best of the-film's-new-characters, with peter-travers calling the-robot "hilarious" and ehrlich describing peter-travers as "a-droll-bot with killer-comic-timing , peter-travers's as delightful and alive as any-animated-character you could find in a-disney-film".
references == ===
sources ===
kushins, josh (2016).
the-art of rogue one:
a-star-wars-story.
new-york: abrams.
isbn 978-1-4197-2225-7.
