Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga is an upcoming Lego-themed action-adventure game scheduled to be released for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X/S.
It will be the sixth entry in TT Games' Lego Star Wars series of video games and the successor to Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
The game will adapt all nine entries in the Skywalker saga series of films.

==
Gameplay ==
Unlike most Lego video games in which players had to advance through the story in a linear order, players can choose to start the game from any of the nine Skywalker saga episodes and complete them in any order they wish.
Each episode will have five story missions, making a total of 45 levels, contrasting from six levels per episode in previous games.
Combat has been revamped from previous titles, such as lightsaber wielders now using a variety of combos with light attacks, heavy attacks, and Force moves, and blaster characters having an over-the-shoulder camera (angle featured in many third-person shooter games).
The game features 300 playable characters.
Much like its predecessor, Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, the game's hub will not be a single area, such as the Mos Eisley Cantina in Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, but a wide range of fully explorable planets filled with many iconic Star Wars landmarks.
Planets and moons confirmed by the developers so far to be explorable in the hub  include Naboo, Tatooine, Coruscant, Kamino, Geonosis, Kashyyyk, Utapau, Mustafar, Yavin 4, Hoth, Dagobah, Bespin, Endor, Jakku, Takodana, D'Qar, Starkiller Base, Ahch-To, Cantonica, Crait, Ajan Kloss, Pasaana, Kijimi, Kef Bir, and Exegol.
Many ships will have freely explorable areas in the hub as well, such as Star Destroyers and the Death Star.
Random encounters will also happen in the game's hub.
For example, an Imperial Star Destroyer could suddenly jump out of hyperspace and send a fleet of TIE Fighters after the player.
Players can choose to engage in dogfights with them or continue onward to progress the story.

==
Development and marketing ==
Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga was first teased to be in development by Lucasfilm sound editor Matthew Wood at Star Wars Celebration Chicago.
An announcement trailer premiered at E3 2019 during Microsoft's press conference.
A second trailer showing one scene from all nine movies was released on 20 December to coincide with the release of The Rise of Skywalker.
The official artwork was revealed on 4 May 2020.Disney and Lucasfilm had not shared significant details of The Rise of Skywalker with the game team before the film's release.
In the meantime, TT Games worked on other aspects of the game until Lucasfilm shared more details.
The game is developed in Traveller's Tales' new engine, NTT (pronounced Entity).

===
Audio ===
Like Lego Star Wars
: The Force Awakens, Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga will use original voice acting, with the first actor of the game being Billy Dee Williams voicing Lando Calrissian.

==
Release ==
On 7 May 2020, the release date was mentioned as 20 October 2020 through the Star Wars YouTube channel.
On the same day, the original video was made private and a new video, in which the release date was cut out, was uploaded.
This date was not otherwise confirmed.
On 26 August 2020, the Lego website displayed the release date as being 2021, but the website was taken down.
It has since been updated to remove any suggestion of a release year.
The following day at the 2020 Gamescom Opening Night Live, it was announced that the game would release in Q1/Q2 2021 under the description of "Spring 2021" with additional versions on the PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S.
On 2 April 2021, it was announced that the game had been delayed, with no further release window specified.
The game will be available in a Standard Edition and a Deluxe Edition.
The Deluxe Edition includes the Character Collection bundle, which collects six character packs based around characters from outside of the Skywalker Saga, which consists of packs from The Mandalorian, Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story, Solo:
A Star Wars Story, the forthcoming series Star Wars:
The Bad Batch and a pack containing Classic Characters.
The retail Deluxe Edition will come with an exclusive Luke Skywalker with blue milk minifigure, and different box art showcasing Darth Vader, with his mask being removable by lifting up the included slipcase.
Physical Deluxe editions will be released for Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5 and an Xbox version which can function as both the Xbox One and Xbox Series X/S versions depending on which console it is played on.
A steelbook resembling Han Solo in carbonite is included with pre-orders of any edition from Best Buy or Best Buy Canada or pre-orders of the Deluxe Edition bundle from Game.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D CGI animated television series produced by Lucasfilm Animation.
The series follows a motley group of rebels conducting covert operations to thwart the sinister Galactic Empire.

==
Overview ==
Wicket Wystri Warrick is a fictional character from the Star Wars franchise, first introduced and portrayed by Warwick Davis in the 1983 film Return of the Jedi.
Warrick appeared in two non-canonical made-for-television movies, an animated series, and promotional media for Star Wars from 1983 to 1986.
Davis reprised the role in the 2019 theatrical film The Rise of Skywalker, appearing in a brief cameo.
Wicket is a diminutive teddy bear-like creature known as an Ewok, living on the forest moon of Endor and eventually participating in the Battle of Endor as an ally of the Rebel Alliance.

==
Character ==


===
Development ===
In concluding his original Star Wars trilogy, George Lucas had foreseen the decisive battle in the Galactic Civil War taking place between the Wookiees and the Empire; however, he considered Chewbacca too skilled with technology, and wanted a more primitive species than the Wookiees to defeat the Empire.
A few different creatures, such as the stilt-legged Yuzzums, were proposed before the diminutive bear-like design of the Ewoks was settled on.
Although neither the word Ewok nor any of the Ewok names are actually mentioned in Return of the Jedi, a handful of Ewoks were named by the production, mentioned in the novelization, and first appeared in the Kenner action figure line based on the movie.

The main focal point of this new Ewok species was to be Wicket Wystri Warrick, a small young male scout and warrior.
Generally considered to be the most well known of the Ewoks, Wicket would be given the lead role in almost all subsequent Ewok related media released after Return of the Jedi.
===
Casting ===
Wicket was portrayed by Warwick Davis in 1983's Return of the Jedi.
The then 11-year-old actor came to be involved in the film after his grandmother heard a radio ad calling for short actors.
Davis began work on the film in January 1982.
Originally cast as a generic Ewok, Davis caught the eye of George Lucas with aspects of his performance, such as his ability to stick his tongue through his Ewok mask and the inquisitive tilting of his head (which was inspired by Davis' dog).
Kenny Baker was originally set to take the role of Wicket; however, Baker fell ill with food poisoning, and Davis was called in as a replacement.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===
The character made his first appearance in the 1983 film Return of the Jedi.
Wicket was the first Ewok to appear on screen, encountering Princess Leia Organa after she survived her speeder bike chase, bringing her to his tree-top Ewok village, and making contact with the Rebel Alliance during the Battle of Endor.
Wicket was also featured in the later village scenes, as well as helping the Alliance during the Battle of Endor itself, attacking Imperial stormtroopers with his slingshot.

At the end of The Rise of Skywalker, Wicket makes a brief appearance alongside Pommet Warrick, his son, celebrating the defeat of Darth Sidious and the Sith Eternal.
Warwick Davis reprised his character, alongside his son Harrison Davis, who played Pommet.

===
Forces of Destiny ===
Wicket appears in the micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014 (with the sequel film The Force Awakens in production), Lucasfilm separated the Star Wars Expanded Universe (rebranded as Star Wars Legends) from official Star Wars canon.

====
Television films ====
Wicket was featured in the 1984 TV film The Ewok Adventure (set before Return of the Jedi), theatrically released as Caravan of Courage: An Ewok Adventure.
In the film, he accompanies stranded brother and sister Mace and Cindel Towani as he and the Ewoks help find and rescue the children's missing parents from the giant Gorax.
Wicket is revealed to be the son of Deej and Shodu, and has two older brothers, Weechee and Widdle.
Wicket would return the following year in a sequel, Ewoks: The Battle for Endor.
In this film, Wicket helps Cindel and new allies Noa (Wilfred Brimley) and Teek defeat King Terak and his Sanyassan Marauders.
This film strengthened the bonds between Wicket and Cindel, with Wicket rescuing his family and learning to speak some Galactic Basic (which he seems to have forgotten by the time of Return of the Jedi).
====
Ewoks ====
Wicket was the main character in the animated series Ewoks, which ran for two seasons in 1985 and 1986, consisting of 35 episodes.
This children's cartoon series, set in the fictional Bright Tree Village, mostly featured the antics of Wicket and his family (in line with the TV movies).
Wicket's friends Kneesaa and Latara were introduced, and further backstories for existing Ewok characters Teebo, Paploo, Chief Chirpa, and Logray were established.
The series would also often showcase Wicket and the Ewoks' battles with the Duloks, Morag the witch, and other creatures on the moon of Endor.

==
Related works and merchandising ==
In the 1980s, Wicket was heavily featured in several promotional items, toys, children's books, read-along records and cassettes and comic books.

== Reception ==
Wicket and the Ewoks are a controversial addition to Return of the Jedi and the Star Wars Universe in general, and are seen by some to be the weakest link of the original trilogy.
According to Tami Katzoff of MTV News, "a prevailing theory among Ewok-haters is that the creatures were originally conceived as a sure way to appeal to small children and sell plush toys to their parents.
"
The Ewoks have some defenders, and have proven to be very popular with children from their introduction in the 1980s to the present day.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Wicket W. Warrick on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Wicket W. Warrick in the StarWars.com Databank
Wicket W. Warrick on IMDb
The following is a list of cast members who have appeared in the MTV reality series Ex on the Beach.

== Cast ==
Bold indicates original cast member; all other cast were brought into the series as an ex.^
Ages at the time the cast member appeared in the seriesKey:
= "Cast member" returns to the beach for the second time.

Key:
= "Cast member" returns to the beach for the third time.

== Duration of cast ==
Key:
= "Cast member" is featured in this episode.

Key:
= "Cast member" arrives on the beach.

Key:
= "Cast member" has an ex arrive on the beach.

Key:
= "Cast member" arrives on the beach and has an ex arrive during the same episode.

Key:   = "Cast member" leaves the beach.

Key:
= "Cast member" has an ex arrive on the beach and leaves during the same episode.

Key:
= "Cast member" arrives on the beach and leaves during the same episode.

Key:
= "Cast member" does not feature in this episode.
=== Series 1 ===
=== Series 2 ===
=== Series 3 ===
=== Series 4 ===
=== Series 5 ===
=== Series 6 ===
=== Series 7 ===
=== Series 8 ===
=== Series 9 ===
=== Series 11 ===


==
Other appearances ==
In addition to appearing on Ex on the Beach, some of the cast members went on to compete in other reality series including Celebrity Big Brother, Big Brother, and The Challenge.

Challenges in bold indicate the cast member was a finalist on The Challenge.

==
References ==
This is a list of Star Wars cast members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the film series.
The list is sorted by film and character, as some of the characters were portrayed by multiple actors.

As the franchise is composed of multiple films (including spin-offs and anthologies) there are multiple lead actors.
In the primary series, dubbed the "Skywalker saga", Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher starred as Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia respectively in the original films Star Wars (1977)
, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983) and reprised the roles in the sequel trilogy films
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017) and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
James Earl Jones, David Prowse and Sebastian Shaw collectively portrayed Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader, and Alec Guinness portrayed Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original films.
Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen portray a younger version of Anakin in the first and next two installments of the prequels and Ewan McGregor stars in all three, Star Wars:
Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999),
Star Wars:
Episode II - Attack of the Clones (2002) and Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith (2005) as a younger Obi-Wan Kenobi, being top billed in the later two films.
Daisy Ridley plays Rey and
Adam Driver plays Kylo Ren in the sequel films (2015—19).

Also starring in the franchise include, Felicity Jones who plays Jyn Erso in Rogue One (2016) and Alden Ehrenheich as Han Solo in Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018).
Solo served as a lead and supporting character in the original (1977—83) and sequel (
2015—19) films respectively, played by Harrison Ford.

Also recurring throughout the franchise include, Frank Oz, Samuel L. Jackson, Jimmy Smits, Natalie Portman, Pernilla August, Liam Neeson, Christopher Lee, Billy Dee Williams, Joel Edgerton, Peter Mayhew, Joonas Suotamo, Emilia Clarke, Ray Park, Andy Serkis, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, Warwick Davis, Oscar Isaac, Kelly Marie Tran, John Boyega, Gwendoline Christie, Domnhall Gleeson, Temuera Morrison, Jeremy Bulloch, Matthew Wood and Ian McDiarmid.

With the release of Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker in 2019, Daniels is credited with the most acting appearances as the same character, having played C-3PO in all nine films of the Skywalker Saga, as well as the anthology film Rogue One, The Clone Wars film and TV series in 2008 and 2003, and a guest appearance in the first season of Rebels.
He also appeared in Solo, but as a different character named "Tak", as well as a character named "Dannl Faytonni" in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, the latter being alongside C-3PO.

Indicators only apply for characters portrayed within multiple categories.
All characters without indicators were introduced within the category they are listed on.
The cast is divided in six categories: main saga (M), anthology series (A), animated series and Star Wars: The Clone Wars film (S), books (B), comic books (C), and the non-canonical Legends series (L).

List indicators:
^M  denotes the character was introduced within the main saga.

^A
denotes the character was introduced within the anthology series.

^S
denotes the character was introduced within an animated series or The Clone Wars film.

^LS
denotes the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends animated series of film before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^B
denotes the character was introduced within a novel.

^LB
denotes the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends novel before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^C
denotes the character was introduced within a comic book or graphic novel.

^LC
denotes
the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends comic book or graphic novel before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^+
denotes the character introduced within the current category, but also has an extended plot-line within another category.
(
Example: ^+A  would denote the character was introduced within the current category but has an extended plot-line in the anthology series, alternatively ^+S  would denote an extended plot-line in the animated series, and ^+AS  would denote extended plot-lines on both categories.)
==
The Skywalker saga ==


==
Anthology series ==
A series of stand-alone films was announced in 2013:
Rogue One was released in 2016, Solo was released in 2018, and another film is planned with an unknown title or release.
The films do contain some characters and cast from the main series, along with new characters.

==
Animated series and Star Wars: The Clone Wars film ==
In 2008, an animated film entitled Star Wars: The Clone Wars was released.
It was followed by a television series of the same name within the same year, three other series entitled Star Wars Rebels, Star Wars Forces of Destiny and Star Wars Resistance premiered soon after.

==
Legends films and television series ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, the Star Wars Holiday Special and Ewok prequel films: Caravan of Courage and The Battle for Endor, as well as most comics and books produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars, were re-branded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Despite the decanonization, the television films do retain many major cast members from the original trilogy reprising their roles; the Holiday Special featured most of the cast from the original film, while the Ewok prequel films featured Warwick Davis reprising his role as Wicket, who originated in Return of the Jedi.

== Notes ==
a The Clone Wars was Saw Gerrera's first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first film appearance in Rogue One, he is portrayed by Forest Whitaker.

b
The Holiday Special was Boba Fett's first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first canon appearance in TESB, he is portrayed by Jeremy Bulloch.

c Kevin Pollack, Ken Grantham, Mark Dodson and Rick Cimino are credited as providing Ewok voices for The Battle for Endor, although which Ewok they voice is not stated.

d Clone Wars was General Grievous' first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first canon appearance in ROTS, he is voiced by Matthew Wood.

e Carrie Fisher appears in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker from footage originally shot for Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, but cut from the film.
The previously unseen footage was repurposed to fit the narrative for the franchise's ninth installment.
Additional material for Fisher's character is provided by Billie Lourd via motion capture.

f
Ewan McGregor's voice can be heard saying the newly recorded dialogue "These are your first steps" while archive recordings of Alec Guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "Rey", both occurring during a flashback caused by Rey's touching of Anakin Skywalker's lightsaber.

g Ewan McGregor's voice can be heard saying the newly recorded dialogue "These are your final steps, Rey, rise and take them" while archive recordings of Alec Guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "Rey", both occurring when Rey says "Be with me", and voices of past Jedi are heard.

h
In the original release of the film, Yoda is portrayed via puppeteery.
In the 2011 Blu-ray re-release, he is played via computer-generated imagery.

==
References ==
The Star Wars Actors Database
Over 1000 Star Wars actors listed with biographies, photos, in-depth credit listings and more.
==
External links ==
Star Wars Episode
I: The Phantom Menace
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope
Star Wars
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi
Star Wars Episode VII:
The Force Awakens
Star Wars Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi
Star Wars Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker
The Postal Alpha Numeric Encoding Technique (PLANET)
barcode was used by the United States Postal Service to identify and track pieces of mail during delivery - the Post Office's "CONFIRM" services.
It was fully superseded by Intelligent Mail Barcode by January 28, 2013.

A PLANET barcode appears either 12 or 14 digits long.

The barcode:

identifies mailpiece class and shape
identifies the Confirm Subscriber ID
includes up to 6 digits of additional information that the Confirm subscriber chose, such as a mailing number, mailing campaign ID or customer ID
ends with a check digitLike POSTNET, PLANET encodes the data in half- and full-height bars.

Also like POSTNET, PLANET always starts and ends with a full bar (often called a guard rail), and each individual digit is represented by a set of five bars using a two-out-of-five code.

However, in POSTNET, the two bars are full bars; in PLANET, the two-of-five are the short bars.

As with POSTNET, the check digit is calculated by summing the other characters and calculating the single digit which, when added to the sum, makes the total divisible by 10.
==
External links ==
https://web.archive.org/web/20060505214851/https://mailtracking.usps.com/mtr/resources/documents/Guide.pdf
http://www.usps.com/strategicplanning/cs05/chp2_021.html
http://www.bccsoftware.com/currentevents/articles/articles/bcc_wwm_article.asp
Rose Tico is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, first appearing in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017).
A mechanic with the Resistance, she befriends Finn and works with him to try to help Resistance forces escape from the First Order.
Rose is portrayed by Kelly Marie Tran.

Rose was created by The Last Jedi writer and director Rian Johnson after he decided a subplot originally involving Finn and Poe Dameron needed a different dynamic.
The Last Jedi was Tran's first film role, and she had never watched a Star Wars film before auditioning for the part.
A struggling actress who had considered quitting the profession altogether before seeking the part, Tran went through an intense five-month audition process, beating out hundreds of other actresses for the role.

Rose's backstory was revealed in the novel Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron (2017), in which Rose is the protagonist along with her sister Paige, a minor character in the film.
That novel establishes that Rose and Paige joined the Resistance after their impoverished home planet was devastated by the First Order.
The character of Rose serves as a relatable audience surrogate, an everywoman, a positive influence on Finn, and the personification of real-life Star Wars fandom.
Johnson originally planned for Rose to be sarcastic and irritable, but the character was changed to match Tran's personality after she was cast, becoming more positive.

Tran felt a connection between Rose's past experiences and those of Tran's own family during the Vietnam War, and Tran did research about the conflict and her family's past to help get into Rose's mindset.
The character and Tran's portrayal received largely positive reactions from critics and fans alike.
Some have praised Tran and the character for providing a positive role model for women of color.
Nevertheless, Tran became the subject of racist and sexist attacks over the Internet, which led her to permanently clear her Instagram account.
Multiple fans and celebrities have come to Tran's defense, and she directly responded to the attacks with an essay for The New York Times.
For her performance in The Last Jedi, Tran was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress.

Rose returned in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019), the final installment in the sequel trilogy, in which she has risen in the ranks of the Resistance and has taken on a greater leadership role.
However, her role in the film was far smaller than in The Last Jedi, which became a major point of criticism among critics and fans alike.
Some accused the filmmakers of deliberately reducing Rose's role in response to the online harassment against Tran, which the film's co-writer Chris Terrio denied.

==
Appearances ==


===
Cobalt Squadron ===
Although Rose Tico was first conceived for the film Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), her backstory is established in the middle-grade novel Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron (2017), by Elizabeth Wein.
The novel and film were both released on December 15, 2017, and Cobalt Squadron is set just before and during the events of Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015), the first film in the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
Dialogue that referred to parts of the novel's backstory was included in the original The Last Jedi script, but was cut from the final film.
Rose is the primary protagonist of the novel along with her older sister, Paige Tico, who was portrayed by Veronica Ngo during a brief appearance in the film.
Although their parents are not featured as characters in the novel, the reference book Star Wars: The Last Jedi
: The Visual Dictionary establishes that the Tico sisters had a close relationship with their parents, Hue and Thanya, who raised them to have a strong sense of right and wrong.
Rose and Paige were raised on the planet Hays Minor, the impoverished mining planet in the Otomok star system far beyond the policing efforts of the New Republic government.
Hays Minor is one of the first places to be victimized by the First Order, an autocratic military dictatorship seeking to control the galaxy.
The First Order used the planet to test its weapons and kidnap children to indoctrinate as stormtroopers.
As a result, Rose developed a hatred of the First Order starting in her early childhood.
The Tico sisters join the Resistance, a paramilitary organization led by General Leia Organa fighting against the First Order.
The two work together on a bomber spacecraft called the Cobalt Hammer, where Paige is a gunner and Rose was a mechanical engineer.
Despite her lack of formal training, Rose receives the post due to her extensive mechanical knowledge.
Rose and Paige each wear matching medallions resembling the insignia of their home system of Otomok.
At the beginning of Cobalt Squadron, Rose and Paige are on a mission to testing new stealth technology when they encounter and rescue a fugitive fleeing from First Order TIE fighters.
They later learn the fugitives were from a planet in the Atterra System which, like Rose's and Paige's home planet, has been devastated by the First Order.
Leia authorizes a team of bombers, including Rose and Paige aboard the Cobalt Hammer, to gather reconnaissance in the Atterra System and run supplies to the citizens there.
Leia also asks Rose to devise a technique to allow the bombers to escape First Order detection, leading her to invent a device called a "baffler", which reduces the ship's ion emissions and makes its energy signature harder to detect, thus making the bombers more difficult for enemy sensors to locate.
Though they sustain casualties from First Order defenders, Rose and the team successfully deliver the supplies, and then escape.
Upon returning to the Resistance, they learn that the entire Hosnian star system, which had housed the capital of the New Republic, was destroyed by the First Order superweapon Starkiller Base, which itself was subsequently destroyed by the Resistance.
Rose and Paige prepare to assist with the evacuation of the Resistance base on the planet D’Qar, which leads directly into the events in the first scene of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
As a result of the success of the Rose's baffler system, Vice Admiral Amilyn Holdo orders that it be adopted throughout the Resistance fleet.
===
The Last Jedi ===
In an early scene in Star Wars: The Last Jedi, Paige Tico is killed during the evacuation of D'Qar, after the Cobalt Hammer is destroyed during an operation in which Paige helps destroy the Mandator IV-class Siege Dreadnought Fulminatrix.
Rose mourns her sister's death aboard the MC85 Star Cruiser Raddus, a Resistance Mon Calamari cruiser.
She is guarding the escape pods against potential Resistance deserters when she finds Finn, a Resistance hero she greatly admires, attempting to flee in one of the pods.
After Rose stops him by stunning him with an electro-shock prod, Finn tells her the First Order had found a way to track the Raddus through hyperspace.
The two formulate a plan to disable the tracking device on the First Order's flagship, the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy, which will allow the Raddus to escape.
With help from Resistance droid BB-8, Rose and Finn set off on an unauthorized mission to the casino city of Canto Bight to find a master codebreaker to assist them.
Although Finn is impressed by the superficial beauty and debauchery of Canto Bight, Rose reveals to him the dark underpinnings of the lavish casino city, pointing out the fortunes of the city's rich inhabitants is supported by child slavery, weapons dealing, and other immoral activities that result in the suffering of others.
Rose and Finn are arrested for their illegal entry into Canto Bight, and in prison they met an unnamed slicer, who along with BB-8 helps them escape and agrees to assist them in disabling the Supremacy's tracking device.
The four escape Canto Bight with the help of some of the enslaved children there
; Rose gives one of them Paige's Rebel Alliance ring to inspire his trust.
Rose and the others return to the Supremacy and infiltrate the ship disguised as First Order officers, but are captured by General Hux and Captain Phasma before they can disable the tracking device.
The slicer betrays Rose and Finn, informing the First Order of their plan and providing information about the Resistance in exchange for his release and a monetary reward.
Phasma attempts to execute Rose and Finn, but BB-8 helps them escape and fight their way to freedom, killing Phasma in the process.
Meanwhile, the surviving Resistance forces escape to an old Rebel Alliance base on the nearby planet Crait; according to the Last Jedi novelization, the baffler technology developed by Rose helps the Resistance ships in their escape.
Rose, Finn, and BB-8 board a stolen First Order light shuttle and fly to Crait.
Along with Finn and Poe, Rose pilot a ski speeder in a defensive battle against First Order forces, during which they try to destroy a superlaser siege cannon before it can destroy the door to the base.
Finn attempts a hopeless suicide attack against the cannon, but Rose saves his life by crashing her speeder into his, knocking him off course and seriously injuring herself in the process.
Rose tells Finn the only way they will defeat the First Order is by fighting for what they love, rather than fighting what they hate and then falls unconscious.
Finn brings Rose back to the base, and her unconscious body is taken aboard the Millennium Falcon along with the other Resistance survivors.
Rose receives medical attention as they flee Crait and escape from the First Order.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
Rose returns in a smaller role in The Rise of Skywalker, the final film of the Star Wars
sequel trilogy.
Set about one year after the events of The Last Jedi, Rose has risen in the ranks of the Resistance and has taken on a greater leadership role, serving as head of the organization's Engineering Corps.
She is stationed on the Resistance's secret base on the jungle moon of Ajan Kloss at the start of the film.
When Rey, Finn, Poe Dameron, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and BB-8 embark on a mission to help track down the revived Palpatine, Finn invites Rose to come along.
She declines because General Leia Organa has asked her to study the specifications of Imperial Star Destroyers.
She later participates in the climactic battle scene at the end of the film, when the Resistance confronts the Sith Eternal's massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers, the Final Order, at the planet of Exegol.
Rose communicates with Finn and his ally Jannah during the battle, and expresses concern for their safety as the fighting intensifies.
She survives the battle and is present with the Resistance when they celebrate their victory later on Ajan Kloss.

===
Other media ===
Rose Tico has been featured in several Star Wars comic books.
She was the protagonist of "Rose Knows", a story in the sixth issue of the Star Wars Adventures comic book series, which was released on January 17, 2018. "
Rose Knows" portrays Rose as an extremely dedicated mechanic who, after first becoming stationed on the Raddus just prior to the events of The Last Jedi, continues working well after her shift ends to study the ship's manuals and learn more about the vessel.
The comic also included the first meeting of Rose and Resistance pilot and officer Poe Dameron, to whom she responded with an excitement similar to that when she met Finn in The Last Jedi.
The knowledge Rose obtains from her research of the Raddus
ultimately helps her in assisting Poe when his squadron is attacked by First Order TIE fighters.
Rose and Paige Tico were the protagonists of the final issue of Star Wars: Forces of Destiny, a five-issue comic book miniseries based on an animated web series of the same name.
The issue, entitled "Rose & Paige", was released on January 31, 2018, and was set before the events of The Force Awakens, when the Resistance was still based on D'Qar.
General Leia Organa is seeking methods to collect natural resources, and Rose conceives an idea to build rechargeable vehicles form junk parts.
Lacking confidence, Rose is reluctant to volunteer the idea, but Paige insists that she do so.
Despite some opposition from the base's engineers, Leia receives the idea warmly, and Rose gets two vehicles working with support from Paige and Leia.
The issue illustrated Rose's deep respect and admiration for Leia; she admitted to Paige, "Every time she talks to me, I can barely function."
Paige later becomes lost in the D'Qar jungles during a scouting mission, and Rose helps find and rescue her.
Rose was the protagonist of one of four announced installments in Age of Resistance, a comic book miniseries that chronicled different characters and time periods from the Star Wars chronology.
The issue, entitled Age of Resistance: Rose, was released in September 2019, and focused on Rose's relationship with her sister Paige during the First Order's invasion of Hays Minor.
This includes Rose and Paige working covertly to sabotage the First Order on the planet, as well as them fleeing Hays Minor to join the Resistance, at the insistence of their parents.
The comic was the first to directly show interaction between the Tico sisters and their parents, and particularly illustrates how they teach the sisters skills that will later serve them in the Resistance, such as piloting starfighters.
It also includes a scene in which Rose and Paige, upon learning of the destruction of Hays Minor, seek to take a ship and fly back to the planet for a suicidal revenge attack against First Order, but are stopped by Leia and urged to stay and serve the Resistance instead.
Rose appeared in "Shuttle Shock", a second season episode of the Star Wars: Forces of Destiny animated web series, created by Lucasfilm Animation and released through Disney's YouTube channel.
The series depicted two- or three-minute stories from various points in the Star Wars chronology. "
Shuttle Shock" was released on March 19, 2018, with Kelly Marie Tran reprising her role as the voice of Rose Tico.
The episode was set before Rose, Finn, and BB-8 reached Canto Bight in The Last Jedi.
Their space shuttle is attacked by huge jellyfish-like creatures, and Rose repairs a shorted out BB-8 while Finn attempts to fly to safety.
In early 2018, Rose was added as a playable character in the mobile collectible RPG game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes.
Her character had special moves such as "Courageous Shot" and "Dauntless Idealism", and was able to stun characters with her shock prod, just as she did to Finn in The Last Jedi.
Rose Tico played a supporting role in the four-issue comic book miniseries Star Wars:
Allegiance, the first issue of which was released on October 9, 2019.
Written by Ethan Sacks and illustrated by Luke Ross and Lee Loughridge, Allegiance is set shortly after The Last Jedi, and in the story Leia asks Rose to accompany her on a mission to the planet Mon Cala to help secure allies for the Resistance.
When Leia and her party are threatened by potential enemies, Rose is quickly prepared to help defend them, though Leia attempts to defuse any hostilities.
Rose ends up arrested along with Rey, Chewbacca, and C-3PO after they get into a dispute with protestors from the Quarren species.
When Rey is coerced into a duel with a massive combat droid, Rose and Chewbacca interfere in the fight and help Rey defeat it.
In the final issue of the series, Rose works with Rey to track down a terrorist who attacked the group due to opposition to Mon Cala allying itself with the Resistance.
Rose also appeared in Lego Star Wars: All-Stars, a series of Lego Star Wars animated short films set in different time periods of the Star Wars chronology.
The series launched on October 29, 2018, with Tran once again providing the voice of Rose.
A profile about Rose Tico was featured in Star Wars: Women of the Galaxy, a book by Amy Ratcliffe highlighting 75 female characters from the Star Wars franchise.
The book was released on October 30, 2018.In the weeks approaching the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Rose was featured in the novels Star Wars: Spark of the Resistance and Star Wars: Resistance Reborn, both of which were released as part of a multimedia project called "Journey to Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker".
Spark of the Resistance, a junior novel by Justina Ireland released on October 4, 2019, tells the story of Rose, Rey, Poe, and BB-8 as they travel to an isolated planet called Minfar to investigate a distress signal.
There they discover the First Order has invaded the planet and threatened the indigenous population in an attempt to find secret laboratories and discover a legendary weapon called the Echo Horn, which has the ability to control the minds of its victims.
Rose and the others successfully repel the First Order and keep the weapon out of their hands.
The novel features illustrations of Rose and the other characters by artist Phil Noto.
Rose has a smaller part of in Resistance Reborn, a novel by Rebecca Roanhorse released on November 5, 2019, which details the efforts by General Leia Organa and the other Resistance members to rebuild their forces immediately following the defeats sustained in The Last Jedi.
In the novel, Rose has recovered quickly from the injuries she suffered in The Last Jedi and is actively working to help restore the Resistance.
The book also features a scene in which Poe inquires as to whether Finn has romantic interests in Rose, to which Finn response that although they shared "a moment" during their kiss on Crait, they are only friends.

== Characterization ==
Rose Tico was an excellent and highly imaginative mechanic, as seen by her design of the baffler system.
With a methodical, technical mind, Rose lacked formal training in mechanical engineering and her knowledge was largely self-taught, which made her resourceful, inventive, and prone to outside-the-box thinking.
For example, most characters in The Last Jedi reacted with shock that the First Order was tracking the Resistance through hyperspace because it was believed to be impossible, but Rose deduced how it is being done and helped develop a solution.
Rose was passionate, loyal, and committed, with a great deal of enthusiasm and intelligence, and a strong moral code.
Idealistic and energetic, she maintained a sense of optimism despite her difficult past and the challenge the Resistance faces against the First Order.
She could be tough, stubborn, and blunt, as well as intensely focused and determined.
But she was also kind, and understood the value of protecting what is good, rather than just fighting what is bad.
Rose also had a great deal of fascination with the galaxy around her, and a sense of awe about the Resistance and the heroes that serve it.
She was hard-working, resilient, and brave, though The Daily Telegraph noted her courage is subtle and not flashy "in a dashing, daring Poe Dameron-style way".
Rose strongly believed in the cause of the Resistance, to which she dedicated her life, and she placed that cause ahead of all things, including herself.
In this way she differed from Finn at the start of The Last Jedi, who was more concerned about himself and his friends than with helping the Resistance or stopping the First Order.
However, the example Rose set for Finn inspired him, leading him to capture some of her idealism and place the mission of the Resistance ahead of himself.
The Last Jedi writer and director Rian Johnson has described Rose as the "angel on Finn's shoulder", serving as his conscience and trying to steer him in the right direction, while the unnamed slicer they encountered serves the opposite function.
Rose's willingness without hesitation to give her precious medallion to the unnamed slicer in exchange for his help showed her unflinching demonstration to the Resistance cause.
However, she could also be rebellious, and was willing to disobey orders to do what she thinks is right, as shown by her willingness to work with Finn and Poe on a secret plan to help the Resistance in The Last Jedi.
Rose was very close with her family, and a strong sense of right and wrong was instilled in her by her late parents and her sister Paige.
Rose particularly looked up to Paige, and the two had an extremely strong emotional connection; according to the Cobalt Squadron novel, the two had never been apart for more than a couple of days, and they shared "a bond that would have been extraordinary even between twins".
That bond, along with their shared tragic history, helped propel them to do the right thing in the face of danger.
Prior to the events of The Last Jedi, Rose was more shy and self-conscious, but Paige had faith in Rose's abilities and encouraged her even when Rose herself lacked confidence.
Paige often forced her younger sister to step forward and be more forthcoming about her ideas and thoughts.
This was particularly illustrated in the "Rose & Paige" issue of the Star Wars: Forces of Destiny comic book, during which Rose hesitated to share an idea with General Leia Organa until Paige pushed her to do so.
In writing about Rose's past in Forces of Destiny and the Star Wars Adventures comic books, writer Delilah S. Dawson said she believed the example Paige set for Rose "
gave her context for her increased confidence and strength in The Last Jedi.
"
When Paige died, Rose felt a void in her own identity, according to Tran, but ultimately Paige's love for Rose helped her become more confident and carry on after her sister was gone.
Paige's death also drove Rose that much harder to fight against the First Order, so her sister's death would not be in vain.
Rose's rage toward the First Order was informed not only by Paige's death, but also because she personally witnessed the brutality and devastation it unleashed on her home planet of Hays Minor.
As a result, her dedication to the Resistance was not tied to a noble, abstract idea of heroism, but a firsthand knowledge of the threat they are fighting, which gave her a deeper understanding of the war than even some of the soldiers around her.
Rose's past experiences also made her feel anger at the mistreatment of others, particularly vulnerable populations, as seen by her contempt for Canto Bight and her sympathy for both the enslaved children and the abused creatures there.
Rose's feelings occasionally manifested in anger, such as her reaction when she discovered Finn attempting to flee the Raddus, or when she said of Canto Bight that she wished she could "put (her)
first through this whole lousy beautiful town".
However, Rose was also very empathetic, as demonstrated by the kindness she showed the children on Canto Bight, and the way she rescued Finn at the end of The Last Jedi.
Rose also served the role of everywoman in The Last Jedi.
Her idealistic nature was something the viewer is meant to identify with; Johnson said in creating the character, he wanted to make someone who could inspire his "10-year-old self".
Both Johnson and Tran have described Rose as an unlikely hero who preferred to work in the background, but was pulled into a prominent position in the conflict by the circumstances around her.
While the Star Wars franchise often focused on particularly strong or powerful heroes, Rose was a very low-ranking member of the Resistance, and she demonstrated that every position matters and anyone, no matter their status or position, can make a difference.
She also illustrated how war affects the average person.
Despite her talents and abilities, Rose did not consider herself a hero, nor was she seeking to become one.
Tran said of the character: "It's such a huge deal to me, the idea that she's not necessarily special in the way that we have defined special before in other movies, or in other stories.
"Rose has also been described as the personification of real-life Star Wars fandom, with Tran herself saying: "I definitely believe that Rose embodies the idea of a fan being pulled into something that’s kind of crazy.
"
This was particularly illustrated in Rose's excitement about meeting Finn for the first time, during which she trips over her words, excitedly calling him "The Finn", and nervously said "doing talking [sic] with Resistance heroes isn't really my forte".
She had similar reactions upon meeting other Resistance figures in other works of Star Wars media, including Poe Dameron and Leia Organa.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
Rose Tico was created by Rian Johnson for the film Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), which he wrote and directed.
While working on the script, he originally had the characters Poe Dameron and Finn go to Canto Bight together, but he decided having a female character accompany Finn would make for a more interesting dynamic because otherwise, "it was just these two dudes on an adventure".
Johnson said in the original versions of the script with Poe and Finn together, their dialogue could have been interchangeable and there was no conflict between them.
This led him to conceive the Rose Tico character, who, in Johnson's words, could "actually challenge [Finn] and push him and contrast with him was where Rose came
from".
Johnson conceived Rose Tico as a relatable audience surrogate, and said he "wanted someone who 10-year-old me would truly be able to relate to, someone who was a genuine nerd, someone who it would be a little surprising that they were front and forward in a Star Wars movie".
Details about the character were first discussed at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Orlando, Florida, on April 14, 2017.
At the time, she was only referenced by her first name, "Rose"; her last name "Tico" was not revealed until a Vanity Fair article on May 23, 2017.
Johnson described Rose Tico as the "biggest new part in the movie", and his favorite new character introduced in the film.
Johnson said of the character: "She's not a soldier.
She's not looking to be a hero, and she gets pulled a very big way into an adventure in this movie with Finn.
...
She's pretty rad."
Rose has the most screen time of any new character introduced in The Last Jedi.
The name Rose was originally used for the character Maz Kanata during the pre-production of Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
The name is a tribute to Rose Gilbert, the late high school English teacher who instructed both Force Awakens director J.J. Abrams and production designer Rick Carter.
A handful of scenes involving Rose in the original The Last Jedi scripts were either eliminated or revised in later drafts.
For example, in the original script, Finn was a gunner along with Paige during her bombing run, and he witnessed her death.
Johnson removed this from later script drafts because he had trouble reconciling it with Finn's later relationship with Rose.
Additionally, the master codebreaker Rose and Finn sought was originally planned to be an insectoid warlord who involved Rose and Finn in an effort to rob a rival.
This led to an extended sequence of Finn, Rose, and the codebreaker's crew climbing atop the casino rooftop during an attempted robbery, which ended with Finn and Rose getting arrested.

===
Casting ===
Kelly Marie Tran spent years struggling to find work and doing temporary jobs on the side, and had considered quitting acting altogether before auditioning for The Last Jedi.
Tran was not a Star Wars fan and had never seen a film in the franchise before seeking the role.
She believed that ultimately helped her in her audition, because she didn't have pre-established expectations or attempt to model Rose on characters from the previous films.
Hundreds of actresses auditioned for the part of Rose Tico.
Tran, a Harry Potter fan, wore her lucky Ravenclaw tie to the audition, but later became concerned when the other actresses were wearing more serious attire.
Nevertheless, she wore the tie again during her first callback.
Tran went through five intense rounds of auditions over five months between the summer and fall of 2015, with one month spanning between each audition.
Johnson observed her during her second audition, and immediately liked her; he said watching her felt like seeing the character he pictured in his mind during the writing process.
During one of the auditions, Tran did one-on-one reads alongside John Boyega, the actor who portrays Finn, to determine whether the two actors had chemistry and worked well together.
Boyega said it was clear from the start of their readings together that Tran was the best actress for the part.
The final audition took place in London with full hair, makeup, and costuming.
Three weeks later, in November 2015, Johnson met with Tran and offered her the role.
Johnson said of the audition process: "We saw a lot of talented actresses of a very broad range, but honestly, it was more about finding Kelly."
Johnson said Tran had an oddball nature and genuine sweetness to her, and he knew audiences would want her character to succeed.
He said of the actress: "She has the most open heart of anyone I’ve ever met
and I knew that was going to shine through onscreen."
Johnson said her chemistry with Boyega was another main reason she got the part.
J. J. Abrams, the producer, co-writer and director of The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, has said of Tran's casting: "I was grateful to Rian Johnson for so many things that he did, but the greatest for me was casting Kelly Marie.
"
Boyega felt Tran's background in improv comedy and numerous Internet videos ultimately helped Tran bring to the role a light tone necessary for The Last Jedi, despite the seriousness of the narrative.
After receiving the part, Rose Tico watched all the Star Wars films, read several books, and listened to podcasts about it, becoming a fan of the franchise.
The casting of Tran was first announced on the official Star Wars website on February 15, 2016, which described the actress as a "talented newcomer".
Tran discussed the character for the first time publicly at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Orlando, where she said: "She's part of the Resistance, and she works in maintenance.
I can’t wait for you to meet her."
In later interviews, Tran said she hopes the character will show viewers that "even if you are not born a princess or into a position of privilege, if you are a background player and aren't a frontrunner like a star pilot, you can still make a difference".

The Last Jedi was Tran's first film role.
A Vietnamese American
, she was the first woman of color to play a leading character in a Star Wars film.
Tran said she believes it was important to have a strong female Asian American character in Star Wars because she knows from her own childhood
how important it is for young people to see characters like themselves represented in film, television, and books.
She said: "A lot of Star Wars fans who are specifically Asian never had a character they could dress up like ..
I get very emotional when I see people who are able to identify with this character.
That means a lot to me and I don’t think it will ever get old."
Tran said she felt it was a major responsibility to portray someone viewers would look up to, and she wanted to do the character justice.
Johnson was not specifically seeking an Asian American actress for the role, and audition notices indicated they were open to actresses from any ethnicity.
In May 2017, Tran posed as Rose on the cover of Vanity Fair, becoming the first Asian American cover to appear on the magazine's cover.
In December 2017, Disney arranged for Tran to embark on a press tour in Singapore and her parents’ home country of Vietnam to publicize The Last Jedi.

===
Costume design ===
The costume design for Rose Tico was being developed for The Last Jedi before the actress was cast.
The crew knew from the early stages that her primary costume would be a basic coverall.
Johnson requested that it be "pretty shapeless", and something that either a man or woman could wear.
The costume is a variation of the uniform members of the Resistance ground crew wear in The Force Awakens, with minor modifications to give it a slightly different look.
The same color from the original uniforms, which costume supervisor David Crossman called "acidy green", was kept for Rose's costume.
The original script called for Rose to wear a beautiful gown during the Canto Bight scenes, so she would blend in with the other wealthy clientele.
Costume designer Michael Kaplan said the scene was "going to be a big reveal for Rose, going from this frumpy-dumpy coverall to a beautiful gown".
This idea was ultimately abandoned, and it was decided that Rose would wear the coverall costume throughout the entire Canto Bight subplot, which had the effect of making Rose and Finn stick out among the crowd.
Costume designer Michael Kaplan said of the coverall costume:
It's in her character.
She's not someone that has to look good for work.
Rose is a no-nonsense character.
She just plugs along
and she's spunky.
So it does work.

Tran wore a form-fitting First Order uniform as a disguise during her The Last Jedi scenes with Finn and the unnamed slicer aboard the Supremacy.
Kaplan said the costume crew wanted to choose a color for the costume that would "enhance" Rose, but they were limited to the First Order colors of black, gray, or teal.
They chose teal because they wanted to establish her as the highest-ranking officer of the trio.
The idea of the medallions worn by Rose and Paige Tico came from Carrie Fisher, the actress who portrayed General Leia Organa.
She insisted to Rian Johnson that the movie needed "space jewelry," with which he agreed.
The original script called for the medallions worn by Rose and Paige to be a two-part pendant that could be placed together to form a single image.
This was later changed so that both Rose and Paige had identical medallions, but concept artist Matthew Savage said they still have a yin and yang quality about them.
Various designs were created for the medallions, but Johnson's favorite was one based on a Celtic reference suggested by set decorator Richard Roberts.
That version was ultimately used in the film.
Johnson and Kaplan spent a great deal of time debating Rose's hair style, spending days of hair tests and trying multiple wigs.
In the end, Tran's real hair was cut into a shape that would look good in a ponytail, but resulted in a mushroom-like shape when taken down.

===
Filming ===
In January 2016, Tran moved to London to begin filming.
She was bound by confidentiality agreements not to discuss the character and could not tell anyone that she was working on a Star Wars film, even her own family.
Tran told them she was filming an independent movie in Canada; she sent them photos of Canada that she downloaded from Google, and purchased Canadian maple syrup for them as a gift to make the ruse more convincing.
To prevent secrets about the film from leaking during filming, Tran and the other actors were driven around the sets in cars with tinted windows, and made to wear black robes
so people would not recognize them.
On her first day on the Last Jedi set, Tran saw Anthony Daniels performing as C-3PO and hugged him, which she called "the best experience ever".
She said it could be difficult at times maintaining her composure and managing her excitement working on a Star Wars set, especially as a fairly new actress.
Tran said: "You have to find a way to just do the work and kind of block everything (else) out.
But then, C-3PO comes up
and you're like, 'Oh.'
You're constantly figuring out, 'How can I work in this environment,' but also, '
This is awesome.'"

Tran was not used to living without her established support system, and often felt scared and lonely during filming, occasionally crying because she wished her friends could be part of the experience it.
To combat the isolation, she joined an improvisational theatre class in London, kept journals, and sought companionship from her fellow cast members, especially John Boyega.
Tran shared more scenes with Boyega than any other cast member, and she said it was very easy to work with him, and that she learned a lot from him.
The two laughed and joked regularly on the set, and occasionally improvised during filming.
Tran said of Boyega: "John is someone who I feel like I immediately was able to mesh with.
We connect on different levels because our parents are immigrants, we’re both people of color, nerds, and he's just hilarious.
"
At one point after filming a scene together, Boyega said to Tran, "Kelly, we are making history," which helped the actress realize the magnitude of appearing in the film.
She said of Boyega: "He was the best partner I could have had on a massive movie like this.
"Tran said director Rian Johnson made her feel very comfortable on the set and collaborated with her, seeking her thoughts and suggestions about the character.
She said: "Rian was so good at inspiring that trust, and I think everyone on set felt as comfortable as me."
In early versions of the script, Tran said Rose Tico was "more sarcastic and grumpy", and Johnson compared her to the Winnie-the-Pooh character Eeyore.
However, once Tran was cast, the character's personality gradually changed to match that of the actress herself.
This is particularly reflected in the excitement and
enthusiasm Rose showed during the scene in which she met Finn.
In the original script, Rose was immediately suspicious of Finn, but because of the way the character had changed to match Tran's personality, Johnson realized she should admire Finn initially and be excited to meet him.
It was one of the few scenes in The Last Jedi that Johnson rewrote during the production.
Tran said of developing the character: "
Sometimes I think Kelly informed Rose, and sometimes I think Rose informed me.
It's such a messy, tangled relationship, which I think is kind of beautiful.
She's always going to be part of me
and I'm always going to be part of her.
"Tran called filming The Last Jedi "the ultimate acting class".
She was particularly excited to work with Laura Dern, of whom she was a strong admirer, and Carrie Fisher, who inspired Tran with her confidence and honesty.
Tran said she felt Fisher was indirectly protecting her just by virtue of her strong personality.
Tran and Boyega were also particularly impressed by Benicio Del Toro, who plays the unnamed slicer that they share multiple scenes with; she said they were obsessed with Del Toro, adding: "Every time he did anything, we would just turn to each other and say, 'He's such a legend!"
Tran enjoyed playing the augmented reality mobile game Pokémon Go on the set of The Last Jedi, and got others on the cast and crew to play it as well, including Johnson and Boyega.
Tran shared a physical trainer with Daisy Ridley, the actress who played Rey, and had to follow a difficult fitness regimen, becoming so strong she learned how to push a car.
The film's stunt crew taught Tran styles of fighting and how to use various weapons, as well as different types of falls and jumps, including, according to Tran, "how to take a bullet".
Tran was so impressed with the work that went into making The Last Jedi that she often visited the set on days when she wasn't performing herself, visiting the art, creature, production design, and costume departments.
Johnson was nervous about filming the scene immediately after Rose and Finn first met, in which Rose was dragging a stunned Finn away on a cart, because the dialogue involved a great deal of exposition
and he feared it would be difficult to make it effective.
Johnson credited the acting abilities of Tran and Boyega for making it work.
The scenes in which Rose and Finn escaped from Canto Bight by riding giant creatures were shot during the final two weeks of filming.
The sequence was created by visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic, who planned out the animation, then created a motion base that Tran and Boyega rode atop.
The base and a motion-controlled camera were programmed to move at a speed and route that matched the planned animation.
A handful of scenes involving Rose were filmed, but cut from the final version of The Last Jedi.
In one, after Rose and Finn were captured on the Supremacy, General Hux mocked Rose after seeing her medallion, and she responds by biting his finger.
Johnson thought it was a good character moment for Rose, but it was cut due to pacing issues.
In another deleted scene, after escaping from the Supremacy on a shuttle, Rose and Finn discussed their next destination and ultimately decided to rejoin the Resistance forces on Crait.
Dialogue that involved Rose chastising Finn for being too emotionally attached to Rey was also cut from the film.
To understand the mindset of Rose's traumatic past experiences with war, Tran researched her own family's experiences during the Vietnam War; her parents had to flee the country during the conflict, and she had other relatives who tried to escape at the time but could not.
She also listened to podcasts about the Vietnam War to learn more about the conflict.
Tran felt a connection between Rose's past experiences and those of Tran's own family, particularly the fact that both suffered losses and experienced poverty due to war.
Tran said, "A lot of the things (Rose) is dealing with are things that I already had inside me".
Tran also listened to podcasts and read books about engineers and how they think, which helped her better understand Tico's role as a mechanic and maintenance worker.
Tran did not share any actual screen time with Veronica Ngo, who played Rose's sister Paige, but they spent time together off-camera and would go to restaurants together and regularly send text messages to each other.
Tran felt a connection with Ngo, who is from Vietnam like Tran's family, and Tran helped her with taped auditions for roles Ngo was seeking.
Tran felt the moment Rose kissed Finn was one of her character's bravest moments:
"It's one thing to believe in a cause and to fight for it, but I think it’s a different type of courage to put yourself in a position where you’re emotionally vulnerable.
To put yourself out there romantically, for me that’s very hard.
"
It was Tran's first on-screen kiss, but she said Boyega made it easier because of his openness and generosity.
Rose's
arguably most important and famous line in The Last Jedi was delivered to Finn at the end of the film: "
That's how we're going win.
Not fighting what we hate.
Saving what we love."
The line, written by Johnson, was partially inspired by a similar statement made by Irvin Kershner, the director of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), the second film in the original Star Wars trilogy.
Describing the difference between the Rebel Alliance and the Galactic Empire in that film, Kershner said: "That's the difference between the Rebels and the Empire.
It's possible to fight because you love, not just because you hate."
Johnson read the quote in the book
Once Upon a Galaxy: A Journal of the Making of The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and incorporated it into The Last Jedi.
After filming wrapped on The Last Jedi, Tran spent a year away from acting, in part to enjoy her last few months of anonymity before her role in Star Wars became widely known.
She worked on an endangered wildlife reserve in South Africa, where there was no electricity, running water, or Internet access.
Nobody there knew she was an actress until Rose Tico toys started coming out.
Tran later went to Vietnam to work with orphans, and brought her parents back to their home country for the first time since they fled during the Vietnam War 40 years earlier.

=== Non-film portrayals ===
The first Rose Tico action figures were revealed by Hasbro on September 1, 2017, as part of a Star Wars merchandising event called "Force Friday".
A Funko Pop figurine of the character was released the same day, as was a Lego Star Wars set of the Resistance Transport Pod vehicle that included Lego figurines of Rose, Finn, and BB-8.
The novelization of Star Wars: The Last Jedi, written by Jason Fry, includes a moment between Rose and Paige Tico that was not featured in the film, during which Rose says goodbye to Paige before the latter departed for the bombing mission that ultimately kills her.
Kelly Marie Tran provided the narration for the audiobook version of Elizabeth E. Wein's Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron novel.
The audiobook was released on December 15, 2017, the same day as the novel and the Last Jedi film.
Comic book writer Delilah S. Dawson wrote Rose Tico's stories for both the "Rose & Paige" issue of Star Wars: Forces of Destiny comic book series, and the "Rose Knows" story in the Star Wars Adventures comic book series.
Rose was illustrated by Nicoletta Baldari in Forces of Destiny, with covers portraying the two title characters by Baldari, penciller Elsa Charretier and colorist Matt Wilson.
Artist Derek Charm illustrated the "Rose Knows" comic and one of its covers, while Tim Levins illustrated an alternative cover.
Before writing the stories, Dawson read the script for The Last Jedi in November 2016, as well as an early draft of the Cobalt Squadron novel.
This gave her an understanding of the personalities and speech patterns of Rose and Paige Tico for her own writing.
Dawson was excited to write about the Tico sisters because she was a "huge fan" of the characters and she considered them a strong role model for children, as well as "a study in finding people who lift you up and believe in you and in using that belief to do what you can’t do alone".
She said of Rose and Paige: "
To me, they’re the heart of what the Resistance means: ordinary people willing to make sacrifices in the hopes that other people and planets won’t have to suffer.
"
Baldari said her illustrations of Rose and Paige was partially inspired by that of Anna and Elsa, sister characters from the Disney animated film Frozen (2013), on which Baladri also worked.
Age of Resistance: Rose Tico was written by Tom Taylor, who specifically requested to write an issue about Rose because she was his son's favorite character.
Taylor said of it, "it's probably the best issue, or the one that we feel the closest to".

== Reception ==


===
Critical reception ===
The character of Rose Tico and performance by Kelly Marie Tran has received a largely positive reception from critics but mixed reviews from fans, with several commentators calling her the breakout star of The Last Jedi.
Katerina Daley of Screen Rant said, based on critic and fan reactions alike, "Rose Tico has quickly gone on to become yet another character in the long line of icons to emerge from Star Wars."
Daley praised Rose Tico's vulnerability, wit, strength, and compassion, saying she embodies all the traits that make Star Wars heroes great.
The Observer film critic Mark Kermode called Tran's performance "winning" and the Rose Tico character an immediate fan favorite.
Alistair Harkness of The Scotsman called Kelly Marie Tran the heart of The Last Jedi, much like John Boyega was for The Force Awakens, and that the two characers are "more interesting to hang out with than some of the more established characters whose adventures we've seen in their prime".
Annlee Ellingson of L.A. Biz wrote: "The first Asian-American woman to play a major role in a Star Wars film, Tran is a welcome addition both culturally and narratively, bringing much-appreciated representation to the cinematic universe.
She’s also a gosh darn delight."
Michael Sragow of Film Comment praised Tran's energetic and emotional performance, which he said made Rose the most rousing figure among the film's heroes.
Sragow said the character "blows into the movie with a fan's enthusiasm, a can-do spirit, and bracing undercurrents of proletarian
rebellion".
Variety's Meredith Woerner said Tran's performance had an energy and passion that energized Star Wars fans.
Woerner wrote: "Stealing the spotlight from The Force Awakens favorites, Tran injected the galaxy far, far away with a dose of pure enthusiasm."
Anna Menta of Newsweek said Rose Tico "has quickly become a favorite addition to the Star Wars universe", and that Tran's off-camera personality and enthusiasm has helped endeared her even more to fans.
Los Angeles Times writer Jen Yamato called Rose Tico an instant fan favorite.
Likewise, Matthew Aguilar of Comicbooks.com said Tran already developed a large fanbase among Star Wars fans even before the film was released.
Quad-City Times writer Linda Cook called Rose one of her favorite new Star Wars characters, praising her compelling background and relationship with Finn.
Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood called Rose a great new character and welcome addition to the franchise.
The Week culture critic Lili Loofbourow called Rose Tico "one of my favorite additions to the franchise".
Metro Silicon Valley writer Richard von Busack described Tran's performance as a show-stealer.
Insider writer Kirsten Acuna said Rose, along with Rey, gave young girls and female Star Wars fans a hero to serve as a role model.
The Daily Herald included Tran's performance as Rose Tico in its list of 10 great screen performers from 2017, with writer Sean Strangland calling the character "a delight".
Film director Jon M. Chu has praised the character and publicly urged the streaming service Disney+
to let him create a television series about Rose.
Richard Trenholm of CNET called Rose delightful to watch, praising her chemistry with Finn and saying she represented the "indomitable moral spirit of Star Wars with her clear-eyed determination to do the right thing".
The Stranger writer Andrew Wright said Rose Tico "makes a strong bid for MVP" among the new Star Wars characters introduced in The Last Jedi.
David Sims of The Atlantic called Rose a "wonderfully sneaky" character because she initially appears to be a sidekick for Finn, but instead becomes an equal partner who teaches him important lessons.
John W. Allman of Creative Loafing called Rose a strong addition with a solid backstory, who elevated and brought a renewed focus to Finn's character.
Nerdist writer Rosie Knight called Rose a much-needed addition to the Star Wars universe, and Lindsey Romain, also of Nerdist, said she "represents hope and positivity in a fandom that can often feel overwhelmingly negative".
Dominic Griffin of Spectrum Culture wrote that Rose "emerges as a compelling lead equal to the others in emotional resonance".
Pam Powell of the San Francisco Daily Journal said Rose shines with personality, with a wonderful sense of humor and timing, and that she pleasantly anticipated seeing her with each scene.
The Daily Beast senior entertainment editor Marlow Stern called Tran's performance "a breath of fresh air".
Ruben Rosario of MiamiArtzine called Tran's performance charming and relatable.
Molly Templeton called Rose an excellent addition to the Star Wars universe.
Kirk Baird of The Blade said Tran delivered an "honestly sweet performance".
The Atlantic writer Christopher Orr was critical of the Canto Bight sequence, but said Tran's performance helped to enliven it.
Some critics who disliked The Last Jedi were still complimentary toward aspects of Rose Tico's character or Tran's performance.
Salon writer Matthew Rozsa, who disliked the film and particularly criticized the Canto Bight sequence, nevertheless noted: "the chemistry between Finn and Rose makes them easily the most likable and sympathetic characters in the film".
Similarly, Ryan Syrek of The Reader felt the first half of The Last Jedi was clunky and the subplot involving Finn and Rose's efforts to shut down the tracking device worked poorly, but he said the character dynamics between the two were strong and described Rose his favorite character from the new trilogy.
Alyssa Rosenberg, an opinion writer for The Washington Post who was critical of The Last Jedi, said of Kelly Marie Tran: "like nearly everyone in this movie, (she) deserved better writing than she was given".
Tor.com writer Emmet Asher-Perrin said the character "deserves more attention than the film is capable of giving her".
Chris Gore of Film Threat said he very much liked the Rose character, but found the Canto Bight scenes to be an unnecessary diversion.
Several critics responded negatively to the Canto Bight subplot with Rose and Finn, calling it an unnecessary and distracting element of the film that contributed little to the overall storyline.
Other critics were more negative about the Rose Tico character.
Gulf News writer Shyama Krishna Kumar called Rose a welcome addition overall, but said she "could have benefited from additional depth".
Cinevue writer Christopher Machell described the character as woefully underwritten.
Kyle Pinion of The Beat called the character "basically a non-entity", saying she "never seems to grow beyond 'earnest'" and her relationship with Finn felt rushed.
Armond White of the National Review calls the relationship between Finn and Rose a politically correct "multi-culti play".
Aine O'Connor of the Irish Independent called the Rose and Finn pairing and subplot weak.
The New York Observer writer felt Finn and Rose had bad chemistry and called their storyline a "misguided side-quest".
===
Online attacks and harassment ===
Despite the positive reviews, Tran became the subject of racist and sexist attacks over the Internet, including insults about her ethnicity and weight, which began immediately after her casting was announced.
In a March 2018 interview, Tran said she had been receiving "really acidic, misogynistic, racist comments" regarding her role as Rose Tico.
Tran has been the target of racist trolling on Twitter.
In one example, right-wing Internet personality Paul Ray Ramsey mocked Tran's weight.
Rose Tico's entry on Wookieepedia, an online encyclopedia about the Star Wars universe, was edited to include racist and vulgar comments in December 2017, which drew national media attention.
Fandom, the wiki hosting service that operated the domain, removed the offensive edits, protected the page, and publicly condemned the vandalism.
The character of Rose Tico was defended by the official Star Wars page on Facebook.
In response to complaints about the character's actions in The Last Jedi, the Facebook page responded with a list of positive and significant actions done by the character, and wrote: "Personal growth is inherent to every Star Wars story.
Without the detour to Canto Bight, Finn wouldn't have grown past only caring about himself and his immediate circle of friends.
And Rose wouldn't have discovered her own ability to be the type of hero she idolized.
"In
June 2018, Tran deleted all of her Instagram posts in response to online harassment, and replaced the account bio with, "Afraid, but doing it anyway.
"
She also pursued therapy following the harassment.
Salon writer Nicole Karlis suggested many of the discriminatory attacks came from "white privileged men" afraid of a strong female character who is not hypersexualized in a film, writing: "I can't help but wonder:
if Tran's character aligned with the misogynistic and racist stereotype of Asian women as submissive and seductive, would the trolls have still come out?"
Esquire writer Dom Nero called the bullying of Tran "another example of the rising current of hatred and discrimination in our culture", and said it came from a "very vocal minority of Star Wars fans who do not agree with the progressive ideals set forth in the refreshingly inclusive, emotionally-nuanced film".
A study released in October 2018 found that up to 51% of the attacks Tran received on social media may have come from Russian bots instead of actual Star Wars fans.
Several cast and crew members of The Last Jedi condemned the attacks and spoke out in defense of Tran, including Rian Johnson, John Boyega, and actors Domhnall Gleeson, and Mark Hamill, the last of whom tweeted a picture of himself with Tran and wrote the caption, "What's not to love?
#
GetALifeNerds".
Johnson branded the attackers as "manbabies", and said they represent a "few unhealthy people" and not the "vast majority" of Star Wars fans.
Claudia Gray, an author who had written several Star Wars books, said the attacks against Tran ran counter to the principles of the franchise, and people who did not understand that "were never a Star Wars fan to begin with".
Other celebrities have expressed support for Tran as well, including Josh Gad, Kumail Nanjiani, Gabrielle Union, Elijah Wood, and Edgar Wright.
Stephen Colbert condemned Tran's attackers during a segment on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert, during which he presented a mock trailer for The Last Jedi specifically designed to make "racist, misogynist nerds" angry.
In less than one day, more than 20,000 fans retweeted a message of support for Tran from a fan on Twitter that sought to "drown out the manbabies".
Star Wars fans began circulating fan art of Rose Tico on Twitter to show support for Tran, along with the hashtag #FanArtForRose.
She was also shown support at the 2018 San Diego Comic-Con during a "Rally for Rose", during which fans appeared in cosplay attire as Rose Tico or wore "Rose for Hope" T-shirts.
Fans posted about the event on social media using the hashtags #ForceOutHate and #RallyForRose.
In response to the harassment, Tran wrote an essay for The New York Times entitled "Kelly Marie Tran: I Won't Be Marginalized by Online Harassment", which ran on August 21, 2018.
She wrote that the attacks reinforced microaggressions she had long faced as a Vietnamese American, and which sought to reinforce a narrative that Asians should be marginalized and treated only as minor characters, both in stories and in real life.
Tran said she even began to believe the negative statements made about her, and that they sent her down "a spiral of self-hate, into the darkest recesses of my mind, places where I tore myself apart, where I put their words above my own self-worth".
She wrote: "Their words reinforced a narrative I had heard my whole life: that I was 'other', that I didn't belong, that I wasn't good enough, simply because I wasn't like them.
And that feeling, I realize now, was, and is, shame, a shame for the things that made me different, a shame for the culture from which I came from."
She concluded with: "You might know me as Kelly.
I am the first woman of color to have a leading role in a Star Wars movie.
I am the first Asian woman to appear on the cover of Vanity Fair.
My real name is Loan.
And I am just getting started."
Tran later said the New York Times essay was difficult to write, but also "probably one of the proudest moments of [her] career thus far".
When Tran appeared during a panel about The Rise of Skywalker at the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago on April 12, 2019, she received a swell of support from the crowd, who chanted her name and gave her a standing ovation, causing the actress to tear up onstage.
Clarisse Loughrey of The Independent called it "the unexpected highlight of the panel" and wrote: "Tran's reception was not only heartening
, it was a moment of pure relief for so many fans of the franchise, worried that the well had finally been poisoned beyond repair."
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
Prior to the release of The Rise of Skywalker, fans and writers expressed concern about how little Rose Tico had been featured in the film's marketing and merchandising, including her omission from film trailers, as well as her exclusion from posters, clothing, and action figure sets that featured the other Resistance heroes.
Several examples of shirts, trading cards, and other memorabilia surfaced in which Rose was not only excluded, but was originally included and later removed.
Fans began using the hashtag #WheresRose in protest of her absence, with some calling the move part of a larger trend of erasing women of color from such merchandising.
Some writers suggested the decision could be a response to the discriminatory attacks to the Rose Tico character and Tran's performance; Lindsey Romain of Nerdist wrote: "It’s also hard not to feel like the racist misogynists are being catered to in these decisions."
A set of individual The Rise of Skywalker character posters released on November 20 initially did not include Rose, but a poster featuring her was released the next day.
Following the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Rose's minor role in the film became a major point of criticism among fans and reviewers alike.
Rose received one minute and sixteen seconds of screen time in the 142-minute film, much shorter than the ten minutes and
fifty-three seconds she received in The Last Jedi, and a shorter amount of time than Rose's sister Paige received in her single scene in The Last Jedi.
An early scene in which Rose opts to stay on the Resistance base while Rey, Finn, and Poe go on adventure together was taken by many as a direct response to the audience reception of The Last Jedi and Rose's arc within the film.
Tran had said in interviews before the film's release that she was looking forward to scenes with Rose and Rey together in The Rise of Skywalker, but fans and critics noted that no such scenes appeared in the final cut.
Fans expressed disappointment and anger on social media, with the hashtags #JusticeForRose and #RoseTicoDeservedBetter trending on Twitter the week after the film's release.

Several critics in their reviews of the finished film criticized Rose's minor role, with some calling it a validation of the people who attacked and harassed Tran online.
Critics said she was "sidelined" and commenting on how she was written out "without any explanation," and her minor role was considered by one critic to be "one of the film's biggest disappointments."
Paul Tassi of Forbes called it a "cowardly response to two years of constant abuse of Tran", and sent a negative message that film directors and writers could be influenced by people who express enough hatred and vitriol on the Internet.
Vivian Kane of The Mary Sue wrote of J. J. Abrams: "
With his treatment of Rose, it's hard to believe he wasn't listening to even the most toxic corners of the internet."
Slate writer Violet Kim said that even if Rose's reduced role was not a response to the harassment, it showed the filmmakers did not understand how deeply her exclusion "would hit those to whom she meant so much".
Comic Book Resources writer Anthony Gramuglia said Rose's screen time "comes across as a failure to support an actor who was put in a rough situation, as if Disney were throwing her to the wolves".
Actor Jimmy Wong wrote on Twitter that he was "livid" with the treatment of Rose, pointing out that newly-introduced background characters received more dialogue than her.
Mike Reyes of CinemaBlend argued other factors could have accounted for Rose's minor role, such as scenes getting cut for pacing purposes, or revisions to the script after screenwriting duties were transferred from original writers Colin Trevorrow and Derek Connolly to J. J. Abrams and Chris Terrio.
In an interview, Terrio said the filmmakers were not trying to deliberately sideline Rose in the film, stressing that he and Abrams "adore" Tran.
He said they wanted Rose to stay behind with Leia while the other characters were away because they wanted one of the principal characters to be an "anchor" for those scenes, which he described as an indication of Rose's importance.
Her screen time was cut, Terrio said, because some of the repurposed footage featuring Carrie Fisher did not meet the standard of realism they had hoped for, so they were deleted from the film.
When asked on the red carpet at the 2020 Academy Awards about her much shorter role in the film, Tran said she was impressed by how Abrams resolved so many different storylines, adding: "At the end of the day, I got to be part of something bigger than me, and that's really special."
==
Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Bibliography ===
Fry, Jason (December 15, 2017).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: Incredible Cross-Sections.
London: DK Publishing.
ISBN 9781465455529.

Hidalgo, Pablo (December 15, 2017).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary.
London: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-5551-2.

Johnson, Rian (March 27, 2018).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (Blu-ray: Director's commentary track).
Lucasfilm.

Ratcliffe, Amy (October 30, 2018).
Star Wars: Women of the Galaxy.
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 9781452166315.

Reynolds, David; Hidalgo, Pablo (September 18, 2018).
Star Wars: The Complete Visual Dictionary: New Edition.
London: DK Publishing.
ISBN 9781465475473.

Szostak, Phil (December 15, 2017).
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419727054.

==
External links ==
Rose in the StarWars.com Databank
Rose Tico on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
A planet is an astronomical body orbiting a star or stellar remnant that is massive enough to be rounded by its own gravity, is not massive enough to cause thermonuclear fusion, and – according to the International Astronomical Union but not all planetary scientists – has cleared its neighbouring region of planetesimals.
The term planet is ancient, with ties to history, astrology, science, mythology, and religion.
Apart from Earth itself, five planets in the Solar System are often visible to the naked eye.
These were regarded by many early cultures as divine, or as emissaries of deities.
As scientific knowledge advanced, human perception of the planets changed, incorporating a number of disparate objects.
In 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) officially adopted a resolution defining planets within the Solar System.
This definition is controversial because it excludes many objects of planetary mass based on where or what they orbit.
Although eight of the planetary bodies discovered before 1950 remain "planets" under the current definition, some celestial bodies, such as Ceres, Pallas, Juno and Vesta (each an object in the solar asteroid belt), and Pluto (the first trans-Neptunian object discovered), that were once considered planets by the scientific community, are no longer viewed as planets under the current definition of planet.

The planets were thought by Ptolemy to orbit Earth in deferent and epicycle motions.
Although the idea that the planets orbited the Sun had been suggested many times, it was not until the 17th century that this view was supported by evidence from the first telescopic astronomical observations, performed by Galileo Galilei.
About the same time, by careful analysis of pre-telescopic observational data collected by Tycho Brahe, Johannes Kepler found the planets' orbits were elliptical rather than circular.
As observational tools improved, astronomers saw that, like Earth, each of the planets rotated around an axis tilted with respect to its orbital pole, and some shared such features as ice caps and seasons.
Since the dawn of the Space Age, close observation by space probes has found that Earth and the other planets share characteristics such as volcanism, hurricanes, tectonics, and even hydrology.

Planets in the Solar System are divided into two main types: large low-density giant planets, and smaller rocky terrestrials.
There are eight planets in the Solar System according to the IAU definition.
In order of increasing distance from the Sun, they are the four terrestrials, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars, then the four giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
Six of the planets are orbited by one or more natural satellites.

Several thousands of planets around other stars
("extrasolar planets" or "exoplanets") have been discovered in the Milky Way.
As of 1 April 2021, 4,704 known extrasolar planets in 3,478 planetary systems (including 770 multiple planetary systems), ranging in size from just above the size of the Moon to gas giants about twice as large as Jupiter have been discovered, out of which more than 100 planets are the same size as Earth, nine of which are at the same relative distance from their star as Earth from the Sun, i.e. in the circumstellar habitable zone.
On 20 December 2011, the Kepler Space Telescope team reported the discovery of the first Earth-sized extrasolar planets, Kepler-20e and Kepler-20f, orbiting a Sun-like star, Kepler-20.
A 2012 study, analyzing gravitational microlensing data, estimates an average of at least 1.6 bound planets for every star in the Milky Way.

Around one in five Sun-like stars is thought to have an Earth-sized planet in its habitable zone.

==
History ==
The idea of planets has evolved over its history, from the divine lights of antiquity to the earthly objects of the scientific age.
The concept has expanded to include worlds not only in the Solar System, but in hundreds of other extrasolar systems.
The ambiguities inherent in defining planets have led to much scientific controversy.

The five classical planets of the Solar System, being visible to the naked eye, have been known since ancient times and have had a significant impact on mythology, religious cosmology, and ancient astronomy.
In ancient times, astronomers noted how certain lights moved across the sky, as opposed to the "fixed stars", which maintained a constant relative position in the sky.
Ancient Greeks called these lights πλάνητες ἀστέρες (planētes asteres, "wandering stars") or simply πλανῆται (planētai, "wanderers"), from which today's word "planet" was derived.
In ancient Greece, China, Babylon, and indeed all pre-modern civilizations, it was almost universally believed that Earth was the center of the Universe and that all the "planets" circled Earth.
The reasons for this perception were that stars and planets appeared to revolve around Earth each day and the apparently common-sense perceptions that Earth was solid and stable and that it was not moving but at rest.

===
Babylon ===
The first civilization known to have a functional theory of the planets were the Babylonians, who lived in Mesopotamia in the first and second millennia BC.
The oldest surviving planetary astronomical text is the Babylonian Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa, a 7th-century BC copy of a list of observations of the motions of the planet Venus, that probably dates as early as the second millennium BC.
The MUL.APIN is a pair of cuneiform tablets dating from the 7th century BC that lays out the motions of the Sun, Moon, and planets over the course of the year.
The Babylonian astrologers also laid the foundations of what would eventually become Western astrology.
The Enuma anu enlil, written during the Neo-Assyrian period in the 7th century BC, comprises a list of omens and their relationships with various celestial phenomena including the motions of the planets.
Venus, Mercury, and the outer planets
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn were all identified by Babylonian astronomers.
These would remain the only known planets until the invention of the telescope in early modern times.

===
Greco-Roman astronomy ===
The ancient Greeks initially did not attach as much significance to the planets as the Babylonians.
The Pythagoreans, in the 6th and 5th centuries BC appear to have developed their own independent planetary theory, which consisted of the Earth, Sun, Moon, and planets revolving around a "Central Fire" at the center of the Universe.
Pythagoras or Parmenides is said to have been the first to identify the evening star (Hesperos) and morning star (Phosphoros) as one and the same (Aphrodite, Greek corresponding to Latin Venus), though this had long been known by the Babylonians.
In the 3rd century BC, Aristarchus of Samos proposed a heliocentric system, according to which Earth and the planets revolved around the Sun.
The geocentric system remained dominant until the Scientific Revolution.

By the 1st century BC, during the Hellenistic period, the Greeks had begun to develop their own mathematical schemes for predicting the positions of the planets.
These schemes, which were based on geometry rather than the arithmetic of the Babylonians, would eventually eclipse the Babylonians' theories in complexity and comprehensiveness, and account for most of the astronomical movements observed from Earth with the naked eye.
These theories would reach their fullest expression in the Almagest written by Ptolemy in the 2nd century CE.
So complete was the domination of Ptolemy's model that it superseded all previous works on astronomy and remained the definitive astronomical text in the Western world for 13 centuries.
To the Greeks and Romans there were seven known planets, each presumed to be circling Earth according to the complex laws laid out by Ptolemy.
They were, in increasing order from Earth (in Ptolemy's order and using modern names): the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
Cicero, in his De Natura Deorum, enumerated the planets known during the 1st century BCE using the names for them in use at the time:
"But there is most matter for wonder in the movements of the five stars which are falsely called wandering; falsely, because nothing wanders which through all eternity preserves its forward and retrograde courses, and its other movements, constant and unaltered. ...
For instance, the star which is farthest from the earth, which is known as the star of Saturn, and is called by the Greeks Φαίνων (Phainon), accomplishes its course in about thirty years, and though in that course it does much that is wonderful, first preceding the sun, and then falling off in speed, becoming invisible at the hour of evening, and returning to view in the morning, it never through the unending ages of time makes any variation, but performs the same movements at the same times.
Beneath it, and nearer to the earth, moves the planet of Jupiter, which is called in Greek Φαέθων (Phaethon); it completes the same round of the twelve signs in twelve years, and performs in its course the same variations as the planet of Saturn.
The circle next below it is held by Πυρόεις (Pyroeis), which is called the planet of Mars, and traverses the same round as the two planets above it in four and twenty months, all
but, I think, six days.
Beneath this is the planet of Mercury, which is called by the Greeks Στίλβων (Stilbon); it traverses the round of the zodiac in about the time of the year’s revolution, and never withdraws more than one sign’s distance from the sun, moving at one time in advance of it, and at another in its rear.
The lowest of the five wandering stars, and the one nearest the earth, is the planet of Venus, which is called Φωσϕόρος (Phosphoros) in Greek, and Lucifer in Latin, when it is preceding the sun, but Ἕσπερος (Hesperos) when it is following it; it completes its course in a year, traversing the zodiac both latitudinally and longitudinally, as is also done by the planets above it, and on whichever side of the sun it is, it never departs more than two signs’ distance from it."
===
India ===
In 499 CE, the Indian astronomer Aryabhata propounded a planetary model that explicitly incorporated Earth's rotation about its axis, which he explains as the cause of what appears to be an apparent westward motion of the stars.
He also believed that the orbits of planets are elliptical.

Aryabhata's followers were particularly strong in South India, where his principles of the diurnal rotation of Earth, among others, were followed and a number of secondary works were based on them.
In 1500, Nilakantha Somayaji of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics, in his Tantrasangraha, revised Aryabhata's model.
In his Aryabhatiyabhasya, a commentary on Aryabhata's Aryabhatiya, he developed a planetary model where Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn orbit the Sun, which in turn orbits Earth, similar to the Tychonic system later proposed by Tycho Brahe in the late 16th century.
Most astronomers of the Kerala school who followed him accepted his planetary model.

===
Medieval Muslim astronomy ===
In the 11th century, the transit of Venus was observed by Avicenna, who established that Venus was, at least sometimes, below the Sun.
In the 12th century, Ibn Bajjah observed "two planets as black spots on the face of the Sun", which was later identified as a transit of Mercury and Venus by the Maragha astronomer Qotb al-Din Shirazi in the 13th century.
Ibn Bajjah could not have observed a transit of Venus, because none occurred in his lifetime.

===
European Renaissance ===
With the advent of the Scientific Revolution, use of the term "planet" changed from something that moved across the sky (in relation to the star field); to a body that orbited Earth (or that was believed to do so at the time); and by the 18th century to something that directly orbited the Sun when the heliocentric model of Copernicus, Galileo and Kepler gained sway.

Thus, Earth became included in the list of planets, whereas the Sun and Moon were excluded.
At first, when the first satellites of Jupiter and Saturn were discovered in the 17th century, the terms "planet" and "satellite" were used interchangeably – although the latter would gradually become more prevalent in the following century.
Until the mid-19th century, the number of "planets" rose rapidly because any newly discovered object directly orbiting the Sun was listed as a planet by the scientific community.

===
19th century ===
In the 19th century astronomers began to realize that recently discovered bodies that had been classified as planets for almost half a century (such as Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta) were very different from the traditional ones.
These bodies shared the same region of space between Mars and Jupiter (the asteroid belt), and had a much smaller mass; as a result they were reclassified as "asteroids".
In the absence of any formal definition, a "planet" came to be understood as any "large" body that orbited the Sun.
Because there was a dramatic size gap between the asteroids and the planets, and the spate of new discoveries seemed to have ended after the discovery of Neptune in 1846
, there was no apparent need to have a formal definition.

=== 20th century ===
In the 20th century, Pluto was discovered.
After initial observations led to the belief that it was larger than Earth, the object was immediately accepted as the ninth planet.
Further monitoring found the body was actually much smaller: in 1936, Ray Lyttleton suggested that Pluto may be an escaped satellite of Neptune, and Fred Whipple suggested in 1964 that Pluto may be a comet.
As it was still larger than all known asteroids and the population of dwarf planets & other trans-Neptunian objects was not well observed, it kept its status until 2006.

In 1992, astronomers Aleksander Wolszczan and Dale Frail announced the discovery of planets around a pulsar, PSR B1257
+12.
This discovery is generally considered to be the first definitive detection of a planetary system around another star.
Then, on October 6, 1995, Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz of the Geneva Observatory announced the first definitive detection of an exoplanet orbiting an ordinary main-sequence star (51 Pegasi).The discovery of extrasolar planets led to another ambiguity in defining a planet: the point at which a planet becomes a star.
Many known extrasolar planets are many times the mass of Jupiter, approaching that of stellar objects known as brown dwarfs.
Brown dwarfs are generally considered stars due to their ability to fuse deuterium, a heavier isotope of hydrogen.
Although objects more massive than 75 times that of Jupiter fuse hydrogen, objects of only 13 Jupiter masses can fuse deuterium.
Deuterium is quite rare, and most brown dwarfs would have ceased fusing deuterium long before their discovery, making them effectively indistinguishable from supermassive planets.

=== 21st century ===
With the discovery during the latter half of the 20th century of more objects within the Solar System and large objects around other stars, disputes arose over what should constitute a planet.
There were particular disagreements over whether an object should be considered a planet if it was part of a distinct population such as a belt, or if it was large enough to generate energy by the thermonuclear fusion of deuterium.

A growing number of astronomers argued for Pluto to be declassified as a planet, because many similar objects approaching its size had been found in the same region of the Solar System (the Kuiper belt) during the 1990s and early 2000s.
Pluto was found to be just one small body in a population of thousands.

Some of them, such as Quaoar, Sedna, and Eris, were heralded in the popular press as the tenth planet, failing to receive widespread scientific recognition.
The announcement of Eris in 2005, an object then thought of as 27% more massive than Pluto, created the necessity and public desire for an official definition of a planet.

Acknowledging the problem, the IAU set about creating the definition of planet, and produced one in August 2006.
The number of planets dropped to the eight significantly larger bodies that had cleared their orbit (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune), and a new class of dwarf planets was created, initially containing three objects (Ceres, Pluto and Eris).

====
Extrasolar planets ====
There is no official definition of extrasolar planets.

In 2003, the International Astronomical Union (IAU)
Working Group on Extrasolar Planets issued a position statement, but this position statement was never proposed as an official IAU resolution and was never voted on by IAU members.

The positions statement incorporates the following guidelines, mostly focused upon the boundary between planets and brown dwarfs:
Objects with true masses below the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium (currently calculated to be 13 times the mass of Jupiter for objects with the same isotopic abundance as the Sun) that orbit stars or stellar remnants are "planets" (no matter how they formed).
The minimum mass and size required for an extrasolar object to be considered a planet should be the same as that used in the Solar System.

Substellar objects with true masses above the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium are "brown dwarfs", no matter how they formed or where they are located.

Free-floating objects in young star clusters with masses below the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium are not "planets", but are "sub-brown dwarfs" (or whatever name is most appropriate).This working definition has since been widely used by astronomers when publishing discoveries of exoplanets in academic journals.
Although temporary, it remains an effective working definition until a more permanent one is formally adopted.
It does not address the dispute over the lower mass limit, and so it steered clear of the controversy regarding objects within the Solar System.
This definition also makes no comment on the planetary status of objects orbiting brown dwarfs, such as 2M1207b.

One definition of a sub-brown dwarf is a planet-mass object that formed through cloud collapse rather than accretion.
This formation distinction between a sub-brown dwarf and a planet is not universally agreed upon; astronomers are divided into two camps as whether to consider the formation process of a planet as part of its division in classification.
One reason for the dissent is that often it may not be possible to determine the formation process.
For example, a planet formed by accretion around a star may get ejected from the system to become free-floating, and likewise a sub-brown dwarf that formed on its own in a star cluster through cloud collapse may get captured into orbit around a star.

One study suggests that objects above 10 MJup formed through gravitational instability and should not be thought of as planets.
The 13 Jupiter-mass cutoff represents an average mass rather than a precise threshold value.
Large objects will fuse most of their deuterium and smaller ones will fuse only a little, and the 13 MJ value is somewhere in between.
In fact, calculations show that an object fuses 50% of its initial deuterium content when the total mass ranges between 12 and 14 MJ.
The amount of deuterium fused depends not only on mass but also on the composition of the object, on the amount of helium and deuterium present.
As of 2011 the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia included objects up to 25 Jupiter masses, saying, "The fact that there is no special feature around 13 MJup in the observed mass spectrum reinforces the choice to forget this mass limit".

As of 2016 this limit was increased to 60 Jupiter masses based on a study of mass–density relationships.
The Exoplanet Data Explorer includes objects up to 24 Jupiter masses with the advisory: "The 13 Jupiter-mass distinction by the IAU Working Group is physically unmotivated for planets with rocky cores, and observationally problematic due to the sin i ambiguity."

The NASA Exoplanet Archive includes objects with a mass (or minimum mass) equal to or less than 30 Jupiter masses.
Another criterion for separating planets and brown dwarfs, rather than deuterium fusion, formation process or location, is whether the core pressure is dominated by coulomb pressure or electron degeneracy pressure.

====
2006
IAU definition of planet ====
The matter of the lower limit was addressed during the 2006 meeting of the IAU's General Assembly.
After much debate and one failed proposal, a large majority of those remaining at the meeting voted to pass a resolution.
The 2006 resolution defines planets within the Solar System as follows:
A "planet" [1] is a celestial body that (a) is in orbit around the Sun,
(b) has sufficient mass for its self-gravity to overcome rigid body forces so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium (nearly round) shape, and
(c) has cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit.[1]
The eight planets are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.

Under this definition, the Solar System is considered to have eight planets.
Bodies that fulfill the first two conditions but not the third (such as Ceres, Pluto, and Eris) are classified as dwarf planets, provided they are not also natural satellites of other planets.
Originally an IAU committee had proposed a definition that would have included a much larger number of planets as it did not include (c) as a criterion.
After much discussion, it was decided via a vote that those bodies should instead be classified as dwarf planets.
This definition is based in theories of planetary formation, in which planetary embryos initially clear their orbital neighborhood of other smaller objects.
As described by astronomer Steven Soter:
"The end product of secondary disk accretion is a small number of relatively large bodies (planets) in either non-intersecting or resonant orbits, which prevent collisions between them.
Minor planets and comets, including KBOs [Kuiper belt objects], differ from planets in that they can collide with each other and with planets.
"The
2006 IAU definition presents some challenges for exoplanets because the language is specific to the Solar System and because the criteria of roundness and orbital zone clearance are not presently observable.

Astronomer Jean-Luc Margot proposed a mathematical criterion that determines whether an object can clear its orbit during the lifetime of its host star, based on the mass of the planet, its semimajor axis, and the mass of its host star.

This formula produces a value π that is greater than 1 for planets.

The eight known planets and all known exoplanets have π values above 100, while Ceres, Pluto, and Eris have π values of 0.1 or less.

Objects with π
values of 1 or more are also expected to be approximately spherical, so that objects that fulfill the orbital zone clearance requirement automatically fulfill the roundness requirement.

===
Objects formerly considered planets ===
The table below lists Solar System bodies once considered to be planets
but no longer considered as such by the IAU, as well as whether they would be considered planets under Stern's 2002 and 2018 definitions.

The reporting of newly discovered large Kuiper belt objects as planets - particularly Eris - triggered the August 2006
IAU decision on what a planet is.

==
Mythology and naming ==
The names for the planets in the Western world are derived from the naming practices of the Romans, which ultimately derive from those of the Greeks and the Babylonians.
In ancient Greece, the two great luminaries the Sun and the Moon were called Helios and Selene; the farthest planet (Saturn) was called Phainon, the shiner; followed by Phaethon (Jupiter), "bright"; the red planet (Mars) was known as Pyroeis, the "fiery"; the brightest (Venus) was known as Phosphoros, the light bringer; and the fleeting final planet (Mercury) was called Stilbon, the gleamer.
The Greeks also made each planet sacred to one among their pantheon of gods, the Olympians:
Helios and Selene were the names of both planets and gods; Phainon was sacred to Cronus, the Titan who fathered the Olympians; Phaethon was sacred to Zeus, Cronus's son who deposed him as king; Pyroeis was given to Ares, son of Zeus and god of war; Phosphoros was ruled by Aphrodite, the goddess of love; and Hermes, messenger of the gods and god of learning and wit, ruled over Stilbon.
The Greek practice of grafting their gods' names onto the planets was almost certainly borrowed from the Babylonians.
The Babylonians named Phosphoros after their goddess of love, Ishtar; Pyroeis after their god of war, Nergal, Stilbon after their god of wisdom Nabu, and Phaethon after their chief god, Marduk.
There are too many concordances between Greek and Babylonian naming conventions for them to have arisen separately.
The translation was not perfect.
For instance, the Babylonian Nergal was a god of war, and thus the Greeks identified him with Ares.
Unlike Ares, Nergal was also god of pestilence and the underworld.
Today, most people in the western world know the planets by names derived from the Olympian pantheon of gods.
Although modern Greeks still use their ancient names for the planets, other European languages, because of the influence of the Roman Empire and, later, the Catholic Church, use the Roman (Latin) names rather than the Greek ones.
The Romans, who, like the Greeks, were Indo-Europeans, shared with them a common pantheon under different names but lacked the rich narrative traditions that Greek poetic culture had given their gods.
During the later period of the Roman Republic, Roman writers borrowed much of the Greek narratives and applied them to their own pantheon, to the point where they became virtually indistinguishable.
When the Romans studied Greek astronomy, they gave the planets their own gods' names: Mercurius (for Hermes), Venus (Aphrodite), Mars (Ares), Iuppiter (Zeus) and Saturnus (Cronus).
When subsequent planets were discovered in the 18th and 19th centuries, the naming practice was retained with Neptūnus (Poseidon).
Uranus is unique in that it is named for a Greek deity rather than his Roman counterpart.

Some Romans, following a belief possibly originating in Mesopotamia but developed in Hellenistic Egypt, believed that the seven gods after whom the planets were named took hourly shifts in looking after affairs on Earth.
The order of shifts went Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon (from the farthest to the closest planet).
Therefore, the first day was started by Saturn (1st hour), second day by Sun (25th hour), followed by Moon (49th hour), Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus.
Because each day was named by the god that started it, this is also the order of the days of the week in the Roman calendar after the Nundinal cycle was rejected – and still preserved in many modern languages.
In English, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday are straightforward translations of these Roman names.
The other days were renamed after Tiw (Tuesday),
Wóden (Wednesday), Thunor (Thursday), and Fríge (Friday), the Anglo-Saxon gods considered similar or equivalent to Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus, respectively.

Earth is the only planet whose name in English is not derived from Greco-Roman mythology.
Because it was only generally accepted as a planet in the 17th century, there is no tradition of naming it after a god.
(
The same is true, in English at least, of the Sun and the Moon, though they are no longer generally considered planets.)
The name originates from the 8th century Anglo-Saxon word erda, which means ground or soil and was first used in writing as the name of the sphere of Earth perhaps around 1300.
As with its equivalents in the other Germanic languages, it derives ultimately from the Proto-Germanic word ertho, "ground", as can be seen in the English earth, the German Erde, the Dutch aarde, and the Scandinavian jord.
Many of the Romance languages retain the old Roman word terra (or some variation of it) that was used with the meaning of "dry land" as opposed to "sea".
The non-Romance languages use their own native words.
The Greeks retain their original name, Γή (Ge).

Non-European cultures use other planetary-naming systems.
India uses a system based on the Navagraha, which incorporates the seven traditional planets (Surya for the Sun, Chandra for the Moon, Budha for Mercury, Shukra for Venus, Mangala for Mars, Bṛhaspati for Jupiter, and Shani for Saturn) and the ascending and descending lunar nodes Rahu and Ketu.

China and the countries of eastern Asia historically subject to Chinese cultural influence (such as Japan, Korea and Vietnam)
use a naming system based on the five Chinese elements: water (Mercury), metal (Venus), fire (Mars), wood (Jupiter) and earth (Saturn).In traditional Hebrew astronomy
, the seven traditional planets have (for the most part) descriptive names – the Sun is חמה Ḥammah or "the hot one," the Moon is לבנה Levanah or "the white one," Venus is כוכב נוגה Kokhav Nogah or "the bright planet," Mercury is כוכב Kokhav or "the planet" (given its lack of distinguishing features), Mars is מאדים Ma'adim or "the red one," and Saturn is שבתאי Shabbatai or "the resting one" (in reference to its slow movement compared to the other visible planets).
The odd one out is Jupiter, called צדק Tzedeq or "justice".
Steiglitz suggests that this may be a euphemism for the original name of כוכב בעל
Kokhav Ba'al or "Baal's planet", seen as idolatrous and euphemized in a similar manner to Ishbosheth from II Samuel.
In Arabic, Mercury is عُطَارِد (ʿUṭārid, cognate with Ishtar / Astarte)
, Venus is الزهرة (az-Zuhara, "the bright one", an epithet of the goddess Al-'Uzzá)
, Earth is الأرض (
al-ʾArḍ, from the same root as eretz), Mars is اَلْمِرِّيخ (al-Mirrīkh, meaning "featherless arrow" due to its retrograde motion), Jupiter is المشتري (al-Muštarī, "the reliable one", from Akkadian) and Saturn is زُحَل (Zuḥal, "withdrawer").

==
Formation ==
It is not known with certainty how planets are formed.
The prevailing theory is that they are formed during the collapse of a nebula into a thin disk of gas and dust.
A protostar forms at the core, surrounded by a rotating protoplanetary disk.
Through accretion (a process of sticky collision)
dust particles in the disk steadily accumulate mass to form ever-larger bodies.
Local concentrations of mass known as planetesimals form, and these accelerate the accretion process by drawing in additional material by their gravitational attraction.
These concentrations become ever denser until they collapse inward under gravity to form protoplanets.
After a planet reaches a mass somewhat larger than Mars' mass, it begins to accumulate an extended atmosphere, greatly increasing the capture rate of the planetesimals by means of atmospheric drag.

Depending on the accretion history of solids and gas, a giant planet, an ice giant, or a terrestrial planet may result.

When the protostar has grown such that it ignites to form a star, the surviving disk is removed from the inside outward by photoevaporation, the solar wind, Poynting–Robertson drag and other effects.
Thereafter there still may be many protoplanets orbiting the star or each other, but over time many will collide, either to form a single larger planet or release material for other larger protoplanets or planets to absorb.
Those objects that have become massive enough will capture most matter in their orbital neighbourhoods to become planets.
Protoplanets that have avoided collisions may become natural satellites of planets through a process of gravitational capture, or remain in belts of other objects to become either dwarf planets or small bodies.

The energetic impacts of the smaller planetesimals (as well as radioactive decay) will heat up the growing planet, causing it to at least partially melt.
The interior of the planet begins to differentiate by mass, developing a denser core.
Smaller terrestrial planets lose most of their atmospheres because of this accretion, but the lost gases can be replaced by outgassing from the mantle and from the subsequent impact of comets.
(
Smaller planets will lose any atmosphere they gain through various escape mechanisms.)

With the discovery and observation of planetary systems around stars other than the Sun, it is becoming possible to elaborate, revise or even replace this account.
The level of metallicity—an astronomical term describing the abundance of chemical elements with an atomic number greater than 2 (helium)—is now thought to determine the likelihood that a star will have planets.
Hence, it is thought that a metal-rich population I star will likely have a more substantial planetary system than a metal-poor, population II star.

==
Solar System ==
According to the IAU definition, there are eight planets in the Solar System, which are in increasing distance from the Sun:

☿ Mercury
♀
Venus
⊕
Earth
♂
Mars
♃
Jupiter
♄
Saturn
♅ Uranus
♆
NeptuneJupiter is the largest, at 318 Earth masses, whereas Mercury is the smallest, at 0.055 Earth masses.

The planets of the Solar System can be divided into categories based on their composition:
Terrestrials: Planets that are similar to Earth, with bodies largely composed of rock: Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars.
At 0.055 Earth masses, Mercury is the smallest terrestrial planet (and smallest planet) in the Solar System.
Earth is the largest terrestrial planet.

Giant planets (Jovians):
Massive planets significantly more massive than the terrestrials:
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune.

Gas giants, Jupiter and Saturn, are giant planets primarily composed of hydrogen and helium and are the most massive planets in the Solar System.
Jupiter, at 318 Earth masses, is the largest planet in the Solar System, and Saturn is one third as massive, at 95 Earth masses.

Ice giants, Uranus and Neptune, are primarily composed of low-boiling-point materials such as water, methane, and ammonia, with thick atmospheres of hydrogen and helium.
They have a significantly lower mass than the gas giants (only 14 and 17 Earth masses).

The number of geophysical planets in the Solar System is unknown - previously considered to be potentially in the hundreds, but now only estimated at only the low double digits.
===
Planetary attributes ===


==
Exoplanets ==
An exoplanet (extrasolar planet) is a planet outside the Solar System.
As of 1 April 2021, there are 4,704 confirmed exoplanets in 3,478 systems, with 770 systems having more than one planet.
In early 1992, radio astronomers Aleksander Wolszczan and Dale Frail announced the discovery of two planets orbiting the pulsar PSR 1257+12.
This discovery was confirmed, and is generally considered to be the first definitive detection of exoplanets.
These pulsar planets are believed to have formed from the unusual remnants of the supernova that produced the pulsar, in a second round of planet formation, or else to be the remaining rocky cores of giant planets that survived the supernova and then decayed into their current orbits.

The first confirmed discovery of an extrasolar planet orbiting an ordinary main-sequence star occurred on 6 October 1995, when Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz of the University of Geneva announced the detection of an exoplanet around 51 Pegasi.
From then until the Kepler mission most known extrasolar planets were gas giants comparable in mass to Jupiter or larger as they were more easily detected.
The catalog of Kepler candidate planets consists mostly of planets the size of Neptune and smaller, down to smaller than Mercury.

There are types of planets that do not exist in the Solar System: super-Earths and mini-Neptunes, which could be rocky like Earth or a mixture of volatiles and gas like Neptune—a radius of 1.75 times that of Earth is a possible dividing line between the two types of planet.
There are hot Jupiters that orbit very close to their star and may evaporate to become chthonian planets, which are the leftover cores.
Another possible type of planet is carbon planets, which form in systems with a higher proportion of carbon than in the Solar System.

A 2012 study, analyzing gravitational microlensing data, estimates an average of at least 1.6 bound planets for every star in the Milky Way.
On 20 December 2011, the Kepler Space Telescope team reported the discovery of the first Earth-size exoplanets, Kepler-20e and Kepler-20f, orbiting a Sun-like star, Kepler-20.Around 1 in 5 Sun-like stars have an "Earth-sized" planet in the habitable zone, so the nearest would be expected to be within 12 light-years distance from Earth.

The frequency of occurrence of such terrestrial planets is one of the variables in the Drake equation, which estimates the number of intelligent, communicating civilizations that exist in the Milky Way.
There are exoplanets that are much closer to their parent star than any planet in the Solar System is to the Sun, and there are also exoplanets that are much farther from their star.
Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun at 0.4 AU, takes 88 days for an orbit, but the shortest known orbits for exoplanets take only a few hours, see Ultra-short period planet.
The Kepler-11 system has five of its planets in shorter orbits than Mercury's, all of them much more massive than Mercury.
Neptune is 30 AU from the Sun and takes 165 years to orbit, but there are exoplanets that are hundreds of AU from their star and take more than a thousand years to orbit, e.g. 1RXS1609 b.


==
Planetary-mass objects ==
A planetary-mass object (PMO), planemo, or planetary body is a celestial object with a mass that falls within the range of the definition of a planet: massive enough to achieve hydrostatic equilibrium (to be rounded under its own gravity), but not enough to sustain core fusion like a star.
By definition, all planets are planetary-mass objects, but the purpose of this term is to refer to objects that do not conform to typical expectations for a planet.
These include dwarf planets, which are rounded by their own gravity but not massive enough to clear their own orbit, planetary-mass moons, and free-floating planemos, which may have been ejected from a system (rogue planets) or formed through cloud-collapse rather than accretion
(sometimes called sub-brown dwarfs).

===
Dwarf planets ===
A dwarf planet is a planetary-mass object that is neither a true planet nor a natural satellite; it is in direct orbit of a star, and is massive enough for its gravity to compress it into a hydrostatically equilibrious shape (usually a spheroid), but has not cleared the neighborhood of other material around its orbit.
Planetary scientist and New Horizons principal investigator Alan Stern, who proposed the term 'dwarf planet', has argued that location should not matter and that only geophysical attributes should be taken into account, and that dwarf planets are thus a subtype of planet.
The IAU accepted the term (rather than the more neutral 'planetoid') but decided to classify dwarf planets as a separate category of object.

===
Rogue planets ===
Several computer simulations of stellar and planetary system formation have suggested that some objects of planetary mass would be ejected into interstellar space.

Such objects are typically called rogue planets.

=== Sub-brown dwarfs ===
Stars form via the gravitational collapse of gas clouds, but smaller objects can also form via cloud-collapse.
Planetary-mass objects formed this way are sometimes called sub-brown dwarfs.
Sub-brown dwarfs may be free-floating such as Cha 110913-773444 and OTS 44, or orbiting a larger object such as 2MASS J04414489+2301513.

Binary systems of sub-brown dwarfs are theoretically possible; Oph 162225-240515 was initially thought to be a binary system of a brown dwarf of 14 Jupiter masses and a sub-brown dwarf of 7 Jupiter masses, but further observations revised the estimated masses upwards to greater than 13 Jupiter masses, making them brown dwarfs according to the IAU working definitions.

===
Former stars ===
In close binary star systems one of the stars can lose mass to a heavier companion.
Accretion-powered pulsars may drive mass loss.
The shrinking star can then become a planetary-mass object.
An example is a Jupiter-mass object orbiting the pulsar PSR J1719-1438.
These shrunken white dwarfs may become a helium planet or carbon planet.

===
Satellite planets ===
Some large satellites (moons) are of similar size or larger than the planet Mercury, e.g. Jupiter's Galilean moons and Titan.
Proponents of the geophysical definition of planets argue that location should not matter and that only geophysical attributes should be taken into account in the definition of a planet.
Alan Stern proposes the term satellite planet for a planet-sized satellite.

=== Captured planets ===
Rogue planets in stellar clusters have similar velocities to the stars and so can be recaptured.
They are typically captured into wide orbits between 100 and 105 AU.
The capture efficiency decreases with increasing cluster volume, and for a given cluster size it increases with the host/primary mass.
It is almost independent of the planetary mass.
Single and multiple planets could be captured into arbitrary unaligned orbits, non-coplanar with each other or with the stellar host spin, or pre-existing planetary system.

==
Attributes ==
Although each planet has unique physical characteristics, a number of broad commonalities do exist among them.
Some of these characteristics, such as rings or natural satellites, have only as yet been observed in planets in the Solar System, whereas others are also commonly observed in extrasolar planets.

===
Dynamic characteristics ===


====
Orbit ====
According to current definitions, all planets must revolve around stars; thus, any potential "rogue planets" are excluded.
In the Solar System, all the planets orbit the Sun in the same direction as the Sun rotates (counter-clockwise as seen from above the Sun's north pole).
At least one extrasolar planet, WASP-17b, has been found to orbit in the opposite direction to its star's rotation.
The period of one revolution of a planet's orbit is known as its sidereal period or year.
A planet's year depends on its distance from its star; the farther a planet is from its star, not only the longer the distance it must travel, but also the slower its speed, because it is less affected by its star's gravity.
No planet's orbit is perfectly circular, and hence the distance of each varies over the course of its year.
The closest approach to its star is called its periastron (perihelion in the Solar System), whereas its farthest separation from the star is called its apastron (aphelion).
As a planet approaches periastron, its speed increases as it trades gravitational potential energy for kinetic energy, just as a falling object on Earth accelerates as it falls; as the planet reaches apastron, its speed decreases, just as an object thrown upwards on Earth slows down as it reaches the apex of its trajectory.
Each planet's orbit is delineated by a set of elements:
The eccentricity of an orbit describes how elongated a planet's orbit is.
Planets with low eccentricities have more circular orbits, whereas planets with high eccentricities have more elliptical orbits.
The planets in the Solar System have very low eccentricities, and thus nearly circular orbits.
Comets and Kuiper belt objects (as well as several extrasolar planets) have very high eccentricities, and thus exceedingly elliptical orbits.

The semi-major axis is the distance from a planet to the half-way point along the longest diameter of its elliptical orbit (see image).
This distance is not the same as its apastron, because no planet's orbit has its star at its exact centre.

The inclination of a planet tells how far above or below an established reference plane its orbit lies.
In the Solar System, the reference plane is the plane of Earth's orbit, called the ecliptic.
For extrasolar planets, the plane, known as the sky plane or plane of the sky, is the plane perpendicular to the observer's line of sight from Earth.
The eight planets of the Solar System all lie very close to the ecliptic; comets and Kuiper belt objects like Pluto are at far more extreme angles to it.
The points at which a planet crosses above and below its reference plane are called its ascending and descending nodes.
The longitude of the ascending node is the angle between the reference plane's 0 longitude and the planet's ascending node.
The argument of periapsis (or perihelion in the Solar System) is the angle between a planet's ascending node and its closest approach to its star.

====
Axial tilt ====
Planets also have varying degrees of axial tilt; they lie at an angle to the plane of their stars' equators.
This causes the amount of light received by each hemisphere to vary over the course of its year; when the northern hemisphere points away from its star, the southern hemisphere points towards it, and vice versa.
Each planet therefore has seasons, changes to the climate over the course of its year.
The time at which each hemisphere points farthest or nearest from its star is known as its solstice.
Each planet has two in the course of its orbit; when one hemisphere has its summer solstice, when its day is longest, the other has its winter solstice, when its day is shortest.
The varying amount of light and heat received by each hemisphere creates annual changes in weather patterns for each half of the planet.
Jupiter's axial tilt is very small, so its seasonal variation is minimal; Uranus, on the other hand, has an axial tilt so extreme
it is virtually on its side, which means that its hemispheres are either perpetually in sunlight or perpetually in darkness around the time of its solstices.
Among extrasolar planets, axial tilts are not known for certain, though most hot Jupiters are believed to have negligible to no axial tilt as a result of their proximity to their stars.

====
Rotation ====
The planets rotate around invisible axes through their centres.
A planet's rotation period is known as a stellar day.
Most of the planets in the Solar System rotate in the same direction as they orbit the Sun, which is counter-clockwise as seen from above the Sun's north pole, the exceptions being Venus and Uranus, which rotate clockwise, though Uranus's extreme axial tilt means there are differing conventions on which of its poles is "north", and therefore whether it is rotating clockwise or anti-clockwise.
Regardless of which convention is used, Uranus has a retrograde rotation relative to its orbit.

The rotation of a planet can be induced by several factors during formation.
A net angular momentum can be induced by the individual angular momentum contributions of accreted objects.
The accretion of gas by the giant planets can also contribute to the angular momentum.
Finally, during the last stages of planet building, a stochastic process of protoplanetary accretion can randomly alter the spin axis of the planet.
There is great variation in the length of day between the planets, with Venus taking 243 days to rotate, and the giant planets only a few hours.
The rotational periods of extrasolar planets are not known.
However, for "hot" Jupiters, their proximity to their stars means that they are tidally locked (i.e., their orbits are in sync with their rotations).
This means, they always show one face to their stars, with one side in perpetual day, the other in perpetual night.
====
Orbital clearing ====
The defining dynamic characteristic of a planet is that it has cleared its neighborhood.
A planet that has cleared its neighborhood has accumulated enough mass to gather up or sweep away all the planetesimals in its orbit.
In effect, it orbits its star in isolation, as opposed to sharing its orbit with a multitude of similar-sized objects.
This characteristic was mandated as part of the IAU's official definition of a planet in August, 2006.
This criterion excludes such planetary bodies as Pluto, Eris and Ceres from full-fledged planethood, making them instead dwarf planets.
Although to date this criterion only applies to the Solar System, a number of young extrasolar systems have been found in which evidence suggests orbital clearing is taking place within their circumstellar discs.

===
Physical characteristics ===


====
Size and shape ====
A planet's size is defined at least by an average radius (e.g., Earth radius, Jupiter radius, etc.);
polar and equatorial radii of a spheroid or more general triaxial ellipsoidal shapes are often estimated (e.g., reference ellipsoid).

Derived quantities include the flattening, surface area, and volume.

Knowing further the rotation rate and mass, allows the calculation of normal gravity.

====
Mass ====
A planet's defining physical characteristic is that it is massive enough for the force of its own gravity to dominate over the electromagnetic forces binding its physical structure, leading to a state of hydrostatic equilibrium.
This effectively means that all planets are spherical or spheroidal.
Up to a certain mass, an object can be irregular in shape, but beyond that point, which varies depending on the chemical makeup of the object, gravity begins to pull an object towards its own centre of mass until the object collapses into a sphere.
Mass is also the prime attribute by which planets are distinguished from stars.
The upper mass limit for planethood is roughly 13 times Jupiter's mass for objects with solar-type isotopic abundance, beyond which it achieves conditions suitable for nuclear fusion.
Other than the Sun, no objects of such mass exist in the Solar System; but there are exoplanets of this size.
The 13-Jupiter-mass limit is not universally agreed upon and the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia includes objects up to 60 Jupiter masses, and the Exoplanet Data Explorer up to 24 Jupiter masses.
The smallest known planet is PSR B1257
+
12A, one of the first extrasolar planets discovered, which was found in 1992 in orbit around a pulsar.
Its mass is roughly half that of the planet Mercury.
The smallest known planet orbiting a main-sequence star other than the Sun is Kepler-37b, with a mass (and radius) slightly higher than that of the Moon.

====
Internal differentiation ====
Every planet began its existence in an entirely fluid state; in early formation, the denser, heavier materials sank to the centre, leaving the lighter materials near the surface.
Each therefore has a differentiated interior consisting of a dense planetary core surrounded by a mantle that either is or was a fluid.
The terrestrial planets are sealed within hard crusts, but in the giant planets the mantle simply blends into the upper cloud layers.
The terrestrial planets have cores of elements such as iron and nickel, and mantles of silicates.
Jupiter and Saturn are believed to have cores of rock and metal surrounded by mantles of metallic hydrogen.
Uranus and Neptune, which are smaller, have rocky cores surrounded by mantles of water, ammonia, methane and other ices.
The fluid action within these planets' cores creates a geodynamo that generates a magnetic field.

====
Atmosphere ====
All of the Solar System planets except Mercury have substantial atmospheres because their gravity is strong enough to keep gases close to the surface.
The larger giant planets are massive enough to keep large amounts of the light gases hydrogen and helium, whereas the smaller planets lose these gases into space.
The composition of Earth's atmosphere is different from the other planets because the various life processes that have transpired on the planet have introduced free molecular oxygen.
Planetary atmospheres are affected by the varying insolation or internal energy, leading to the formation of dynamic weather systems such as hurricanes, (on Earth), planet-wide dust storms (on Mars), a greater-than-Earth-sized anticyclone on Jupiter (called the Great Red Spot), and holes in the atmosphere (on Neptune).
At least one extrasolar planet, HD 189733 b, has been claimed to have such a weather system, similar to the Great Red Spot but twice as large.
Hot Jupiters, due to their extreme proximities to their host stars, have been shown to be losing their atmospheres into space due to stellar radiation, much like the tails of comets.
These planets may have vast differences in temperature between their day and night sides that produce supersonic winds, although the day and night sides of HD 189733 b appear to have very similar temperatures, indicating that that planet's atmosphere effectively redistributes the star's energy around the planet.

====
Magnetosphere ====
One important characteristic of the planets is their intrinsic magnetic moments, which in turn give rise to magnetospheres.
The presence of a magnetic field indicates that the planet is still geologically alive.
In other words, magnetized planets have flows of electrically conducting material in their interiors, which generate their magnetic fields.
These fields significantly change the interaction of the planet and solar wind.
A magnetized planet creates a cavity in the solar wind around itself called the magnetosphere, which the wind cannot penetrate.
The magnetosphere can be much larger than the planet itself.
In contrast, non-magnetized planets have only small magnetospheres induced by interaction of the ionosphere with the solar wind, which cannot effectively protect the planet.
Of the eight planets in the Solar System, only Venus and Mars lack such a magnetic field.
In addition, the moon of Jupiter Ganymede also has one.
Of the magnetized planets the magnetic field of Mercury is the weakest, and is barely able to deflect the solar wind.
Ganymede's magnetic field is several times larger, and Jupiter's is the strongest in the Solar System (so strong in fact that it poses a serious health risk to future manned missions to its moons).
The magnetic fields of the other giant planets are roughly similar in strength to that of Earth, but their magnetic moments are significantly larger.
The magnetic fields of Uranus and Neptune are strongly tilted relative the rotational axis and displaced from the centre of the planet.
In 2004, a team of astronomers in Hawaii observed an extrasolar planet around the star HD 179949, which appeared to be creating a sunspot on the surface of its parent star.
The team hypothesized that the planet's magnetosphere was transferring energy onto the star's surface, increasing its already high 7,760 °C temperature by an additional 400 °C.
===
Secondary characteristics ===
Several planets or dwarf planets in the Solar System (such as Neptune and Pluto) have orbital periods that are in resonance with each other or with smaller bodies (this is also common in satellite systems).
All except Mercury and Venus have natural satellites, often called "moons".
Earth has one, Mars has two, and the giant planets have numerous moons in complex planetary-type systems.
Many moons of the giant planets have features similar to those on the terrestrial planets and dwarf planets, and some have been studied as possible abodes of life (especially Europa).The four giant planets are also orbited by planetary rings of varying size and complexity.
The rings are composed primarily of dust or particulate matter, but can host tiny 'moonlets' whose gravity shapes and maintains their structure.
Although the origins of planetary rings is not precisely known, they are believed to be the result of natural satellites that fell below their parent planet's Roche limit and were torn apart by tidal forces.
No secondary characteristics have been observed around extrasolar planets.
The sub-brown dwarf Cha 110913-773444, which has been described as a rogue planet, is believed to be orbited by a tiny protoplanetary disc and the sub-brown dwarf OTS 44 was shown to be surrounded by a substantial protoplanetary disk of at least 10 Earth masses.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
International Astronomical Union website
Photojournal NASA
NASA Planet Quest – Exoplanet Exploration
Illustration comparing the sizes of the planets with each other, the Sun, and other stars
"
IAU Press Releases since 1999 "
The status of Pluto: A Clarification"".
Archived from the original on 2007-12-14.

"Regarding the criteria for planethood and proposed planetary classification schemes.
"
article by Stern and Levinson
Planetary Science Research Discoveries (educational site with illustrated articles)
The Planets, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Paul Murdin, Hugh Jones & Carolin Crawford
(In Our Time, May 27, 2004)
The ninth series of Geordie Shore, a British television programme based in Newcastle upon Tyne was confirmed on 12 July 2014, and began airing 28 October 2014.
It was also announced that the cast would be travelling to Paris and Somerset.
All cast members from the previous series returned.
Ahead of the series launch, cast member Vicky Pattison announced that this would be her final series.
She has featured in the show since the first series.

== Cast ==
Aaron Chalmers
Charlotte-Letitia Crosby
Gary Beadle
Holly Hagan
James Tindale
Kyle Christie
Marnie Simpson
Scott Timlin
Vicky Pattison


==
=
Duration of cast ===
=
Cast member is featured in this episode.

=
Cast member voluntarily leaves the house.

= Cast member leaves and returns to the house in the same episode.

= Cast member returns to the house.

= Cast member leaves the series.

==
Episodes ==


==
Ratings ==


==
References ==
This is a list of cast members who have appeared in Geordie Shore.

==
Current cast ==
This is a list of the current cast members appearing in the show in order of their first appearance.

==
Former cast ==
This is a list of the former cast members who have appeared in the show in order of their last appearance.

== Duration of cast ==
= Cast member features in this series as part of the main cast
  =
Cast member features in this series as recurring
  =
Cast member features in this series as a guest
  =
Cast member does not feature in this series


===
Other appearances ===
As well as appearing in Geordie Shore, some of the cast members have competed in other reality TV shows including Celebrity Big Brother and I'm a Celebrity
...Get Me Out of Here!
both in the UK and Australia.

Celebrity Big Brother
Charlotte Crosby – Series 12 (2013) –
Winner
Ricci Guarnaccio – Series 14 (2014) – Eighth
Scott Timlin – Series 17 (2016) –
Winner
Marnie Simpson – Series 18 (2016) – Fourth
Chloe Ferry – Series 19 (2017) –
Twelfth
I'm a Celebrity...
Get Me Out of Here!

Vicky Pattison – UK Series 15 (2015) –
Winner
Vicky Pattison – Australian Season 4 (2018) –
Fourth
Charlotte Crosby - Australia Season 6 (2020) –
Fifth
Hell's Kitchen Australia
Gaz Beadle  – Season 1 (2017) –
Runner-up
The Celebrity Circle
Charlotte Crosby (catfishing as Peter Andre) – Series 1 (2021)
– Blocked
The Challenge


== Cast changes ==
The original cast members were: Gary "Gaz" Beadle, Charlotte-Letitia Crosby, Jay Gardner, Holly Hagan, Greg Lake, Sophie Kasaei, Vicky Pattison and James Tindale.
Lake made a guest appearance in the opening episode of series 2 where he announced his departure.
He was replaced by Ricci Guarnaccio and Rebecca Walker.
The third series saw no cast member changes.

After the third series, Gardner and Walker exited the show and auditions were held to find their replacements for the fourth series of Geordie Shore.
Daniel Thomas-Tuck and Scott Timlin joined the cast.
The fifth series saw no cast member changes.

On 2 April 2013, it was announced that Thomas-Tuck and Guarnaccio had left Geordie Shore and would not be returning for the sixth series.
On 9 April 2013 it was confirmed that former cast member Jay Gardner, who featured from series 1–3, would be returning briefly for the sixth series.
The sixth series began 9 July 2013.
On 12 July 2013 it was announced that Sophie Kasaei had been sacked from the show following an incident which took place in a nightclub where she used a racist term off camera.
Sophie will have appeared in the show from series 1–7.
On 13 August 2013, it was confirmed that Sophie's cousin, Marnie Simpson had joined the cast for Series 7.
On 24 September 2013, it was revealed that Jay Gardner would make another brief return to the series, this time in the seventh series.
On 4 April 2014, it was announced that 26-year-old Aaron Chalmers had joined the cast for the eighth series.
He had previously appeared during the second series when he took Holly out for a date.
It was then confirmed on 10 June 2014, that Kyle Christie had also joined the cast for the eighth series.
He has previously hooked up with Charlotte and Vicky, and is a friend of Marnie's.
On 28 October 2014, it was revealed that the upcoming ninth series of the show would be Vicky's last series.
On 17 November 2014, despite a tenth series already being announced, it was confirmed that this would be James' last series after he would be axed from the show at the end of the series.
On 29 November 2014, it was confirmed that Chloe Etherington had joined the cast for the tenth series.
It was also confirmed that Nathan Henry had joined the cast for this series.
In 2015, during the eleventh series, Kyle Christie made his final appearance after his turbulent relationship with Holly broke down.
In November 2015 it was confirmed that Chantelle Connelly and Marty McKenna had joined the cast for the twelfth series.
Marty had previously appeared during the third series of Ex on the Beach.
Marnie also left at the end of the eleventh series because of the engagement proposal to former The Only Way
Is Essex star Ricky Rayment, however her circumstances changed and rejoined for the twelfth series.
In the Big Birthday Battle, former cast mates returned.
These were Dan, Jay, James, Ricci, Sophie and Kyle (not in a certain order).

On 1 June 2016, Charlotte Crosby announced that she had quit Geordie Shore meaning that the Big Birthday Battle would be her final series.
It was later confirmed that Sophie would replace her as she had expressed her desire to return following the Big Birthday Battle.
Chantelle departed the cast during the thirteenth series meaning the series would be her last.
Also in the thirteenth series Kyle rejoined following making up with Holly during the Big Birthday Battle series.

It was announced that the thirteenth series trailer in October 2016, meant the cast would be in Magaluf, Ibiza, Kavos and Ayia Napa.
During filming series 13, it was cited that Sophie Kasaei had made another comeback since Big Birthday Battle earlier in the year.
In December 2016, it was announced that Holly and Kyle would be leaving Geordie Shore together in the thirteenth series finale.

In November 2016, the cast announced via Twitter that filming for the fourteenth series had commenced and Sophie Kasaei had made yet another comeback, however she had permanently rejoined the main cast since her departure in the seventh series.
Abbie Holborn was selected to become permanent.
Season fifteenth featured the departure of Marty McKenna and Scott Timlin after they were both fired from the show, it was also the last season to feature original cast member Gaz Beadle following his decision to resign.
Elettra Lamborghini visits the cast while they were in Rome.
Series sixteenth featured new cast members Sam Gowland and Stephanie Snowdon.
Aaron Chalmers and Marnie Simpson announced their departure, this being their final season.
It was later announced that Snowdon was fired.
Season seventeen introduced five new cast members:
Alex MacPherson, Chrysten Zenoni, Dee Nguyen, Grant Molloy, and Nick Murdoch.
Chrysten and Grant then left the season.
The new cast member Adam Guthrie has also joined in to replace Grant.
Holly Hagan returned as a main member after her last appearance during the thirteenth season.
After the seventeenth season, Dee and Nick did not return to the show.
Alex also left at the end of the seventeenth season, however, he rejoined the eighteenth season.
Faith Mullen joined the cast in the eighteenth season.
Scott Timlin returned to the show in the role of boss.

Faith Mullen, Abbie Holborn and Adam Guthrie did not return for the nineteenth season, however the last two appeared on a recurring basis throughout this season.
Alex also left the show, however, he returned a second time.
Before the series, four new cast members were confirmed, Beau Brennan, Bethan Kershaw, Natalie Phillips, and Tahlia Chung.
That season featured the latest appearances from Scott Timlin and Alex MacPherson, and original cast members Sophie Kasaei and Holly Hagan.

In the twentieth season it was confirmed that former cast members Abbie Holborn and James Tindale returned.
Sam Gowland and Tahlia Chung left the show after that season.
For the twenty-first season, new cast members Amelia Lily, Anthony Kennedy, and Louis Shaw joined the cast.
Nathalie Phillips left the program.

==
References ==
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (also known as Star Wars: Episode IX –
The Rise of Skywalker) is a 2019 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the third installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015) and The Last Jedi (2017), and the final episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Carrie Fisher, Mark Hamill, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Anthony Daniels, Naomi Ackie, Domhnall Gleeson, Richard E. Grant, Lupita Nyong'o, Keri Russell, Joonas Suotamo, Kelly Marie Tran, Ian McDiarmid, and Billy Dee Williams.
The Rise of Skywalker follows Rey, Finn, and Poe Dameron as they lead the Resistance's final stand against Supreme Leader Kylo Ren and the First Order, who are aided by the return of the deceased Galactic Emperor, Palpatine.

Following initial reports that The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson would write the script for Episode IX, in August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a script with his collaborator Derek Connolly; both ultimately retain story credit with Abrams and Chris Terrio.
In September 2017, Trevorrow left the project following creative differences with producer Kathleen Kennedy, and Abrams returned as director.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score for the last time for the franchise.
Principal photography began in August 2018 at Pinewood Studios in England and wrapped in February 2019, with post-production completed in November 2019.
With an estimated budget of $275 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on December 16, 2019, and was released in the United States on December 20.
Unlike The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi which received positive reviews, The Rise of Skywalker received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the acting, action sequences, musical score, and visual effects, but criticized the story, pacing, and its perceived departures from the plot and themes of The Last Jedi.
The film grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2019; although the film was the lowest-grossing installment of the trilogy, it turned an estimated net profit of $300 million.
The film received three nominations at the 92nd Academy Awards (Best Original Score, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound Editing) as well as three at the 73rd British Academy Film Awards (also Best Special Visual Effects, Best Original Music, and Best Sound).
==
Plot ==
Following a threat of revenge by the revived Emperor Palpatine, Kylo Ren obtains a Sith Wayfinder, leading him to the uncharted planet Exegol.
There, he finds Palpatine, who reveals that he created Snoke as a puppet to control the First Order and lure Kylo to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order—a secret armada of Star Destroyers—and tells Kylo to find and kill Rey, who is continuing her Jedi training under Resistance leader Leia Organa.
Finn and Poe Dameron deliver intelligence from a spy that Palpatine is on Exegol; Rey has learned from Luke Skywalker's notes that a Sith Wayfinder can lead them there.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, BB-8, and C-3PO depart in the Millennium Falcon to Pasaana, where a clue to a Wayfinder is hidden.

Kylo initiates a Force bond with Rey to discover her location; he travels to Pasaana with his warrior subordinates, the Knights of Ren.
With the help of Lando Calrissian, Rey and her friends find the clue—a dagger inscribed with Sith text, which C-3PO's programming forbids him from interpreting—and the remains of a Jedi hunter named Ochi and his ship.
Rey senses Kylo nearby and faces him.
The First Order captures the Falcon, Chewbacca, and the dagger; attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys a First Order transport with Force lightning.
Believing Chewbacca to be dead, the group escapes on Ochi's ship.

The group travels to Kijimi, where a droidsmith extracts the Sith text from C-3PO's memory, revealing coordinates to a Wayfinder.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive, and the group mounts a rescue mission to Kylo's Star Destroyer.
Rey recovers the dagger and has visions of Ochi killing her parents with it.
Kylo informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter; the Sith Lord had ordered Ochi to recover Rey as a child, but her parents hid her on Jakku to protect her.
General Hux saves Poe, Finn, and Chewbacca from execution, revealing himself as the spy.
He permits the group to escape on the Falcon but is discovered and killed by Allegiant General Pryde.
The group flies the Falcon to the Wayfinder's coordinates on a moon in the Endor system.

Rey retrieves the Wayfinder from the remains of the second Death Star, but she is met by Kylo, who destroys the Wayfinder and duels her.
In a dying act, Leia calls to Kylo through the Force, distracting him as Rey impales him.
Sensing Leia's death, Rey heals Kylo and takes his ship to exile herself on Ahch-To.
There, Luke's Force spirit encourages Rey to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber.
Rey leaves for Exegol in Luke's X-wing fighter, using the Wayfinder from Kylo's ship.
Meanwhile, Kylo converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber and reclaims his identity as Ben Solo.
Sensing Leia's death and Ben's redemption
, Palpatine sends one of his superlaser-equipped Star Destroyers to destroy Kijimi as a show of force.

Rey transmits her coordinates to R2-D2, allowing the Resistance—now led by Poe and Finn—to follow her to Exegol.
There, she confronts Palpatine; he demands that she kill him for his spirit to pass into her.
Lando brings reinforcements from across the galaxy to join the battle.
Ben overpowers the Knights of Ren and joins Rey, but Palpatine drains their power to rejuvenate himself.
He incapacitates Ben and attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who lend her their strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing Palpatine before dying herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive her at the cost of his own life; they share a kiss before he dies.
The Resistance defeats Palpatine's armada, while people across the galaxy rise up against the First Order.
The Resistance returns to their base to celebrate.

After the celebration, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries his and Leia's lightsabers.
A passerby asks her name; as the spirits of Luke and Leia watch, she replies, "Rey Skywalker."
== Cast ==
Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa, the Force-sensitive leading general of the Resistance, mother to Ben Solo, Luke Skywalker's twin sister, and Anakin Skywalker's daughter.
Fisher, who died in late 2016, appears through the use of repurposed unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi Master and maternal uncle of Kylo Ren.
He became one with the Force in The Last Jedi.

Adam Driver as Ben Solo / Kylo Ren, the Supreme Leader of the First Order.
He is the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, and the grandson of Anakin Skywalker.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a former scavenger from Jakku, member of the Resistance, and the next JediCailey Fleming and Josefine Irrera Jackson as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn, a member of the Resistance and a former stormtrooper (FN-2187) who defected from the First Order
Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot and commander of the Resistance who later inherits the rank of general from Leia
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of General Organa
Naomi Ackie as Jannah, a former stormtrooper of the First Order (TZ-1719) living on the planet Kef Bir, who aids the Resistance
Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the First Order's third in-command
Richard E. Grant as Allegiant General Pryde, a high-ranking general in the First Order, who previously served in the Galactic Empire
Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a former space pirate and ally of the Resistance
Keri Russell as Zorii Bliss, an old acquaintance of Poe's from Kijimi
Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca, a Wookiee and first mate of the Millennium Falcon
Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a mechanic in the Resistance and friend of Finn
Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the resurrected Dark Lord of the Sith and Rey's paternal grandfather
Billy Dee Williams
as Lando Calrissian, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance, a former owner of the Millennium Falcon, and an old friend of ChewbaccaBillie Lourd and Greg Grunberg reprise their roles as Lieutenant Kaydel Ko Connix and Temmin "Snap" Wexley respectively.
Additionally, Dominic Monaghan portrays Resistance trooper Beaumont Kin, Shirley Henderson voices Babu Frik, and Nick Kellington portrays Klaud via capture performance.
Hassan Taj and Lee Towersey perform the role of R2-D2, while Dave Chapman and Brian Herring return as the puppeteers of BB-8, and director J. J. Abrams also provides the voice for D-O. Martin Wilde, Anton Simpson-Tidy, Lukaz Leong, Tom Rodgers, Joe Kennard, and Ashley Beck appear as the Knights of Ren.
Amanda Lawrence reprises her role as Commander Larma D’Acy, while Vinette Robinson plays her wife, Pilot Wrobie Tyce.
Jodie Comer and Billy Howle briefly appear as Rey's parents, while Tom Wilton and screenwriter Chris Terrio briefly appear as the performer and voice for Aftab Ackbar, the son of Admiral Ackbar, respectively; and Mike Quinn and Kipsang Rotich return as the performer and voice of Nien Nunb, respectively.
Denis Lawson and Warwick Davis briefly reprise their roles as Wedge Antilles, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance; and Wicket W. Warrick, now the leader of the Ewoks, respectively.
Harrison Ford reprises his role as Han Solo in an uncredited cameo.
Composer John Williams cameos as Oma Tres, a Kijimi bartender, Kevin Smith cameos as a Kijimi inhabitant, and Abrams' frequent composer collaborator Michael Giacchino cameos as a Sith Trooper, while Lin-Manuel Miranda and Jeff Garlin both cameo as human and alien Resistance troopers, respectively.
Ed Sheeran, Karl Urban, Dhani Harrison, Nigel Godrich, J. D. Dillard, and Dave Hearn all cameo as stormtroopers.
Actors making reprisal vocal cameos include James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, Andy Serkis as Snoke, and the voices of several past Jedi, including Ewan McGregor and Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi (the latter via digitally altered archive audio), Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli, Frank Oz as Yoda, Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura, Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, and Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney subsequently announced the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
In June 2014, it was announced that Rian Johnson, writer and director of The Last Jedi, would write a story treatment for Episode IX.
However, Johnson later stated that he was not involved in writing the film.
In August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was announced as the director of the film; he was to write the script with frequent collaborator Derek Connolly.

=== Pre-production ===

In February 2016, Disney chief executive officer Bob Iger confirmed that pre-production on Episode IX had begun.
Carrie Fisher died in December 2016.
Prior to the release of the film, Carrie Fisher's brother Todd Fisher, who planned her character
General Leia Organa to appear in the film before her death, revealed that “she was going to be the big payoff in the final film” and “she was going to be the last Jedi, so to speak.
”In
August 2017, it was announced that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.
In September 2017, Lucasfilm stated that Trevorrow had left the production following creative differences, resulting his working relationship with Kathleen Kennedy to become unmanageable after failing to deliver a satisfactory script, despite writing several drafts.
That same month, Johnson was rumored as the top choice to replace Trevorrow as director, but stated "it was never in the plan for me to direct Episode IX", and later, J. J. Abrams, the director of The Force Awakens, was announced to return as the director in Episode IX.The story team met with George Lucas before writing the new script to discuss the nature of the Force.
Abrams co-wrote the script with Chris Terrio, though Trevorrow and Connolly retain story credits.
The story was rewritten to some extent before filming was completed.
The film was produced by Abrams' company Bad Robot Productions, Kathleen Kennedy, and Michelle Rejwan.
According to Terrio, the film's script had to include certain narrative beats provided by Kennedy and Rejwan, including the redemption of the character Kylo Ren.
Before filming, Episode IX was initially given the working title Black Diamond, which was then changed to TrIXie in 2018, so that the roman numeral "IX" would be included in the working title.
The film's title, The Rise of Skywalker, was announced at April 2019's the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago.

===
Casting ===
Carrie Fisher, who played Leia Organa, died on December 27, 2016.
Variety and Reuters reported that she had been planned for a key role in Episode IX.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm stated that there were no plans to digitally generate Fisher's performance as they had for Rogue One (2016).
The following April, Fisher's brother Todd revealed that Fisher's daughter, Billie Lourd, had granted Disney the rights to use recent footage of Fisher.
However, a week later, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not appear in the film.
In July 2018, J. J. Abrams announced that unused footage of Fisher from The Force Awakens would be used to help complete the story.
In flashback scenes, digital de-aging was used for the appearance of Luke and Leia through the use of facial shots of both characters from the Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi respectively.

In July 2018, Keri Russell was in talks to play a part with some "action-heavy fight scenes", and it was confirmed that Billy Dee Williams would return as Lando Calrissian, onscreen for the first time since 1983's Return of the Jedi—marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.
At the end of July, Russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an announcement of returning and additional new cast members.
In late August, Deadline Hollywood announced that Dominic Monaghan and Matt Smith had been cast in unspecified roles, but Smith later denied his involvement.
Greg Grunberg reprises his role as Temmin "Snap" Wexley.
At the Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, it was revealed via the film's teaser trailer that Ian McDiarmid would return to portray Palpatine.
Since the event was held after principal photography wrapped, Abrams was thrilled that news of McDiarmid on the set never leaked.
Kathleen Kennedy said they decided to reveal Palpatine's return ahead of the film's release because of the characters playing a larger role in the story, having them differentiated from Baby Yoda, the character from The Mandalorian.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography began on August 1, 2018, at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.

Filming also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan.

Oscar Isaac stated that Abrams was allowing more improvised acting than in the previous two films.
Due to the tight schedule, some editing took place on set.
Principal photography wrapped on February 15, 2019.
Footage from the film was shown at The Walt Disney Company's annual shareholders meeting on March 7, 2019.
Two weeks of reshoots took place at Pinewood involving Hamill, Ridley, and Isaac in July 2019.
Another round of reshoots took place between late September and October.

===
Post-production ===
The visual effects were created by Industrial Light & Magic and supervised by Roger Guyett.
The film finished post-production on November 25, 2019.
After Boyega accidentally left a copy of the script in his hotel room, it was listed on eBay for around £65.
===
Music ===
In January 2018, it was confirmed that John Williams would return to compose and conduct The Rise of Skywalker.
The next month, Williams announced that it would be the last Star Wars film for which he would compose the score.
In August 2019, it was revealed that Williams had written about 35 of an expected 135 minutes of music for the film, which according to Williams' brother Don, would incorporate all of the major themes of the Skywalker saga.
Scoring began in July 2019 with Williams and William Ross conducting and orchestrating the sessions over the course of six months.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 20, 2019.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Despite staying silent about many details of the film, Abrams expressed his hopes that fans and general audiences would be "satisfied".
He headed a panel dedicated to the film on April 12, 2019, during the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago, where the film's title was revealed.
Additionally, the story events of the Disneyland themed area Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge precede the film, including the Millennium Falcon:
Smugglers Run motion simulator, which features Chewbacca.
On August 24, a new poster and "sizzle reel" was released at D23; the latter was released to the public two days later.
The footage includes a montage of the Skywalker saga so far, as well as several new shots from the film.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
A publishing campaign titled "Journey to Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker" was announced on May 4, 2019.
It includes the novel Resistance Reborn, set between The Last Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker, and various other titles.
From December 18, 2019, to March 11, 2020, a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren, telling the story of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren and elaborating upon the character's backstory, was published by Marvel Comics, written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney.
The official novelization of The Rise of Skywalker is by Rae Carson:
hardcover and audiobook versions were released on March 19, 2020.
The novel details Palpatine's return in more depth
: he transferred his consciousness into a clone body following his death in Return of the Jedi, and his "son", Rey's father, was a failed clone of Palpatine.
The junior novel and corresponding audiobook are by Michael Kogge and were released on April 21, 2020.
Additionally, a five-issue Marvel Comics adaptation written by Jody Houser and illustrated by Will Sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later canceled, making the film the first in the franchise not to receive a comic adaptation.

===
Video games ===
The video game Star Wars Battlefront II (2017) released a free level set on Ajan Kloss.
In December 2019, the video game Fortnite Battle Royale released several cosmetics featuring character skins for Rey, Finn, a Sith Trooper, Kylo Ren, and Zorii Bliss along with a TIE fighter glider, a Millennium Falcon glider (which was given to players for free from the Winterfest Event), four emotes, and two free banners.
On December 14, Fortnite's publisher Epic Games released a preview of the film on an in-game theater screen as a live event.
At the end of the event, a message from Palpatine (the one mentioned in the film's opening crawl) was heard.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film was originally planned to be released in the United States on May 24, 2019, before being pushed back to December 20.
It had its world premiere at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles on December 16.
Unlike most studio films, Disney reportedly did not hold test screenings for The Rise of Skywalker, instead only showing it to Abrams' friends and family, as well as a terminally-ill fan.
Before the film's release, Disney issued a warning that the scenes with strobe-like flashing lights may trigger photosensitive migraines and seizures during some of those scenes.

===
Home media ===
The Rise of Skywalker was scheduled to be released on Digital HD on March 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Its DVD, Blu-ray, and 4K Ultra HD release was followed on March 31 by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment.
The 4K version of the film was also released in "The Skywalker Saga" Ultra HD Blu-ray box set that same date.
It was released on Disney+
on May 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of its previously scheduled release date.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $558.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.074 billion.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $300 million when factoring together all expenses and revenues.
Pre-sale tickets went on sale on October 21, 2019, and the film sold more tickets in their first hour of availability on Atom Tickets than the previous record-holder for ticket sales, Avengers: Endgame (2019).
It became Atom Tickets' second-best first-day seller of all time behind Endgame, selling more than twice the number of tickets as The Last Jedi sold in that same timeframe, while Fandango reported it outsold all previous Star Wars films.
Box office tracking had The Rise of Skywalker grossing around $200 million in its opening weekend, though some firms predicted a debut closer to $175 million.
The film made $90 million on its first day, including $40 million from Thursday night previews.
It went on to debut to $177.3 million, and it was also noted that Saturday (which saw a 47% drop from Friday's gross) was the busiest shopping day of the year, likely affecting ticket sales.
The film made $32 million on Christmas Day, the second-best total ever for the holiday after The Force Awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.
It went on to have a five-day total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the weekend.
In its third weekend, the film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in its fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).Worldwide the film was projected to gross around $450 million in its opening weekend, including $250 million from 52 international territories.
It made $59.1 million from its first day of international release in 46 countries.
The biggest markets were the United Kingdom ($8.3 million), Germany ($7.2 million), France ($5.3 million), and Australia ($4.3 million).
In China, the film made $1.6 million (RMB11.6 million) through its first day.
It went on to open to $198 million from overseas countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than The Last Jedi's total.
Its biggest opening totals remained the UK ($26.8 million), Germany ($21.8 million), France ($15.2 million), Japan ($14.6 million), Australia ($12.6 million), and China ($12.1 million).

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 51% of 507 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.1/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "The Rise of Skywalker suffers from a frustrating lack of imagination, but concludes this beloved saga with fan-focused devotion.
"
As of January 2020, the film is the lowest-rated live-action film of the Star Wars series.
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 61 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 53 out of 100, The Rise of Skywalker received "mixed or average reviews".
Richard Roeper, reviewing for the Chicago Sun-Times, gave the film three stars out of four, writing that it "rarely comes close to touching greatness, but it's a solid, visually dazzling and warmhearted victory [for] quality filmmaking."
The A.V. Club's A. A. Dowd gave the film a C+, stating that the film "is so freighted with obligation that it almost groans under the weight, flashing a weak smile as it vaguely approximates the appearance of a zippy good time."
Michael Phillips for Chicago Tribune wrote that the film "does the job.
It wraps up the trio of trilogies begun in 1977 in a confident, soothingly predictable way, doing all that is cinematically possible to avoid [upsetting the] tradition-minded quadrants of the Star Wars fan base.
"Mick
LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle described the film as "a disappointment" and wrote, "For all the movie's faults, it's likely that most people will consider The Rise of Skywalker and accept the trade: Sit through a
so-so 110 minutes to get to a strong half hour.
"
Owen Gleiberman of Variety called the film "the most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying Star Wars adventure since the glory days of Star Wars (1977) and The Empire Strikes Back (1980) [...]
but given the last eight films, the bar isn't that high.
"
The BBC's Nicholas Barber praised the film's acting and wrote, "The Rise of Skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a host of talented people, and yet the best they can do is pay tribute to everything he did several decades ago.
"Scott
Mendelson for Forbes described the film as "possibly worse" compared to the previous Skywalker saga films while ending the main saga and "denying this new trilogy its artistic reason for existence", and criticized the film for retconning The Last Jedi and its plot; saying that "patronizing reversals in the name of mollifying the fans who merely want to be reminded of the first three movies."
Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times described the film as "a Last Jedi corrective", which is "more accurate way to describe it" and is "an epic failure of nerve"; saying that "feels more like a retreat, a return to a zone of emotional and thematic safety from a filmmaker with a gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
"
Writing for The New Yorker, Richard Brody states that the film's faults "are those of the franchise over all"; as the film's director "J. J. Abrams is mainly a distiller and a magnifier and brings virtually no originality to it", using the controls of Michael Bay.
Whereas Asian actress Kelly Marie Tran was a main character in The Last Jedi, she appears for about a minute in The Rise of Skywalker.
The reduced role was interpreted by some critics as a concession to fans who disliked her character; Tran had been a target of online harassment following the release of The Last Jedi.
People involved on the previous film defended her, with some claiming some of the attackers were racist, and body shamers.
Critics said she was "sidelined" into a minor character, and commented on how she was written out "without any explanation" and her minor role was considered by one critic to be "one of the film's biggest disappointments".
In regards to the criticism towards her reduced screen-time, screenwriter Chris Terrio said it was due to the difficulty of including the deceased Carrie Fisher archive footage in scenes planned to feature both characters.

===
Audience response ===
According to CinemaScore, American audiences gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, the lowest among the live-action films.
On PostTrak, audiences gave the film an average four stars out of five, with 70% saying they would definitely recommend it; parents and children under 12 years old (who made up 16% of opening night attendance) gave it a full five stars out of five.
Men (who made up 67% of the audience) gave the film an overall positive score of 80% while women (32%) gave it an 84%.
RelishMix, which tracks social media posts and online presence, "noticed a divided reaction to Skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
Months prior to the film's trailer release, it was review bombed on Rotten Tomatoes to the point where the "Want to See" percentage went down as far as 5% within a day, with many of the reviews focusing on lingering negativity towards The Last Jedi.
Similar bombing with Captain Marvel (2019) caused Rotten Tomatoes to completely remove the "Want to See"  feature after temporarily changing it to a number.
===
Accolades ===
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Disney A to Z
Kelly Marie Tran (born January 17, 1989), is an American actress.
She began acting in 2011, with most of her roles being in short film and television.
She came to global prominence for her role as Rose Tico in the Star Wars sequel trilogy films
The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
She voiced Raya in the animated film Raya and the Last Dragon (2021).

==
Early life ==
Kelly Marie Tran was born on January 17, 1989, in San Diego, California.
Her parents were refugees from Vietnam who fled the country following the Vietnam War.
As a child, her father was homeless and grew up on the streets of Vietnam.
After moving to the United States, her father worked at Burger King to support the family, and her mother worked at a funeral home.
Tran attended Westview High School in San Diego and worked at a yogurt shop to earn money for head shots.
Tran then graduated from UCLA with a B.A. in communications.

==
Career ==


===
2011–2014:
Early work ===
Her early credits consisted of primarily CollegeHumor videos and small TV roles.
She landed a commercial agent in 2011, who got Tran to take improv classes at the Upright Citizens Brigade.
At The Second City, Tran is part of the all-female, Asian-American improv group, Number One Son.
In 2013, she starred in the web-series Ladies Like Us.
In 2015, Tran was working as an assistant at a creative recruiting firm in Century City.

=== 2015–2019:
Star Wars ===
In 2015, Tran was cast as Rose Tico in Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Rose Tico is a rebel mechanic who joins up with main character Finn after the sacrifice of her oldest sister, Paige Tico (Veronica Ngo), a gunner trained by Resistance commander Poe Dameron.
When she went to shoot her scenes in England in early 2016, she was required to keep her role secret, so she told her family she was making an independent film in Canada.
The Last Jedi made Tran the first Asian-American woman to have a major role in a Star Wars film.
In 2017, she also became the first Asian woman to appear on the cover of Vanity Fair when she appeared on the cover of the summer 2017 issue with actor John Boyega (who played Finn), and Oscar Isaac (who played X-Wing fighter pilot Poe Dameron).Tran plays the lead role of Kaitlin Le in Radiotopia's mystery thriller podcast, Passenger List.
She was a series regular on the Facebook Watch series Sorry for Your Loss.

=== 2020–present ===
Tran voiced Raya in the Walt Disney Animation Studios production Raya and the Last Dragon, replacing Cassie Steele.

Tran was to play Val Little in the upcoming Disney+
series Monsters at Work, but has since been replaced by Mindy Kaling.
She has also been cast as Dawn in the film
The Croods: A New Age, replacing Kat Dennings.

==
Personal life ==


===
Online attacks and harassment ===
Following the release of Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017), Tran became the subject of racist and misogynistic attacks over the Internet, including insults about her ethnicity and weight.
She was the target of racist trolling on Twitter; in one example, Internet personality Paul Ray Ramsey mocked her weight.
In December 2017, her character Rose Tico's entry on Wookieepedia, an online encyclopedia about the Star Wars universe, was edited to include racist and vulgar comments, which drew national media attention.
Fandom, the wiki hosting service that operated the domain, removed the offensive edits, protected the page, and publicly condemned the vandalism.
After months of online harassment, Tran deleted all of her Instagram posts in June 2018, and replaced the account bio with, "Afraid, but doing it anyway.
"
She also pursued therapy following the harassment.
Subsequently, several cast and crew members of The Last Jedi condemned the attacks and spoke out in defense of Tran, including writer-director Rian Johnson and actors John Boyega, Domhnall Gleeson, and Mark Hamill, the last of whom tweeted a picture of himself with Tran and wrote the caption, "What's not to love?
#
GetALifeNerds".
Johnson branded the attackers as "manbabies", and said they represent a "few unhealthy people" and not the "vast majority" of Star Wars fans.
Other celebrities voiced support for Tran as well, including Stephen Colbert, Josh Gad, Kumail Nanjiani, Gabrielle Union, Elijah Wood, and Edgar Wright.
In less than one day, more than 20,000 fans retweeted a message of support for Tran from a fan on Twitter that sought to "drown out the manbabies".
She was also shown support at the 2018 San Diego Comic-Con during a "Rally for Rose", where fans appeared in cosplay attire as her Star Wars character Rose Tico or wore "Rose for Hope" T-shirts.
Fans posted about the event on social media using the hashtags #ForceOutHate and #RallyForRose.
After a prolonged stretch of silence about her harassment, Tran wrote an essay on the subject for The New York Times entitled "Kelly Marie Tran: I Won't Be Marginalized by Online Harassment", which ran on August 21, 2018.
She described how the matter made her self-conscious, writing that the attacks reinforced microaggressions she had long faced as a Vietnamese-American, and which sought to reinforce a narrative that Asians should be marginalized and treated only as minor characters, both in stories and in real life.
Tran further wrote that the ordeal came to a point when she began to believe the negative remarks made about her, stating they had sent her "down a spiral of self-hate, into the darkest recesses of my mind, places where I tore myself apart, where I put their words above my own self-worth."
She concluded with, "You might know me as Kelly.
I am the first woman of color to have a leading role in a Star Wars movie.
I am the first Asian woman to appear on the cover of Vanity Fair.
My real name is Loan.
And I am just getting started."
Tran later said the essay was difficult to write, but also "probably one of the proudest moments of [her] career thus far."
==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


==
Awards and nominations ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Kelly Marie Tran at IMDb
Kelly Marie Tran
at Rotten Tomatoes
Fennec Shand is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who appears in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian, and the upcoming The Bad Batch and The Book of Boba Fett.
An elite mercenary and assassin, she was introduced in  "Chapter 5: The Gunslinger" of The Mandalorian, in which she is sought by the title character and another  bounty hunter, Toro Calican,
the latter of whom seemingly kills her.
In "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", it was established that Fennec was saved by the bounty hunter Boba Fett, and had parts of her body replaced with cybernetics.
She serves as Fett's new partner and assists him in his mission to recover his old armor from the Mandalorian, and later to rescue Grogu in order to honor an agreement made with the latter.
Once their mission is completed, the two conquer Tatooine and the remnants of the Hutt cartels.

Portrayed by actress Ming-Na Wen, elements of the character's personality were inspired by the fennec fox, including its trickiness, stealthiness, maneuverability, and ability to survive.
The fox also influenced the design of Fennec's costume and hairstyle.
Costume designer Joseph Porro incorporated orange accents into Fennec's black costume, and Wen recommended the character's hair include braids inspired by the fennec fox.

Fennec Shand has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike, and has been described as a fan favorite.

==
Appearances ==


===
The Mandalorian ===
In The Mandalorian, Fennec Shand is presented as an elite mercenary and assassin who developed a significant reputation committing murders for the galaxy's top crime syndicates, including the Hutts, before their leaders were imprisoned by the New Republic.
Little else about her backstory is revealed.
She appears in the Mandalorian episode "Chapter 5: The Gunslinger", starting the episode in hiding on the desert planet Tatooine, because a large bounty has been placed upon her.
Toro Calican, an aspiring bounty hunter, takes the bounty on Fennec as his first assignment, believing capturing such a notorious target would bring him prestige and allow him to join the Bounty Hunters' Guild.
Toro recruits the show's protagonist, a bounty hunter known as "The Mandalorian", to help him find and capture her.
They track Fennec to a part of the planet known as the Dune Sea, where they discover the dead body of another bounty hunter she had previously killed.
While they investigate, Fennec opens fire on them with a long-ranged blaster rifle, keeping them pinned down from a high vantage point.
The Mandalorian and Toro eventually charge toward her position on speeder bikes and use flash charges to temporarily blind and distract her.
After a brief fight, they are able to incapacitate Fennec, and restrain her with handcuffs.
When the Mandalorian temporarily departs to secure them transportation, Fennec informs Toro that the Mandalorian is wanted by the Bounty Hunters Guild, and that capturing him would bring Toro a legendary reputation.
Fennec offered to work with Toro to subdue the Mandalorian and turn him over to Guild.
Instead, Toro fatally shot Fennec in the stomach, believing she would have killed him if he had released her.
Toro decides to attempt to capture the Mandalorian himself, and leaves Fennec's body in the desert. "
Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger" ends with an unidentified person wearing boots and a cape walking up to Fennec's body to investigate.
Shand returns in the second-season episode "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", in which it is revealed that she was rescued by Boba Fett, who nursed her back to health using cybernetics and recruited her as his partner.
She accompanies Fett to Tython, where they attempt to recover the latter's old armor from the Mandalorian, and ensure the safety of Grogu, a Force-sensitive alien infant that the Mandalorian has adopted, in exchange for the armor's return.
When Moff Gideon's Imperial remnant attacks the group, Fennec helps the Mandalorian and Fett fend off the stormtroopers deployed to capture Grogu, but fail to prevent him from being taken by Gideon's Dark Troopers.
To repay their debt to the Mandalorian for returning Fett's armor, he and Fennec aid his efforts to rescue Grogu in both "Chapter 15:
The Believer" and ''
Chapter 16:
The Rescue''.
At the conclusion of the latter episode, Fennec and Fett return to Tatooine and kill Bib Fortuna, who has been in charge of Jabba the Hutt's palace since his death.
Fett then sits on the throne that once belonged to Jabba, with Fennec at his side, which sets the stage for the two characters' upcoming spin-off series, titled The Book of Boba Fett.
===
The Bad Batch ===
A younger Fennec will appear in the animated series Star Wars: The Bad Batch, with Ming-Na Wen returning to voice the character.

===
The Book of Boba Fett ===
Fennec will appear in The Book of Boba Fett, scheduled to be released in December 2021, with Wen reprising her role.

== Characterization ==
Fennec Shand is portrayed as an elite assassin, one who is mysterious and very dangerous.
She is a highly skilled fighter at both firearms and hand-to-hand combat, and displays a sharpshooter's ability with a sniper rifle.
She is very graceful and agile, and stealthy, demonstrating an ability to maneuver and survive.
Ming-Na Wen, the actress who portrays Fennec, felt the character has a moral ambiguity similar to that of popular Star Wars character Han Solo.
She is also very tricky, playing mind games with her victims, as demonstrated by her attempts to manipulate Toro Calican once captured.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair has noted that the character is rather talkative in this way, in contrast to the usually stoic and silent title character, the Mandalorian.
Wen feels the character "has a good sense of humor about it all as well".
Nevertheless, she also at times demonstrates a gruff and reserved personality.
Fennec is ruthless, independent, unpredictable, and is loyal to herself first and foremost.
She occasionally shows errors in judgement, like when she fatally underestimates the ruthlessness of Toro Calican.

==
Portrayal ==
Fennec Shand is portrayed by Ming-Na Wen.
It marks one of several notable performances by Wen in Walt Disney Company projects, including voicing Mulan in the animated films Mulan (1998) and Mulan II (2004), and portraying Melinda May on the Marvel series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Patrick Hipes of Deadline Hollywood called this a "Disney franchise trifecta".
Wen has jokingly said of Disney: "Please just keep acquiring all these different franchises, because I just keep getting employed by them.
I have hit every bucket list thanks to Disney.
"Wen was a fan of the original Star Wars trilogy, and as one of the few Asian girls growing up in Mt. Lebanon, Pennsylvania during her childhood, she could relate in particular to the character Luke Skywalker and his dreams of a more meaningful life.
She said: "Just that image of him looking at the binary suns and wishing for more, it always stays with me."
She has described Star Wars as her "favorite all-time genre".
Wen grew up in the same town as The Mandalorian executive producer Dave Filoni, who also directed the episode in which she appears.
Fennec Shand is the first major Star Wars villain character portrayed by an Asian actress.
Wen said she is pleased there has been more representation of Asians among the casts of Star Wars projects in recent years, citing Kelly Marie Tran's character Rose Tico in Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017) as another example.
She noted that the Star Wars franchise has often been influenced by Asian culture in its costumes and set design elements, despite an earlier lack of Asian actors.
Wen said: "There was all this incredible imagery, but yet there were very few Asians in the films.
Any sort of representation is important and necessary.
And I’m just happy that I got chosen.
"After
attending the premiere for The Mandalorian on November 13, 2019, Wen posted photos from the event on Twitter and wrote: "
What a night!
If you told my 13 yr old self that I’d be on the red carpet celebrating being IN a @starwars project, she’d think you were nuts!
Well, that little girl inside me still think it’s nuts!"
==
Development ==
Elements of Fennec Shand's personality and development were inspired by the character's name, which Wen said brought to mind the idea of the namesake fennec fox.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair noted the fennec fox is a particularly appropriate model for the character because, like Fennec Shand, it is both predator and prey.
Wen felt the character shared common attributes with the fox, including trickiness, stealthiness, maneuverability, and the ability to survive.
The character of Fennec Shan and casting of Wen were first announced at the D23 Expo in Anaheim, California on August 23, 2019.
Bob Iger, CEO of The Walt Disney Company, announced the news on the same day that Wen was named one of the Disney Legends for her past work in Disney works.
Footage of Fennec Shand was first publicly shown in a 30-second teaser trailer for The Mandalorian released on November 4, 2019.
The teaser concluded with a shot of Fennec delivering the line: "Your name will be legendary."
Abbey White said the character was "eagerly anticipated" by the time The Mandalorian premiered.

== Costume ==
Fennec Shand's costume was created by Joseph Porro, the costume designer for The Mandalorian.
A black, leather outfit of armor with broad shoulders and accents of orange, it was inspired by the fennec fox referenced in the character's name.
Wen referred to it as an "amazing outfit that I fell in love with right
away".
Original plans for Fennec's hair called for it to be loose and unkempt, but Wen suggested her hairstyle include some of "the fennec fox architecture", similar to the costume.
She also felt the original plan was too similar to the long, flowing hair of her Melinda May character on Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., and she wanted the two characters to be more differentiated.
Wen brought these ideas to Dave Filoni and The Mandalorian creator and showrunner Jon Favreau, and they responded enthusiastically.
As a result, the hairstylist on The Mandalorian conceived a braiding system with triangular points, similar to the ears of a fennec fox.
The braids are pulled back tight against her head and threaded with orange, which was also influenced by the fennec fox animal.
Wen said felt the hairstyle "gives her such a strong, unique look".

== Reception ==
Fennec Shand has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike.
Izak Bulten of Screen Rant wrote: "Despite appearing in just one episode, she had a clear, well-realized character and has quickly become a favorite amongst fans of the series.
"
Men's Health writer Evan Romano said "In only a few lines, this character has already had some very impressive lore built around her".
Vanity Fair writer Anthony Breznican felt the character continued a positive and significant trend of greater diversity in Star Wars casting, citing other examples of Asian actors in recent projects such as Kelly Marie Tran in The Last Jedi and Christopher Sean in Star Wars Resistance.
Joanna Robinson, also of Vanity Fair, praised the character, saying she had a "coiled power in her", and complimented the casting of Wen.
Jackson McHenry of Vulture praised Wen's performance, and called the character "one of the badder-ass badasses in the world of The Mandalorian".
Fennec Shand was included on Vulture's list of the show's 15 best cameo appearances from season one.
Prior to her return in the second season, several reviewers felt the character was eliminated too quickly and did not get the chance to live up to her potential.
Joanna Robinson said she would have preferred a full episode of word play between Fennec and the Mandalorian, and said of Fennec's role in the episode:
"There's a real potential there, and it was over too quickly for my taste.
I would've loved more of it."
Dirk Libbey of CinemaBlend called the character "criminally underused", and Allie Gemmill of Inverse called her death "hasty".
Breznican said, "There's way too much potential for that character to just vanish like this."
Keith Phipps of Vulture wrote that she "seemed too clever to be taken out so easily by a rookie".
Kerr Lordygan of TV Fanatic wrote that "Fennec's demise was too easily obtained, though the possibility of her return was left open".
Several reviewers correctly speculated that the character was still alive, with some arguing
this is foreshadowed by the final scene of "Chapter 5: The Gunslinger", during which a mysterious stranger investigates her body.
Allie Gemmill called that scene "one of the most tantalizing closings to a Mandalorian episode since the series premiere revealed Baby Yoda".
Dirk Libbey called the mysterious character's identity and his interest in Fennec "one of our bigger cliffhanger moments" from the series.
Evan Romano said he would not be surprised to see Fennec Shand turn up again in a future Star Wars film or series, writing: "This character seems just a little too capable, and a little too cool to be disarmed and killed after just a single brief appearance".
Stephanie Dube Dwilson of Heavy.com said she so enjoyed Wen's acting that she hopes the character returns.

==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===
Wen, Ming-Na; Breznican, Anthony; Robinson, Joanna (December 6, 2019).
"
Still Watching: The Mandalorian—'Chapter Five: The Gunslinger' with Bryce Dallas Howard and Ming Na Wen".
Vanity Fair (Podcast).
Retrieved January 29, 2020.

==
External links ==
Fennec Shand on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The tenth series of Geordie Shore, a British television programme based in Newcastle upon Tyne was confirmed on 1 November 2014, and began airing on 7 April 2015.
This will be the first series not to include original cast member Vicky Pattison after she departed at the end of the previous series.
Ahead of the series it was confirmed that new cast members Chloe Ferry and Nathan Henry had joined the show.

== Cast ==
Aaron Chalmers
Charlotte-Letitia Crosby
Chloe Ferry
Gary Beadle
Holly Hagan
James Tindale
Kyle Christie
Marnie Simpson
Nathan Henry
Scott Timlin


===
Duration of cast ===
=
Cast member is featured in this episode.

=
Cast member arrives in the house.

=
Cast member voluntarily leaves the house.

= Cast member leaves and returns to the house in the same episode.

= Cast member returns to the house.

= Cast member leaves the series.

=
Cast member does not feature in this episode.

=
Cast member is not officially a cast member in this episode.

==
Episodes ==


==
Ratings ==


==
References ==
The eighth series of Geordie Shore, a British television programme based in Newcastle upon Tyne was confirmed in October 2013 after cast member Holly Hagan announced it on Twitter and is expected to air 22 July 2014.
Filming began for this series on 25 March 2014.
This series will be the first not to feature former cast member Sophie Kasaei after she was axed during the seventh series following a racial slur.
All other cast members from the previous series return with the addition of new cast member Aaron Chalmers who had briefly appeared during series two of the show as a one-night stand of Holly's.
In May 2014, Gaz announced that the series would begin in July.
An exclusive first trailer for the series was released during an episode of Ex On The Beach on 3 June 2014.
It was revealed on 10 June 2014 that another new cast member had joined, 21-year-old Kyle Christie.

== Cast ==
Aaron Chalmers
Charlotte-Letitia Crosby
Gary Beadle
Holly Hagan
James Tindale
Kyle Christie
Marnie Simpson
Scott Timlin
Vicky Pattison


==
=
Duration of cast ===
=
Cast member is featured in this episode.

=
Cast member arrives in the house.

=
Cast member voluntarily leaves the house.

= Cast member leaves and returns to the house in the same episode.

= Cast member returns to the house.

=
Cast member does not feature in this episode.

=
Cast member is not officially a cast member in this episode.

==
Episodes ==


==
Ratings ==


==
References ==
Rey, also known as Rey Skywalker, is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise and the main protagonist of the sequel film trilogy.
She was created by Lawrence Kasdan, J. J. Abrams, and Michael Arndt for The Force Awakens (2015), the first installment of the trilogy, and is portrayed by Daisy Ridley.
She also appears in the film's sequels, The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), and related Star Wars media.

Rey is introduced as a scavenger who was left behind on the planet Jakku when she was a child.
She later becomes involved with the Resistance's conflict with the First Order.
Powerful with the Force, Rey trains to be a Jedi under Luke Skywalker and General Leia, and faces adversaries such as Supreme Leader Snoke, Kylo Ren, and the resurrected Emperor Palpatine—who is revealed to be her grandfather in The Rise of Skywalker.
Rey later adopts the name "Skywalker" to honor her mentors and the family legacy.
Reception to the character and Ridley's performance has been highly positive.
Ridley has garnered multiple accolades for her performances as Rey, including two Saturn Award nominations.

==
Development ==


===
Creation and casting ===
Screenwriter Michael Arndt said that he found Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy's offer to write Episode VII daunting in mid-2012, but he became interested when it was explained to him that the tale was about the origin story of a female Jedi and he met with George Lucas.
The character was known as Kira in the early stages of production, and Arndt described her as a "loner, hothead, gear-head, badass".
Arndt said that he struggled with introducing the young woman as the main character in his story while keeping her from being overshadowed after her early meeting with Luke Skywalker, whose role in the film was eventually minimized.
Ridley recalled that director and writer J. J. Abrams originally intended to name the character "Keera"  [sic], but during filming in Abu Dhabi, Abrams revealed to Ridley that he was thinking of going with "Rey".
On creating a female lead for the new trilogy, Abrams stated that from his initial discussions with writer Lawrence Kasdan, he was excited at the concept of having a woman at the center of the story.
He said that "We always wanted to write Rey as the central character" and that other female representation in the story was also important.
Kennedy stated that, "Rey is the new generation's Luke Skywalker.
"
Rey's background as a scavenger was part of the developers attempting to portray her as "the ultimate outsider and the ultimate disenfranchised person", due to their belief that a person of that nature would likely experience a prolonged journey compared to other types of people.
Daisy Ridley was largely unknown before being cast for the role of Rey.
Ridley said that she auditioned many times for the role over the course of seven months and had to keep her casting a secret for three months.
She was announced as part of the cast at the end of April 2014.
She only had experience with small parts in TV shows.
Her inexperience and lack of exposure were a crucial part of what convinced Abrams to give Ridley the role, as the previous installments had featured relatively unknown talent that would not experience heightened degrees of scrutiny.
Abrams stated that Ridley "was so funny and had a great spark", as well as having her act out an emotional scene, proclaiming that "she nailed it on the first take."
Abrams went on to praise Ridley, saying, "She was born with this gift to be in a moment and make it her own.
She simultaneously works from the inside out and the outside in."
Kennedy proclaimed, "Daisy had a physicality and a self-confidence that was so important to the character we were looking for.
She epitomizes that optimism where anything is possible."
Director Dusan Lazarevic, who was present at the casting of Ridley for a role in British drama series Silent Witness, in addition to praising her acting range, stated, "She showed a combination of vulnerability and strength which gave her a complexity, and there was an intelligence in her eyes that was an indicator she could play quite a complicated part."
Cailey Fleming was additionally cast to portray a young Rey.
Although Ridley said she was "riddled with doubts and insecurities", she said that Rey's hopefulness is what she related to most
: it "was something driving me through the auditions—even though it felt so insanely out of anything that I could've imagined.
"
Ridley recalled her shooting experience as starting off bumpy, with Abrams telling her that her first few takes were "wooden".
But Ridley and Abrams had an "incredibly collaborative" process creating Rey; Ridley recalled that the character "changed from when we first began, she became softer.
And I think that's probably me, because Americans tend not to understand me, so it helped, slowing down the speech and everything just made it softer than I am."
Ridley has said that Rey will have "some impact in a girl power-y way", adding that the character "doesn't have to be one thing to embody a woman in a film.
It just so happens she's a woman
but she transcends gender.
She's going to speak to men and women.
"
In an interview with Elle, Ridley said, "She's so strong.
She's cool and smart and she can look after herself," adding, "Young girls can look at her and know that they can wear trousers if they want to.
That they don't have to show off their bodies.
"Composer
John Williams said he immediately loved Ridley in the film and found composing her theme an interesting challenge.
He said that her theme does not suggest a love theme, but rather a strong female adventurer character infused with the Force for a mature, thoughtful theme.
He added that the "musical grammar" of Rey's theme is not heroic, but conveys "an adventurous tone that needs to illustrate empathy."
===
Characterization ===
Rey is introduced as a 19-year-old woman in The Force Awakens.
She is stubborn, headstrong, brave, optimistic, and maintains fierce loyalty to her friends.
Matthew Yglesias of Vox wrote, "Rey is considerably less callow than Luke".
Ridley says of the character, "It's not because Rey is strong that she's amazing.
It's all the complexities of a human.
It's because she is a well-drawn person who is struggling with things
and you're with her.
"Rey is highly Force-sensitive, which is revealed when she is presented with the lightsaber first owned by Anakin Skywalker, then his son Luke.
Without training, she is able to use the Force and defeat the powerful (albeit injured)
Kylo Ren in a duel.
On the mirror-invoking vision Rey experiences in The Last Jedi, writer and director Rian Johnson said that it represents the character learning that she has to connect with herself.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
Rey is first introduced as an orphan living alone on the desert planet Jakku, scraping a living through scavenging parts from ships.
She rescues the astromech droid BB-8 and encounters Finn (John Boyega), a former stormtrooper.
Attacked by First Order troops, Rey steals and pilots the Millennium Falcon to evade them and escape Jakku.
Smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Wookiee Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) take back the Falcon in their freighter ship.
She saves Finn and they escape the freighter in the Falcon.
Impressed with Rey's bravery and piloting skill, Han offers her a job on the Falcon; however, Rey declines his offer, feeling that she has to return to Jakku.

After they convene at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong'o) castle on the planet
Takodana to return BB-8 to the Resistance, the First Order is alerted to their presence.
Rey visits the castle's basement vault in which Maz has stored a lightsaber that once belonged to Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and his father before him.
Upon touching it, she experiences a terrifying vision: she sees a battle led by First Order enforcer Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), a flashback of her younger self being left behind on Jakku, and a vision of Luke, the last Jedi Master in the galaxy, who has been missing for several years.
Maz debates that whoever abandoned her will never return to Jakku, and her only option is to seek out strength in the Force.
Feeling overwhelmed, Rey rejects the lightsaber and flees into the forest.

The First Order attacks Maz's castle, and Ren captures Rey when the Resistance arrives.
Ren takes her to Starkiller Base, where he probes her mind for the map piece that BB-8 showed her.
Ren uses the Force to read Rey's mind, revealing Rey feels that Han is like the father she never had.
Rey then resists him and reads Ren's emotions, exposing his fear that he will never be as powerful as his grandfather, Darth Vader.
Ren reports to his master, Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), who commands that Rey should be brought before him.
Left alone with a stormtrooper guarding her, Rey uses a Jedi mind trick to get him to help free her.
After sneaking around inside the base looking for a way to escape, she is elated to find Finn, Han, and Chewbacca have come for her.
They watch in horror as Ren kills his own father, Han.

As they try to escape the base through the woods, Ren challenges Rey and Finn, using his lightsaber.
After Ren seriously injures Finn and disarms him of Luke's lightsaber, Rey uses the Force to retrieve the weapon and battles Ren herself.
Initially overpowered, Rey rejects Ren's offer to train her and uses the Force with the lightsaber, disfiguring his face.
After escaping the destroyed base in the Millennium Falcon with Chewbacca and the wounded Finn, she returns to the Resistance base.
While the Resistance celebrates the victory, Rey mourns Han's death with Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) and visits Finn, who is still unconscious.
She decides to seek out Luke's location, using information provided by BB-8 and the re-activated R2-D2 (Kenny Baker).
Rey, Chewbacca, and R2 travel in the Falcon to the oceanic planet of Ahch-To; upon finding Luke, Rey presents him with his longtime lightsaber.

=====
Related works and merchandising =====
Rey is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Rey's Survival Guide (2015) by Jason Fry is a first-person account from Rey's perspective about herself and her home planet of Jakku.
Rey is also a point of view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
Fans noticed a lack of tie-in toys featuring Rey.
Hasbro released a version of Monopoly based on The Force Awakens that excluded the Rey character.
After receiving criticism, Hasbro stated that they did not include Rey to avoid revealing spoilers, and would be including Rey in future toy releases.
Paul Southern, the head of Lucasfilm Licensing, said that they wanted to protect the secrets that "the Force awakens in Rey" and that her character carries a lightsaber.
He said that demand for Rey products was underestimated.
Abrams said, "I will say that it seems preposterous and wrong that the main character of the movie is not well represented in what is clearly a huge piece of the Star Wars world in terms of merchandising."
Regarding Rey's relative absence in Star Wars merchandising, CBBC presenter and voice actor Christopher Johnson stated: "It still baffles me to this day that some toy manufacturers don't think that girls want to play with 'superhero' toys and that boys aren't interested in female characters."
====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Rey is one of the key characters of The Last Jedi.
Picking up directly where the previous installment left off, Rey presents Luke with his lightsaber, but Luke dismissively throws it aside.
Luke eventually agrees to teach Rey the ways of the Force.
Rey demonstrates immense raw strength and a clear temptation toward the dark side of the Force that reminds Luke of Kylo Ren, who was once his nephew and student, Ben Solo.
All the while, Rey feels a sudden connection through the Force with Ren, who tells her that Luke tried to kill him while he was the Jedi master’s student (Luke later tells her that he was tempted to kill Ben after seeing a vision of the pain and suffering he would cause, but relented).
In one of their conversations, Rey and Ren touch hands, and through this Rey swears that she is able to feel conflict within Ren, and becomes determined to turn him back to the light side.
Rey asks Luke once more to come with her and rejoin the Resistance, but he declines.
So, Rey, Chewbacca, and R2-D2 leave without him, and Rey goes to meet Ren in the Supremacy.

Ren takes Rey prisoner and brings her before Snoke.
Snoke tells her that he created the Force connection between her and Ren as a trap to reach Luke.
Snoke tortures and taunts Rey, showing her the attack on the Resistance transports, and eventually orders Ren to kill her.
Ren instead kills Snoke, and he and Rey fight Snoke's guards side by side.
After the duo win, Ren asks Rey to join him and create a new order separate from the legacies of Snoke and Luke, but Rey refuses.
In an attempt to get her to turn, Ren gets Rey to admit that her parents abandoned her.
Despite the revelation, Rey refuses to join him and uses the Force to summon Luke's lightsaber, but Ren does so, too, resulting in a standoff that ultimately breaks the lightsaber.
Shortly afterwards, Resistance leader Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern) rams her cruiser into Snoke's flagship, separating Rey from Ren.
Rey subsequently uses Snoke's escape craft to flee the dreadnought as later stated by General Hux.

Rey is later revealed to have made her way back to the Millennium Falcon, aiding the Resistance in fighting the First Order’s troops during the Battle of Crait.
Despite their valiant efforts, the Resistance loses the battle, and Rey focuses her efforts on finding the surviving Resistance fighters to help evacuate them.
Eventually, she finds the Resistance fighters behind a dead-end, and uses the Force to move the rocky barrier aside, clearing the path for them to board the Falcon.
Rey reunites with Finn and Leia and meets Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) for the first time aboard the Falcon.
Rey feels Luke’s death through the Force, and reassures Leia that he met his end with "peace and purpose".
As she holds the leftovers of Luke's lightsaber, Rey asks Leia how they can rebuild the Resistance from what remains, and
Leia, gesturing towards Rey, says that they now have all they need.
Unbeknownst to Leia, that includes the fact that Rey stole the sacred Jedi texts from Luke before Yoda's (Frank Oz) ghost burned the tree cave they were in.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Rey is the main protagonist of the trilogy's final film, The Rise of Skywalker, which is set one year after the events of The Last Jedi.
Rey is continuing her Jedi training at the Resistance base under the tutelage of Leia.
The Resistance announces that the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) has been manipulating events from the Sith world Exegol and has built a secret armada of Star Destroyers—the Final Order.
Rey discovers from Luke's old notes that a Sith wayfinder can lead them to Exegol.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and BB-8 leave for Pasaana, where a clue to the wayfinder's location is hidden.
Rey locates the clue—a dagger with Sith inscriptions—with the help of Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams).
Meanwhile, Rey continues communicating with Ren; through this correspondence, Ren learns where Rey is and comes for her.
Rey confronts Ren, inadvertently allowing Chewbacca to be taken aboard a First Order transport.
Attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys the transport with Force lightning, seemingly killing him.
Rey is stricken with guilt and reveals to Finn that she has been having visions of herself and Ren sitting on the Sith throne.

Rey and the others travel to Kijimi, where programmer Babu Frik extracts the location of the wayfinder—the moon Kef Bir—from C-3PO's memory files.
Ren and the First Order follow Rey to Kijimi.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive and the group mounts a rescue mission.
Rey retrieves the dagger aboard Ren's Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast and has visions of her parents being killed with it; Ren informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter.
Palpatine had fathered a son who renounced him; he and his wife hid Rey on Jakku, assuming lives as "nobodies" to protect her.
Palpatine eventually found Rey's parents and had them killed, but never found Rey.
Ren also reveals that as the grandchildren of Sith Lords, their connection is actually a dyad in the Force.
Ren urges her to join him so they can overthrow Palpatine and take the throne of the Sith together, but Rey refuses and escapes aboard the Millennium Falcon with her friends.

Together, they travel to Kef Bir where Rey retrieves the wayfinder on the remains of the second Death Star; upon touching the artifact, she has a vision of herself as a Sith.
Having tracked them, Ren destroys the wayfinder and duels Rey.
Leia, dying, calls to Ren through the Force; Rey impales him as he is distracted.
Also sensing Leia's death, Rey realizes what she did to Ren and regrets impaling him.
She uses the Force to heal him and confesses that she did want to join him as Ben Solo before escaping aboard his TIE fighter.
Disturbed by her Sith lineage, Rey exiles herself on Ahch-To.
Luke's Force spirit encourages her to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber and his old X-wing.
Rey departs for Exegol with the wayfinder from Ren's ship.
Meanwhile, Ren resumes his true identity as Ben Solo.

Rey transmits her coordinates to the Resistance, allowing them to launch an offensive against the Final Order forces.
Rey confronts Palpatine, who demands she kill him in anger for his spirit to pass into her, making her "Empress Palpatine".
However, Ben arrives and joins Rey.
Palpatine absorbs their life energy to restore his full power and incapacitates Ben.
He then attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who restore her strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing him and herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive Rey at the cost of his own life; Rey kisses Ben before he vanishes into the Force.
Rey then returns to the Resistance base and reunites with her friends, celebrating their victory.

Sometime later, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries the Skywalker lightsabers, having built her own in a golden color.
A passerby asks Rey her name; after seeing the Force spirits of Luke and Leia, she responds, "Rey Skywalker".
=====
Related works =====
The novelization of The Rise of Skywalker reveals that Rey's father was a nonidentical clone of Palpatine.
An upcoming issue of the comic book series Star Wars Adventures will feature a story set after the events of the film featuring Rey, Finn, and Poe continuing to fight the First Order.
===
Television ===


====
Star Wars Rebels (2014) ====
Rey makes a brief cameo as a disembodied voice in the television series Star Wars Rebels, in the episode "A World Between Worlds".
In the episode, set 16 years before her birth and 35 years before The Force Awakens, the young padawan Ezra Bridger briefly hears some of her lines from the film (specifically her speaking to the unconscious Finn at the end) in the World Between Worlds, a dimension that exists outside of time and space.

====
Forces of Destiny (2017) ====
Rey stars in the micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, voiced by Daisy Ridley.
===
Video games ===
The character of Rey appears in the video games Disney Infinity 3.0, Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, and Star Wars Battlefront II (2017),
all voiced by Ridley, as well as in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.
The character was also introduced as a player "skin" in the game Fortnite.

==
Reception ==


===
General ===
The character and Ridley's portrayal have received critical acclaim.
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal proclaimed that Rey is "a woman warrior with the stylish ferocity of a kung-fu star," praising "the verve [Ridley] must have been born with plus the skill she must have acquired as a young actress coming up in England," and stating, "It's hard to imagine what the movie—and the sequels to come—might have been if they'd cast the wrong person, but here Daisy Ridley is in all her unassuming glory, and all's right with the galaxy."
Adam Howard of MSNBC stated that "one of the most pleasant surprises of the film has been the strength of its lead female character," adding that some have likened Rey to a "new feminist icon".
Relatedly, Emily Rome of HitFix argued that Rey is "everything we wanted in a Star Wars female character," praising her for being a character that is "independent, skilled, scrappy, tough, and doesn't need saving."
In a personal essay, Nicole Sperling of Entertainment Weekly wrote about her daughters feeling empowered after viewing the film, stating, "They never commented on how pretty Rey is.
They never had to flinch because Rey was a sexual object to some man in power.
They just felt strong.
Equal.
"Megan
Garber of The Atlantic wrote that Rey "proves herself to be, in extremely short order, extremely adept as a fighter".
Some fans opined that Rey is too skilled despite her inexperience during The Force Awakens, making her a Mary Sue.
Rome wrote that "the speed with which Rey mastered Jedi mind tricks and lightsaber fighting with zero training is the stuff of fan fiction.
Rey is geek feminist wish-fulfillment."
Tasha Robinson of The Verge said that Rey "keeps falling into standard-issue damsel-in-distress situations, then capably rescuing herself."
Robinson wrote "Rey is kind of a Mary Sue character" and that "She's a fantasy wish-fulfillment character with outsized skills, an inhuman reaction time, and a clever answer to every question—but so are the other major Star Wars heroes."
Other outlets, including Ridley herself, have argued that the term Mary Sue carries an inherent gender bias, and that the male characters from the original trilogy did not face comparable criticism.
J. J. Abrams stated that "the people who are getting freaked out are the people who are accustomed to [male] privilege, and this is not oppression, this is about fairness."
He elaborated, "You can probably look at the first [Star Wars] movie that George [Lucas] did and say that Leia was too outspoken, or she was too tough.
Anyone who wants to find a problem with anything can find the problem.
The internet seems to be made for that."
Adrienne Tyler of Screen Rant argued Rey's abilities are explained in The Rise of Skywalker as resulting from the pair forming a dyad in the Force, sharing the same fighting capabilities.
Rey's unique hairstyle attracted attention before and after The Force Awakens was released, being compared to Leia's hairdo from the original film, with debate over whether it would become as popular.
Rey has also been compared to the titular character from the Hayao Miyazaki anime film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (1984).Richard Roeper described Ridley's portrayal of Rey as "a breakout performance", continuing by calling the character "tough and resourceful and smart and brave".
Ridley was nominated for a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Actress for her portrayal.
The first Reel Women in Technology Award for a fictional character was awarded to the character Rey.
Some fans criticized Rey's trilogy-wide character arc as insufficient.

Fan fiction author Ricca said that tension that was built in the first two films never gets resolved in the last film.

She wanted a moment at the end of The Rise of Skywalker in which Rey reacts to and reflects on everything that has happened to her.
Some critics and fans have noted a visual resemblance between Rey's character design to that of Bastila Shan from the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, and that her character arc shares thematic similarities with that of Bastila's.
===
Parentage ===
The question of Rey's parentage was a significant point of discussion for the series, and spawned numerous fan theories.
The most popular theories were that she is the daughter of Luke Skywalker or Han Solo, or is Obi-Wan Kenobi's granddaughter (because of a scene where Rey hears Kenobi's echoed voice following a vision in The Force Awakens).
The view that she is Luke's daughter was especially prominent, with fans and critics highlighting their story arc similarities, Star Wars being a Skywalker saga, Rey having a strong attachment to Luke's lightsaber, and being exceptionally strong with the Force without any training.
Some fan theories about Rey's parentage pointed to "Rey's Theme" featured in John Williams' score of The Force Awakens, as the theme shared similarities with the themes for Darth Vader and Luke.
Abrams stated that he intentionally withheld Rey's last name and background in The Force Awakens.
He said that he felt that the origin of Kylo Ren was the only thing that could be revealed in his film and that he knew "quite a bit" about Rey's origin but would give courtesy to The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson by not saying any more.
Former Star Wars:
Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow stated that the answer of Rey's origin would be "deeply and profoundly satisfying" and that Rey is "important in this universe, not just in the context of The Force Awakens, but in the entire galaxy.
She deserves it."
Ridley said that she knew who Rey's parents were.
In The Last Jedi, Rey is coaxed by Kylo Ren into admitting that her parents were "nobodies".
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox equated this scene with Luke finding out that Darth Vader is his father, which was his greatest nightmare.

To VanDerWerff, "Rey's greatest nightmare is being no one."
She added that while Kylo Ren "has every reason to be lying" about this, to her mind it is a good thing that "Rey is the child of nobody of particular importance to the story so far."

Josh Spiegel of The Hollywood Reporter stated that although some fans might be disappointed by Ren's revelation, it "fits in perfectly" with the film's through line that one can be "both exceptionally gifted in the Force and also not a Skywalker" because "the spirit of the Jedi extends ... to anyone with a gift and the power to believe.
"

Conversely, Casey Cipriani of Bustle opined that while Ren might be right about Rey's parents, he is unreliable and "we have to take what he says with a grain of salt and look elsewhere [within the story] for hints of Rey's lineage.
"Before
the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Abrams said that "there's more to the story than you've seen," though, according to Ridley, the facts presented in The Last Jedi would not change.
Rey being revealed as a Palpatine in The Rise of Skywalker received a mixed reception.
Joanna Robinson of Vanity Fair interprets the twist as a rebuttal to the themes presented in Episode VIII, calling it "a blow to those fans who eagerly devoured [Rian] Johnson’s message that anyone from anywhere can be a Force-wielding hero."
Contrarily, Ryan Britt of Fatherly writes that the revelation may be resonant for those with a "Dark Side-inclined family," because Rey decides not to play Palpatine's "stupid game", and "when Palpatine’s face melts off and the dark side disappears into the ether, a lot of emotional family bullshit goes with it.
"
Inverse similarly argues that the end of the film sees Rey reject "any power her grandfather held over her" and "bury the past", in a completion of the hero's journey.
Following the film's release, Daisy Ridley revealed that the identity of Rey's parents had been in constant flux over the course of the production of the Sequel Trilogy.
According to Ridley, during the early production of the Sequel Trilogy, Lucasfilm had been "toying with an Obi-Wan connection" before settling on the idea of her character being no one.
J.J. Abrams then pitched the idea of Emperor Palpatine being Rey's grandfather to Ridley at the start of production on Episode IX, although this aspect of her character "kept changing" over the course of filming.
James Hunt of Screen Rant argues that the idea of an Obi-Wan connection "would've been an equally bad decision," because it would still mean the character "is powerful because of her lineage, rather than Rey simply being powerful because the Force chose her.
It continues the focus on nostalgia and trying to connect everything, rather than letting Rey be wholly new."
==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations
Sources


==
Further reading ==
Hawkes, Rebecca (December 23, 2015).
"
Who is Rey?
Everything we know about Daisy Ridley's mysterious new Star Wars heroine".
The Daily Telegraph.
Retrieved December 29, 2015.

Oswald, Anjelica (October 22, 2015).
"
Meet Daisy Ridley, the 23-year-old who snagged a lead role in 'Star Wars:
The Force Awakens' –
her Hollywood career is about to blow up".
Business Insider.
Retrieved December 19, 2015.

==
External links ==
Rey in the StarWars.com Databank
Rey on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars is an American epic space-opera media franchise, centered on a film series created by George Lucas that includes Star Wars (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980), and Return of the Jedi (1983).
The series depicts the adventures of various characters "a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away".
Many derivative Star Wars works have been produced in conjunction with, between, and after the original trilogy of films, and later installments.
This body of work was collectively known as the Star Wars Expanded Universe for decades.

In October 2012, The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm for $4.06 billion.
In April 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded the Expanded Universe material as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canon to the franchise.
The company's focus would be shifted towards a restructured Star Wars canon based on new material.
The first new canon adult novel was Star Wars:
A New Dawn by John Jackson Miller, published in September 2014.This is a list of original novels, novel adaptations, original junior novels, junior novel adaptations, young readers, and short stories in the Star Wars franchise.
This list does not include journals, graphic novels or comic books, which can be found in the list of Star Wars comic books.
Reference books and roleplaying gamebooks can be found at the list of Star Wars reference books.

==
Film and television adaptations ==
The novelizations offer an alternate take on the events of the movies.
Many include discarded or slightly altered plot-lines.
It should be remembered that those published before 25 April 2014 are considered Legends like all other media.

Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999), by Terry Brooks (32 BBY) (A)
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (junior novel) (1999), by Patricia Wrede (32 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), by R.A. Salvatore (22 BBY) (A)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (junior novelization) (2002), by Patricia Wrede (22 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008), by Karen Traviss (21.5 BBY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), by Matthew Stover (19 BBY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (junior novel) (2005), by Patricia Wrede (19 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker/Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1976), by Alan Dean Foster as George Lucas (0 BBY-0 ABY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980), by Donald F. Glut (3 ABY) (A)
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983), by James Kahn (4 ABY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi –
The Illustrated Edition (1983), by James Kahn (4 ABY)


===
William Shakespeare's Star Wars ===
William Shakespeare's The Phantom of Menace:
Star Wars Part the First (2015), by Ian Doescher (32 BBY)
William Shakespeare's The Clone Army Attacketh:
Star Wars Part the Second (2015), by Ian Doescher (22 BBY)
William Shakespeare's Tragedy of the Sith's Revenge:
Star Wars Part the Third (2015), by Ian Doescher (19 BBY)
William Shakespeare's Star Wars (Verily, A New Hope) (2013), by Ian Doescher (0 BBY–0 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Empire Striketh Back (2014), by Ian Doescher (3 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Jedi Doth Return (2014), by Ian Doescher (4 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Force Doth Awaken (2017), by Ian Doescher (34 ABY)
William Shakespeare's Jedi the Last (2018), by Ian Doescher (34 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Merry Rise of Skywalker (2020) by Ian Doescher (35 ABY)


==
Original canon stories (2014–present) ==
Since 2014, the official Star Wars canon includes all of the movie episodes, The Clone Wars film and the television shows Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars Rebels, and Star Wars Resistance, as well as any books, comics, and video games published after April 2014.
===
Short stories ===


====
Star Wars Insider (2014–present) ====
Since 2014, various short stories have been published in Star Wars Insider.

====
The Rise of the Empire (October 2015) ====
"Mercy Mission" by Melissa Scott (14 BBY)
"Bottleneck" by John Jackson Miller (12 BBY)
"
The Levers of Power" by Jason Fry (4 ABY)


====
"The Perfect Weapon" ====
"The Perfect Weapon" (November 2015) by Delilah S. Dawson (34 ABY).
This story is part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens promotional campaign.
Printed in the paperback edition of the Star Wars: The Force Awakens novelization.

====
Tales from a Galaxy
Far, Far Away: Aliens ====
The collection Tales from a Galaxy
Far, Far Away: Aliens is part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens promotional campaign.
Some stories were originally published as individual e-books, and later collected with other new stories.
However, they were all published together as a book called Star Wars: Tales From a Galaxy
Far, Far Away
"All Creatures Great and Small" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
High Noon on Jakku" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Count Dooku" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (31 ABY;
flashbacks to 19 BBY)
"
The Face of Evil" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
A Recipe for Death" (April 2016) by Landry Q. Walker
(Pre–32 BBY)
"True Love" (April 2016) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)


====
From a Certain Point of View (October 2017) ====


====
Canto Bight (December 2017) ====
"Rules of the Game", by Saladin Ahmed (34 ABY)
"Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing", by Rae Carson (34 ABY)
"
The Wine in Dreams", by Mira Grant (34 ABY)
"The Ride", by John Jackson Miller (34 ABY)


===
Children's books ===
Canon storybooks for younger readers that are shorter than a standard novel or young adult novel.

==
Original Star Wars Legends stories ==
This body of work represents the original Star Wars expanded universe, which was rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Beginning with the 1999 release of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, Lucasfilm has divided its titles by fictional "era" with symbols designating such.
===
Before the Republic era ===
This era contains stories taking place more than 25,000 years before Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
===
Old Galactic Republic era ===
This era contains stories taking place 25,000 to 1,000 years before Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
===
Rise of the Empire era ===
This era contains stories taking place within 100 years before Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

====
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones ====


====
The Clone Wars ====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008), by Karen Traviss (21.5 BBY) (Y)
The Clone Wars: Wild Space (2008), by Karen Miller (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Clone Wars: No Prisoners (2009), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
(A)


====
Clone Wars: Gambit by Karen Miller (21 BBY) ====
Stealth (2010)
(A)
Siege (2010)
(A)


====
Clone Wars:
Secret Missions by Ryder Windham (21 BBY) ====
Breakout Squad (2009)
(Y)
Curse of the Black Hole Pirates (2010)
(Y)
Duel at Shattered Rock (2011)
(Y)
Guardians of the Chiss Key (2012)
(Y)


====
Republic Commando ====
Republic Commando:
Hard Contact (2004), by Karen Traviss (22 BBY)
"Omega Squad: Targets" (2005), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #81 and Republic Commando:
Triple Zero
Republic Commando:
Triple Zero (2006), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
"Republic Commando: Odds" (2006), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #87 and Republic Commando: True Colors
Republic Commando:
True Colors (2007), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2008), by Karen Traviss (19 BBY)


=====
Imperial Commando =====
Imperial Commando: 501st (2009), by Karen Traviss (19 BBY)


====
Clone Wars ====
Shatterpoint (2003), by Matthew Stover (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Cestus Deception (2004), by Steven Barnes (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Hive (2004), by Steven Barnes (21.5 BBY) (E)
(A)
Jedi Trial (2004), by David Sherman & Dan Cragg (21.5 BBY)
(A)
Yoda: Dark Rendezvous (2004), by Sean Stewart (20 BBY)
MedStar
I:
Battle Surgeons (2004), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (20 BBY)
(A)
MedStar II:
Jedi Healer (2004), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (20 BBY)
(A)
Labyrinth of Evil (2005), by James Luceno (19 BBY)
(A)


====
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ====
Dark Lord:
The Rise of Darth Vader (2005), by James Luceno (19 BBY)
(A)
Kenobi (2013), by John Jackson Miller (19 BBY)
(A)
"Incognito" (2013), by John Jackson Miller (19 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #143 and Kenobi (A)


====
Coruscant Nights (18.8 – 17 BBY) ====
Jedi Twilight (2008), by Michael Reaves (18.8 BBY)
Street of Shadows (2008), by Michael Reaves (19 BBY–18.46 BBY)
Patterns of Force (2009), by Michael Reaves with Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (uncredited) (18.3 BBY)
The Last Jedi (2013), by Michael Reaves & Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (18–17 BBY)


====
The Last of the Jedi by Jude Watson (18 BBY) ====
The Desperate Mission (2005)
(Y)
Dark Warning (2005)
(Y)
Underworld (2005)
(Y)
Death on Naboo (2006)
(Y)
A Tangled Web (2006)
(Y)
Return of the Dark Side (2006)
(Y)
Secret Weapon (2007)
(Y)
Against The Empire (2007)
(Y)
Master of Deception (2008)
(Y)
Reckoning (2008)
(Y)


====
A New Hope:
The Life of Luke Skywalker (15 BBY – 4 ABY) ====
A New Hope:
The Life of Luke Skywalker (2009), by Ryder Windham (Y)


====
The Han Solo Trilogy ====
The Paradise Snare (1997), by A.C. Crispin (10 BBY)
(A)
The Hutt Gambit (1997), by A.C. Crispin (5-4 BBY)
(A)
Rebel Dawn (1998), by A.C. Crispin (3-0 BBY)
(A)


====
The Adventures of Lando Calrissian ====
Lando Calrissian and the Mindharp of Sharu (1983), by L. Neil Smith (4 BBY)
Lando Calrissian and the Flamewind of Oseon (1983), by L. Neil Smith (4 BBY)
Lando Calrissian and the Starcave of ThonBoka (1983), by L. Neil Smith (3 BBY)


====
The Force Unleashed (3 – 1 BBY) ====
The Force Unleashed (2008), by Sean Williams (3-2 BBY)
(A)
The Force Unleashed II
(2010), by Sean Williams (1 BBY)
(A)


====
The Han Solo Adventures (2 BBY) ====
Han Solo at Stars' End (1979), by Brian Daley
Han Solo's Revenge (1979), by Brian Daley
Han Solo and the Lost Legacy (1980), by Brian Daley


====
Death Troopers ====
Death Troopers (2009), by Joe Schreiber (1 BBY)
(A)


===
Rebellion era ==
=
This era contains stories taking place within five years after the events of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

====
Death Star ====
Death Star (2007), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (1 BBY – 0 BBY)


====
Shadow Games ====
Shadow Games (2011), by Michael Reaves and Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (1 BBY – 0 BBY)


====
Episode IV:
A New Hope ====
====
Rebel Force by Alex Wheeler (0 – 1 ABY) ====
0
ABY
Target (2008)
(Y)
Hostage (2008)
(Y)
Renegade (2009)
(Y)
0.5 ABY
Firefight (2009)
(Y)
Trapped (2010)
(Y)
Uprising (2010) (1 ABY) (Y)


====
Scoundrels
====
Winner Lose All
—A Lando Calrissian Tale (2012), by Timothy Zahn (1-0 BBY) (E)
Scoundrels (2013), by Timothy Zahn (0 ABY)
(A)


====
Galaxy of Fear by John Whitman (0.5 ABY) (Y) ===
=
Eaten
Alive (1997)
City of the Dead (1997)
Planet Plague (1997)
The Nightmare Machine (1997)
Ghost of the Jedi (1997)
Army of Terror (1997)
The Brain Spiders (1997)
The Swarm (1998)
Spore (1998)
The Doomsday Ship (1998)
Clones (1998)
The Hunger (1998)


====
Hand of Judgment (0.5 – 0.8 ABY) ====
Allegiance (2007), by Timothy Zahn (0.5 ABY) (A)
Choices of One (2011), by Timothy Zahn (0.8 ABY)


====
Smuggler's Gambit (0 – 3 ABY) ====
Smuggler's Gambit (2012), by Kyle Newman, F.J. DeSanto (A)


====
Star Wars Galaxies ====
Star Wars Galaxies:
The Ruins of Dantooine (2003), by Voronica Whitney-Robinson & Haden Blackman (1 ABY) (Y)


====
Splinter of the Mind's Eye ====
Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978), by Alan Dean Foster (2 ABY)
(A)


====
Empire and Rebellion (2 – 3 ABY)
(A) ====
Razor's Edge (2013), by Martha Wells (2 ABY)
Honor Among Thieves (2014), by James S. A. Corey (2–3 ABY)


====
The Further Adventures ====
24-page read-along book with color illustrations accompanied by a 7-inch 33 1/3 record or cassette.

Droid World (1983), by Archie Goodwin (adapter) and Dick Foes (illustrator) (3 ABY) (Y)
Planet of the Hoojibs (1983), by David Michelinie (adapter) and Greg Winters (illustrator) (3 ABY) (Y)


====
Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell ====
Vinyl record only, no book.

Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell (1983), by Brian Daley (3 ABY) (Y)


====
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back ====


====
Shadows of the Empire ====
Shadows of the Empire (1996), by Steve Perry (3.5 ABY)
(A)


====
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ====
24-page read-along book with color illustrations accompanied by a 7-inch 33 1/3 record or cassette.

The Ewoks Join the Fight (1983), by Bonnie Bogart (adapter) & Diane de Groat (illustrator) (4 ABY) (Y)


====
Golden Books ====
24-page illustrated children's books by Golden Books

Journey to Mos Eisley (1998), by Jay Rudko (0 BBY) (Y)
The Hoth Adventure (1998), by Jay Rudko (3 ABY)
(Y)
Escape from Jabba's Palace (1998), by Jay Rudko (4 ABY)
(Y)In 2015, the original six Star Wars films were adapted as Little Golden Books.
In 2017, A New Hope was also released as a Big Golden Book.
Additionally, Solo:
A Star Wars Story and the sequel trilogy were adapted.
Many other original titles featuring scenes from throughout the saga have been released, including I Am a Padawan by Ashley Eckstein.
An upcoming release will adapt The Mandalorian.

====
The Bounty Hunter Wars ====
The Mandalorian Armor (1998), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)
Slave Ship (1998), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)
Hard Merchandise (1999), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)


====
The Truce at Bakura ====
The Truce at Bakura (1993), by Kathy Tyers (4 ABY) (A)


===
New Republic era ===
This era takes place from five to 25 years after Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
====
Dark Forces by William C. Dietz (0 – 5 ABY) ====
Soldier for the Empire (1997) (0 ABY) (Y)
(A)
5 ABY
Rebel Agent (1998)
(Y)
(A)
Jedi Knight (1998)
(Y)
(A)


====
Jedi Prince by Paul & Hollace Davids (5 ABY) ====
The Glove of Darth Vader (1992) (Y)
The Lost City of the Jedi (1992)
(Y)
Zorba the Hutt's Revenge (1992)
(Y)
Mission from Mount Yoda (1993) (Y)
Queen of the Empire (1993) (Y)
Prophets of the Dark Side (1993) (Y)


====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor ====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor (2008), by Matthew Stover (5.5 ABY)
(A)


====
X-wing ====
Rogue Squadron (1996), by Michael Stackpole (6.5 ABY)
(A)
Wedge's Gamble (1996), by Michael Stackpole (6.5 ABY) (A)
The Krytos Trap (1996), by Michael Stackpole (7 ABY)
(A)
The Bacta War (1997), by Michael Stackpole (7 ABY)
(A)
Wraith Squadron (1998), by Aaron Allston (7 ABY) (A)
Iron Fist (1998), by Aaron Allston (7.5 ABY) (A)
Solo Command (1999), by Aaron Allston (7.5 ABY) (A)
Isard's Revenge (1999), by Michael Stackpole (9 ABY)
(A)
Starfighters of Adumar (1999), by Aaron Allston (12–13 ABY)
(A)


====
The Courtship of Princess Leia ====
The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994), by Dave Wolverton (8 ABY) (A)


====
A Forest Apart ====
A Forest
Apart (2003), by Troy Denning (8 ABY) (E)


====
Tatooine Ghost ====
Tatooine Ghost (2003), by Troy Denning (8 ABY)
(A)


==== Mixed up Droid ====
Mixed up Droid (1995), by Ryder Windham (8 ABY)
(A)


====
The Thrawn Trilogy ====
Heir to the Empire (1991), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)
Dark Force Rising (1992), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)
The Last Command (1993), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)


====
The Dark Empire Trilogy ====
Dark Empire (1991–1992), by Tom Veitch (10 ABY) (A)
Dark Empire II (1994–1995), by Tom Veitch (10 ABY)
(A)
Empire's End (1995), by Tom Veitch (11 ABY) (A)


====
Crimson Empire ====
Crimson Empire (1997), by Mike Richardson, Randy Stradley (11 ABY)
(A)


====
The Jedi Academy Trilogy ====
Jedi Search (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)
Dark Apprentice (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)
Champions of the Force (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)


====
I, Jedi ====
I, Jedi (1998), by Michael Stackpole (11 ABY) (A)


====
The Callista Trilogy ====
Children of the Jedi (1995), by Barbara Hambly (12–13 ABY)
(A)
Darksaber (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson (12–13 ABY)
(A)
Planet of Twilight (1997), by Barbara Hambly (12–13 ABY)
(A)


====
The Crystal Star ====
The Crystal Star (1994), by Vonda McIntyre (14 ABY) (A)


====
The Black Fleet Crisis Trilogy ====
Before the Storm (1996), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)
Shield of Lies (1997), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)
Tyrant's Test (1998), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)


====
The New Rebellion ====
The New Rebellion (1996), by Kristine Kathryn Rusch (17 ABY)
(A)


====
The Corellian Trilogy ====
Star Wars Legends:
Ambush at Corellia (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)
Assault at Selonia (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)
Showdown at Centerpoint (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)


====
The Hand of Thrawn ====
Specter of the Past (1997), by Timothy Zahn (19 ABY)
(A)
Vision of the Future (1998), by Timothy Zahn (19 ABY)
(A)


====
Scourge ====
Scourge (2012), by Jeff Grubb (19 ABY) (A)


====
Survivor's Quest ====
Fool's Bargain (2004), by Timothy Zahn (22 ABY) (E)
Survivor's Quest (2004), by Timothy Zahn (22 ABY)
(A)


====
Junior Jedi Knights ====
The Golden Globe (1995), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Lyric's World (1996), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Promises (1996), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Anakin's Quest (1996), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)
Vader's Fortress (1997), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)
Kenobi's Blade (1997), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)


====
Young Jedi Knights ====
Heirs of the Force (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Shadow Academy (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
The Lost Ones (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Lightsabers (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Darkest Knight (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Under Siege (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Shards of Alderaan (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Diversity Alliance (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Delusions of Grandeur (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Bounty (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
The Emperor's Plague (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Return to Ord Mantell (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Trouble on Cloud City (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Crisis at Crystal Reef (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Shadow (Omnibus – Heirs of the Force, Shadow Academy & The Lost Ones) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Sunrise (Omnibus – Lightsabers, Darkest Knight, & Jedi Under Siege) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Under the Black Sun (Omnibus – Return to Ord Mantell, Trouble on Cloud City, & Crisis at Crystal Reef) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)


===
New Jedi Order era ===
This era takes place within 25 to 39 years after Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
====
A Practical Man ====
Boba Fett:
A Practical Man (2006), by Karen Traviss (25 ABY) (E)


====
The New Jedi Order ====
Vector Prime (1999), by R.A. Salvatore (25 ABY) (A)
Dark Tide
I: Onslaught (2000), by Michael Stackpole (25 ABY)
(A)
Dark Tide II:
Ruin (2000), by Michael Stackpole (25 ABY)
(A)
Agents of Chaos
I: Hero's Trial (2000), by James Luceno (25 ABY) (A)
Agents of Chaos II:
Jedi Eclipse (2000), by James Luceno (25 ABY)
(A)
Balance Point (2000), by Kathy Tyers (26 ABY)
(A)
Recovery (2001), by Troy Denning (26 ABY) (E)
Edge of Victory I: Conquest (2001), by Greg Keyes (26 ABY) (A)
Edge of Victory II: Rebirth (2001), by Greg Keyes (27 ABY)
(A)
"Emissary of the Void" (2002), by Greg Keyes (26–27 ABY), serialized epic published in Star Wars Gamer, issues 8–10, and Star Wars Insider, issues
62–64
(A)
Star by Star (2001), by Troy Denning (27 ABY)
(A)
Dark Journey (2002), by Elaine Cunningham (27 ABY)
(A)
Enemy Lines
I: Rebel Dream (2002), by Aaron Allston (27 ABY) (A)
Enemy Lines II: Rebel Stand (2002), by Aaron Allston (27 ABY)(A)
Traitor (2002), by Matthew Stover (27 ABY)
(A)
Destiny's Way (2002), by Walter Jon Williams (28 ABY)
(A)
Ylesia (2002), by Walter Jon Williams (28 ABY) (E)
Force Heretic
I: Remnant (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28 ABY)
(A)
Force Heretic II:
Refugee (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28 ABY)
(A)
Force Heretic III: Reunion (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28–29 ABY)
(A)
The Final Prophecy (2003), by Greg Keyes (29 ABY) (A)
The Unifying Force (2003), by James Luceno (29 ABY)
(A)


====
The Dark Nest trilogy ====
The Joiner King (2005), by Troy Denning (35 ABY) (A)
The Unseen Queen (2005), by Troy Denning (36 ABY) (A)
The Swarm War (2005), by Troy Denning (36 ABY) (A)


===
Legacy era ===
This era takes place
40+ years after Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.
====
Legacy of the Force ====
Betrayal (2006), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY) (A)
Bloodlines (2006), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY)
(A)
Tempest (2006), by Troy Denning (40 ABY) (A)
Exile (2007), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY) (A)
Sacrifice (2007), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY) (A)
Inferno (2007), by Troy Denning (40 ABY)
(A)
Fury (2007), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY)
(A)
Revelation (2008), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY) (A)
Invincible (2008), by Troy Denning (41 ABY)
(A)


====
Crosscurrent ====
Crosscurrent (2010), by Paul S. Kemp (41 ABY)
(A)
Riptide (2011), by Paul S. Kemp (41 ABY)
(A)


====
Millennium Falcon ====
Millennium Falcon (2008), by James Luceno (60 BBY, 19 BBY, 10 BBY, 5 BBY, 43 ABY) (A)


====
Fate of the Jedi ====
Outcast (2009), by Aaron Allston (43.5 ABY)
(A)
Omen (2009), by Christie Golden (43.5 ABY) (A)
Abyss (2009), by Troy Denning (43.5 ABY)
(A)
Backlash (2010), by Aaron Allston (44 ABY) (A)
Allies (2010), by Christie Golden (44 ABY)
(A)
Vortex (2010), by Troy Denning (44 ABY) (A)
Conviction (2011), by Aaron Allston (44.5 ABY) (A)
Ascension (2011), by Christie Golden (44.5 ABY)
(A)
Apocalypse (2012), by Troy Denning (44.5 ABY) (A)


====
Crucible ====
Crucible (2013) by Troy Denning (45 ABY)
(A)


===
Short story anthologies ===
These books contain short Star Wars stories from several notable science-fiction authors with stories that span different timelines.

Tales from the Mos Eisley Cantina (1995), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (0–3 ABY) (E)
Tales from Jabba's Palace (1995), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (4 ABY)
Tales of the Bounty Hunters (1996), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (3 ABY)
Tales from the Empire (1997), edited by Peter Schweighofer (Various) (4 ABY)
Tales from the New Republic (1999), edited by Peter Schweighofer and Craig Carey (Various) (4 ABY)
Star Wars:
Science Adventures (1999) were authored by Jude Watson and K.D. Burkett.

== Notes ==


==
References ==
Planet of the Apes is an American science fiction media franchise consisting of films, books, television series, comics, and other media about a world in which humans and intelligent apes clash for control.
The franchise is based on French author Pierre Boulle's 1963 novel La Planète des singes, translated into English as Planet of the Apes or Monkey Planet.
Its 1968 film adaptation, Planet of the Apes, was a critical and commercial hit, initiating a series of sequels, tie-ins, and derivative works.
Arthur P. Jacobs produced the first five Apes films through APJAC Productions for distributor 20th Century Fox; since his death in 1973, Fox has controlled the franchise.

Four sequels followed the original film from 1970 to 1973:
Beneath the Planet of the Apes, Escape from the Planet of the Apes, Conquest of the Planet of the Apes and Battle for the Planet of the Apes.
They did not approach the critical acclaim of the original but were commercially successful, spawning two television series in 1974 and 1975.
Plans for a film remake stalled in "development hell" for over ten years before Tim Burton's Planet of the Apes was released in 2001.
A reboot film series commenced in 2011 with Rise of the Planet of the Apes, which was followed by Dawn of the Planet of the Apes in 2014 and War for the Planet of the Apes in 2017.
The films have grossed a total of over US$2 billion worldwide, against a combined budget of $567.5 million.
Along with further narratives in various media, franchise tie-ins include video games and toys.

Planet of the Apes has received particular attention among film critics for its treatment of racial issues.
Cinema and cultural analysts have also explored its Cold War and animal rights themes.
The series has influenced subsequent films, media, and art, as well as popular culture and political discourse.

==
La Planète des singes ==
The series began with French author Pierre Boulle's 1963 novel La Planète des singes.
Boulle wrote the novel in six months after the "humanlike expressions" of gorillas at the zoo inspired him to contemplate the relationship between man and ape.
La Planète des singes was heavily influenced by 18th- and 19th-century fantastical travel narratives, especially Jonathan Swift's satirical Gulliver's Travels.
It is one of several of Boulle's works to use science fiction tropes and plot devices to comment on the failings of human nature and mankind's overreliance on technology, though Boulle rejected the science fiction label, instead terming his genre "social fantasy".
The novel is a satire that follows French journalist Ulysse Mérou, who participates in a voyage to a distant planet where speechless, animalistic humans are hunted and enslaved by an advanced society of apes.
The ape species are sorted into classes: the gorillas are police officers, the chimpanzees are scientists, and the orangutans are politicians.
Eventually, Mérou discovers that humans once dominated the planet until their complacency allowed the more industrious apes to overthrow them.
The story's central message is that human intelligence is not a fixed quality and could atrophy if taken for granted.
Boulle considered the novel one of his minor works, though it proved to be a bestseller.
British author Xan Fielding translated it into English; it was published in the United Kingdom as Monkey Planet and in the United States as Planet of the Apes.

==
Original film series ==
Boulle's literary agent, Allain Bernheim, brought the novel to the attention of American film producer Arthur P. Jacobs, who had come to Paris looking for properties to adapt with his new company, APJAC Productions.
To explain his interests, Jacobs would tell agents, "I wish King Kong hadn't been made so
I could make it."
Bernheim initially approached him about a Françoise Sagan novel, which Jacobs turned down.
Remembering Jacobs' earlier comment about King Kong, Bernheim mentioned La Planète des singes, not expecting he would be interested.
However, the story intrigued Jacobs, who bought the film rights immediately.

===
Planet of the Apes (1968) ===
After optioning the novel's film rights, Jacobs spent over three years trying to convince filmmakers to take on the project.
He engaged a succession of artists to create test sketches and hired veteran television writer Rod Serling, creator of The Twilight Zone, to pen the screenplay.
Serling's script changed elements of Boulle's novel, introducing Cold War themes; notably, he devised a new twist ending that revealed the planet to be a future Earth where humans had destroyed themselves through nuclear warfare.
Production costs were estimated at over $10 million, a risk
no studio in either Hollywood or Europe would assume.
Jacobs and associate producer Mort Abrahams persevered and eventually persuaded Charlton Heston to star; Heston in turn recommended director Franklin J. Schaffner.
The team recorded a brief screen test featuring Heston, which ultimately convinced 20th Century Fox the film could succeed.
Fox insisted on changes to reduce the budget to a more manageable $5.8 million.
The producers hired veteran writer Michael Wilson, who had previously adapted Boulle's novel The Bridge over the River Kwai, to rewrite Serling's script.
To save on special effects costs, Wilson's script described an ape society more primitive than that which appeared in the novel.
The new version changed much of the plot and dialogue but retained the Cold War themes and Serling's ending.
John Chambers created the makeup effects.
Heston played 20th-century American astronaut George Taylor, who travels to a strange planet where intelligent apes dominate mute, primitive humans.
Kim Hunter and Roddy McDowall played the sympathetic chimpanzees
Zira and Cornelius and Linda Harrison portrayed Taylor's love interest Nova.
Maurice Evans played the villain, orangutan Minister of Science Dr. Zaius.
The finale, in which Taylor comes upon a ruined Statue of Liberty and realizes he has been on Earth all along, became the series' defining scene and one of the most iconic images in 1960s film.
Planet of the Apes was released on February 8, 1968, and was a smash success with both critics and audiences.
It was one of the year's 10 biggest money-makers in North America, taking in an estimated $22 million (nearly four times its budget) and earned rave reviews.
John Chambers received an honorary Oscar at the 41st Academy Awards for his make-up effects, the first ever given to a make-up artist.
Jerry Goldsmith's score and Morton Haack's costume design also earned Oscar nominations.
Fox approached Jacobs and Abrahams about filming a sequel.
Though they had not made the film with sequels in mind, its success led them to consider the prospect.

===
Beneath the Planet of the Apes (1970) ===
Planning for the sequel, eventually titled Beneath the Planet of the Apes, began two months after the original film's release.
Jacobs and Abrahams considered several treatments by Serling and Boulle, eventually rejecting them.
In late 1968, the producers hired Paul Dehn to write the script; he would become the primary writer for the franchise.
Charlton Heston was uninterested in a sequel but agreed to shoot a few scenes if his character was killed off and his salary was donated to charity.
In one of many major rewrites, Dehn altered the script to center on a new character, Brent, played by James Franciscus.
With Schaffner unavailable, owing to his work on Patton, the producers hired Ted Post as director on January 8, 1969.
Post struggled with the material, especially after the studio cut the budget to $3.4 million.
The story follows Franciscus' character, an astronaut who, while searching for Taylor, inadvertently follows him into the future.
After encountering the apes from the first film, Brent finds Taylor imprisoned by a colony of subterranean human mutants who worship an ancient nuclear bomb.
Kim Hunter, Maurice Evans and Linda Harrison returned as Zira, Zaius and Nova.
David Watson replaced Roddy McDowall as Cornelius, as McDowall was unavailable due to a scheduling conflict.
James Gregory played gorilla General Ursus and Paul Richards played mutant leader Méndez.
The film opened on May 26, 1970.
Unlike its predecessor, Beneath was poorly reviewed; critics typically regard it as the worst of the Apes sequels other than the last one, Battle for the Planet of the Apes.
Nonetheless, it was a major box office hit, nearing the original's numbers.
Despite a conclusion depicting the planet's nuclear destruction, Fox requested another sequel, creating a series.

===
Escape from the Planet of the Apes (1971) ===
Following the financial success of Beneath, Arthur P. Jacobs recruited Paul Dehn to write a new script with a brief telegram: "Apes exist, sequel required.
"
Dehn immediately started work on what became Escape from the Planet of the Apes.
The producers hired a new director, Don Taylor.
Fox gave the production a greatly diminished budget of $2.5 million, which required a tight production schedule.
To work around the budget, as well as Beneath's seemingly definitive ending, the film took the series in a new direction by transporting Zira (Kim Hunter) and Cornelius (Roddy McDowall, returning to the role after being absent from Beneath) back in time to the contemporary United States, reducing the need for expensive sets and ape make-up effects.
In the film, Zira and Cornelius are initially accepted by American society, but the humans' fears that their child will bring about the domination of the human race by evolved apes leads to conflict.
Jacobs' wife, Natalie Trundy, who appeared as a mutant in Beneath and would play the ape Lisa in the next two sequels, was cast as Dr. Stephanie Branton.
Bradford Dillman played Dr. Lewis Dixon, Ricardo Montalbán played Armando and Eric Braeden portrayed the villain, the president's science advisor Otto Hasslein.
Compared to its predecessors, Escape dwelt more heavily on themes of racial conflict, which became a primary focus through the rest of the series.
The film opened on May 21, 1971, less than a year after Beneath.
It was well-received by critics.
From this point critics began seeing the films less as independent units and more as installments in a greater work; Cinefantastique editor Frederick S. Clarke wrote that the burgeoning series had "the promise of being the first epic of filmed science fiction.
"
It also performed well at the box office, though not as strongly as its predecessors.
Fox ordered a third sequel.

===
Conquest of the Planet of the Apes (1972) ===
Based on the strong positive response to Escape, Fox ordered Conquest of the Planet of the Apes, though it provided a comparatively low budget of $1.7 million.
Paul Dehn returned as the scriptwriter, and producer Jacobs hired J. Lee Thompson to direct.
Thompson had worked with Jacobs on two earlier films as well as during the initial stages of Planet, but scheduling conflicts had made him unavailable during its long development process.
For Conquest, Thompson and Dehn focused heavily on the racial conflict theme, an ancillary concern in the early films that became a central focus in Escape.
In particular, Dehn associated the apes with African-Americans and modeled the plot after the 1966 Watts Riots and other episodes from the Civil Rights Movement.
Roddy McDowall signed on to play Caesar, the son of his previous character Cornelius.
Ricardo Montalban returned as Armando, while Don Murray played Governor Breck, Severn Darden played Kolp and Hari Rhodes played MacDonald.
Following Escape, Conquest is set in a near future where humans have turned apes into slaves; Caesar rises from bondage to lead an ape rebellion.
The film opened on June 30, 1972.
Reviews were mixed, but the ending left the series open to another sequel and Conquest was successful enough at the box office that Fox commissioned another film.
===
Battle for the Planet of the Apes (1973) ===
Fox approved Battle for the Planet of the Apes with a $1.2 million budget, the lowest of the series.
The filmmakers went into the project knowing that it would be the end of the series.
J. Lee Thompson returned as director.
Series writer Paul Dehn submitted a treatment, but illness forced him to leave the film before completing the script.
The producers subsequently hired John William Corrington and Joyce Hooper Corrington to write the screenplay.
Battle continued Conquest's focus on racial conflict and domination but, likely based in part on the studio's wishes, the Corringtons discarded Dehn's pessimistic treatment in favor of a story with a more hopeful, though ambiguous, resolution.
Battle follows Caesar as he leads the apes and their human subjects after a devastating war that destroyed much of the planet.
He contends with both an attack by radiation-scarred human mutants and a coup attempt as he attempts to build a better society for both apes and humans.
McDowall returned as Caesar and Severn Darden returned as Kolp.
Paul Williams played the orangutan
Virgil, Austin Stoker played MacDonald (the brother of Hari Rhodes' character) and Claude Akins played the evil gorilla general Aldo.
John Huston played the orangutan Lawgiver in a frame narrative.
The film opened on May 2, 1973.
It made a profit over production costs but received poor reviews from critics, who regard it as the weakest of the five films.
Critics have offered various interpretations of the film's message and its significance for the series.
Particular attention has been paid to the ambiguous imagery in the ending: set over 700 years after the main events, the last scene depicts a statue of Caesar shedding a single tear as the Lawgiver recounts Caesar's story to an integrated audience of ape and human children.
By one interpretation, the statue cries tears of joy because the species have broken the cycle of oppression, giving the series an optimistic finale.
By another, the statue weeps because racial strife still exists, implying the dystopian future of Planet and Beneath is unavoidable.

==
Television series ==


===
Planet of the Apes TV series ===
As well as their profitable returns at the box office, the films earned very high ratings on television after their theatrical runs.
To capitalize on this success, Arthur P. Jacobs conceived of an hour-long live-action television series to follow the films.
He first had the idea in 1971 during the production of Conquest, which he then anticipated would be the final film, but he shelved the project once Fox ordered a fifth installment.
Jacobs died on June 27, 1973, bringing an end to the APJAC Productions era of the Planet of the Apes franchise.
Former Fox executive Stan Hough took over as producer for the television project, titled Planet of the Apes.
CBS picked up the series for its 1974 autumn lineup.
Ron Harper and James Naughton played Alan Virdon and Peter Burke, two 20th-century American astronauts who pass through a time warp to a future where apes subjugate humans (unlike the original film, the humans can speak).
Roddy McDowall returned to the franchise as Galen, a chimpanzee who joins the astronauts.
Booth Coleman played orangutan Councillor Zaius and Mark Lenard played gorilla General Urko.
The episodes portray Virdon, Burke, and Galen as they search for a way home, aid downtrodden humans and apes and avoid the authorities.
The show premiered on September 13, 1974, filling CBS's 8–9 p.m. time slot on Fridays.
It earned low ratings during its run, a fact the production team attributed to repetitive storytelling and too little screen time for the apes who made the franchise famous.
Given the considerable production costs, CBS canceled the show after 14 episodes, the last airing on December 20, 1974.In 1981, Fox reedited ten of the episodes into five television films.
Each film combined two episodes and (in some markets) added new introductory and concluding segments starring McDowall as an aged Galen.
The films were given what scholar Eric Greene calls "the most outlandish titles of the Apes corpus": Back to the Planet of the Apes; Forgotten City of the Planet of the Apes; Treachery and Greed on the Planet of the Apes; Life, Liberty and Pursuit on the Planet of the Apes; and Farewell to the Planet of the Apes.
Greene finds the show's position in the Apes timeline significant: set in 3085, it occurs about 900 years before Taylor's crash in the original film and 400 years after the Lawgiver's sermon in Battle.
By depicting a future where apes dominate humans, it implies the Lawgiver's message of equality between man and ape has failed, giving weight to the more pessimistic interpretation of Battle's ending.
Greene argues that the show emphasized the theme of racial conflict less than the films had, though the episodes "The Trap" and "The Liberator" made it a central focus.

===
Animated series ===
In 1975, after the failure of the live-action series, NBC and 20th Century Fox agreed to adapt Planet of the Apes for an animated series.
The network contracted DePatie-Freleng Enterprises to produce a half-hour Saturday-morning cartoon titled Return to the Planet of the Apes.
Doug Wildey, co-creator of Jonny Quest, took on most creative control as associate producer, storyboard director and supervising director.
Wildey had only watched the original film and Beneath and thus based his interpretation on them.
As such, the show relied less on the themes and plot developments from Escape, Conquest and Battle and instead returned to the Vietnam War and Cold War themes prominent in the first two films.
The plot concerns three American astronauts, Bill Hudson (Tom Williams), Jeff Allen (Austin Stoker, who played MacDonald in Battle) and Judy Franklin (Claudette Nevins), who inadvertently journey to Earth's far future.
They find the world populated by three groups: mute humans who inhabit desert caves, subterranean human "Underdwellers" fashioned after the mutants of Beneath and civilized apes who subjugate the humans.
Through the show, the astronauts become increasingly involved in the planet's affairs and in defending the humans against an ape invasion.
The cast featured characters based on those from the previous films and TV series, including Nova (Nevins again), General Urko (Henry Cordin), Zira (Philippa Harris), Cornelius (Edwin Mills) and Dr. Zaius (Richard Blackburn).
NBC broadcast 13 episodes between September 6 and November 29, 1975.
The show did not achieve particularly strong ratings.
The network considered producing a second three-episode season to complete the story, but this never materialized.

==
Remake film ==


===
Planned relaunch and development
hell ===
Fox initiated plans to relaunch the Planet of the Apes series in the 1980s, but the project fell into a drawn-out and fruitless development phase—"development
hell"—for over 10 years, one of the most protracted development periods in film history.
It began in 1988, when Fox announced that Adam Rifkin, then a 21-year-old independent film director, would develop a new Apes movie.
At a Fox executive's invitation, Rifkin pitched a concept for Return to the Planet of the Apes, an alternative sequel to Planet that ignored the other four films.
In Rifkin's initial concept, Taylor's descendant Duke launches a Spartacus-like uprising against Roman-inspired ape oppressors led by General Izan.
Days before the project was scheduled to enter pre-production, Fox brought in new studio executives, who sent it back to development.
They commissioned Rifkin to write several redrafts, but found them unsatisfactory and ultimately scrapped the project.
After several years in limbo, Fox returned to the Apes concept, this time with Oliver Stone as a producer.
Stone brought in Terry Hayes as screenwriter and they developed a script titled Return of the Apes.
In their script, humanity is threatened by an ailment encoded in their DNA, so two scientists go back in time thousands of years to stop it at its origin.
They discover the disease was engineered by advanced apes to ensure humanity's eventual destruction.
Arnold Schwarzenegger committed to star as
scientist Will Robinson and Philip Noyce agreed to direct.
The draft impressed Fox president Peter Chernin, but other executives were ambivalent about the action script, believing that it should be lighter.
At one point, executive Dylan Sellers insisted the script include a comic scene involving apes playing baseball as his "stamp" on the film and fired Hayes when he left it out.
This move caused Noyce to quit as well, and subsequently, almost everyone involved in the project left for one reason or another.
After the collapse of the Stone-Hayes project, Fox brought on Chris Columbus to develop a new Apes concept.
Columbus hired Sam Hamm to write a screenplay taking elements from Boulle's novel and various unused treatments.
In Hamm's script, an ape astronaut from a distant planet unleashes a devastating virus on Earth.
Scientists go to the astronaut's planet, where apes hunt humans; they locate a cure but return to find Earth overrun by simians.
Schwarzenegger remained attached, but Fox found the script underwhelming.
Columbus left the project in 1995 after his mother's death and James Cameron stepped in to produce.
Cameron intended to go in a "very different direction" with the script, but following the critical and financial success of his film Titanic, he dropped out of the project.
Fox approached a series of directors to take over, without success.
===
Planet of the Apes (2001) ===
In 1999, Fox hired William Broyles, Jr. to write a new script.
Fox insisted on a July 2001 release date but otherwise offered Broyles considerable creative license.
This prospect attracted director Tim Burton, who hoped to do a "re-imagining" of Planet of the Apes.
Burton found the production arduous, largely due to Fox's strict release schedule.
The studio budgeted the film at $100 million, meaning Broyles' ambitious script had to be altered to reduce costs; Lawrence Konner and Mark Rosenthal worked on rewrites even as the film entered production.
The tight schedule meant that all stages of production were rushed.
The film stars Mark Wahlberg as astronaut Leo Davidson, who accidentally travels through a wormhole to a distant planet where talking apes enslave humans.
He leads a human revolt and upends ape civilization by discovering that the apes evolved from the normal Earth primates who had accompanied his mission and had arrived on the planet years before.
Helena Bonham Carter played chimpanzee Ari, while Tim Roth played the human-hating chimpanzee General Thade.
The film received mixed reviews; most critics believed it failed to compare to the original.
Much of the negative commentary focused on the confusing plot and twist ending, though many reviewers praised the special effects.
The film succeeded at the box office, taking in $362 million worldwide.
Fox had initially hoped for a sequel, but the difficult production left Burton unenthusiastic about participating, and the film failed to generate enough interest for the studio to pursue a follow-up.
==
Reboot film series ==


===
Rise of the Planet of the Apes (2011) ===
In 2005, screenwriters Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver developed a concept for a new Planet of the Apes film, eventually titled Rise of the Planet of the Apes.
Inspired by news articles on apes raised as humans and advances in genetics, Jaffa conceived an idea for a film about a genetically enhanced chimp raised in a human household.
He and Silver pitched the concept to Fox as a way to reboot the Apes franchise by reinventing the story of the chimpanzee Caesar, the lead character of Conquest and Battle.
Fox was impressed and bought the pitch, but development struggled for five years as the production cycled through scripts, writers, directors and producers.
In 2010, producers Chernin and Dylan Clark of Chernin Entertainment stepped in to move the film forward, retaining Jaffa and Silver as writers.
In the final script, Caesar receives enhanced cognition from a viral drug created by Will Rodman, who raises him.
After being imprisoned in a primate sanctuary, Caesar uses his ingenuity to launch an uprising.
The screenplay contains complex connections to other entries in the series, causing some confusion as to its exact relation to them.
Oliver Lindler writes that while the film's premise might identify it as a remake of Conquest, official dispatches and professional reviewers typically avoided the term, instead calling the film a prequel or "origin story" to the original Planet of the Apes film and/or a reboot of the series; fans and bloggers were more apt to refer to it as a "remake".
The completed script attracted director Rupert Wyatt.
To portray ape characters realistically, the production avoided practical effects in favor of performance capture acting, partnering with New Zealand visual effects company Weta Digital.
Wyatt cast James Franco as Will Rodman, while veteran performance-capture actor Andy Serkis signed on to star as Caesar.
Rise debuted on August 5, 2011.
Critics reviewed it positively, especially praising the visual effects and Serkis' performance.
It was a major box office hit, taking in $482 million globally, more than five times its $93 million budget.
Weta's special effects earned the film two Visual Effects Society Awards and an Oscar nomination at the 84th Academy Awards, among other accolades.
The strength of Serkis' performance also inspired Fox to promote him for Oscar consideration; he was not nominated by Academy voters.
Following the movie's success, Fox immediately planned for a sequel.

===
Dawn of the Planet of the Apes (2014) ===
Producers Peter Chernin and Dylan Clark started planning the film eventually titled Dawn of the Planet of the Apes just after Rise's release in 2011.
Fox allocated a budget of $170 million.
Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver returned to pen the script and produce and the studio quickly signed Andy Serkis to reprise his role as Caesar.
Director Rupert Wyatt withdrew from the project due to production and scheduling issues and was replaced by Matt Reeves.
Set 10 years after Rise, the film establishes that the "simian flu", a side effect of the drug that enhanced the apes' intelligence, has killed most humans.
Caesar struggles to maintain peace as his ape community is drawn into violent clashes with nearby human survivors.
Weta Digital again provided special effects work, which combined practical sets, digitally manipulated backgrounds and performance capture ape characters.
The lead human characters were played by Jason Clarke, as Malcolm; Keri Russell, as Ellie; and Gary Oldman, as Dreyfus.
Released on July 11, 2014, the film was very well received by critics, who found it a strong follow-up to Rise and lauded the combination of an engaging script with impressive special effects.
It also performed very strongly at the box office, taking in $707 million in worldwide grosses.
Its special effects received several honors, including three Visual Effects Society Awards and an Oscar nomination at the 87th Academy Awards.

===
War for the Planet of the Apes (2017) ===
Fox was confident enough in Dawn of the Planet of the Apes that the studio started planning for the next installment months before the film debuted.
After Fox and Chernin Entertainment screened Matt Reeves' cut of Dawn, he was contracted to return as director; he also wrote the script with Mark Bomback.
Peter Chernin, Dylan Clark, Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver again served as producers.
Given a $150 million budget, War for the Planet of the Apes was released on July 14, 2017.The film depicts the apes and humans in armed conflict and follows Caesar and his followers as they track down the mysterious Colonel, a human paramilitary leader, and search for a new home.
Serkis returned as Caesar, Woody Harrelson played the villainous Colonel and Steve Zahn played Bad Ape.
It earned widespread critical acclaim; reviewers praised the effects and narrative and found the film a fitting conclusion to Caesar's story.
It earned $491 million around the globe.
===
Fourth film ===
In October 2016, it was reported that a fourth film in the new series was being discussed.
Shortly before the release of War in July 2017, Reeves said that he expressed interest in making more Apes films and that Steve Zahn, who played Bad Ape in the film, had set up a story for further sequels.
Writer Mark Bomback hinted that further films would be possible.
In April 2019, following the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney, Disney announced that future Planet of the Apes films are in development.
In August 2019, Disney stated that any future installments would take place in the universe first established in Rise of the Planet of the Apes.
In February 2020, Wes Ball was announced as director of the next film, with Joe Hartwick Jr. and David Starke serving as producers.
Ball explained that the story will take place after the events of War for the Planet of the Apes, and continue to follow "Caesar's legacy".
In May 2020, it was announced that Josh Friedman will serve as screenwriter alongside Ball, while Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver will return to the franchise as producers.

==
Other media and merchandise ==


===
Books ===
Pierre Boulle's novel La Planète des singes was translated and reprinted several times after its original publication in 1963.
All four of the original sequels spawned novelizations by established science fiction writers of the day, each of which went through multiple reprintings of their own.
Michael Avallone wrote the novelization for Beneath the Planet of the Apes in 1970.
Jerry Pournelle, who later co-authored Lucifer's Hammer and The Mote in God's Eye, wrote the Escape from the Planet of the Apes novelization.
John Jakes, former Science Fiction Writers of America president, wrote the Conquest of the Planet of the Apes novelization.
David Gerrold, scriptwriter for the Star Trek episode "
The Trouble with Tribbles", novelized Battle for the Planet of the Apes.
Novelizations of the live-action and animated television series were also produced.
William T. Quick novelized the 2001 Planet of the Apes; he also wrote two prequel novels, and
several other book tie-ins were published.

===
Comics ===
Planet of the Apes–based comics have been published regularly since 1968.
Among the most notable is Marvel Comics' Planet of the Apes magazine, published from 1974 to 1977.
The black-and-white series featured adaptations of each of the films, new Apes stories by Doug Moench, series news, essays, interviews, and other material.
It became one of Marvel's most successful titles, attracting 300 to 400 fan letters with every issue, so many that the studio had to suspend its practice of writing personal responses.
Marvel also published the monthly title Adventures on the Planet of the Apes from 1975 to 1976, comprising color reprints of the Planet and Beneath adaptations.
In 1990, during a resurgence of interest in the franchise, Malibu Comics launched a new monthly black-and-white Planet of the Apes comic through its Adventure Comics studio.
The debut issue sold 40,000 copies, a record for black-and-white comics, leading to a successful run of 24 issues over two years.
The series follows Caesar's grandson and heir Alexander as he struggles to govern ape civilization.
The comic's success led Malibu to publish five four-issue spinoff miniseries: Ape City, Planet of the Apes: Urchak's Folly, the Alien Nation crossover Ape Nation, Planet of the Apes: Blood of the Apes and Planet of the Apes: The Forbidden Zone.
Malibu also published two one-shot comics, A Day on the Planet of the Apes and Planet of the Apes: Sins of the Fathers, a prequel story to the original film; a trade paperback collecting the first four issues of the main series, titled Monkey Planet; and reissues of stories from Marvel's earlier Apes series.
Gold Key Comics, Dark Horse Comics, and Boom!
Studios have also produced Planet of the Apes comic books.
The Boom!
releases include crossovers with other properties: 2014's Star Trek/Planet of the Apes:
The Primate Directive and 2017's King Kong story Kong on the Planet of the Apes.
In 2018, Boom!
released a graphic novel, Planet of the Apes: Visionaries, adapted by Dana Gould and Chad Lewis from the original 1968 film's unused screenplay by Rod Serling.

===
Toys and merchandise ===
The series, and particularly the live-action Apes television show and the Return to the Planet of the Apes cartoon, generated numerous toy and merchandising tie-ins.
During the 1970s, Fox licensed around 60 companies to produce about 300 different Apes products, including action figures and playsets, model building kits, coloring books, book-and-record sets, trading cards, toy weapons, costumes, apparel, branded tableware, and lunch boxes.
This level of merchandising was unusual for the time and the success of Apes merchandise may have inspired the campaigns that later became commonplace for films and television series.
The action figures, sold by Mego beginning in 1973, were the first such toys sold as film tie-ins; they proved popular and inspired the rise of action figure series based on popular culture franchises.
Eric Greene writes that Apes toys were popular enough to lead some contemporary children to engage in apes-vs.-humans
role-playing make believe games that simulated the series' conflicts in a manner similar to "Cowboys and Indians".
With the release of the 21st-century films, Fox licensed several companies to manufacture new Apes toys, including detailed action figures of new and "classic" characters sold as collectibles.

===
Video games ===
In 1983, 20th Century Fox Videogames developed a Planet of the Apes game for the Atari 2600, which was to be the first computer game based on the series.
The game was still in the prototype phase when Fox shuttered its game division during the video game crash of 1983 and never saw release.
It was assumed lost until 2002, when collectors identified a prototype, found earlier in a case labeled Alligator People, as the missing Apes game.
Independent designers
Retrodesign completed and released the game as Revenge of the Apes in 2003.
In the game, the player controls Taylor as he fights apes across several levels inspired by the film to reach the Statue of Liberty.
A video game based on the series did not appear until 2001.
Fox Interactive began developing a Planet of the Apes game in 1998 for PC and PlayStation as a tie-in to the long-gestating remake project.
Fox and developer Visiware proceeded with the game when the project went into limbo, creating their own story based on Boulle's novel and the original films.
The game is an action-adventure in which players control astronaut Ulysses as he explores an ape-ruled future Earth.
Fox Interactive's decision to co-publish with another company, Ubisoft, further delayed the game's release.
Despite its long development, the game missed the debut of Tim Burton's Planet of the Apes film by two months; it finally appeared on September 20, 2001, to mostly negative reviews.
Additionally, Ubisoft produced a substantially different Planet of the Apes game for Game Boy Advance and Game Boy Color, a side-scroller following the first two films.
In 2014, Fox partnered with Ndemic Creations on a substantial Dawn of the Planet of the Apes–themed update to the mobile game
Plague Inc. Players create and spread a "simian flu" virus to eradicate humans while helping apes survive.
In 2017, Fox commissioned an adventure game to accompany War for the Planet of the Apes called Planet of the Apes: Last Frontier.

Serkis' digital effects company The Imaginarium worked on the game and Serkis performed motion capture.
It was released on PlayStation 4 on November 21, 2017 to mixed reviews.
In 2018, Fox's virtual reality division FoxNext VR Studio partnered with developers
Imaginati Studios on a VR first-person shooter, Crisis on the Planet of the Apes.
The player controls a chimpanzee attempting to escape a human detention facility.
It was released on PC and PlayStation 4, receiving negative to average reviews.

==
Themes ==


===
Race ===
Critics consider race to be the Planet of the Apes series' primary theme.
Eric Greene, author of a book on the role of race in the original films and spinoff material, writes that "when seen as one epic work, the Apes saga emerges as a liberal allegory of racial conflict."
In Greene's interpretation, the franchise's plot arc is rooted in the central conflict in which humans and apes alternately subjugate one another in a destructive cycle.
Difference between human and ape manifests primarily in physical appearance, and dominance derives from social power rather than innate superiority.
Each film shifts the power balance so that the audience identifies sometimes with the humans and at other times with the apes.
According to Greene, this arc's central message is that unresolved racial discord inevitably leads to cataclysm.
Other critics have adopted or echoed Greene's interpretation.
Producers Abrahams and Jacobs did not consciously intend the first film's racial undertones and did not appreciate them until Sammy Davis Jr. pointed them out in 1968.
Subsequently, the filmmakers incorporated the theme more overtly in later installments; as a result, race moves from being a secondary motif in the first two films to becoming the major concern of the last three.
Several critics have written that the reboot films downplay this theme from the original series, removing the racial subtext of conflict between humans and apes.
These critics generally argue that this is to the films' detriment, writing that it softens the series' edge, leaves it thematically shallow, and marginalizes non-white characters; several critics have written that the films appear to invoke a "post-racial America", rather than exploring issues of race.
Others write that the films incorporate racial themes in subtler ways, but that their presentation oversimplifies a complex message to the point of reinforcing racial norms rather than challenging them.

===
Cold War and nuclear apocalypse ===
The Cold War and the threat of nuclear holocaust are major themes introduced in Rod Serling's original Planet of the Apes script.
The films are apocalyptic and dystopian, suggesting the era's tensions could well lead to world destruction.
The films critique both sides of the war, with the oppressive ape society and the underground mutant city featuring traits of both Western culture and the Soviet bloc.
According to Greene, Cold War motifs were central to the first two films and some spinoff media, but were less significant in the later sequels, which foregrounded racial conflict instead.

===
Animal rights ===
Questions of animal rights also figure heavily in the series; Greene considers this related to the racial themes.
The first film portrays Taylor treated cruelly by apes who consider him an animal; in later films, humans abuse apes for the same reason.
The idea of primate rights is much more dominant in the reboot films, which directly invoke the question of great ape personhood in portraying Caesar and his followers struggling for their rights in a society that does not consider them legal persons.

==
Cultural impact and legacy ==
Planet of the Apes received popular and critical attention well after production ended on the original films and television series.
Fans' interest in the franchise continued through publications like Marvel Comics' Planet of the Apes magazine and science fiction conventions, where the series was sufficiently popular to inspire "apecons"—conventions devoted entirely to films involving apes—in the 1970s.
The series' distinctive ape costumes were employed in live appearances, including by musician Paul Williams (Virgil from Battle) on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson and by Mike Douglas on The Mike Douglas Show.
In the 1970s, fans Bill Blake and Paula Crist created Cornelius and Zira costumes; their routine was convincing enough that Fox licensed them to portray the characters at events.
The films earned strong ratings when they aired on television after their releases and various stations rebroadcast them together in marathons in later years.
The live-action television series was reformatted into five TV movies for further broadcast in 1981 and the Sci-Fi Channel ran both it and the cartoon series in the 1990s.
Planet of the Apes had a wide impact on subsequent popular media.
In terms of production, the series' success with sequelization, spinoffs and merchandising established a new model of media franchising in Hollywood filmmaking, in which studios develop films specifically to generate multimedia franchises.
In terms of content, the series influenced various films and television productions during the 1970s and 1980s that used science fiction settings and characters to explore race relations, including Alien Nation, Enemy Mine, and V. More direct influence can be seen in DC Comics' 1972–1978 series Kamandi:
The Last Boy on Earth and the Japanese franchise Time of the Apes, which concern human protagonists in post-apocalyptic worlds ruled by talking animals.
Mel Brooks' 1987 science fiction spoof Spaceballs lampooned the original Planet's Statue of Liberty ending.
Interest in the series resurged in the 1990s, as plans for a new film and other media circulated.
Greene attributes this renewed interest to a combination of "pop culture nostalgia and baby boomer economics", as well as a "political ferment" rising at the time that hearkened back to the period when the films were first released.
Inspired particularly by the publication of the Malibu Comics series, during this period fans founded new clubs, websites, and fanzines active in the U.S., Canada, Brazil, and other countries.
Companies began producing new branded merchandise, including clothing, toys, and costumes.
Especially after the 1990s, artists in diverse media referenced, incorporated, or were otherwise influenced by the series.
Planet of the Apes turned up in songs by various musicians, allusions in films, comedy bits by Dennis Miller and Paul Mooney, and an episode of Saturday Night Live hosted by Charlton Heston.
The Simpsons parodied the series several times.
In particular, the episode "A Fish Called Selma" features the washed-up actor Troy McClure starring in a Broadway musical adaptation called Stop the Planet of the Apes, I Want to Get Off!
Artist Martha Rosler incorporated footage of Cornelius and Zira's interrogation from Escape in her installation "Global Taste:
A Meal in Three Courses", while Guillermo Gómez-Peña and Coco Fusco employed video from Planet in a 1993 performance art piece at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
The series' impact has extended to the political sphere, and groups of various leanings have employed its themes and imagery in their discourse.
The phrase "planet of the apes" has been used for an overturning of the political or racial status quo.
Eric Greene writes that it is especially popular among racial nationalists and reactionaries of different stripes.
According to Greene, white supremacists liken minority advancement to the films' world in which supposed "inferiors" seize control, while black nationalists subvert the reference to celebrate the "racial apocalypse"; in this spirit, gangsta rap group Da Lench Mob titled their 1994 album Planet of da Apes.
Greene writes that these uses invert the anti-racist message of the films.
Planet's final image of the ruined Statue of Liberty has become a common political reference; for example, Greenpeace used it in an advertising campaign against nuclear testing.
The series' themes and imagery have been invoked in political discussions on topics as varied as 1960s culture, urban decay, contemporary wars, and gun violence.

== List of media ==


===
Films ===
== Reception ==


===
Box office performance ===


===
Critical and public response ===


===
Accolades ===


====
Academy Awards ====


==
Cast and crew ==


===
Cast ===
The following table shows the cast members who played the primary characters in the nine films to date.

Note:
A gray cell indicates the character does not appear in that film.

===
Crew ===


==
Footnotes ==


==
References ==
Becker, Lucille Frackman (1993).
"
Science and Detective Fiction:
Complementary Genres on the Margins of French Literature".

In Henry, Freeman G. (ed.).
French Literature Series:
On The Margins of French Literature.
XX.
Ropodi.
pp.
119–126.
ISBN
9051834268.CS1 maint: ref duplicates default (link)
Chidester, Phil (January 1, 2015).
"
The Simian That Screamed
No!
:
Rise of the Planet of the Apes and the Speculative as Public Memory".
Visual Communication Quarterly.
22 (1)
: 3–14.
doi:10.1080/15551393.2015.1026597.
S2CID 142599451.CS1
maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Davis, Jason (2013).
"
Aping Race, Racing Apes".

In Huss, John (ed.).
Planet of the Apes and Philosophy:
Great Apes Think Alike.
Open Court Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-8126-9822-0.CS1 maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Fordham, Joe; Bond, Jeff (2014).
Planet of the Apes: The Evolution of a Legend.
Titan Books.
ISBN 978-1-78329-198-4.

Greene, Eric (1998).
Planet of the Apes as American Myth: Race and Politics in the Films and Television Series.
Wesleyan University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8195-6329-3.CS1 maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Hamilton, Sheryl N. (November 2016). "
'
Human no like smart ape': figuring the ape as legal person in Rise of the Planet of the Apes".
Law and Humanities.
Routledge.
10 (2): 300–321.
doi:10.1080/17521483.2016.1233744.
S2CID 151901820.CS1
maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Handley, Rich (2008).
Timeline of the Planet of the Apes: The Definitive Chronology.
Hasslein Books.
ISBN 978-0-615-25392-3.CS1 maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Hughes, David (2004).
Tales from Development Hell.
London:
Titan Books.
pp.
34–37.
ISBN 1-84023
-691-4.CS1
maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Kassabian, Anahid (2013).
Ubiquitous Listening: Affect, Attention, and Distributed Subjectivity.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-27515-7.CS1 maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Kirshner, Jonathan (2001).
"
Subverting the Cold War in the 1960s: Dr. Strangelove, The Manchurian Candidate, and The Planet of the Apes".
Film & History:
An Interdisciplinary Journal of Film and Television Studies.
31 (2): 40–44.CS1
maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Lindner, Oliver (2015). "
The Remade Prequel: Rise of the Planet of the Apes (2011)".
Remakes and Remaking: Concepts – Media − Practices.
Transcript Verlag.
pp.
23–39.
ISBN 978-3-8394-2894-8.CS1 maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Russo, Joe; Landsman, Larry; Gross, Edward (2001).
Planet of the Apes Revisited.
Thomas Dunne Books.
ISBN 0
-312-25239-0.

Scott, Sharon M. (2010).
Toys and American Culture: An Encyclopedia.
ABC-CLIO.
ISBN 978-0
-313-35111-2.CS1
maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Southard, Bruce (March 1, 1982).
"
The Language of Science Fiction Fan Magazines".
American Speech.
Duke University Press.
57 (1):
19–31.
doi:10.2307/455177.
ISSN 0003-1283.
JSTOR
455177.CS1 maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Von Busack, Richard (2004).
"
Signifying Monkeys: Politics and Story-Telling in the Planet of the Apes Series".

In Rickman, Gregg (ed.).
The Science Fiction Film Reader.
Limelight Editions.
pp.
165–177.
ISBN 0-87910-994-7.

Webb, Gordon C. (July–August 1998).
"
30 Years Later:
Rod Serling's Planet of the Apes".
Creative Screenwriting.
Archived from the original on December 13, 2017.
Retrieved November 10,
2014.CS1 maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
Weiss, Brett (2012).
Classic Home Video Games, 1972–1984: A Complete Reference Guide.
McFarland.
ISBN 978-0-7864-8755-4.CS1 maint:
ref duplicates default (link)


==
External links ==
Dale Winogura (Summer 1972).
"
Special Planet of the Apes Series Issue – Interviews & Set Visit" (PDF).
Cinefantastique.
=
=
Humans and humanoid sentient species ==


===
Humans ===
Humans are a species in the fictional Star Wars universe.
They are the most numerous and dominant species, with apparently millions of major and minor colonies galaxywide.
Humans are native to many different worlds and are characterized by multidimensional complex personalities, that are both individual and unique.
They are the only race accepted as pure by Emperor Palpatine.
By the time the hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a few scattered worlds throughout the galaxy; according to the New Essential Chronology, the humans of Coruscant managed to send out a number of 'sleeper ships' between the fall of the Rakatan Infinite Empire and the invention of the hyperdrive.
Star Wars humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life humans.
The presence of ordinary humans in the story is important dramatically and the first movie establishes their vulnerability and weakness.

Luke Skywalker's introduction early in the first movie was rewritten to establish this.
In the Star Wars mythology, the human homeworld, according to the New Essential Chronology, is generally believed to be Coruscant.
However, there is actually no real consensus on the issue; according to releases from the official Starwars.com site, the ancient human home world has simply been lost to history.

Star Wars humans live on many different worlds throughout the galaxy, with many populations living together with several other species—something which is most common either on the cosmopolitan worlds at the core, or on the frontier at the Outer Rim of the galaxy, such as on Tatooine.

Mandalorians: Mandalorians are a culture of humans using armors from Mandalore.
Whose origins are descended from the Taung, a gray skinned humanoid race native to Coruscant.
The Taung are forced from Coruscant by the rising human population.
The warring race name their new planet "Mandalore", after their leader, Mandalore the First.
After the extinction of the Taung, the Mandalorian culture lives on and comprises various species from around the galaxy.

===
Humanoid sentient species ===
The following is a list of Star Wars humanoid sentient species from the Star Wars franchise.

List of Star Wars species
(A–E)
Dathomirians:
The Zabrak, also known as Iridonians (when referring to the Zabrak who came from Iridonia), were a carnivorous humanoid species native to Iridonia, a planet located in the Mid Rim known for its inhospitable terrain and fierce predatory life.
They were a race known for having a fierce sense of self-determination and an equally dominant need for independence.
Zabrak resembled Humans to some degree, but had a number of significant physical characteristics that set them apart from baseline Humanity.
The most striking of these were a series of vestigial horns that crowned the heads of both males and females.
These horns grew at puberty in varying patterns and signified that the time of their rite of passage was drawing near, both Darth Maul and his brother Savage Opress were Zabraks.

Duros (or "Durosians") are humanoids from planet Duro, with large, ovular heads, red eyes and blue skin.

They were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the development of hyperdrives and other related technological advancements.

They are proud of their heritage and many take up the mantle of spacefarer.

Some have made a name for themselves, such as Cad Bane, a notorious Duros bounty hunter.

Others prefer a simpler life, and can be found in Mos Eisley quite often.

Ewok
: The Ewok is a small, sentient furry creature who lives in trees on the forest moon of Endor.

List of Star Wars species
(F–J)
Jawa:
Jawa are creatures that inhabit Tatooine.
They wear hoods over their heads to cover their identities from outsiders.
They roam the land in sandcrawlers and deal in trade among others.

Geonosian: Geonosians are sentient, winged insectoid creatures native to Geonosis.

Gungans: Gungans are sentient amphibious creatures native to the swamps of Naboo.

Gungans first appeared in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
Jar Jar Binks, a main character, is a Gungan, and despite his lack of intelligence, he becomes a representative in the galactic senate in place of Padme Amadala.

Ithorians:
Ithorians are a hammer-headed humanoid species.
They have appeared in Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope, Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II and Star Wars: Bounty Hunter.

Hutts:
Hutts are portly, grotesque, slug-like creatures native to Nal Hutta.
Many are very greedy and very gluttonous.
Some famous Hutts, such as Jabba the Hutt, are crime lords.

List of Star Wars species
(K–O)
Neimoidian:Neimoidians are large-eyed, amphibian and reptilian-like sapient bipeds native to the planet of Neimoidia.
Many Neimoidians are wealthy businessmen.
Despite their commonly menacing attitudes, however, Neimoidians are generally dishonest and easily frightened, preferring to lie even to their leaders, whether it be for profit or for self-safety.

Noghri:
Noghri are short, bipedal, sapient beings native to Honoghr.

The Galactic Empire usually employed them as assassins.
Later, Leia Organa Solo was able to prove how they were duped into service, and they swore allegiance to her and her family.

They often worked as guards for the New Republic.

List of Star Wars species (P–T)
Togruta: Togruta are species from the planet Shili.[4]
They are a humanoid race distinguished by their three, and rarely 4, lekku (similar to those of Twi'leks, and
more commonly called 'head tails'), which are striped to help them blend in with their natural surroundings.
Togruta possess a form of passive echolocation by means of their hollow montrals, which allows them to sense space and the proximity and movement of physical objects around them.
Togruta work well in large groups, and individualism is seen as abnormal within their culture.
Jedi Shaak Ti and Anakin Skywalker's former Padawan Ahsoka Tano are togrutan.

Tusken Raiders: Tusken Raiders, also known as Sand People, are vicious humanoid creatures native to Tatooine.
"
Tuskens" are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing their identity.
Their first appearance is in Star Wars (1977) when Luke and C-3PO search for R2-D2 on Tatooine.

Twi'lek: Twi'leks are humanoid creatures native to Ryloth.
Their culture strongly suggests male rule and has been that way since Nola Tarkona founded the Diversity Alliance in the Young Jedi Knights series of books.
These creatures have two "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the back of their head.
The muscles in these tails can be used to relate the mood of their owner.
Most of twi'lek economy is based on slave trade.
Female slaves were sold as dancers, assistants, and into other lowly jobs until Nola took over Ryloth.
After her takeover most of the economy was based on Ryll spice, which grows native in the caves of Ryloth.
Known twi'lek include Jedi master Aayla Secura; Mission and Griff Vao from the game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic; and Oola, a slave dancer in Jabba the Hutt's Palace on Tatooine.

List of Star Wars species
(U–Z)
Wookiee:
Wookiees are large, hairy, primate-like creatures, native to Kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the modern day depictions of Sasquatch.
Despite having great strength and a short temper, they are described as an intelligent and scientific race.

==
Animal non-sentient creatures ==
The following is a list of non-sentient, animal fictional creatures species found in the Star Wars franchise.

==
A ==


===
Acklay ===
An Acklay is a large non-Sentient creature resembling a praying mantis.
It is a crustacean.
It is equipped with three eyes and six legs with four digits each, the fourth of which terminates in an elongated scythe-like claw and has a crest to protect its long neck from aerial attacks.
As a carnivore, it possesses a mouth full of long, sharp teeth that it uses for catching fish.
It originated on Vendaxa, but has since adapted to other environments such as Felucia and Geonosis.

One was killed by Obi-Wan Kenobi during the Battle of Geonosis.

Acklay are night and day hunters.
Acklay could be Force-sensitive due to a rare mutation, learning to use Force lightning with their mouths.

===
Air Shrimp ===
Air shrimps are flying shrimp native to Bespin that float in the upper atmosphere.
Not much is known about them, besides the fact that they are eaten by the birdlike Rawwks.
They are tiny and eat human flesh.
They are the pets of sandpeople.

===
Aiwha ===
Aiwha are 30 foot long aquatic mammals that somewhat resemble very large mynocks and cetaceans.
Most claim that its home world is Naboo but it also lives on Kamino.
They dwell in the oceans and the sky above it.
The Gungans and Kaminoans ride on them.

===
Akk Dog ===
Akk dogs, sometimes called Aak dogs, are lizard like creatures the length of a speeder.
They formed Force bonds with any handler, Force-sensitive or not.
Commonly seen as Jedi pets or companions, their hides are resistant to lightsabers.
They are native to Haruun Kal.
===
Angler ===
Crustaceal multi-ocular mollusks from Yavin 4 that fish for underwater prey, such as the Aquatic Gundark and the pinkish salamander, by dangling their root-like tentacles/claws below the water's surface.
===
Anooba ===
Anoobas are scavengers that will occasionally attack large creatures such as rontos and eopies, but most commonly they attack smaller creatures.
Their strong jaws have a horny exterior beak that is able to crush thick bones.
They have a long tail that acts as a counterbalance during sprints, and helps to regulate their internal temperature.
They range in weights between 25 and 40 kilograms ( though the males are often larger than females ).
Anoobas have unregulated appetites, and they will gorge until they can no longer move.
They are pack animals and hunt in packs of 10 to 12, within the pack there are 2 dominant adults, an alpha male, and an alpha female.
Female anoobas foster between 3 and 4 cubs per season
, they feed them through methods of regurgitation.
There are some anoobas that have been domesticated by the tusken raiders.
There are also some escaped packs roaming the streets of Coruscant.

===
Asyyyriak ===
The Asyyyriak lives in the forests of Kashyyyk.
It spends most of its time high above the forest floor.
It has an elongated head and a pointed snout filled with sharp teeth.
It has six legs, which are positioned along its flexible spine to provide a highly maneuverable frame.
Each foot has four toes, which end in razor sharp talons.
Its body is covered with long brown and green hair, which lies on top of green skin.

Asyyyriaks primarily prey upon avians and other small animals.
A few small Wookiee children are lost each year because of the Asyyyriak.
Asyyyriaks hibernate during cold seasons, and tend to favor a hollow tree trunk as a den.

===
Aquatic Gundark ===
A medium-sized predator from Yavin 4
, It stalks the shallows of streams and lakes for runyips and whisper birds.
It has multiple sets of eyes to allow simultaneous vision above and below the water.

== B (including Birds) ==


===
Bandara ===
Bandaras, which are also known as sandbar dwellers, are beetles from the planet Devaron who live in huge unyielding swarms on sandbars and beaches.
Their unified mating call during the summer can be unbearable to hear.

===
Bantha ===
The bantha is a colossal, shaggy, mammalian mount with circular ram-like horns.
Herds of bantha inhabit the desert wastes of Tatooine in the outer Rim, as well as grasslands and plains of other worlds throughout the Star Wars galaxy.
They are very sociable animals, have long sticky tongues to catch prey, and are notorious for their smell.
Since bantha are found in such a large number of agricultural systems, it is believed that early space settlers transported the species to new worlds.
Although largely domesticated, on some planets wild herds can still be found.
There are several known varieties of banthas in existence, including the common bantha (Bantha majorus), the smaller, shy dwarf bantha, and the rangier, slender dune bantha.
One specific subtype of bantha is the Kashyyyk greyclimber, which differs in that the greyclimber has massive cranial bone plates in place of horns; it has also adapted to climbing through the evolution of articulated toes that can grip wroshyr trees.
Banthas can be seen in video games and the movie Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
They can also be found in The Mandalorian "Chapter 9: The Marshal".
Also Star Wars Episode II, Attack of the Clones.
They were commonly used on Tatooine by the Tusken Raiders.
The Tusken raiders form symbiotic bonds with banthas.
When the Tusken Raiders reach the age of 7, a bantha of the same gender is ceremoniously given to the youngling, as its partner in life.
When Tusken Raiders marry, the couple's banthas mate.
When the Tusken Raiders have offspring, the banthas often produce an offspring of the same gender at the same time.
Upon the death of a bantha or a Tusken raider, the species left behind will often commit suicide.

===
Barri ===
Barri are enigmatic spacefaring creatures that can hitch rides on asteroids and derelict spacecraft for thousands of years in space.
Their acid secretions break down and help the barris digest the asteroid they ride on.

=== Beck-tori ===
Beck-tori are aquatic parasites endemic to the planet Nam Priax.
They are blue and resemble the shape of an eel.
These creatures channel the force to enhance their senses and heal themselves.

===
Beldon ===
Beldons are colossal floating creatures found in the lower atmosphere of Bespin.
They are gas-filled creatures that can metabolize the natural chemicals and biospheric plankton of the slushy gas-liquid-solid interface
(via long, trailing, tentacles) of the lower atmosphere.
Beldons grow between 800m and 10 km.
They travel together in herds.
Their light-sensitive skin cells aid with defense and metabolism.
Eggs and sperm are released into the atmosphere and drift freely until random fertilization.
They have a caudal fin on their back to help with stability.
They excrete Tibannna gas which can be collected and used as a hyperdrive coolant.
They are surrounded by a small electrical field to detect approaching danger.
A herd of Beldons are seen in season 2 of Star Wars Rebels.

===
Bergruutfa ===
Bergruutfa are large 7m tall herbivorous grazers from the planet
Teloc Ol-sen.
They have been known to serve as caravan beasts, warbeasts and farm animals, and have an armored frill around their head.

===
Birds ===


====
Clawbird ====
The clawbird is a black-feathered carrion-eating bird, similar to a vulture.
They live on Tatooine, Geonosis and Wayland.

====
Gartro ====
Gartros are small, avian creatures that live on Coruscant.
They have bat-like wings, spiked tails, and jaws filled with sharp teeth.
Gatros are omnivorous and completely harmless.

====
Geejaw ====
Geejaws are leathery-winged bird creatures that live on Naboo and the forest moon of Endor.

====
Hawk-bat ====
Hawk-bats are purple or red creatures with a curved beak and leathery wings.
They can be found on civilized worlds like Coruscant and Taris.

====
Kkryytch ====
Kkryytch are avian creatures that eat seeds and live on Kashyyyk.

====
Porgs ====
Porgs are a penguin or puffin-like species with facial features of seals.
They are native to the planet Ahch-To, where Jedi Master Luke Skywalker made his exile in the years following the victory over the Galactic Empire.
They are introduced in The Last Jedi and are known for how "insanely cute" they are, serving as comic relief.
The creatures, who dwell on the cliffs of the island where Skywalker lives in exile, could build nests and fly.
Male porgs are known to be slightly bigger in size than females; baby porgs are called porglets.
A flock of porgs is known as a murder.
During The Last Jedi, one porg finds its way aboard the Millennium Falcon with Chewbacca; they serve as a foil for the Wookiee.
A porg also appears in The Rise of Skywalker when Rey travels to Ahch-To.

The introduction of the porgs was somewhat controversial, with some critics claiming the creatures were introduced to cater to children and boost merchandise sales.
However, the production team has stated that the porgs were created to account for the puffins in the background of outdoor shots set on Ahch-To.
Puffins are native to the Skellig Islands, which served as the filming location of Ahch-To, and local conservation laws prevented the filmmakers from taking actions that would keep the puffins out of frame; they either had to remove the puffins from the shots with digital editing or disguise them as something else to maintain continuity.
Disguising the puffins proved technically easier and cheaper than removing them, which led to the development of the porgs.
The porgs' voices were created through a mixture of sounds from turkeys, chickens, and doves.

====
Pylat bird ====
Pylat birds are beautiful white and black cockatiels that inhabit Neimoidia and are a symbol of their owner's wealth.

====
Woodoo ====
Woodoos are carnivorous ground dwelling birds native to Tatooine.

===
Blase Tree Goat ===
The Blase Tree Goat, as called by the natives who live on Endor, is known galaxy wide as a Choreamnos.
A lazy animal that looks like a cross between a goat and a sloth.
They hardly move except to get leaves on other branches.

===
Blistmok ===
The Blistmok is a lizard, native to the planet of Mustafar.
They are usually dark red or a dark teal color.

===
Blurrg ===
The blurrg is used for transportation on Ryloth, on Endor's forest moon, and on Arvala-7, where some are found in a feral state.
It is typically used as a beast of burden by the freedom fighters of Cham Syndulla, and mauraders.
It is found in Star Wars: The Clone Wars and in The Mandalorian episode one.
They are tough-skinned reptilian herbivores known for their small brains and simple intelligence.
Their brain is roughly the size of a jubba nut.
Their dense skull is used as a battering ram, they utter frequent low roars, but besides this no other communications.
Males are eaten during mating.
Their eggs are laid in clutches between 5–6, and are left where they drop.
Young stay inside their mothers' protective circles during early years.
On Endor they are preyed upon by boar-wolves, and are objects of derision in Ewok culture and folk-lore.

===
Borcatu ===
Borcatus are a non-canon, quadrupedal, scavenger vermin found amongst garbage and trash on thousands of civilized planets.
Up to 0.5-metre (1.6 ft) in length, they are protected from the environment and predators by strong, armored scales.

===
Bordok ===
The bordok is a herbivorous equine animal, native to the forest moon of Endor.
They have an erect mane, and short knobby forward pointing horns on either side of their head.
It is used by Ewoks as a pack animal and a mount if captured.

===
Bursa ===
Bursas are carnivorous quadrupeds native to Naboo.
They live in mud huts or burrows they build in the ground.
Rumors are, being that they hunted and killed the early Gungan race, they are partially responsible for the Gungans seeking shelter from them
underwater..


==
C ==


===
Can-cell ===
The can-cell is a monstrous dragonfly, about 1.5 m (4.9 ft)
long, which flies the skies of Kashyyyk and Teth.
It is seen in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars and Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
===
Cannok ===
Cannoks inhabit the forest moon of Dxun.
Cannoks are small, annoying creatures that have the ability to consume anything, including mechanical components.

===
Cherfer ===
Cherfers are aggressive, quadrupedal, herd animals from the planet Elom.
Although they are omnivores, these beasts are quick to anger and prefer meat.

===
Chiilak ===
Chiilak are thick-furred, six-limbed bipeds that inhabit the glacial regions of the moon Misnor, and can grow up to 2.2 m
(7.2 ft) tall.
Although they can breathe air, they can hold their breath underwater for up to 20 minutes; similarly, their webbed paws make for easy swimming.

===
Choreamnos ===


===
Coruscani ogre ===
The Coruscani ogre is a large sentient being that wanders the lower levels of Coruscant.
They have hard gray skin, pointed ears and very sharp teeth.
These beasts feed off the flesh of other creatures.

===
Cracian thumper ===
The Cracian Thumper is a widely used bipedal beast of burden used on human-populated worlds throughout the galaxy.
It is named for the sound it doesn't make, as it makes very little sound while running.
It is a central component of the Rebel Alliance's program of live mount scouting, and Cracian Thumper racing is a popular sport.

===
Crab Glider ===
"Crab gliders" are small, carrion eating crablike creatures native to the planet of Bespin.
Patches of skin between their six legs allow them to glide around their home planet, feeding on the corpses of Beldons, giant air jellyfish.
It is presumed that they keep from falling by catching updrafts from below.

===
Croator ===
The croator, a creature native to Wyndigal II, a planet with extreme ultraviolet radiation exposure, is an asexual, flightless avian-like creature with reflective plumage and an unusually long proboscis, used to inhale tiny fish and insects for food.
Travelers on Wyndigal II often use croator plumage as anti-radiation protection.

===
Cthon ===
The cthon is a zombie-like sentient humanoid that is believed to have evolved from another humanoid creature.
Like the ogre, it feeds off the flesh of others.
It has huge ears, enabling it to find its way around the perpetually dark Coruscant underlevels, but no eyes, as it has no use for them.
Cthons live in small groups and attack the unwary, trapping them with electro nets and devouring them.

They appeared in the novel Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter.

=== Cy'een ===
Cy'een are huge long-necked reptilian fish that are native to the oceans of the planet Chad.

===
Colo Claw Fish ===
Colo Claw Fish are Eel-like predators from the waters of the planet Naboo.
One tried to attack a Gungan sub, but didn't lay a claw on it once.
At the end of the tunnel, a Sando Aqua Monster tried to eat the sub but didn't manage it.
The unlucky Colo, however, ran in to the Sando's mouth, killing it.

== D ==


===
Dashta eel ===
Dashta eels are a species native to Ord Cestus with the ability to use the Force.
They were the biological part of the JK-13 droid.

===
Dactillion ===
Dactillions are four-legged lizard-like creatures with wings and a two part beak.
They fly the skies of Utapau.

===
Danchaf ===
Danchafs, also known as "tree goblins" by the native sentient Jenet species on the planet Garban, these arboreal creatures are ferocious pack carnivores that attack unwary travelers in Garban's forests, and can grow up to 2 m (6.5 ft) tall.

===
Derkolo ===
Derkolo are a sentient species native to the planet Sileron.

=== Dewback ===
Dewbacks or Dewback lizards are large reptilian creatures native to Tatooine.
They are commonly used as beasts of burden by moisture farmers.
They have been described to resemble a t-rex pretending to be a camel.

They move slowly at night, but are known to run at a brisk pace for short distances during the day.
Both Imperial stormtroopers and Jawas have been known to utilize these large beasts.
Dewbacks can be seen in video games, the movie Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope and the series The Mandalorian.
===
Dianoga ===
Dianoga, also known as garbage squids, are large, highly adaptable cephalopods capable of growing up to 10 m (32.8 ft) in length.
They have a spherical body, seven tentacles, a mouth of inward-pointing teeth, and one large eye on a stalk.
They originated in the swamps of planet Vodran, but can now be found in many watery trash or sewage disposals on any planet in the galaxy, living off of any present organic matter.
They are primarily scavengers, and only pose a threat to living creatures when starving or frightened.
Dianogae are now considered sentient beings, as seen in the new canon short story The Baptist.

===
Draagax ===
Draagax are pack hunters that hunt in the equatorial grasslands of the planet Relkass.
Apart from hunting small rodents, these animals also consume wild sentinel plants.
When the plants bloom in the dry season, they provide the draagax with a narcotic that sends them on a berserker frenzy, attacking everything in their path.

===
Dragon ===
====
Condor dragon ====
Condor dragons are flying reptiles from the forest moon of Endor.
They have excellent eyesight and massive fangs for tearing through even the thickest hides.
They have a wingspan of approximately 3 m (9.8 ft).
They are known to eat Ewoks.
They make nests in caves and eat the giant cave spiders.
The Ewok pony is not the prey of the Condor dragon.

====
Dragon snake ====
Dragon snakes are long, ferocious creatures, native to the swamps of Dagobah and Nal Hutta.

====
Hssiss ====
Hssiss, or dark side dragons are large, dark gray, reptilian creatures that originated on Stenness.

They were corrupted by the planet's dark side aura, and domesticated by the Sith.

They have the ability to become almost invisible, making them extremely dangerous to the unwary.

====
Kell dragon ====
Kell dragons are the slightly stockier relatives of the krayt dragon.
While not heavily mentioned in the original Star Wars movies, they featured significantly in the first two installments of the Dark Forces series of games.
Huge and powerful, they rival rancors in their ferocity and, as such, are favored by wealthy crime lords such as the Hutts.

====
Krayt dragon ====
Krayt dragons are massive, carnivorous, terrestrial reptiles native to the planet of Tatooine.

Their digestive tract contains multiple chambers, in which mineral deposits may become gems known as 'Krayt Dragon Pearls', sold for high prices.
Smuggler Hu Wanio became known as the "Kraytcutter" on Sullust from his specialty of dealing in Krayt dragon stomachs on the black market.
The Krayt dragon had two known subspecies, the Canyon Krayt dragon, and the Greater Krayt Dragon.

Canyon Krayt Dragons live in the rocky caves and canyons of Tatooine's safari ranges.
10 m (33 ft) tall and 30 m
(98 ft) long, the canyon krayt represents the smallest of the krayt subspecies.
An evolved hunter, the four-legged canyon krayt possesses a yellow-brown camouflage skin pattern, a five-horned crown ridge, a face armored with dermal bone plates, and a spike-studded tail.
They usually feed on womp rats, eopies, and lone banthas.

Greater Krayt Dragons are rare subspecies of the krayt dragon on Tatooine, measuring up to 100 meters in length, have 10 legs and blue scales, and feed on anything
but mostly Banthas, or on a rare occasions a Sarlacc.
C-3PO passes by a juvenile's skeleton in A New Hope.
This prop was reportedly still in place when the crew of Attack of the Clones went there to film.

===
Drexl ===
Drexl are giant creatures that are usually green, and have teeth the size of human arms.
They are native to Onderon.

The adult form can fly, and is used as a means of transport and defense by the planet's Beast-riders.

Drexl larvae are unable to fly, but are strong and extremely fierce.
They appear in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords.

===
Duracrete slug ===
Having been spread throughout the galaxy by freighters and cargo ships, Duracrete slugs dig tunnels into building foundations and feed off of the concrete in there.
Some specimens have been known to reach 10 m (32.8 ft) in length.
They can consume almost any kind of concrete because the parts they cannot digest are excreted into armor nodules on their bodies.

===
Dweebit ===
The dweebit is a small, reddish-brown beetle, native to the Yuuzhan Vong galaxy.
Dweebits have been used as weapons.
When they were put onto Belkadan, they emitted extremely noxious fumes that made the planet uninhabitable.

== E ==
===
Eopie ===
Eopies are 1.75 meter tall herbivores native to the planet Tatooine, appearing in all three prequel movies,
(Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds and Star Wars Galaxies also feature Eopies).
The quadruped mammals are distinguished by their pale skin and long flexible snouts.
An eopies's pale, white skin helps keep the creature cool by reflecting the intense sunlight of the planet's twin suns.
Eopies are used as beasts of burden due to their endurance and ability to carry a lot of cargo.
They are known for being stubborn and querulous creatures and for having incredibly potent flatulence.
Eopies reach maturity around six standard years of age and their average lifespan is 90 standard years.

==
F ==


===
Fabool ===
Fabools are balloon-like creatures.
They are sometimes punctured by thorny Blba trees and eaten by carnivorous snails.
They live in the Dantarian Savannahs on Dantooine.

===
Falleen ===
Falleens are sentient reptilian beings that can emit pheromones that can affect many species.

===
Falumpaset ===
The Falumpaset is a large mammal native to Naboo, appearing in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, The Gungan Frontier, Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds, and Star Wars Galaxies: The Ruins of Dantooine.
They roamed the plains and swamps of the planet in large herds, and their distinctive call could be heard for kilometers around.
Easily domesticated, falumpasets were popular mounts all over the galaxy.

===
Fambaa ===
Fambaas are the largest terrestrial herbivores of the Naboo swamp, appearing in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, The Gungan Frontier, Star Wars Galaxies, Star Wars: Battlefront, and Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds.
Fambaas are technically amphibians but have the scaly hide of reptiles.
These creatures can easily knock over trees to get at leaves and berries.
They also forage for underwater plants.

Fambaas in the wild travel in herds of up to 12.
They are born with moist skin and gills and upon maturity their tails grow, the gills disappear and their skin hardens.
The Fambaa has been domesticated by Gungan for millennia as beasts of burden and cavalry/artillery draft beasts.

===
Fathier ===
Fathiers, or space horses, appears in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi.
These animals are seen in the coastal city Canto Bight on the desert planet Cantonica.
They are a sentient species that could be tamed and used for riding.
They were known to be graceful and majestic, while being prized for their speed by the wealthy of the galaxy.
The inhabitants of Canto Bight exploited them in competitive and highly popular races on the planet's racetracks.

===
Felucian ground beetle ===
Felucian ground beetles, also known as gelagrubs, are large insects that live on planet Felucia.

===
Fenner's Rock ===
Fenner's Rocks are harmless, slow-moving creatures that consume lichen, moss and algae.
Their bodies resemble rocks and can be stationary for a long time.
They have great big jaws that can suddenly open and sometimes shoot a piercing screech, scaring away unwary passers-by.
===
Fern bicker ===
Fern bickers are ape-like creatures that live on Kashyyyk.
They are mostly solitary creatures.

===
Firaxan shark ===
Alien Firaxan sharks live on the ocean planet of Manaan.
They appeared in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

===
Fish ===


====
Colo claw fish ===
=
Colo Claw Fish are immense underwater carnivores that dwell in the porous caverns of the Naboo core, appearing in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
Natural phosphorescence give its eel-like skin an eerie glow.
They have flattened flukes for bodies, with a large toothy snout flanked by hooked grasping claws.
It can grow up to 40 meters in length, mostly made up of hypersensitive tail tissue that detects movement.
While hunting, the colo uses chin lures to attract prey, then screams with special organs in its throat to sonically stun prey.
The colo can then dislocate its jaws to swallow oversized food.
Once ingested, weak stomach acids and poison assist in the stupefaction of live prey.

====
Opee Sea Killer ====
"Opee" is a large, carnivorous,  anglerfish-like aquatic animal living in the underwater sections of Naboo.

====
Sando aqua monster ====
Sando aqua monsters are 200 m (656 ft) long aquatic mammals from Naboo.
They are ravenous, deadly predators, eating everything including the opee sea killer and the colo claw fish.

====
Zuxu ====
Zuxu are carnivorous lungfish from the planet Ganlihk.
Its flippers are large, padded and prehensile enough for it to actually "walk" on four legs on land for a limited time, sometimes even chasing its prey on land.

===
Forntarch ===
Forntarchs are carnivorous, predatory rodents on the planet Gorsh, who await their prey in trees, and then leap down and impale them with razor-sharp forelimbs.

===
Frog-dog ===
Frog-dogs are sentient reptiles with characteristics of both frogs and dogs.
Their diet is carnivorous, and they use their long tongues to capture prey.
Jabba the Hutt kept a frog-dog named Buboicullaar as a pet.

===
Fynock ===
Fynocks are avian creatures that can be kept as pets.
They look like exotic birds with snake tails.
Fynocks live on Talus.
They do not have appendages besides their wings and they have large suckers on their face.

===
Fyrnock ===
Fyrnocks are predatory quadrupeds that live on Anaxes.
They are unable to walk in sunlight.

==
G ==


===
Galoomp ===
Galoomps are herbivorous reptile-like creatures, (though actually mammals) native to Tatooine.
They resemble long-legged armadillos with ankylosaur-like tails.

===
Ganjuko ===
Ganjuko are massive, furred predators found predominantly on planets in the Filve sector and Bothan worlds, and can grow more than 3.5 m (11.5 ft) tall and 5 m
(16.4 ft) long.
Despite their 600 kg (1,320 lb) mass, they can outrun most humans in a sprint.
They are protected by thick external skull plates and beaks, reinforced by thick layers of cartilage, and finally covered over all parts of their body except on its head by thick fur.
===
Ghest ===
Ghests are large reptilian predators from the bayous of Rodia, and they are entrenched in the mythology of the planet.
Ghests are often portrayed as demons in modern Rodian fiction.
They slink underwater quietly in wait and then surprise their prey by attacking and devouring them in a single pounce.

===
Gizka ===
Gizka are small, frog-like creatures that adapt to almost any environment very swiftly, and reproduce just as quickly.
Their first appearance was in the Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic video game.

===
Goffbird (Titavian) ===
A large, purple pterodactyl like creature with a wingspan of 100 m, native to Naboo.
There are large feathers on its chest, which the Gungans use.
It is believed to have a large opening beneath its throat, that emits a secretion with a reddish color to attract other Goffbirds.

===
Gornt ===
A squat, ugly, quadrupedal omnivore, native to the planet Hethar, gornts are now bred as domesticated herd animals on many planets for their extremely nutritious meat.

===
Gorg ===
Not to be confused with Gorog.
Gorgs are frog like creatures that are domestically farmed on Tatooine.

===
Gorog ===
A huge, mammoth animal resembling an ape.
The Gorog is a mythical creature used in an underground arena on Cato Neimodia.
The Gorog can be about 700 meters tall.
The creature is native to Cato Neimodia and walks like a gorilla, with numerous bones and horns sprouting from its head.
The creature is massive, and has two hearts, which makes it difficult to kill.
The Gorog appears in Star Wars
The Force Unleashed II
===
Graiveh ===
Graivehs originate from the planet Ealor, and are dangerous bipedal predators that are considered "pre-sentients" by the scientists of the Galactic Empire, as they seem to almost achieve sentience.
They grow up to 2.5 m (8.2 ft) tall and possess great eyesight.

===
Graul
===
Grauls originate from the planet Dantooine and walk like gorillas.
Their colors range from green to reddish orange and are about the size of rancors.
===
Grazer ===
Grazers are fat animals with spikes on their backs and large udders.
They live on Alderaan, Gestron, and Haruun Kal.
===
Great oopik ===
Great oopiks, flightless creatures from the planet Paramatan with vestigial wings, seem to be the evolutionary link between reptiles and avians.
They also use echolocation to seek their food and stun them with powerful ultrasonic waves emitted from their throat sacs.
They also possess a sac below their backs.
This lethal sac emits a toxic odor when stimulated.
===
Greysor ===
Greysors are monkey-like creatures that live on Naboo, Mimban and Cholganna.
Gungans are known to keep them as pets.

===
Grotseth ===
Grotseths are dangerous predatory fish on the ocean planet Baralou.
They hunt in packs, grow up to 4 m (13.1 ft) in length and are covered in many small razor-sharp shells.

===
Gualamas ===
Gualamas are docile and swift quadrupeds native to Naboo.
They are seen usually in herds, are white with long, swinging tails, and horns atop their heads.
They are smaller relatives of gualaras.

===
Gullipuds ===
Gullipuds are self-inflating creatures, used in gullipud ball games on planets like Naboo, Manaan, Selonia and Drall.

===
Gundark ===
Gundarks are large, long-eared primates, native to the jungle planet of Poiu-Trewq.

Surprisingly solitary for primates, they are noted for both their great strength and their fierce tempers.

== H ==
===
Hanadak ===
Hanadaks are like a cross between a bear and a baboon.
They hibernate during the winters on Hok and have a fierce temper.

===
Hoska ===
Hoska are grazers herd beasts living on the plains of the planet Essowyn, and are primary source of food for the Saurton, the local sentient species.

===
Howlers ===
Howlers are carnivorous, reptilian quadrupeds that may be native to Yavin 4.
They attack prey mainly by lunging and clawing, but they do have an ear-splitting howl that they use to stun prey.
They make an appearance on the video game Jedi Academy.

==
I ==


===
Ishi Tib ===
Ishi Tib are an amphibious species native to Tibrin.

===
Ikopi ===
Ikopis are fleet-footed ungulates that live on the plains of Naboo.

===
Iriazes ===
Iriazes are bipedal ungulates with one horn, a long kangaroo-like tail and brown fur.

They live on Muunilinst and Dantooine.

==
J ==
===
Jyykle vulture ===
Jyykle vultures are solitary creatures that live on Mimban and Kashyyyk.
They are extremely temperamental and often attack without warning.

==
K ==


===
Kaadu ===
Kaadu are large, flightless, billed waterfowl that live in the swamps of the planet Naboo.
Gungans use them as mounts.

===
Kalaks ===
Kalaks are large and very stupid reptilian creatures that stand
2.35 m (7.7 ft) tall.
They live on Mobus and have a tough hide, thereby making them difficult to hunt.

===
Kaminoan ===
Kaminoans are tall, long-necked creatures native to the ocean planet of Kamino and are most commonly known for running the famous cloning factories of Kamino, where the Republic's clone army was created.
They are almost humanoid, very tall, long neck, extremely pale.

===
Kath hound ===
Kath hounds are horned,
wolf-like creatures native to Dantooine.
There are two variants: the smaller one is orange and white with two horns; the larger is brown overall with three large horns.
This latter variant is also called a "bull kath hound".

===
Kimogila ===
Kimogila are large,  vicious lizards from Lok.
They resemble the Krayt Dragons of Tatooine with some distinct aesthetic differences including its bulkier build and its lack of floppy ears.
Kimogila (or "kimos") are generally a dark green color with rows of horns running from nose to tail.
They are very aggressive and trophies, though rare, are made of their skulls.

===
K'lor Slugs ===
K'lor slugs are large worm-like creatures native to the Sith Homeworld of Korriban, and inhabit the tombs of the Sith lords, and prey on anything that attempts to plunder the tombs, from archeologists to Sith Acolytes.
They are also found on several other worlds.
For example: A massive K'lor Slug is found on Taris.
They appear in Star Wars:
The Old Republic


===
Koriena ===
Koriena are striped canines that hunt in packs and are similar to wolves.

=== Kouhun ===
Kouhun are centipede-like creatures with stingers and teeth.
They live on Mimban and Indoumodo.
As well, giant kouhuns live in the swamps of Naboo and shoot poison puffs at their prey.

===
Kowakian monkey-lizards ===
Kowakian monkey-lizards are small, hairy creatures with large ears, beaks and tails, and stand approximately two feet (60 cm) tall.
They are small, semi-intelligent creatures from the planet Kowak.

===
Krakanas ===
Krakanas are aquatic creatures that live on Mon Calamari.
They are similar to giant octopi, in that they have many tentacles; however, each tentacle ends in a large razor-sharp pincer.

===
Krykna ===
Krykna are large, pale-white six-legged arachnoid arthropods native to the planet Atollon, large enough to be aggressively dangerous to humans, but repelled by sensor marker technology.
These spiders closely resemble the Knobby White Spider (above) from the planet Dagoba.
They can be found in chapter ten of The Mandalorian.

===
Kybuck ===
Kybucks are fast, grassland-inhabiting ungulates that inhabit Kashyyyk.
These swift mammals use the tall grasses of their native grasslands to hide from would-be predators, although they are capable of outrunning most predators anyway, being able to perform magnificent acrobatic jumps while running up to 90 kilometers per hour.
Male Kybucks have short horns on the top of their heads, and different species can be told apart by horn variations.

===
Kyren ===
The kyren is a small herbivorous insect from Ansion that travels in swarms of up to 150 million individuals.
They have no legs, and spend most of their lives airborne, feeding on the wide grasslands of Ansion.

==
L ==
===
Laa ===
Laas are fish, resembling angler fish.
Laas live in Naboo's swamps.

===
Laigrek ===
Laigreks are large arachnids from the planet Dantooine.
They like dank, dark areas and took up residence in the ruins of the Dantooine Jedi Enclave after it was bombarded by Darth Malak in the Jedi Civil War.

Their bite is painful, but not venomous.

===
Lava flea ===
Lava fleas are a species of hard shelled arthropod.
The Mustafar lava flea has been domesticated by the native Mustafarians who use it in their large industry of mining the various metals dissolved in the plentiful lava on their planet.

===
Lepi ===
The lepi are an omnivorous humanoid species, resembling anthropomorphic rabbits, with large incisors, long ears, lanky frames, and big feet.
Lepi are covered in short fur that varies in color from green to dark blue.
They possess a heightened metabolism such that they are always in motion, giving some an air of fidgetiness.
Lepi developed and pursued stellar travel in response to over crowding on their homeworld Coachelle Prime.
===
Loper ===
Lopers are small, opossum-like rodents from the fourth moon of Yavin.
They are readily identified by their luxurious red fur, sharp teeth and claws, and hairless, bone-plated tail that ends in wicked barbs.
Though nasty when cornered, Lopers will tend to avoid conflict with larger creatures.

===
Lylek ===
The Lylek is the most dangerous predator on the planet of Ryloth.
It is one of the few creatures that is able to survive in the Bright Lands.
Lyleks are tall beasts that are protected by a thick exoskeleton.
They are armed with sharp, spear-footed limbs, powerful jaws, and overpowering tentacles.
Lyleks are fierce and prey on each other when there is no other food available.
In addition to their viciousness and strength, their tail tentacle is also tipped with a poisonous barb.
The poison is not deadly, but it is strong enough to disable most creatures
so they do not escape.
Lyleks are also known for crawling into inhabited caves and threatening city dwellers.

===
Lizards ===


====
Scyk ====
Scyks are reptilian lizards native to Tatooine.
They appear in the video game Star Wars Galaxies.

====
Vesp ====
Vesps are poisonous lizards that live on the planet Lok.

====
Vyp ====
Vyps are poisonous lizards that live on Cholganna.

== M ==


===
Malia ===
Malia are swift creatures living in dens on the surface of Ragoon 6, marked by blue-gray fur, long tapered snouts, and a triple row of yellow teeth.
They are fearsome fighters, especially during the night when they do their hunting and are most active.

===
Maramu ===
Maramu, a cross between a ram and a kangaroo, live in the mountains of Genesia and Cholganna, they are also native to the forest moon of Endor.

===
Massiff ===
Massiffs are creatures that can be found across the galaxy, including Geonosis and Tatooine.
They are used as pets and guards.
They are often found living with tusken raiders.
In The Mandalorian chapter 9, the Mandalorian uses tusken to speak with them.

===
Minstyngar ===
Minstyngars are insects that live in troops on Kashyyyk and Mimban.

===
Mogo ===
Mogos are camel-like creatures with ten legs that inhabit the planet Roon; the mogo's shaggy fur keeps it warm in the mountains.
Mogos can be used for transportation and food, and their fur is used for clothing.

===
Mott ===
Motts are strong, horned mammals that live on Naboo and Mimban.
They look like a cross between a rhinoceros and a hippopotamus with orange-tan, white-striped hides, motts are easily domesticated.

===
Mouf ===
Moufs are medium-sized, solitary creatures that often get together to feed or mate.
They look similar to bears.

===
Mutriok ===
The mutriok is a four-legged creature found on Socorro.
It is often preyed on by the tra'cor.
===
Mygeetoan yaks ===
Mygeetoan yaks are white yak-like creatures that live on Mygeeto.

===
Mynock ===
A mynock is a leathery-looking silicon-based organism that grows up to 1.6 m (5.25 ft) long, with a wingspan of up to 1.25 m (4.1 ft), and that feeds on electrical energy.
They are often found leeching power from spacecraft, as mynocks are one of the few species capable of living in the vacuum of space, feeding on stellar radiation, silicon and other minerals from asteroids and other space debris.
Mynocks' bat-like wings also allow them to fly in the atmosphere.
Found across the galaxy (having spread prolifically from their original system), mynocks tend to flock together, migrating annually in large groups.
The most notable of these events are the migrations of Roon, during which the sky darkens from swarms of these creatures.

First seen in The Empire Strikes Back feeding on the Millennium Falcon.
The vynock was a leathery, winged subspecies of the mynock native to the planet Kalarba.

==
N ==
===
Neebray ===
Neebray are giant manta ray-like creatures that first appeared in the Clone Wars TV series.
They live in the vacuum of space, use nebulas as breeding grounds and they have been found on planets such as the coral moon of Rugosa and the moon of Rishi.

===
Neks ===
Neks are quadrupeds that resembles a hairless muscular dog, with three large claws to every paw and large teeth.
They are classically called "Battle Dogs" and are bred in the Cyborrean system for sale on the Galactic Black Market.
These huge and vicious creatures are sometimes fitted with armour plating and special simulators calls "Attack Simulators" for either sparring for duelling.

===
Nerf ===
Nerfs are fur-covered, smelly, herbivores with dull horns protruding from their head, first seen in Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
They raised on planets such as Alderaan for their delicious meat, although they have a bad odor.
They are first mentioned by name as an insult in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980)
, nerf herders on Alderaan are known for their poor hygiene.
===
Nexu ===
Nexus are felines from the planet of Cholganna.
Nexus possess tooth-filled jaws that cover most of their spade-shaped heads.
They are covered in tan-brown fur, which helps them blend into the background of their native prairies.
The stripes also aid in hiding out in the rainforest brush.
The four-legged carnivores have four eyes also, as the second set, situated next to the first, can see in infrared to find hidden prey.
They also feature a split ended tail, covered underneath with two rows of suction cups used to climb and swing from tree to tree in their forest home.
A Nexu was seen as an 'Arena Beast' in Attack of the Clones.
Padme Amidala was also attacked by the nexu in the arena on Geonosis before it was killed by a Reek.
Nexu can be trained to act as guards or pets.
Allana Djo Solo owned a nexu named Anji.

===
Night Beast ===
The Night Beast is a fictional monster from the Star Wars Saga as well as a movie by American film maker Don Dohler.

After the Massassi had departed from the planet Yavin IV, they left behind a creature known only as The Night Beast to guard and protect their homeworld against anybody who might seek to take it over until they eventually returned.

Its skin is leathery and is murky green in colour, and has slightly aquatic facial features such as large fish-like lips that are filled with enormous teeth.
It is a bipedal life form whose feet and hands end with gigantic, devastating claws and it possesses great strength.

===
Nudj ===
Nudj are swamp lizards, similar to chameleons.
They are native to the swamps of Dagobah.

===
Nuna ===
The Nuna are gamebirds from Naboo, who can be seen living around the Lianorm Swamp.
A dwarf species existed, the adult of which was the same size as a chick of the common species.
The Nuna is also found on Tatooine, notably around Mos Espa.
The Naboo Nuna is socially aggressive, if one is attacked then nearby Nuna will attack the aggressor.
The Tatooine Nuna is mostly non-aggressive and as a result is farmed in large numbers by local hunters.

==
O ==
===
Opee Sea Killer ===
Opee sea killers are large aquatic meat-eating crustaceous sea creatures that live in the planet core of Naboo.
They are approximately twenty meters in length and hybrids of both crustacean and fish.
The creatures have two pectoral guidance fins, six crablike legs in the back, two antennas, bouncy eyes, and abnormally large jaws with larger prehensile tongues within them.

===
Orbalisk ===
Orbalisks are barnacle-like creatures, native to the Beast Moon of Dxun.
They are parasites that attach to the skin of their host.
They feed on Dark Side Energy.
They pump chemicals into the blood that increase rage, anger, and fury.
When killed they pump toxins into the host.
They appeared in Darth Bane: The Rule of Two.
===
Orray ===
Orrays are creatures that have been described as having a build like a horse or alligator.
Extremely aggressive.
Have the smell of an arm pit.

===
Oslet ===
Oslets are 3 m (9.8 ft) tall, timid creatures that live in the jungles of the planet Joralla.
They are also used as mounts and nest high up in the sio trees.

==
P ==


===
Peko peko ===
Peko pekos are reptavians with purple feathers, native to the swampy regions of Naboo.
They are capable mimics, and are often kept as pets.

===
Pharple ===
Pharple are a small to medium-sized game bird found on Lok.

===
Pikobi ===
Pikobis are dinosaur-like creatures that live in the swamps of Naboo.

===
Profogg ===
Profoggs are little creatures resembling prairie dogs, that live on Tatooine.

===
Pug jumper ===
Pug jumpers are hard exoskeletal creatures that live on Kashyyyk.

== R ==


===
Rainbow gem ===
Rainbow gems are long-living silicon-based lifeforms that live on Gallinore.
They radiate a beautiful, colorful shine that stems from their inner light, but only after maturing for thousands of years.
They are considered extremely valuable, as just one is worth the price of a Mon Calamari cruiser.

===
Rakghoul ===
The Rakghoul is the end result of a Sith bioweapon, turning beings into mindless mutants.
Rakghoul infection can be transferred by contact with one.
The original outbreak occurred on the planet Taris, where they plagued the inhabitants of the Undercity – criminals or their descendants – but they also live on Coruscant.
First appeared in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic


===
Rancor ===
The rancor is an immense, warm-blooded predator native to Dathomir, Lehon, and Felucia.
It was first seen in Return of the Jedi wherein Luke Skywalker is attacked by one at the behest of Jabba the Hutt.
Luke kills the creature by triggering a heavy steel gate to fall and crush its head.

===
Rat ===


====
Jakrab ====
Jakrabs are hare like rodents native to Tatooine.

====
Womp rat ====
A womp rat is a slow-moving rodential creature, often found scavenging in packs at the bottom of canyons.
They are one of the most vile creatures native to Tatooine.
They are covered in short fur that is usually yellow or tan and look through garbage and waste dumps for meals.
Due to exposure to radioactive waste and chemicals, womp rats can mutate into larger beasts, with larger jaws, long, whip-like tails, and even an infectious disease-causing saliva.
According to Luke Skywalker in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, they attain approximately two meters in length.

===
Rathtar ===
A rathtar is a large, carnivorous creature resembling a giant octopus, with razor sharp teeth, multiple tentacles, and numerous eyes.
Introduced in Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015), they are pack hunters.

===
Reek ===
The reek is a large quadrupedal mammal native to the plains of Ylesia in Hutt space, and often bred on ranches on that world's Codian Moon.
Large tusks protrude from their cheeks, which they use for headlocks in contests for dominance among their own kind.
One central horn is used to attack an opponent head-on.
While they are herbivores by nature, they are often fed meat to make them vicious and are then used for exhibition sport as execution animals.
Was seen as an 'Arena Beast' in Attack of the Clones.

===
Rock worrt ==
=
Rock worrts are orange insects found on many planets.
Their bite delivers a combination poison and neurotoxin to their victim, which is then used as an incubator for up to 20 eggs.

===
Ro-roo ===
Ro-roos are lemur-like creatures that live on Kashyyyk and Mimban.

===
Rong boar ===
Rong boars are a porcine species found on Mimban.

===
Ronto ===
Rontos are large, four-legged creatures that are beasts of burden utilized by the Jawas of Tatooine.
They appear in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (and video game adaptation), Star Wars Empire: Darklighter, Star Wars Galaxies, Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (Special Edition),
A Hunter's Fate: Greedo's Tale, and Shards of Alderaan.

Like the native dewbacks of Tatooine, rontos are easy to train and become quite fond of their masters.
Rontos have superb senses of hearing and smell, contrasting their poor vision, which is why they are startled by sudden movements.

===
Rugger ===
Ruggers are small, furry rodents, found on the forest moon of Endor.

===
Roggwart ===
Roggwarts are large, predatory beasts with long tails, curved horns, and tough thick skin.
This is the creature General Grievous kept as a pet in episode ten "Lair of Grievous", season one of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, an animated cartoon series from 2008.
General Grievous would then name his pet roggwart "Gor".
Gor would then live in Grievous's castle on the third moon of the planet Vassek.
Gor would devour any unintended guests for the rest of his life, until Gor would be slain by Kit Fisto in episode ten, season one of the Clone Wars series.

==
S ==


===
Sand Creature ===
Sand Creatures are monstrous worm-like creatures that do not seem to have a true name.
They tunnel under the ground quickly, and shoot up above ground mouth first to swallow prey.

===
Sarlacc ===
The sarlacc is an omnivorous, immobile beast, found on several planets, most notably Tatooine.
The largest known member of the species resides on Felucia, and is several kilometers long.
Jabba the Hutt used to toss his enemies into a sarlacc, which would then slowly digest them for a thousand years.
Boba Fett is the only one known to survive the sarlacc.
It consists of a single giant beak and many tentacles emerging from the depths of its pit as well as spike-like teeth that help snag onto prey's clothes "like barbed wire
" long enough for the tentacles to grab it.
Xenobiologists are unsure as to whether the sarlacc is animal or plant, as it possesses characteristics of both kingdoms.
They reproduce by spitting out a small dart like object that attaches to a living creature and devours it.
First appears in Return of the Jedi.
They are mentioned in the Disney TV show The Mandalorian.
In episode 9, a Krayt Dragon appears in an empty Sarlacc pit.

===
Scurrier ===
Scurriers are rat-like creatures from Tatooine.
They travel in packs of around 30 members.
Males can be distinguished from females by the horns which are small and straight compared to the larger, curled horns of the males.

===
Shaak ===
Shaaks are plump, pachydermal herd animals with enormous rears that jut into the air.
They are native to the grasslands of Naboo, where they graze on flowers and grass.
They are raised for meat.
They can be found in the animated Disney TV show Star Wars: The Clone Wars.

===
Shyrack ===
Shyracks are bat-like creatures that inhabit the caves of Korriban.
Shyracks are very dangerous pests, that often attack intruders in flocks.

===
Sketto ===
Skettos are flying reptiles, native to Tatooine.
They are active at twilight and live off of the blood of large mammals, often travelling in large groups to overwhelm and feed on prey.

===
Slivilith ===
A slivilith is a large, green, amorphous creature that thrives off ambient energy and solar radiation in space.
Sliviliths have a semi-discernible head with two glowing red eyes and two antenna stalks.
The rear side of the body tapers off into a mass of tentacles.
Sliviliths have membranous wings that can propel them through space or atmospheric environments.

===
Snarb ===
Snarbs are lizards with grey skin and 2 legs.
They live on Mimban.

===
Sleen ===
Sleens are lizards native to Dagobah.

===
Spider ===
====
Kinrath ====
Kinrath are large, venomous arachnid-like creatures that live on Dantooine and Kashyyyk.
They appear in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords.

====
Knobby White Spider ====
Knobby White Spiders are a bizarre organism of the Dagobah System: essentially the larvae stage of the gnarl tree, resembling a gigantic arachnid, which roams the swamps and devours animals, and eventually anchors itself to the ground and becomes a mature tree.

====
Shell Spider ====
Shell Spiders, as depicted in Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter, are known for their incredibly tough and durable silk, which was used to form dense armor plating for personal protection.
When woven into a mat, shell spider silk could deflect a vibroblade as well as low-power beams and lasers.

====
Spice spider ====
Spice spiders, also called Energy Spiders, are arachnids, native to the mines of Kessel.
Their excrement is the basis of the narcotic glitterstim.
They are one of Han Solo's greatest fears, as he was chased by one in the Kessel Mines.
About 9 years before the Clone Wars began, some of these spiders were brought to Ryloth and altered to produce the more potent narcotic "glitteryll".

====
Webweaver ====
Webweavers are arachnid creatures that live on Kashyyyk.
They are the dominant species on the dark lower and ground levels of the forest planet, where they use their violent characteristics to thrive.

===
Staga ===
Staga are used as herd animals on the planet Ambria.
They have tufts of fur on their shoulders, but are otherwise reptilian-looking, with scales, horns and thick tails.

===
Stone Mite ===
Stone mites are scorpion-like creatures that cling to spaceships, consuming their hulls with a combination of strong jaws and acidic saliva.
Three individual stone mites can merge to form an ambiotic triont that features a hard shell, strengthened by electrolytic reactions.
These creatures have been suspected as the work of military genetic engineers.
Stone mites can be found across the galaxy, including on Tatooine, Coruscant, Malastare and Naboo.

===
Storm beast ===
Storm Beasts are monsters that inhabit Malachor V.


===
Stratt ===
The stratt is a large reptilian beast that lives on Coruscant.

===
Suubatar ===
The suubatar is a riding beast, native to the grasslands of Ansion.
Suubatars are 6 m (19.7 ft) tall, and can travel at an impressive speed on their six muscular legs.
They are omnivores, and feed equally well on large fruit and small prey.

===
Swamp slug ===
Swamp slugs are large aquatic mollusks that live on the planet Dagobah.

==
T ==


===
Tach ===
Tach are harmless monkey-like creatures that inhabit the Shadowlands on the planet Kashyyyk.
During the Czerka occupation of Kashyyyk, tach were hunted by poachers for their glands, which were used as an additive in brewing a type of strong ale unique to the planet Taris.

===
Talortai ===
The Talortai are a mysterious, force sensitive race who are immune to aging.
They are avian-humanoid in appearance but also have reptilian features.
The Talortai are fierce warriors who hone their abilities using the force.
Talortai also have the ability to regenerate any wounds.

Urai Fen in the game
Star Wars: Empire at War
: Forces of Corruption is the only Talortain seen in the Star Wars franchise.

===
Talz ===
The Talz were a sentient species native to the planet Orto Plutonia.
They were covered in thick, shaggy white fur and possessed four eyes and a small proboscis.
During the Clone Wars, they lived a primitive lifestyle.
A talz named Muftak can be seen in A New Hope.

===
Taozin ===
The taozin is a huge, completely transparent, insect-like beast, endemic to the moon of Va'art.
It eats anything foolish enough to come near, which it traps by spitting a gluey fluid that becomes silk and entwines it.

===
Tauntaun ===
Tauntauns are 2.5 m (8.2 ft) tall bipedal snow reptiles, indigenous to the ice planet Hoth.
Tauntauns are covered with white fur and have downturned horns, four nostrils, and a foul body odor.
They graze on lichen, moss and fungi found in ice grottoes as a food source, as well as scavenging on frozen flesh or small rodents; their own meat is unfit for human consumption.
They are used as mounts by the Rebel Alliance during their occupation of Echo Base.
The tauntaun's thick layers of fat and fur provide adequate protection from the cold during the daytime, but it cannot survive exposure to the cold of night.
Due to oil excreted from their skin, tauntauns give off a very unpleasant odor.
They are the primary prey of the wampa.
The species' first appearance was in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980, with one appearing in the center of this movie poster for the film)
, although a mounted tauntaun head appears in Return of the Jedi (1983) next to Jabba the Hutt's favorite trophy, the frozen Han Solo.

===
Terecon ===
Predators on the planet
Essowyn, terecons are reptiles, who attack by burrowing into the ground and leaping spectacularly upon their unsuspecting prey.
They can grow up to 1 m
(3.3 ft) tall and 8 m
(26.2 ft) long.
===
Terentatek ===
A creature mentioned in the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, presumably created by the Sith to kill Jedi.
On the Jedi Academy on Dantooine, a Twi'lek Jedi teaches Revan about an event called 'The Great Hunt' where numerous Jedi were sent out to kill the creatures.
In the game Terentateks are encountered in the Kashyyyk Shadow lands (it is referred to as 'the ritual beast'), in Naga Sadow's tomb on Korriban and the Shyrack Cave on Korriban.
Terentateks feed on force adepts, and are found where the dark side thrives.
Slow but powerful, Terentateks use their large claws to strike foes.
Many Jedi have fallen to the dark side on their quest to rid the galaxy of these abominations.

===
Tesfli piercer ===
Tesfli piercers are tiny flying insects, who inhabit the dense swamps of the planet Gorsh and live in swarms.
Although their bites are not lethal, they sometimes carry dangerous "rotting disease" that simulates gangrene.

===
Thernbee ===
Thernbees are fearsome beasts with psychic abilities, that live on Almania.
They are hairy and have giant teeth and large claws, similar to a lion or wolf.
They are generally quite playful creatures and are often kept as pets, though are also used as watchdogs.
They possess numbing saliva.

===
Thevaxan marauder ===
An enormous reptilian predator on the planet Gorsh, the Thevaxan marauder can always be heard approaching its prey, being a loud, dimwitted and clumsy beast.
It can grow up to 20 m (65.6 ft)
long and 8 m (26.2 ft) tall at the shoulder.

===
Thranta ===
Thrantas are a group of flying animals found on Alderaan, Bespin, and Coruscant.
While there are multiple breeds varying in size and functions (some for personal travel, others for massive air ferries), most thrantas serve the purpose of aerial transport.
The predominant physical feature of these creatures are their manta ray-like figure.

===
Torton ===
Tortons are red and green turtle-like creatures with long legs.
They originated on Naboo's moon of Rori.
===
Tolibs ===
Tolibs are large swamp birds that live on the planet Mimban.

===
Tra'cor ===
The "Tra'cor" is an amphibious relative of the rancor.
Like the rancor, it possessed a hostile temper, but is smaller than the rancor and almost completely water bound.
The tra'cor will feed on moss and grasses growing underwater, but will also eat meat whenever it presents itself.
These water creatures wait to ambush creatures that come to the water to have a drink.
It is found on the planet Socorro and will also walk on land.

===
Treppok ===
Treppoks are enormous fish that grow up to 30 m (100 ft)
long on the ocean planet of Baralou.
They are the herd animals of the sentient species Krikthasi.

===
Tunnel snake ===
Tunnel snakes are poisonous snakes found in jungle regions of planets, such as Kashyyyk and Wayland.

===
Tuskcat ===
Tuskcats are tiger-like animals that live on Naboo and possibly other planets, such as Orto Plutonia.
They had very long sabre-tooth fangs, hence their name, and are also called "Nabooan Tusked Panthers" or Nabooan tusk-cat.
==
U ==


===
Ubeba ===
Ubebas are simians, native to the planet Cholganna.

===
Ugja ===
Ugja are solitary creatures, native to the planet Cholganna.

===
Ugnaught ===
Ugnaughts are small, humanoid creatures that are seen commonly on Bespin.
In The Mandalorian chapter 1, there is an Ugnaught who used to work for the empire.
He was a slave and worked hard to buy his freedom.
His name was Kuill and was killed in the last episode of the season.
They can also be found in The Empire Strikes Back.
They work on the machine that freezes Han Solo in carbonite.
In the beginning of Return of the Jedi, Leiha disguises herself as an Ugnuaght bounty hunter.

===
Uller ===
Ullers are horned creatures that live on Kashyyyk.

===
Umgullian blob ===
The Umgullian blob is a pink, blobby creature, found on Shili and Mimban.
They are most well known to be employed in the blob races on Umgul.

===
Unark ===
Unarks are small, acid-spitting worms that live on Coruscant.

===
Urusai ===
Urusais are reptavians (reptile and avian) native to Tatooine.

==
V ==


===
Varactyl ===
Varactyls are lizard-like creatures with green scales and coloured plumage on their necks.
They are native to the planet Utapau.
Their toes allow them to climb almost vertically.
They seem to have the head of a bird and a body of a gecko, and their call is a short warble-type sound.
A female one named Boga is ridden by Obi-Wan Kenobi in Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
===
Veermok ===
Veermoks are guard creatures found on Naboo and Mimban.
They resemble lanky, upright, and formidable gorillas.

They are useful as guards because they are nearly immune to blaster fire.

ter, to counter its ferociousness.

===
Velker ===
Velker are star fighter shaped creatures found on the planet Bespin.

===
Voorpak ===
Voorpaks are small carnivores that look like balls of fur standing on stick-like legs.
They are kept as pets.
They can be found on Naboo.

===
Vornskr ===
The vornskr is a canine-like animal, native to the planet Myrkr.
It possesses the unusual ability to hunt using the Force.
They are wild, aggressive and vicious beasts.
The voxyn race created by the Yuuzhan Vong to hunt and kill Jedi were a hybrid of the vornskr and the Yuuzhan Vong fero


===
Vulptex ===
Vulptices (sometimes referred to as crystal critters) are fox-like animals, native to the mineral planet Crait.
They live in caves under Crait's salt crust in groups called skulks.
They are best known for their coats made of white crystalline bristles.

==
W ==


===
Wamba ===
Wambas are hooved creatures that live on Cholganna.

===
Wampa ===
Wampas are a horned, clawed, white-furred, carnivorous species of snow monsters native to the frozen world of Hoth.
They are a semi-sentient race of predators standing over 2 m (6.6 ft) in height, subsisting in the cold climate by hunting tauntauns—their primary prey.
Wampas are usually solitary creatures, but are known to occasionally hunt in packs.
Their white fur allows wampas to blend-in with Hoth's blinding blizzards, enabling them to catch their prey completely unaware.
Once they have made their kill, wampas drag the carcasses back to their icy lair, where they suspend them from the ceiling until ready to eat them.
Due to the extreme temperatures of Hoth and the cold-blooded nature of the wampa, the creatures are difficult to track on radar.
A similar species is believed to inhabit the planet Gall, in the Outer Rim.

The wampa made its first appearance in The Empire Strikes Back (1980), as a predator that attacks Luke and eats his tauntaun.
Several other wampa sequences were planned for The Empire Strikes Back, but were ultimately cut.
The wampa also made an appearance in the Family Guy special "Something, Something, Something, Dark Side" (2009), being depicted as Cookie Monster from Sesame Street.

====
Tatooine Howler ====
The Tatooine Howler, also commonly referred to as the Desert Wampa, is a native species of Tatooine that resembles the Wampas of the planet Hoth, despite having no genetic relation.
They are intelligent and solitary creatures, hunting for prey on their own.

===
Wandrella ===
Wandrellas are 10–15 m (32.8–49.2 ft)
long worms, found in the muddy plains of the jungle-covered planet Mimban.
The wandrella's thoughts are primitive, and it often charges at its prey, using its armored belly to quickly move forward.
This large beast has phosphorescent skin, streaked with brown, and has a cluster of several eyes on one end.

===
Woolamander ===
A woolamander is an ape-like animal native to Yavin IV.

It has a blue furred body, a long, multi-colored tail, a prominent belly, and a multi-colored face.
Its chief enemy is the syntaril.

===
Wolf ===


====
Garral ====
Garrals are wolf-like creatures that live in the forests of Wayland and Cholganna.

====
Loth-wolf ====
The Loth-wolf is a near-legendary, Force-sensitive large canid native to Lothal, known since prehistoric times on that world by its inhabitants.
A white-furred one occasionally assisted Ezra Bridger on Lothal in the Star Wars Rebels TV series.

===
Worm ===


====
Blenjeel Sand Worm ====
Gigantic carnivorous caterpillar-like creatures with round mouths filled with sharp teeth, inhabit the planet Blenjeel.

The worms are blind, but can detect motion.
They appear in Jedi Knight and Jedi Academy games.

====
Conduit worm ====
The conduit worm is a long worm that lives in the electrical wiring channels of underground Coruscant and thrives on the electrical currents sent through them.
They may also be attracted to the electric activity in brains, if they do not find a stronger electrical power source to feed on.
As such, many a person has awoken on Coruscant to find one of the worm's feelers creeping into their ears.
The worms can end up on starships, causing power outages, and are treated as vermin.

====
Glim worm ====
Glim worms are tunneling 1 m (3.3 ft) long predators, found on many planets.
They are covered by sharp, flexible scales that move to propel the worms through sand or soil at speeds
up to 40 km/h (25 mph).
They are also hunted for their skin for use as clothing, and their slime for use as adhesive.

====
Space slug ====
Space slugs, also called exogorths or giant asteroid worms, are silicon-based gastropods capable of surviving in near-vacuum conditions.
Space slugs generally make their habitats in asteroids, where they spend the majority of their lives.
Many space slugs have been found in Hoth's asteroid field, some reaching thousands of meters (feet) in length, up to a recorded maximum around 1,000 metres (3,300 ft), although most are much smaller at around 10 metres (33 ft).
They feed by absorbing an asteroid's minerals through their roots.
Smaller space slugs also devour mynocks (in large space slugs, consumed mynocks are not digested and instead become parasites within the space slug).
Large space slugs may also consume starships and have been known to eat sections of Imperial Star Destroyers that flew too close.
The burrow of a space slug is called a "caysh".
They first appeared in The Empire Strikes Back (1980).

===
Worrt ===
Worrts are frog-like creatures native to Tatooine.
They feed on mostly insects and rodents and catch prey by sitting stationary in the sand and using their long tongues to catch and wrap around passing animals.
Jabba the Hutt kept a number of worrts for pest control.
One is briefly seen in Return of the Jedi outside Jabba's palace.
It catches an animal with its tongue, swallows it, and burps.
Many consider this to be the first major introduction of George Lucas's childish humor into Star Wars movies, and a prelude to Jar Jar Binks.
They are sometimes confused with frog-dogs.

===
Wraid ===
Wraids are large, lizard-like creatures that live and are hunted for their armored head plates on the desert planet of Tatooine.
There is also a subspecies on Korriban.

===
Wyrwulves ===
Wyrwulves are six-legged, canine animals that were in fact the children of the Codru-Ji race.
When a wyrwulf reaches puberty, it encases itself in a cocoon, from which a Codru-Ji adult emerges several weeks later.
They can be found on Munto Codru.

==
Y ==


===
Yeltz ===
Yeltz is an amphibious species that resides in the artificial outpost planets of the Lupania ring.
No one
but Yaddle has seen the creature, and thus it is still regarded as a legend.
They are thought to possess the ability to turn transparent under water.
When submerged, they are fearsome predators, but when on-land, they are shy and tamable.

===
Yeomet ===
Yeomets are trash-eating quadrupeds that live on artificial habitats, like space stations or large capital ships.
They are able to eat almost any form of matter, thanks to a special digestive enzyme triggered by strong electromagnetic radiation.
They carry disease.

===
Yorik coral ===
Yorik coral was the primary shipbuilding material of the Yuuzhan Vong.
It was grown on-planet in the shape of a ship.
Later, symbiotic creatures were implanted or grown within it to form the ship's functions.
The completed yorik ship had a nervous system that controlled and coordinated the various functions, and a circulatory system that sustained them.

===
Ysalamiri ===
Ysalamiri are furry salamander-like beings that live on Myrkr.
They have the unique property of repelling the Force, rendering all Force powers within their sphere of influence void; for this reason, they are prominently used by Grand Admiral Thrawn in his campaigns against the New Republic.
The supposed reason for the Force bubble is that it acts as a way to hide from the other unique carnivores of Myrkr that use the Force to hunt down prey, such as the vornskr.
The term "bubble" is particularly apt because, like water bubbles underwater, multiple ysalamiri's bubbles reinforce each other instead of overlapping.
Because of this, large sections of Myrkr are completely removed from the Force.

==
Z ==
===
Zakkeg ===
Zakkegs are large beasts that reside on Dxun.
They are relatively solitary creatures, with thick hides, and covered in spikes and horns.
Along with their tough hide for defense, they are also immune to most Force powers.
Zakkeg are tough, and are a good challenge for Mandalorians.

===
Zillo Beast ===
The Zillo Beast is a lengthy creature sporting the unique feature of five limbs, the fifth protruding from behind its shoulder blades.
It first appeared in the second season of the popular Cartoon Network series The Clone Wars, toward the end of the season.
It was the dominant predator on Malastare before the Dugs wiped them out using various methods, including drilling for fuel that poisons them.
Though they were rendered extinct, rumors spread of a surviving Zillo that would bring about their apocalypse.
While the Republic engaged in a battle against droids on the planet, they tested a new weapon (a type of E.M.P) over the hollow ground concealing the last Zillo Beast in its cave.
Destroying the droids and accidentally opening up the ground leading below, the Dugs immediately wanted to kill the five-story high creature, the last of its kind.
Seeing its armour was resistant to most projectiles, including lightsabres, the Republic tricked the Dugs into thinking that the beast perished and instead transported it to Coruscant for study.
Before study was over, Palpatine ordered the beast to be killed anyway, but the Zillo Beast broke from its prison to hunt Palpatine down in the nearby Senate building.
Because of this and the danger it posed to the citizens of Coruscant, the beast was, shortly after escaping, killed using a toxin gas converted from Malastare fuel.
At the end of the episode, Palpatine informs doctor Sionver Boll he wants the beast cloned.

==
References ==


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
The Essential Guide to Alien Species on Wookieepedia
Planetes (Japanese:
プラネテス, Hepburn:
Puranetesu, Ancient Greek: Πλάνητες Planētes, "Planets"; literally "Wanderers") is a Japanese hard science fiction manga written and illustrated by Makoto Yukimura.
It was adapted into a 26-episode anime television series by Sunrise, which was broadcast on NHK from October 2003 through April 2004.
The story revolves around the crew of a space debris collection craft in the year 2075.

The manga was published in English in North America by Tokyopop, and the anime was distributed in North America by Bandai Entertainment.
Both the manga and anime received the Seiun Award for best science fiction series.

==
Plot ==
The story of Planetes follows the crew of the DS-12 "Toy Box" of the Space Debris Section, a unit of Technora Corporation.
Debris Section's purpose is to prevent the damage or destruction of satellites, space stations and spacecraft from collision with debris (so-called "space debris") in Earth's and the Moon's orbits.
They use a number of methods to dispose of the debris (mainly by burning it via atmospheric reentry or through salvage), accomplished through the use of EVA suits.

The story sometimes revolves around debris collection itself, but more often the concept of collecting "trash" in space is merely a storytelling method for building character development.
The members of the Debris Section are looked down upon as the lowest members of the company and they must work hard to prove their worth to others and accomplish their dreams.

Ongoing plot elements include an upcoming exploratory mission to Jupiter on the new fusion powered ship, Von Braun, and the lead character's decision to join the mission, no matter the cost.
Many other plot threads are also developed throughout the series that help to explain each character's motivations and personalities.
The Space Defense Front is a terrorist organization that believes mankind is exploiting space without first curing global problems such as mass famine and the widened socio-economic divide on Earth.

==
Realism ==


===
Technical ===
The story of Planetes takes place in the near future.
Special care was given in Planetes for a very realistic depiction of space and space travel.
For instance, when in a weightless environment, the frame count dramatically increases in order to make weightless motion more fluid and realistic.
Also, spaceships make no noise in the vacuum of space and astronauts routinely suffer from known space illnesses such as radiation poisoning, decompression sickness, cancer, brittle bones and mental illnesses spawned from isolation in the vacuum of space.

Concepts like momentum in weightlessness are early plot points and are always illustrated naturally.
Director Goro Taniguchi stated in the DVD commentary that he learned much about orbital mechanics in the course of making the series.
This can be shown in showing specific orbital energy, through changing orbits by applying thrust throughout the series.
Even the necessity for the retrieval of space debris that is central to the plot is rooted in the serious and growing problem with space debris today.
The show also works to connect itself to the history of rocketry and space flight.
The opening sequence is similar to the television series Star Trek: Enterprise, featuring a montage of the history of space flight from Greek mythology to the "modern" setting outlined in the series.
Along the way, animated images of important milestones in space travel like Robert Goddard's early rocket tests, the V-2 rocket, Sputnik 1, Laika the dog, the Vostok spacecraft, Apollo 11, Skylab, Mir, the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle Endeavour and other milestones are displayed.
References to early pioneers in rocketry like Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Robert H. Goddard, Wernher von Braun and Hermann Oberth are also made regularly.
The Japanese space agency JAXA served as a technical consultant to the series.
The US version of the DVDs featured interviews with two scientists from NASA's Orbital Debris Section.
However, both scientists stated that the premise of having to rendezvous with debris in orbit is highly unlikely as it would take an extravagant amount of energy for a relatively small amount of salvageable material.
One of the scientists stated that the previous director of the NASA Orbital Debris Section was in fact Donald J. Kessler, the scientist who proposed the eponymous Kessler Syndrome, which is cited and used several times in both the anime and manga.

===
Human elements ===
The story also depicts the richer countries monopolizing resources in space and the poorer ones falling into civil war and being invaded or needing the assistance of those richer countries, telling a story of dependency theory and the negative side of environmentalism.
The conflicting views of the terrorist group, the Space Defense Front, who wish to shut human beings off from space, the main characters who believe in the importance of space exploration and development, and the International Treaty Organization (INTO) which wants space development primarily to serve the economic and military needs of developed nations also play major roles.
The anime refrains from oversimplification of the various factions, portraying both true believers and those with ulterior motives on all sides.
The final settlement of the conflict is also unique in that it is not resolved by any of the main protagonists or antagonists, but by a compromise struck between powers above their heads.
Both the anime and manga set a precedent of portraying a highly multicultural cast of characters.
Usually, characters who refer to anime stereotypes are immediately berated by other characters.

==
Themes ==
The themes in Planetes are philosophical, sociological, and political in nature.

The theme most prevalent within the plot is the relationship between space, humanity, and the individual.
Hachimaki struggles throughout the story with his own relationship with space and consequently, other people.

Existential dread (or angst) and the characters' response to it is an important part to their characterization.
The characters' response to angst, particularly the protagonist Hachimaki, becomes a source of both internal and external conflict throughout the story.

Both the manga and the anime criticize artificial divisions, including political divisions within humanity, as well as divisions between nations, individuals, and class divisions.

In the anime, several characters were introduced in order to add its criticism of salaryman culture.
Some of these characters are portrayed only to seek to climb the corporate ladder, however unlikely it may be.
This fact makes several characters lose sight of the importance of their job, however lowly others might see it.
At the same time, several characters are introduced who seek to work within the system in order to make a difference.

More generally, the series examines the difference between greed and ambition.
The purpose and consequences of space exploration are seen both as they relate to humanity as a whole, and how they relate to the Hoshino family in particular.
For humanity, space exploration holds the promise of increased wealth and prosperity.
However, as the most wealthy nations are the only ones that can develop space, they are the only ones who end up reaping the benefits.
Similarly, the protagonist, Hachirota Hoshino, initially wants to go faster and farther than he ever has before, yet as a result he nearly destroys both himself, and his relationships with others.
Hachi's father, Goro Hoshino, is also caught between the two, having spent many years away from his wife and children so that he could explore space.
Lastly, Hachi's younger brother, Kyutaro Hoshino, is obsessed with building rockets, either to make a name for himself, to upstage his brother, or to gain more attention and respect from his family, even if this occasionally results in putting their lives in danger when one of his rockets flies out of control.

==
Production ==
Though author/illustrator Makoto Yukimura does not have a background in the sciences, the idea of Planetes came to him while reading a book called A Garbage Problem in Space: Space Debris, and found the Japanese phonetics for the word debris (deburi (デブリ)) amusing.
Yukimura intentionally did not research space technology for fears that it would compromise his artistic freedom.
The presentation of technology in the anime adaptation broke from the manga in several areas, such as with the inclusion of touch-controlled HUDs, retractable debris face shields with a video screen, and peripheral cameras to the EVA suits the main characters use.
Also, the anime introduces refinements in the weightless living and working spaces, with foot and hand bars for people to stabilize their movement in a weightless environment.
The base of operations of Toy Box is moved from the Moon to a space station called the ISPV 7 in Low Earth Orbit.
The United States of America is explicitly named in the manga, as opposed to in the anime where it is seldom mentioned in favor of "INTO" or the International Treaty Organization (a possible reference to NATO and SEATO), which seems to be a federation of individual countries including the United States and Japan.

Planetes shared part of its production staff with another anime series that ran at the same time on NHK, Twin Spica.
From this, the production staff slipped several easter egg cross overs into Planetes.
Some of these include:
The hotel on the ISPV 7 Space Station is called the Hotel Spica.

Episode 20 of the Planetes anime featured an isolation test which mirrored the isolation test which was part of the National Space Academy entrance test in Twin Spica.

Inflated spherical escape pods, or "rescue balls" are featured in both series at some point.
There are several times where the anime and the manga would allude to each other.
The following are some examples of this:
"Nora", Technora Corporation's mascot in the anime is originally Hachimaki's alien friend who appeared in a dream.

The white cat the SDF used as an avatar in the anime to talk to the Union conference delegates in episode 23 is Hachimaki's vision of God during his vision quest on the Lunar surface.

In episode 22, the Debris Section Office Staff visit the Moon Debris Section office and find that the office staff there is very similar to them.
This is a reference to the fact that the Toy Box and its crew were based on the Moon in the manga.

In a non-canon yonkoma gag strip in the manga, Tanabe is defeated in volleyball by Claire (who only appears in the anime).
However, Claire's face is not seen, as she states that the cartoonist "Isn't confident enough to draw me".
==
Media ==
===
Manga ===
Written and illustrated by Makoto Yukimura, the twenty-six chapters appeared as a serial in the Kodansha seinen manga magazine Weekly Morning from January 1999 to January 2004.
Kodansha collected the chapters into four tankōbon volumes, and published them from January 23, 2001, to February 23, 2004.
It was licensed for an English-language translation in North America by Tokyopop.
It published the series in five volumes by splitting the last volume in two parts from October 7, 2003, to February 8, 2005.
The translation was rereleased in two omnibus volumes by Dark Horse Comics on December 22, 2015, and May 10, 2016.
===
Anime ===
The anime adaptation of Planetes began airing its 26-episode run on NHK
BS-2 on October 4, 2003, and ended on February 23, 2004.
Produced and animated by Sunrise, it was directed by Gorō Taniguchi and scripted by Ichirō Ōkouchi.
The anime began development and production before the end of the manga serialization.
In the beginning and middle of the series, the writing and production staff only had the first three volumes of the manga as source.
In order to fill the entire 26-episode run of the anime, new characters, new settings and new relationships between characters were made in order to increase dramatic tension, reinforce themes introduced in the manga, and introduce new themes that were compatible with the manga.
While the manga deals more with existential themes, and humanity's relationship with space, the anime further expands the political elements of the story.

The music score was composed by Kōtarō Nakagawa and produced by Victor Entertainment.
The opening theme is "Dive in the Sky" by Mikio Sakai, and
the ending themes are "Wonderful Life" by Mikio Sakai for episodes 1-25 and "Planetes" by Hitomi Kuroishi for episode 26.
There are two insert songs, "A Secret of the Moon" by Hitomi Kuroishi, used in various episodes, and "Thanks My Friend" by Mikio Sakai used in episode 13.

== Reception ==
Both the manga and the anime were critically acclaimed.
According to Anime News Network, the manga has a "solid, engrossing storyline and well-developed characters".
Anime News Network also proclaimed Planetes to be the best science fiction anime series of 2005.
Both the manga and anime received the Seiun Award for best science fiction series, the manga in 2002 and the anime in 2005.In terms of sales, the manga was only a modest success in North America, with volume 3 reaching 81st place on the Diamond US sales top 100, selling about 1100 copies through the distributor.
Volume 4 reached 93rd place, selling about 1400 copies.

== See also ==
Kessler syndrome §
In fiction


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Beard, Jeremy A. (
14 May 2004).
"
Planetes".
T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews.

Carlson, Johanna Draper (23 December 2005). "
Planetes - Recommended Series".
Manga Worth Reading.

Crocker, Janet; Bevers, Mandy; Fay, Shannon (August 2005).
"
Manga Shorts".
Animefringe.
Vol.
6
no.
8.
p. 28.

Solomon, Charles (6 September 2011). "'
Planetes': NASA could use these misfits to clean up space junk".
Los Angeles Times.

==
External links ==
Official website (in Japanese)
Planetes at IMDb
Planetes (manga) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens is a Lego-themed action-adventure video game developed by TT Fusion, based on the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
It is the fifth entry in TT Games' Lego Star Wars series of video games.
Under license from Lucasfilm, the game was released by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for iOS, Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita, and Wii U, on 28 June 2016, and for Android on 27 July 2016.
The game was ported and released by Feral Interactive for OS X on 30 June 2016.

In addition to adapting the film, the game includes content which covers the period between Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens.

==
Gameplay ==
The gameplay of Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens is similar to previous Lego video games.
New systems were introduced including Multi-Builds which grant players access to various building options.
These options can be destroyed and rebuilt in certain brick-building sections of the game, allowing for new path to be opened within the game's world.
Players can also hide behind cover and engage in "Blaster Battles" with enemies throughout the game.
The game features over 200 playable characters, including Rey, Finn, Captain Phasma, Poe Dameron, Han Solo, Kylo Ren and droids, such as C-3PO and BB-8, as well as ships, both regular-sized (which can only be used in certain misisons), and miniaturized.
Players may freely explore Jakku, Takodana, D'Qar, and Starkiller Base, which all act as mini-open worlds.
In addition to adapting the film, the game also bridged the gap between Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens, with Lucasfilm allowing for creative freedom in the additional content that will explore the characters' backstories.

==
Plot ==
The plot closely follows that of Star Wars:
Episode VII -The Force Awakens, though with numerous humorous deviations or minor changes to adapt to the two player co-op gameplay.
There is also a prologue that depicts the Battle of Endor, the defeat of Emperor Palpatine, and the destruction of the Death Star II at the end of Return of the Jedi.

==
Development ==
In early February 2016, publisher Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment teased that the company is working on a new title that involved "two of the world's most popular entertainment brands".
The game was later leaked by several retailers, before its official announcement on 2 February 2016.
Players who purchase the game's Deluxe Edition will receive a season pass to the game and a Lego minifigure of Finn, while players of the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 versions received additional downloadable content, including a character pack and a bonus level, titled the "Droid Character Pack" and the "Phantom Limb Level Pack" respectively.
The game was released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Nintendo 3DS and Wii U on 28 June 2016.

===
Audio ===
The game featured the voice acting of Daisy Ridley, Oscar Isaac, John Boyega, Adam Driver, Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, Anthony Daniels, Domhnall Gleeson, Gwendoline Christie and Max von Sydow reprising their roles from The Force Awakens, as well as Bill Kipsang Rotich as Nien Nunb, Christian Simpson as C'Ai Threnalli and Tom Kane reprising his role as Admiral Ackbar from various Star Wars video games.
Archival recordings from the film also serve as the game's dialogue.

===
Downloadable content ===
A total of 12 downloadable content (DLC) packs were released from the game.
The first one, entitled "The Phantom Limb,", which is exclusive to Sony systems, includes a level that explains how C-3PO obtained his red arm, in addition to eight characters and a miniature vehicle based on the level.
There were three more level packs, namely "Escape from Starkiller Base" (which follows a pair of Resistance pilots as they make their escape from the besieged Starkiller Base), "First Order Siege of Takodana" (which depicts the Battle of Takodana from the First Order's perspective), and "Jakku:
Poe's Quest for Survival" (which depicts Poe Dameron's escape from Jakku upon being separated from Finn and presumed dead in the main storyline).
The other eight packs were character packs, each adding eight characters and a miniature ship: the "Droid Character Pack", "The Clone Wars Character Pack", "Rebels Character Pack", "
The Empire Strikes Back Character Pack", "Jabba's Palace Character Pack", "The Freemaker Adventures Character Pack", "Prequel Trilogy Character Pack", and "Jedi Character Pack".
==
Reception ==
The game received mostly positive reviews.
GameSpot awarded of 7.0 out of 10, saying "Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens doesn't really take you to a new galaxy far, far away, but it's still a pleasant journey."
Game Informer awarded it 8.5 out of 10, saying "A blast for Star Wars and Lego fans alike.
"
IGN awarded it 9.0 out of 10, saying "Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens is the most gaming fun I’ve had with either series in years.
"The
game was the best-selling retail video game in the UK in its week of release and the fourth biggest launch for a Star Wars game in the UK, and became the fourth fastest-selling game based on the Star Wars universe, and the fourth fastest-selling Lego game.
It stayed in the top position for five consecutive weeks, and was the second Lego game to do so, following Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes.

===
Awards ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
The Solar System's planets, and its most likely dwarf planets, are known to be orbited by at least 218 natural satellites, or moons.
19 of them are large enough to be gravitationally rounded; of these, all are covered by a crust of ice except for Earth's Moon and Io.
Several of the largest ones are in hydrostatic equilibrium and would therefore be considered dwarf planets or planets if they were in direct orbit around the Sun and not in their current states (orbiting planets or dwarf planets).

Moons are classed in two separate categories according to their orbits: regular moons, which have prograde orbits (they orbit in the direction of their planets' rotation) and lie close to the plane of their equators, and irregular moons, whose orbits can be pro- or retrograde (against the direction of their planets' rotation) and often lie at extreme angles to their planets' equators.
Irregular moons are probably minor planets that have been captured from surrounding space.
Most irregular moons are less than 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) in diameter.

The earliest published discovery of a moon other than the Earth's was by Galileo Galilei, who discovered the four Galilean moons orbiting Jupiter in 1610.
Over the following three centuries only a few more moons were discovered.
Missions to other planets in the 1970s, most notably the Voyager 1 and 2 missions, saw a surge in the number of moons detected, and observations since the year 2000, using mostly large, ground-based optical telescopes, have discovered many more, all of which are irregular.

== Moons by primary ==
Mercury, the smallest and innermost planet, has no moons, or at least none that can be detected to a diameter of 1.6 km (1.0 mi).
For a very short time in 1974, Mercury was thought to have a moon.

Venus also has no moons, though reports of a moon around Venus have circulated since the 17th century.

Earth has one Moon, the largest moon of any rocky planet in the Solar System.
Earth also has at least two co-orbitals: the asteroids 3753 Cruithne and 2002
AA29; however, since they do not orbit Earth, they are not considered moons.
(
See Other moons of Earth and Quasi-satellite.)

Mars has two known moons, Phobos and Deimos ("fear" and "dread", after attendants of Ares, the Greek god of war, equivalent to the Roman Mars).
Searches for more satellites have been unsuccessful, putting the maximum radius of any other satellites at 90 m (100 yd).Jupiter has 79 moons with known orbits, of which 72 have received permanent designations; of these, 57 have been named.
Its eight regular moons are grouped into the planet-sized Galilean moons and the far smaller Amalthea group.
They are named after lovers of Zeus, the Greek equivalent of Jupiter.
Its 71 known irregular moons are organized into two categories: prograde and retrograde.
The prograde satellites consist of the Himalia group and three others in groups of one.
The retrograde moons are grouped into the Carme, Ananke and Pasiphae groups.

Saturn has 82 moons with known orbits; 53 of them have names.
Most of them are quite small.
Seven moons are large enough to be in hydrostatic equilibrium, including Titan, the second largest moon in the Solar System.
Including these large moons, 24 of Saturn's moons are regular, and traditionally named after Titans or other figures associated with the mythological Saturn.
The remaining 58, all small, are irregular, and classified by their orbital characteristics into Inuit, Norse, and Gallic groups, and their names are chosen from the corresponding mythologies.
The rings of Saturn are made up of icy objects ranging in size from one centimetre to hundreds of metres, each of which is on its own orbit about the planet.
Thus a precise number of Saturnian moons cannot be given, as there is no objective boundary between the countless small anonymous objects that form Saturn's ring system and the larger objects that have been named as moons.
At least 150 "moonlets" embedded in the rings have been detected by the disturbance they create in the surrounding ring material, though this is thought to be only a small sample of the total population of such objects.

Uranus has 27 moons, five of which are massive enough to have achieved hydrostatic equilibrium.
There are 13 moons that orbit within Uranus's ring system, and another nine outer irregular moons.
Unlike most planetary moons, which are named from antiquity, all the moons of Uranus are named after characters from the works of Shakespeare and Alexander Pope's work
The Rape of the Lock.

Neptune has 14 moons; the largest, Triton, accounts for more than 99.5 percent of all the mass orbiting the planet.
Triton is large enough to have achieved hydrostatic equilibrium, but, uniquely for a large moon, has a retrograde orbit, suggesting it was a dwarf planet that was captured.
Neptune also has seven known inner regular satellites, and six outer irregular satellites.

Pluto, a dwarf planet, has five moons.
Its largest moon Charon, named after the ferryman who took souls across the River Styx, is more than half as large as Pluto itself, and large enough to orbit a point outside Pluto's surface.
In effect, each orbits the other, forming a binary system informally referred to as a double-dwarf-planet.
Pluto's four other moons, Nix, Hydra, Kerberos and Styx are far smaller and orbit the Pluto–Charon system.
Among the other dwarf planets, Ceres has no known moons.
It is 90 percent certain that Ceres has no moons larger than 1 km in size, assuming that they would have the same albedo as Ceres itself.
Eris has one large known moon, Dysnomia.
Accurately determining its size is difficult: one indicative estimate of its radius is 350±57.5 km,Two objects were named as dwarf planets, under the expectation that they would prove to be so (though this remains uncertain).
Haumea has two moons, Hiʻiaka and Namaka, of radii ~195 and ~100 km, respectively.
Makemake has one moon, discovered in April 2016.

A number of other objects in the Kuiper belt and scattered disk may turn out to be dwarf planets.
90482
Orcus was found to have a natural satellite, later named Vanth, in 2005.
50000
Quaoar, 225088 Gonggong and 120347 Salacia all since been discovered to have moons.

As of August 2020, 309 asteroid moons and 119 trans-Neptunian moons (including those of Pluto and Haumea) had been discovered.

Due to Earth's varying distance from these planets (as well as their distance to the Sun), the limits at which we are able to detect new moons is very inconsistent.
As the below graph demonstrates, the absolute magnitude (total inherent brightness, abbreviated H) of moons we have detected around planets peaks at H = 17 for Jupiter, H = 16 for Saturn, H = 13 for Uranus, and H = 11 for Neptune.
Smaller moons may (and most likely do) exist around each of these planets, but are currently undetectable from Earth.
Although spacecraft have visited all of these planets, Earth-based telescopes continue to outperform them in moon-detection ability.

==
List ==
This is a list of the recognized moons of the planets and of the largest potential dwarf planets of the Solar System, ordered by their official Roman numeral designations.
The 19 moons that are large enough to have been rounded by their own gravity are listed in bold.
The seven largest moons, which are larger than any of the known dwarf planets, are listed in bold and italic.
Sidereal period differs from semi-major axis because a moon's speed depends both on the mass of its primary and its distance from it.

== See also ==
List of black holes
List of dwarf planets
List of galaxies
List of IAU designated constellations
List of largest cosmic structures
List of multiplanetary systems
List of Solar System objects by size
List of Solar System objects most distant from the Sun
Lists of astronomical objects
Lists of black holes
Lists of exoplanets
Lists of galaxies
Lists of stars
Lists of stars by constellation


==
References ==
 Media related to Natural satellites at Wikimedia Commons
The twenty-first series of Geordie Shore, a British television program based in Newcastle upon Tyne, began airing on 28 July 2020 and concluded following eight episodes on 15 September 2020.
The series was due to begin earlier in the year, but due to the COVID-19 pandemic, production on the series was put on hiatus.
Ahead of the series it was confirmed that three new cast members had joined the show, Ant Kennedy, Louis Shaw, and former The X Factor and Celebrity Big Brother contestant Amelia Lily.
These replace former cast Sam Gowland and Tahlia Chung.
During the series Nat Phillips made her final appearance.

== Cast ==
Abbie Holborn
Amelia Lily
Anthony Kennedy
Beau Brennan
Bethan Kershaw
Chloe Ferry
James Tindale
Louis Shaw
Natalie Phillips
Nathan Henry
=== Duration of cast ===
=
Cast member is featured in this episode.

=
Cast member arrives in the house.

=
Cast member voluntarily leaves the house.

= Cast member leaves and returns to the house in the same episode.

= Cast member returns to the house.

= Cast member leaves the series.

= Cast member returns to the series.

= Cast member features in this episode, but is outside of the house.

=
Cast member does not feature in this episode.

==
Episodes ==


==
Ratings ==


==
References ==
Star Wars comics have been produced by various comic book publishers since the debut of the 1977 film Star Wars.
Marvel Comics launched an eponymous series in 1977 which began with a six-issue comic adaptation of the film and ran for 107 issues, included an adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back.
Marvel also released an adaptation of Return of the Jedi and spin-offs based on Droids and Ewoks.
A self-titled comic strip ran in American newspapers between 1979 and 1984.
Blackthorne Publishing released a three-issue run of 3-D comics from 1987 to 1988.

Dark Horse Comics published the limited series Dark Empire in 1991, and ultimately produced over 100 Star Wars titles, including Tales of the Jedi (1993–1998), X-wing: Rogue Squadron (1995–1998), Republic (1998–2006), Tales (1999–2005), Empire (2002–2006), Knights of the Old Republic (2006–2010), and Legacy (2006–2010), as well as manga adaptations of the original film trilogy and the 1999 prequel The Phantom Menace.

The Walt Disney Company acquired Marvel in 2009 and Lucasfilm in 2012, and the Star Wars comics license returned to Marvel in 2015.
Several new series were launched, including Star Wars, Star Wars: Darth Vader, and Doctor Aphra.
In 2017, IDW Publishing launched the anthology series Star Wars Adventures.

==
Overview ==
An eponymous series by Marvel Comics began in 1977 with a six-issue comic adaptation of the original film and ran for 107 issues and three Annuals until 1986, featuring stories set between the original trilogy films, as well as adaptations of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
From 1985 to 1987, Marvel published two short-lived series based on the Star Wars animated series Droids and Ewoks.
Briefly, the publishing rights went to Blackthorne Publishing, which released a three-issue run of 3-D comics from 1987 to 1988.
Then, three years later, the rights to publish Star Wars comics were acquired by Dark Horse Comics, who published the limited series Dark Empire in 1991 and ultimately produced over 100 Star Wars titles until 2014.

Following the October 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, in January 2014, it was announced that the Star Wars comics license would return to Marvel Comics in 2015 (Disney having previously purchased Marvel Entertainment and the Marvel Comics brand and publishing in 2009).

In April 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded the majority of the Star Wars Expanded Universe as Legends, only keeping the theatrical Skywalker saga and the 2008 Clone Wars theatrical film and television series as canon.
Most media released since then is considered part of the same canon, including comics.

===
Marvel (1977–1987) ===
Lucasfilm publicity supervisor Charles Lippincott approached publisher Stan Lee at Marvel Comics in 1975 about publishing a Star Wars comic book prior to the film's release.
Lee initially declined to consider such a proposal until the film was completed, and was only persuaded otherwise in a second meeting arranged by Roy Thomas, who wanted to edit the series.
Since movie tie-in comics rarely sold well at that time, Lee negotiated a publishing arrangement which gave no royalties to Lucasfilm until sales exceeded 100,000.
Thomas and artist Howard Chaykin adapted the events of the original film in issues #1–6 of Star Wars, with the first issue released for sale on April 12, 1977.
According to former Marvel editor-in-chief Jim Shooter, the strong sales of Star Wars comics saved Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
The series began featuring original stories with issue #7 (January 1978).
Writer Archie Goodwin and artist Carmine Infantino took over the series as of #11 (May 1978).
The series was one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.
The 100,000 copy sales quota was surpassed quickly, allowing Lippincott to renegotiate the royalty arrangements.
A six-issue adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back by Goodwin and artists Al Williamson and Carlos Garzon appeared in issues
#39–44 (September 1980 – February 1981).
Writer David Michelinie and artist Walt Simonson became the new creative team with issue #51 (September 1981).
Ron Frenz became the regular artist of the title starting with issue #71 (May 1983).
As of 1984, the Star Wars series was primarily written by Jo Duffy, and art for the final year and a half of the series was by Cynthia Martin.
Marvel published the series until 1986, lasting 107 issues and three Annuals.
The first original Star Wars stories not directly adapted from the films to appear in print form were Star Wars comics serialized in the Marvel magazine Pizzazz (1977–1979).
The first story arc, titled "The Keeper's World", was by Thomas, Chaykin, and Tony DeZuniga.
The second story arc, entitled "The Kingdom of Ice", was by Goodwin, Simonson, Klaus Janson, Dave Cockrum, and John Tartaglione.
The final two chapters were scheduled to be printed in issues #17 and 18, but the magazine was cancelled after issue #16.
Marvel UK reprinted "The Keeper's World" in its Star Wars Weekly #47–50, and "The Kingdom of Ice" (including the previously unreleased chapters) in its Star Wars Weekly #57–60 between 1978 and 1979.Marvel's Star Wars comics were reprinted in the U.K. as a weekly black-and-white comics anthology.
The weekly U.K. issues split the stories from the U.S. monthly issues into smaller installments, and it usually took around three weekly issues to complete a U.S. monthly issue.
The U.K. comic also published original Star Wars stories by British creators, including Alan Moore.
Star Wars Weekly #1 was published with a free cut-out X-wing fighter on February 8, 1978.
It became The Empire Strikes
Back Weekly from issue #118 in May 1980, and then became a monthly title from issue #140 in November 1980, reverting to the title Star Wars with issue #159 in July 1982.
The monthly comic ran until issue #171 in July 1983, when the numbering was reset at #1 for Return of the Jedi Weekly, which was the first time the U.K. comic had been printed in color.
This is the title and format that remained until the last issue (#155) was published in June 1986.
Further original content was published in issues #94–99, 104–115, 149 and 153–157.
Throughout this eight-year period, Marvel UK also published several Star Wars Annuals and Specials.

Marvel's adaptation of Return of the Jedi (October 1983 – January 1984) appeared in a separate, eponymous four-issue limited series as well as in Marvel Super Special #27 and in a mass market paperback.
From 1985 to 1987, the animated children's series Ewoks and Droids inspired comic series from Marvel's Star Comics line.

===
Pendulum Press (1978) ===
In 1978, Pendulum Press, under their educational series Contemporary Motivators, also published a 31-page loose adaptation of Star Wars by Linda A. Cadrain and Charles Nicholas.
Produced as part of a package which included an audio tape and a film strip, the comic was specifically designed for classroom use, with typeset instead of hand lettering, and vocabulary appropriate for children.

===
Newspaper strip (1979–1984) ===
A newspaper strip was published between 1979 and 1984, distributed by Los Angeles Times Syndicate and the Watertown Daily Times.
The creative teams were revolving, but included Archie Goodwin, Williamson, Russ Manning, Steve Gerber, Alfredo Alcala, Carlos Garzon and letterer Ed King.
Goodwin switched from writing Marvel's Star Wars series to the weekly newspaper comic strip after the release of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), becoming the first writer to draw from more than just the original film in establishing the era set between the two films.
The strip was based on the storyline and characters established in the original trilogy, but never adapted any of the films, instead fleshing out the history between them.
From October 1980 to February 1981, Goodwin and Alcala adapted Brian Daley's Han Solo at Stars' End (1979).In 1991, Russ Cochran published a 2500-copy limited run of a three-volume hardcover boxset of all of Goodwin and Williamson's Star Wars comic strips from 1981 to 1984, signed by both creators, and featuring new cover illustrations by the latter.
Dark Horse Comics collected colorized compilations of the newspaper strip in its Classic Star Wars series from 1992 to 1994.
Between 2017 and 2018, The Library of American Comics published a three-volume reprint series of the complete comic strip.

===
Blackthorne (1987–1988) ===
Blackthorne Publishing released a three-issue series called Star Wars 3D from December 1987 to February 1988.
The comics were later reprinted in a black-and-white, non-3-D format by Dark Horse in their 2013 Star Wars Omnibus: Wild Space, Volume 1.
===
Dark Horse (1991–2014) ===


====
Adaptations ====


=====
Film and television adaptations =====
Dark Horse also published miniseries adapting Episode I: The Phantom Menace, Episode II: Attack of the Clones, Episode III: Revenge of the Sith .
From 1998 to 1999, Dark Horse produced Star Wars manga, adapting the original trilogy and The Phantom Menace as manga with all the typical narrative and stylistic characteristics of the form.

=====
Legends
novel adaptations =====
Between 1995 and 1998, Dark Horse published adaptations of the Thrawn trilogy of novels by Timothy Zahn.
====
Original series (Dark Horse comics) ====
Dark Horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after, in between, and before the original film trilogy, including Tales of the Jedi (1993–1998), X-wing: Rogue Squadron (1995–1998), Republic (1998–2006), the mostly non-canonical Tales (1999–2005), Empire (2002–2006), Knights of the Old Republic (2006–2010), and Legacy (2006–2010)
=====
Dark Empire =====
In the late 1980s, writer Tom Veitch and artist Cam Kennedy secured a deal to produce a Star Wars comic for Archie Goodwin at Epic Comics, a Marvel imprint.
After the project was announced, Goodwin left Marvel, which dropped the comic.
Dark Horse Comics subsequently published it as the Dark Empire sequence (1991–1995).

=====
Classic Star Wars =====
Classic Star Wars is a series of comics which included compilations of weekly installments of the newspaper comics written by Archie Goodwin with art by Al Williamson.

===== X-wing
=====
Star Wars:
X-wing – Rogue Squadron is a comic book series of 35 issues released between 1995 and 1998.
It follows the titular squadron beginning about one year after the events of Return of the Jedi.

X-wing – Rogue Leader is a three-part comic book series set approximately one week after the end of Return of the Jedi.
Several participants in the destruction of the second Death Star are sent, a little while after the events of Bakura, to scout out Imperial activity in Corellian space.
=====
Shadows of the Empire =====


=====
Crimson Empire =====
The Crimson Empire trilogy follows Kir Kanos, one of Palpatine's Imperial guards, beginning about seven years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
Set shortly after Dark Empire, it relates that Imperial Guard Carnor Jax betrayed the cloned Palpatine and his guards in an attempt to consolidate his own power.
Kanos swears to stop him, coming close to New Republic Intelligence agent Mirith Sinn in the process.

===== Qui-Gon & Obi-Wan =====

Qui-Gon & Obi-Wan: Last Stand on Ord Mantell is a three-part comics series written by Ryder Windham, published by Dark Horse Comics between December 2000 and March 2001.
The story features Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi five years before Episode I – The Phantom Menace.

Qui-Gon & Obi-Wan:
The Aurorient Express is a two-part comics series written by Mike Kennedy, and published by Dark Horse Comics between February 2002 and June 2002.
The series is set in the Star Wars galaxy six years before The Phantom Menace.
A luxury cloud cruiser has slipped out of control and is going to crash over Yorn Skot.
The two Jedi must board the runaway ship and regain control.

====
=
Knights of the Old Republic and The Old Republic =====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and Star Wars:
The Old Republic are series set around the events of the game series of the same name, exploring its backstory.

=====
Legacy =====


=====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars =====
=====
Other original series (Dark Horse comics) =====
Star Wars: Agent of the Empire is a series set a few years before Episode IV – A New Hope, and focusing on an Imperial Intelligence agent named Jahan Cross.
Trade paperbacks:
Volume 1: Iron Eclipse (collects Star Wars: Agent of the Empire –
Iron Eclipse #
1–5, 128 pages, October 2012
, ISBN 1-59582-950-4)Star Wars:
Invasion is a series set during the early days of the Yuuzhan Vong War, and dealing with how the New Republic is faring.
The series, published by Dark Horse Comics, was written by Tom Taylor, and illustrated by Colin Wilson with color by Wes Dzioba.
The first printed issue was published on July 1, 2009.
Published by Dark Horse Comics, the series was set in the New Jedi Order era and depict the events of the Yuuzhan Vong War over 16 issues, plus a prologue issue.
In January 2010, Star Wars: Invasion #0 was nominated for a 'Diamond Gem Award' in the '2009 Comic Book of the Year Over $3.00' category.
Star Wars:
Dark Times, is a series set in the years after Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, and showing former characters from Star Wars: Republic after Order 66.Star Wars: Knight Errant, a series set 1,000 years before The Phantom Menace, and dealing with a lone Jedi's war against the Sith.

Star Wars:
Blood Ties, a series set in varying time periods that shows the bonds between certain characters in the saga, such as Jango Fett and Boba Fett.

Star Wars:
Darth Vader, a series set almost immediately after Revenge of the Sith, and showing how Darth Vader is dealing with his past as Anakin Skywalker.

Star Wars: Dawn of the Jedi, a series set thousands of years before Episode I – The Phantom Menace, and showing the origins of the Jedi and the Sith.
====
Limited series (Dark Horse comics) ====
After Knights of the Old Republic and Legacy ended in 2010, instead of publishing ongoing series, Dark Horse began publishing a "series of miniseries", including:

Star Wars: Jedi, a series set a few decades before The Phantom Menace, and dealing with Qui-Gon Jinn in an undocumented area of his life.

====
One-shots (Dark Horse comics) ====
Routine Valor is a comic book one-shot released on May 6, 2006 by Dark Horse Comics for Free Comic Book Day 2006 as part of a Star Wars-Conan flipbook.
The story is set during the end of the Clone Wars, approximately one year before the events of Revenge of the Sith (and 20 years before the events of A New Hope).
Characters include Obi-Wan Kenobi, along with Clone troopers Commander Cody, CT-8867, CT-8868, and CT-8869
External links:
Routine Valor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Dark Horse Listing


====
Alternate storylines ====
While non-canonical to the Expanded Universe, Star Wars Infinities shows alternate storylines for the original trilogy films, and Visionaries featured stories by artists who worked on Revenge of the Sith.

The Star Wars is a non-canonical series based on George Lucas's discarded 1974 draft for the original film.
Adapted by J. W. Rinzler, Dark Horse released it as an eight-part comic book series beginning in September 2013.
In this version, Luke Skywalker is more mature and a Jedi, and the main protagonist is named Annikin Starkiller.
The series received mostly positive reviews.

===
Return to Marvel (2015–present) ===
Following the acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, it was announced in January 2014 that the Star Wars comics license would return to Marvel Comics in 2015.
Disney had purchased Marvel's parent company, Marvel Entertainment, in 2009.
Meanwhile, with the sequel film The Force Awakens in production, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.Early reports in May 2014 suggested that Marvel would announce two new ongoing Star Wars comic series at the San Diego Comic-Con.
In July 2014, Marvel announced three new series at SDCC:
Star Wars, Star Wars: Darth Vader, and the limited series
Star Wars: Princess Leia.
====
Ongoing series ====
The initial series, Star Wars, was released in January 2015, with Darth Vader debuting in February.
The ongoing series Star Wars: Poe Dameron was announced in January 2016.
Featuring X-wing fighter pilot Poe Dameron introduced in The Force Awakens, the series debuted on April 6, 2016.
A six-issue comic adaptation of The Force Awakens by Chuck Wendig began publication in June 2016.
In 2017.
A second volume of the Marvel Darth Vader comic, subtitled Dark Lord of the Sith, began in June 2017 from writer Charles Soule and artist Giuseppe Camuncoli.
In August 2019, Marvel announced that the main Star Wars series that started in 2015, which has narratively caught up to the timeframe of the events of The Empire Strikes Back, would end in November 2019 with issue #75.
A 56-page one-shot called Star Wars: Empire Ascendant, written by Soule, Greg Pak, Simon Spurrier, and Ethan Sacks, was released in December 2019 to wrap up the series.
At New York Comic Con in October 2019, Lucasfilm and Marvel announced the main Star Wars title would relaunch with a new ongoing series beginning in January 2020.
Written by Soule, the flagship series will explore the time between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
It will expand on stories like how the demoralized ragtag band of rebels grows into the massive fleet that attacks the second Death Star
, how the plan to rescue Han Solo from Jabba the Hutt is formed, how Leia balances her personal desires to save Han with her responsibilities to the Rebellion, Luke's growth as a Jedi while coming to an understanding of Darth Vader's reveal of his heritage, and the evolution of Lando Calrissian from selfish betrayer to trusted general.
First announced as Project Luminous at Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, full details of a publishing initiative called Star Wars: The High Republic were revealed in a press conference in February 2020.
Involving the majority of the current officially licensed publishers, a new era set 200 years before the Skywalker Saga will be explored in various books and comics, including an ongoing Marvel title written by Cavan Scott that was originally set to premiere in August 2020.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the launch of The High Republic was pushed to January 2021 with the release date of the ongoing comic title yet to be revealed.

=====
Trade paperback collections =====


======
Star Wars (2015) ======


======
Star Wars (2020) ======


======
Darth Vader (2015) ======


======
Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith ======
======
Darth Vader (2020) ======


======
Doctor Aphra ======


======
Kanan ======


======
Poe Dameron ======


======
Star Wars: Bounty Hunters ======


======
Crossovers ======


====
Limited series and one-shots ====
Princess Leia released in March 2015.
Chewbacca (October–December 2015), Obi-Wan & Anakin (January–May 2016), and Han Solo (June–November 2016), as well as the one-shots Vader Down (November 2015) and C-3PO (April 2016).
Several other limited series followed, including Kanan (April 2015 – March 2016), Lando (July–October 2015), Shattered Empire (September–October 2015),In 2017, limited series Darth Maul, Mace Windu, and Captain Phasma, as well as further one-shots, continued to expand the Star Wars universe.
The comic adaptation of Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story was also released.
Both the Poe Dameron and the second Darth Vader comics ended their runs in 2018, in September and December respectively.
In 2018, Marvel adapted the events of author Timothy Zahn's Star Wars:
Thrawn novel in a limited series.
The character had been introduced by Zahn's Heir to the Empire trilogy in the early 1990s, now part of the Legends line, and was re-introduced in the new canon in Star Wars Rebels.
Adaptations of both The Last Jedi and Solo: A Star Wars Story were released, and the timeframe of Solo was explored further in the Beckett one-shot and in limited series featuring young Lando (Double or Nothing) and Han's time in the Empire (Imperial Cadet).
Marvel announced in October 2018 that a five-issue, Wendig penned miniseries, Star Wars: Shadow of Vader, would be released starting in January 2019.
The series would be an anthology told from the perspectives of those who had encountered Darth Vader.
After three issues had been written, Wendig was removed from the miniseries (and future projects) by Marvel over concerns of his use of social media, and ultimately the miniseries was cancelled.
In December 2018, a new miniseries with a similar premise, Star Wars: Vader – Dark Visions, was announced to be written by Dennis Hopeless with art from Paolo Villanelli and Brian Level and was launched in March 2019.For 2019, Marvel announced a number of new limited series.
As a companion to Star Wars: Alphabet Squadron, a novel by author Alexander Freed centered on a New Republic squadron of various Rebel ships (an A-wing interceptor, B-wing heavy assault fighter, U-wing transport, X-wing starfghter, and Y-wing bomber) in the wake of the Battle of Endor, a five-issue series called Star Wars: TIE Fighter will explore the fallout of the battle from both the New Republic and Imperial Remnant sides.
A five-issue miniseries titled Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge will feature stories of the Black Spire Outpost on the Outer Rim planet Batuu and tie into the theme park experiences set to open at Disneyland and Walt Disney World in 2019.
In May 2019, a one-shot by writer Matthew Rosenberg and various artists called Star Wars #108 will pick up the story of the original Marvel Star Wars comic run that ended in 1986.In connection with the forthcoming video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order by Electronic Arts and Respawn Entertainment, a five-issue miniseries called Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order –
Dark Temple was announced in June 2019 to start publishing in September.
At a panel discussing the Journey to The Rise of Skywalker publishing program at San Diego Comic-Con 2019, the four-issue Star Wars: Journey to The Rise of Skywalker – Allegiance miniseries was announced.
It will help cover a one-year period during the time between The Last Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker.
Charles Soule was announced to be writing a four-issue miniseries exploring the backstory of Ben Solo's transition into Kylo Ren.
Star Wars:
The Rise of Kylo Ren premiered on December 16, 2019.
====
Age of Star Wars maxiseries ====
At San Diego Comic-Con 2018, Marvel announced Age of Star Wars, a 27-issue maxiseries starting in December 2018 that would span all three eras of the Star Wars saga.
Star Wars:
Age of Republic by writer Jody Houser will focus on the time of the Galactic Republic and the Clone Wars during the prequel trilogy era; Star Wars: Age of Rebellion by writer Greg Pak will focus on the Galactic Civil War between the Empire and the Rebel Alliance during the original trilogy era; and Star Wars:
Age of Resistance by writer Tom Taylor will focus on the fall of the New Republic and the struggle between the Resistance and the First Order during the sequel trilogy era.
At the time of release, Age of Republic was revealed to have eight one-shots spotlighting individual characters and a special anthology issue with up to four stories by different creative teams.

Age of Star Wars trade paperbacks:


====
Reprints ====
In mid-2014, Marvel stated that it would publish collected volumes of past Star Wars comics, beginning with Volume 1 of Star Wars: The Original Marvel Years in January 2015, and Volume 1 of Star Wars Legends Epic Collection: The Empire in April 2015, which reprinted Dark Horse's Star Wars comics.
In December 2019, Marvel reprinted the first issue of the 1977 series as Star Wars #1 – Facsimile Edition.
A series of reprints under the title
True Believers:
Star Wars was released in April and May 2019, celebrating Marvel's 80th anniversary.
A second collection of True Believers: Star Wars titles was released in December 2019.

===
IDW Publishing (2017–present) ===
In September 2017, IDW Publishing debuted Star Wars Adventures, an anthology series published as part of the "Journey to Star Wars: The Last Jedi" publishing program.
In January 2018, IDW released a five-issue comic tie-in to Star Wars: Forces of Destiny.
In November 2018, IDW released Star Wars Adventures: Destroyer Down.
This three-issue miniseries reprinted the previously released Loot Crate special from December 2017.

IDW has also published graphic novel adaptations of each Star Wars film since The Force Awakens.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars comic books, an in-universe "chronological" list of comics
Star Wars (UK comics), a British publication which reprints some of the Dark Horse comics
Star Wars (manga)


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars (Marvel) at the Grand Comics Database
 Star Wars (Dark Horse) at the Grand Comics Database
Star Wars (1977–1986 Marvel Comics) at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original)
Star Wars (2015–present Marvel Comics) at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original)
Van As, Trevor (October 9, 2017). "
Your Ultimate Guide To Marvel's Star Wars Comics [2015–present]".
How to Love Comics.
Archived from the original on October 30, 2017.
Media related to Star Wars comics at Wikimedia Commons
The Solar System is the gravitationally bound system of the Sun and the objects that orbit it, either directly or indirectly.
Of the objects that orbit the Sun directly, the largest are the eight planets, with the remainder being smaller objects, the dwarf planets and small Solar System bodies.
Of the objects that orbit the Sun indirectly—the natural satellites—two are larger than the smallest planet, Mercury.
The Solar System formed 4.6 billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of a giant interstellar molecular cloud.
The vast majority of the system's mass is in the Sun, with the majority of the remaining mass contained in Jupiter.
The four smaller inner planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, are terrestrial planets, being primarily composed of rock and metal.
The four outer planets are giant planets, being substantially more massive than the terrestrials.
The two largest planets, Jupiter and Saturn, are gas giants, being composed mainly of hydrogen and helium; the two outermost planets, Uranus and Neptune, are ice giants, being composed mostly of substances with relatively high melting points compared with hydrogen and helium, called volatiles, such as water, ammonia and methane.
All eight planets have almost circular orbits that lie within a nearly flat disc called the ecliptic.

The Solar System also contains smaller objects.
The asteroid belt, which lies between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, mostly contains objects composed, like the terrestrial planets, of rock and metal.
Beyond Neptune's orbit lie the Kuiper belt and scattered disc, which are populations of trans-Neptunian objects composed mostly of ices, and beyond them a newly discovered population of sednoids.
Within these populations, some objects are large enough to have rounded under their own gravity, though there is considerable debate as to how many there will prove to be.
Such objects are categorized as dwarf planets.
The only certain dwarf planet is Pluto, with another trans-Neptunian object, Eris, expected to be, and the asteroid Ceres at least close to being a dwarf planet.
In addition to these two regions, various other small-body populations, including comets, centaurs and interplanetary dust clouds, freely travel between regions.
Six of the planets, the six largest possible dwarf planets, and many of the smaller bodies are orbited by natural satellites, usually termed "moons" after the Moon.
Each of the outer planets is encircled by planetary rings of dust and other small objects.

The solar wind, a stream of charged particles flowing outwards from the Sun, creates a bubble-like region in the interstellar medium known as the heliosphere.
The heliopause is the point at which pressure from the solar wind is equal to the opposing pressure of the interstellar medium; it extends out to the edge of the scattered disc.
The Oort cloud, which is thought to be the source for long-period comets, may also exist at a distance roughly a thousand times further than the heliosphere.
The Solar System is located in the Orion Arm, 26,000 light-years from the center of the Milky Way galaxy.

== Discovery and exploration ==
For most of history, humanity did not recognize or understand the concept of the Solar System.
Most people up to the Late Middle Ages–Renaissance believed Earth to be stationary at the centre of the universe and categorically different from the divine or ethereal objects that moved through the sky.
Although the Greek philosopher Aristarchus of Samos had speculated on a heliocentric reordering of the cosmos, Nicolaus Copernicus was the first to develop a mathematically predictive heliocentric system.
In the 17th century, Galileo discovered that the Sun was marked with sunspots, and that Jupiter had four satellites in orbit around it.
Christiaan Huygens followed on from Galileo's discoveries by discovering Saturn's moon Titan and the shape of the rings of Saturn.
Edmond Halley realised in 1705 that repeated sightings of a comet were recording the same object, returning regularly once every 75–76 years.
This was the first evidence that anything other than the planets orbited the Sun.
Around this time (1704), the term "Solar System" first appeared in English.
In 1838, Friedrich Bessel successfully measured a stellar parallax, an apparent shift in the position of a star created by Earth's motion around the Sun, providing the first direct, experimental proof of heliocentrism.
Improvements in observational astronomy and the use of uncrewed spacecraft have since enabled the detailed investigation of other bodies orbiting the Sun.

== Structure and composition ==
The principal component of the Solar System is the Sun, a G2 main-sequence star that contains 99.86% of the system's known mass and dominates it gravitationally.
The Sun's four largest orbiting bodies, the giant planets, account for 99% of the remaining mass, with Jupiter and Saturn together comprising more than 90%.
The remaining objects of the Solar System (including the four terrestrial planets, the dwarf planets, moons, asteroids, and comets) together comprise less than 0.002% of the Solar System's total mass.
Most large objects in orbit around the Sun lie near the plane of Earth's orbit, known as the ecliptic.
The planets are very close to the ecliptic, whereas comets and Kuiper belt objects are frequently at significantly greater angles to it.
As a result of the formation of the Solar System, planets (and most other objects) orbit the Sun in the same direction that the Sun is rotating (counter-clockwise, as viewed from above Earth's north pole).
There are exceptions, such as Halley's Comet.
Most of the larger moons orbit their planets in this prograde direction (with Triton being the largest retrograde exception) and most larger objects rotate themselves in the same direction (with Venus being a notable retrograde exception).

The overall structure of the charted regions of the Solar System consists of the Sun, four relatively small inner planets surrounded by a belt of mostly rocky asteroids, and four giant planets surrounded by the Kuiper belt of mostly icy objects.
Astronomers sometimes informally divide this structure into separate regions.
The inner Solar System includes the four terrestrial planets and the asteroid belt.
The outer Solar System is beyond the asteroids, including the four giant planets.
Since the discovery of the Kuiper belt, the outermost parts of the Solar System are considered a distinct region consisting of the objects beyond Neptune.
Most of the planets in the Solar System have secondary systems of their own, being orbited by planetary objects called natural satellites, or moons (two of which, Titan and Ganymede, are larger than the planet Mercury).
The four giant planets have planetary rings, thin bands of tiny particles that orbit them in unison.
Most of the largest natural satellites are in synchronous rotation, with one face permanently turned toward their parent.

Kepler's laws of planetary motion describe the orbits of objects about the Sun.
Following Kepler's laws, each object travels along an ellipse with the Sun at one focus.
Objects closer to the Sun (with smaller semi-major axes) travel more quickly because they are more affected by the Sun's gravity.
On an elliptical orbit, a body's distance from the Sun varies over the course of its year.
A body's closest approach to the Sun is called its perihelion, whereas its most distant point from the Sun is called its aphelion.
The orbits of the planets are nearly circular, but many comets, asteroids, and Kuiper belt objects follow highly elliptical orbits.
The positions of the bodies in the Solar System can be predicted using numerical models.

Although the Sun dominates the system by mass, it accounts for only about 2% of the angular momentum.
The planets, dominated by Jupiter, account for most of the rest of the angular momentum due to the combination of their mass, orbit, and distance from the Sun, with a possibly significant contribution from comets.
The Sun, which comprises nearly all the matter in the Solar System, is composed of roughly 98% hydrogen and helium.
Jupiter and Saturn, which comprise nearly all the remaining matter, are also primarily composed of hydrogen and helium.
A composition gradient exists in the Solar System, created by heat and light pressure from the Sun; those objects closer to the Sun, which are more affected by heat and light pressure, are composed of elements with high melting points.
Objects farther from the Sun are composed largely of materials with lower melting points.
The boundary in the Solar System beyond which those volatile substances could condense is known as the frost line, and it lies at roughly 5 AU from the Sun.
The objects of the inner Solar System are composed mostly of rock, the collective name for compounds with high melting points, such as silicates, iron or nickel, that remained solid under almost all conditions in the protoplanetary nebula.
Jupiter and Saturn are composed mainly of gases, the astronomical term for materials with extremely low melting points and high vapour pressure, such as hydrogen, helium, and neon, which were always in the gaseous phase in the nebula.
Ices, like water, methane, ammonia, hydrogen sulfide, and carbon dioxide, have melting points up to a few hundred kelvins.
They can be found as ices, liquids, or gases in various places in the Solar System, whereas in the nebula they were either in the solid or gaseous phase.
Icy substances comprise the majority of the satellites of the giant planets, as well as most of Uranus and Neptune (the so-called "ice giants") and the numerous small objects that lie beyond Neptune's orbit.
Together, gases and ices are referred to as volatiles.

===
Distances and scales ===
The distance from Earth to the Sun is 1 astronomical unit [AU] (150,000,000 km; 93,000,000 mi).
For comparison, the radius of the Sun is 0.0047 AU (700,000 km).
Thus, the Sun occupies 0.00001% (10−5 %) of the volume of a sphere with a radius the size of Earth's orbit, whereas Earth's volume is roughly one millionth (10−6) that of the Sun.
Jupiter, the largest planet, is 5.2 astronomical units (780,000,000 km) from the Sun and has a radius of 71,000 km (0.00047 AU), whereas the most distant planet, Neptune, is 30 AU (4.5×109 km) from the Sun.

With a few exceptions, the farther a planet or belt is from the Sun, the larger the distance between its orbit and the orbit of the next nearer object to the Sun.
For example, Venus is approximately 0.33 AU farther out from the Sun than Mercury, whereas Saturn is 4.3 AU out from Jupiter, and Neptune lies 10.5 AU out from Uranus.
Attempts have been made to determine a relationship between these orbital distances (for example, the Titius–Bode law), but no such theory has been accepted.

Some Solar System models attempt to convey the relative scales involved in the Solar System on human terms.
Some are small in scale (and may be mechanical—
called orreries)—whereas others extend across cities or regional areas.
The largest such scale model, the Sweden Solar System, uses the 110-metre (361 ft) Ericsson Globe in Stockholm as its substitute Sun, and, following the scale, Jupiter is a 7.5-metre (25-foot) sphere at Stockholm Arlanda Airport, 40 km (25 mi) away, whereas the farthest current object, Sedna, is a 10 cm (4 in) sphere in Luleå, 912 km (567 mi) away.
If the Sun–Neptune distance is scaled to 100 metres, then the Sun would be about 3 cm in diameter (roughly two-thirds the diameter of a golf ball), the giant planets would be all smaller than about 3 mm, and Earth's diameter along with that of the other terrestrial planets would be smaller than a flea (0.3 mm) at this scale.

==
Formation and evolution ==
The Solar System formed 4.568 billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of a region within a large molecular cloud.
This initial cloud was likely several light-years across and probably birthed several stars.
As is typical of molecular clouds, this one consisted mostly of hydrogen, with some helium, and small amounts of heavier elements fused by previous generations of stars.
As the region that would become the Solar System, known as the pre-solar nebula, collapsed, conservation of angular momentum caused it to rotate faster.
The centre, where most of the mass collected, became increasingly hotter than the surrounding disc.
As the contracting nebula rotated faster, it began to flatten into a protoplanetary disc with a diameter of roughly 200 AU and a hot, dense protostar at the centre.
The planets formed by accretion from this disc, in which dust and gas gravitationally attracted each other, coalescing to form ever larger bodies.
Hundreds of protoplanets may have existed in the early Solar System, but they either merged or were destroyed, leaving the planets, dwarf planets, and leftover minor bodies.

Due to their higher boiling points, only metals and silicates could exist in solid form in the warm inner Solar System close to the Sun, and these would eventually form the rocky planets of Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars.
Because metallic elements only comprised a very small fraction of the solar nebula, the terrestrial planets could not grow very large.
The giant planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune) formed further out, beyond the frost line, the point between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter where material is cool enough for volatile icy compounds to remain solid.
The ices that formed these planets were more plentiful than the metals and silicates that formed the terrestrial inner planets, allowing them to grow massive enough to capture large atmospheres of hydrogen and helium, the lightest and most abundant elements.
Leftover debris that never became planets congregated in regions such as the asteroid belt, Kuiper belt, and Oort cloud.
The Nice model is an explanation for the creation of these regions and how the outer planets could have formed in different positions and migrated to their current orbits through various gravitational interactions.
Within 50 million years, the pressure and density of hydrogen in the centre of the protostar became great enough for it to begin thermonuclear fusion.
The temperature, reaction rate, pressure, and density increased until hydrostatic equilibrium was achieved: the thermal pressure equalled the force of gravity.
At this point, the Sun became a main-sequence star.
The main-sequence phase, from beginning to end, will last about 10 billion years for the Sun compared to around two billion years for all other phases of the Sun's pre-remnant life combined.
Solar wind from the Sun created the heliosphere and swept away the remaining gas and dust from the protoplanetary disc into interstellar space, ending the planetary formation process.
The Sun is growing brighter; early in its main-sequence life its brightness was 70%
that of what it is today.
The Solar System will remain roughly as we know it today until the hydrogen in the core of the Sun has been entirely converted to helium, which will occur roughly 5 billion years from now.
This will mark the end of the Sun's main-sequence life.
At this time, the core of the Sun will contract with hydrogen fusion occurring along a shell surrounding the inert helium, and the energy output will be much greater than at present.
The outer layers of the Sun will expand to roughly 260 times its current diameter, and the Sun will become a red giant.
Because of its vastly increased surface area, the surface of the Sun will be considerably cooler (2,600 K at its coolest) than it is on the main sequence.
The expanding Sun is expected to vaporize Mercury and render Earth uninhabitable.
Eventually, the core will be hot enough for helium fusion; the Sun will burn helium for a fraction of the time it burned hydrogen in the core.
The Sun is not massive enough to commence the fusion of heavier elements, and nuclear reactions in the core will dwindle.
Its outer layers will move away into space, leaving a white dwarf, an extraordinarily dense object, half the original mass of the Sun but only the size of Earth.
The ejected outer layers will form what is known as a planetary nebula, returning some of the material that formed the Sun—but now enriched with heavier elements like carbon—to the interstellar medium.

==
Sun ==
The Sun is the Solar System's star and by far its most massive component.
Its large mass (332,900 Earth masses), which comprises 99.86% of all the mass in the Solar System, produces temperatures and densities in its core high enough to sustain nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium, making it a main-sequence star.
This releases an enormous amount of energy, mostly radiated into space as electromagnetic radiation peaking in visible light.
The Sun is a G2-type main-sequence star.
Hotter main-sequence stars are more luminous.
The Sun's temperature is intermediate between that of the hottest stars and that of the coolest stars.
Stars brighter and hotter than the Sun are rare, whereas substantially dimmer and cooler stars, known as red dwarfs, make up 85% of the stars in the Milky Way.
The Sun is a population I star; it has a higher abundance of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium ("metals" in astronomical parlance) than the older population II stars.
Elements heavier than hydrogen and helium were formed in the cores of ancient and exploding stars, so the first generation of stars had to die before the universe could be enriched with these atoms.
The oldest stars contain few metals, whereas stars born later have more.
This high metallicity is thought to have been crucial to the Sun's development of a planetary system because the planets form from the accretion of "metals".

==
Interplanetary medium ==
The vast majority of the Solar System consists of a near-vacuum known as the interplanetary medium.
Along with light, the Sun radiates a continuous stream of charged particles (a plasma) known as the solar wind.
This stream of particles spreads outwards at roughly 1.5 million kilometres per hour, creating a tenuous atmosphere that permeates the interplanetary medium out to at least 100 AU (see § Heliosphere).
Activity on the Sun's surface, such as solar flares and coronal mass ejections, disturbs the heliosphere, creating space weather and causing geomagnetic storms.
The largest structure within the heliosphere is the heliospheric current sheet, a spiral form created by the actions of the Sun's rotating magnetic field on the interplanetary medium.
Earth's magnetic field stops its atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind.
Venus and Mars do not have magnetic fields, and as a result the solar wind is causing their atmospheres to gradually bleed away into space.
Coronal mass ejections and similar events blow a magnetic field and huge quantities of material from the surface of the Sun.
The interaction of this magnetic field and material with Earth's magnetic field funnels charged particles into Earth's upper atmosphere, where its interactions create aurorae seen near the magnetic poles.

The heliosphere and planetary magnetic fields (for those planets that have them) partially shield the Solar System from high-energy interstellar particles called cosmic rays.
The density of cosmic rays in the interstellar medium and the strength of the Sun's magnetic field change on very long timescales, so the level of cosmic-ray penetration in the Solar System varies, though by how much is unknown.
The interplanetary medium is home to at least two disc-like regions of cosmic dust.
The first, the zodiacal dust cloud, lies in the inner Solar System and causes the zodiacal light.
It was likely formed by collisions within the asteroid belt brought on by gravitational interactions with the planets.
The second dust cloud extends from about 10 AU to about 40 AU, and was probably created by similar collisions within the Kuiper belt.

==
Inner Solar System ==
The inner Solar System is the region comprising the terrestrial planets and the asteroid belt.
Composed mainly of silicates and metals, the objects of the inner Solar System are relatively close to the Sun; the radius of this entire region is less than the distance between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn.
This region is also within the frost line, which is a little less than 5 AU (about 700 million km) from the Sun.

===
Inner planets ===
The four terrestrial or inner planets have dense, rocky compositions, few or no moons, and no ring systems.
They are composed largely of refractory minerals, such as the silicates—which form their crusts and mantles—and metals, such as iron and nickel, which form their cores.
Three of the four inner planets (Venus, Earth and Mars) have atmospheres substantial enough to generate weather; all have impact craters and tectonic surface features, such as rift valleys and volcanoes.
The term inner planet should not be confused with inferior planet, which designates those planets that are closer to the Sun than Earth is (i.e. Mercury and Venus).

====
Mercury ====
Mercury (0.4 AU from the Sun) is the closest planet to the Sun and on average, all seven other planets.
The smallest planet in the Solar System (0.055 M⊕), Mercury has no natural satellites.
Besides impact craters, its only known geological features are lobed ridges or rupes that were probably produced by a period of contraction early in its history.
Mercury's very tenuous atmosphere consists of atoms blasted off its surface by the solar wind.
Its relatively large iron core and thin mantle have not yet been adequately explained.
Hypotheses include that its outer layers were stripped off by a giant impact, or that it was prevented from fully accreting by the young Sun's energy.

====
Venus ====
Venus (0.7 AU from the Sun) is close in size to Earth (0.815 M⊕) and, like Earth, has a thick silicate mantle around an iron core, a substantial atmosphere, and evidence of internal geological activity.
It is much drier than Earth, and its atmosphere is ninety times as dense.
Venus has no natural satellites.
It is the hottest planet, with surface temperatures over 400 °C (752 °F), most likely due to the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
No definitive evidence of current geological activity has been detected on Venus, but it has no magnetic field that would prevent depletion of its substantial atmosphere, which suggests that its atmosphere is being replenished by volcanic eruptions.

====
Earth ====
Earth (1 AU from the Sun) is the largest and densest of the inner planets, the only one known to have current geological activity, and the only place where life is known to exist.
Its liquid hydrosphere is unique among the terrestrial planets, and it is the only planet where plate tectonics has been observed.
Earth's atmosphere is radically different from those of the other planets, having been altered by the presence of life to contain 21% free oxygen.
It has one natural satellite, the Moon, the only large satellite of a terrestrial planet in the Solar System.

====
Mars ====
Mars (1.5 AU from the Sun) is smaller than Earth and Venus (0.107 M⊕).
It has an atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide with a surface pressure of 6.1 millibars (roughly 0.6% of that of Earth).
Its surface, peppered with vast volcanoes, such as Olympus Mons, and rift valleys, such as Valles Marineris, shows geological activity that may have persisted until as recently as 2 million years ago.
Its red colour comes from iron oxide (rust) in its soil.
Mars has two tiny natural satellites (Deimos and Phobos) thought to be either captured asteroids, or ejected debris from a massive impact early in Mars's history.

===
Asteroid belt ===
Asteroids except for the largest, Ceres, are classified as small Solar System bodies and are composed mainly of refractory rocky and metallic minerals, with some ice.
They range from a few metres to hundreds of kilometres in size.
Asteroids smaller than one meter are usually called meteoroids and micrometeoroids (grain-sized), depending on different, somewhat arbitrary definitions.

The asteroid belt occupies the orbit between Mars and Jupiter, between 2.3 and 3.3 AU from the Sun.
It is thought to be remnants from the Solar System's formation that failed to coalesce because of the gravitational interference of Jupiter.
The asteroid belt contains tens of thousands, possibly millions, of objects over one kilometre in diameter.
Despite this, the total mass of the asteroid belt is unlikely to be more than a thousandth of that of Earth.
The asteroid belt is very sparsely populated; spacecraft routinely pass through without incident.

====
Ceres ====
Ceres (2.77 AU) is the largest asteroid, a protoplanet, and a dwarf planet.
It has a diameter of slightly under 1000 km, and a mass large enough for its own gravity to pull it into a spherical shape.
Ceres was considered a planet when it was discovered in 1801 and was reclassified to asteroid in the 1850s as further observations revealed additional asteroids.
It was classified as a dwarf planet in 2006 when the definition of a planet was created.

==== Asteroid groups ====
Asteroids in the asteroid belt are divided into asteroid groups and families based on their orbital characteristics.
Asteroid moons are asteroids that orbit larger asteroids.
They are not as clearly distinguished as planetary moons, sometimes being almost as large as their partners.
The asteroid belt also contains main-belt comets, which may have been the source of Earth's water.
Jupiter trojans are located in either of Jupiter's L4 or L5 points (gravitationally stable regions leading and trailing a planet in its orbit); the term trojan is also used for small bodies in any other planetary or satellite Lagrange point.
Hilda asteroids are in a 2:3 resonance with Jupiter; that is, they go around the Sun three times for every two Jupiter orbits.
The inner Solar System also contains near-Earth asteroids, many of which cross the orbits of the inner planets.
Some of them are potentially hazardous objects.

==
Outer Solar System ==
The outer region of the Solar System is home to the giant planets and their large moons.
The centaurs and many short-period comets also orbit in this region.
Due to their greater distance from the Sun, the solid objects in the outer Solar System contain a higher proportion of volatiles, such as water, ammonia, and methane than those of the inner Solar System because the lower temperatures allow these compounds to remain solid.
===
Outer planets ===
The four outer planets, or giant planets (sometimes called Jovian planets), collectively make up 99% of the mass known to orbit the Sun.
Jupiter and Saturn are together more than 400 times the mass of Earth and consist overwhelmingly of the gases hydrogen and helium, hence their designation as gas giants.
Uranus and Neptune are far less massive—less than 20 Earth masses (M⊕) each—and are composed primarily of ices.
For these reasons, some astronomers suggest they belong in their own category, ice giants.
All four giant planets have rings, although only Saturn's ring system is easily observed from Earth.
The term superior planet designates planets outside Earth's orbit and thus includes both the outer planets and Mars.

====
Jupiter ====
Jupiter (5.2 AU), at 318 M⊕, is 2.5 times the mass of all the other planets put together.
It is composed largely of hydrogen and helium.
Jupiter's strong internal heat creates semi-permanent features in its atmosphere, such as cloud bands and the Great Red Spot.
Jupiter has 79 known satellites.
The four largest, Ganymede, Callisto, Io, and Europa, show similarities to the terrestrial planets, such as volcanism and internal heating.
Ganymede, the largest satellite in the Solar System, is larger than Mercury.

====
Saturn ====
Saturn (9.5 AU), distinguished by its extensive ring system, has several similarities to Jupiter, such as its atmospheric composition and magnetosphere.
Although Saturn has 60% of Jupiter's volume, it is less than a third as massive, at 95 M⊕. Saturn is the only planet of the Solar System that is less dense than water.
The rings of Saturn are made up of small ice and rock particles.
Saturn has 82 confirmed satellites composed largely of ice.
Two of these, Titan and Enceladus, show signs of geological activity.
Titan, the second-largest moon in the Solar System, is larger than Mercury and the only satellite in the Solar System with a substantial atmosphere.

====
Uranus ====
Uranus (19.2 AU), at 14 M⊕, is the lightest of the outer planets.
Uniquely among the planets, it orbits the Sun on its side; its axial tilt is over ninety degrees to the ecliptic.
It has a much colder core than the other giant planets and radiates very little heat into space.
Uranus has 27 known satellites, the largest ones being Titania, Oberon, Umbriel, Ariel, and Miranda.
====
Neptune ====
Neptune (30.1 AU), though slightly smaller than Uranus, is more massive (17 M⊕) and hence more dense.
It radiates more internal heat, but not as much as Jupiter or Saturn.
Neptune has 14 known satellites.
The largest, Triton, is geologically active, with geysers of liquid nitrogen.
Triton is the only large satellite with a retrograde orbit.
Neptune is accompanied in its orbit by several minor planets, termed Neptune trojans, that are in 1:1 resonance with it.

===
Centaurs ===
The centaurs are icy comet-like bodies whose orbits have semi-major axes greater than Jupiter's (5.5 AU) and less than Neptune's (30 AU).
The largest known centaur, 10199 Chariklo, has a diameter of about 250 km.
The first centaur discovered, 2060 Chiron, has also been classified as a comet (95P) because it develops a coma just as comets do when they approach the Sun.

==
Comets ==
Comets are small Solar System bodies, typically only a few kilometres across, composed largely of volatile ices.
They have highly eccentric orbits, generally a perihelion within the orbits of the inner planets and an aphelion far beyond Pluto.
When a comet enters the inner Solar System, its proximity to the Sun causes its icy surface to sublimate and ionise, creating a coma: a long tail of gas and dust often visible to the naked eye.

Short-period comets have orbits lasting less than two hundred years.
Long-period comets have orbits lasting thousands of years.
Short-period comets are thought to originate in the Kuiper belt, whereas long-period comets, such as Hale–Bopp, are thought to originate in the Oort cloud.
Many comet groups, such as the Kreutz Sungrazers, formed from the breakup of a single parent.
Some comets with hyperbolic orbits may originate outside the Solar System, but determining their precise orbits is difficult.
Old comets whose volatiles have mostly been driven out by solar warming are often categorised as asteroids.

==
Trans-Neptunian region ==
Beyond the orbit of Neptune lies the area of the "trans-Neptunian region", with the doughnut-shaped Kuiper belt, home of Pluto and several other dwarf planets, and an overlapping disc of scattered objects, which is tilted toward the plane of the Solar System and reaches much further out than the Kuiper belt.
The entire region is still largely unexplored.
It appears to consist overwhelmingly of many thousands of small worlds—the largest having a diameter only a fifth that of Earth and a mass far smaller than that of the Moon—composed mainly of rock and ice.
This region is sometimes described as the "third zone of the Solar System", enclosing the inner and the outer Solar System.
===
Kuiper belt ===
The Kuiper belt is a great ring of debris similar to the asteroid belt, but consisting mainly of objects composed primarily of ice.
It extends between 30 and 50 AU from the Sun.
Though it is estimated to contain anything from dozens to thousands of dwarf planets, it is composed mainly of small Solar System bodies.
Many of the larger Kuiper belt objects, such as Quaoar, Varuna, and Orcus, may prove to be dwarf planets with further data.
There are estimated to be over 100,000 Kuiper belt objects with a diameter greater than 50 km, but the total mass of the Kuiper belt is thought to be only a tenth or even a hundredth the mass of Earth.
Many Kuiper belt objects have multiple satellites, and most have orbits that take them outside the plane of the ecliptic.
The Kuiper belt can be roughly divided into the "classical" belt and the resonances.
Resonances are orbits linked to that of Neptune (e.g. twice for every three Neptune orbits, or once for every two).
The first resonance begins within the orbit of Neptune itself.
The classical belt consists of objects having no resonance with Neptune, and extends from roughly 39.4 AU to 47.7 AU.
Members of the classical Kuiper belt are classified as cubewanos, after the first of their kind to be discovered, 15760 Albion (which previously had the provisional designation 1992 QB1), and are still in near primordial, low-eccentricity orbits.

====
Pluto and Charon ====
The dwarf planet Pluto (with an average orbit of 39 AU) is the largest known object in the Kuiper belt.
When discovered in 1930, it was considered to be the ninth planet; this changed in 2006 with the adoption of a formal definition of planet.
Pluto has a relatively eccentric orbit inclined 17 degrees to the ecliptic plane and ranging from 29.7 AU from the Sun at perihelion (within the orbit of Neptune) to 49.5 AU at aphelion.
Pluto has a 3:2 resonance with Neptune, meaning that Pluto orbits twice round the Sun for every three Neptunian orbits.
Kuiper belt objects whose orbits share
this resonance are called plutinos.
Charon, the largest of Pluto's moons, is sometimes described as part of a binary system with Pluto, as the two bodies orbit a barycentre of gravity above their surfaces (i.e. they appear to "orbit each other").
Beyond Charon, four much smaller moons, Styx, Nix, Kerberos, and Hydra, orbit within the system.

==== Makemake and Haumea ====
Makemake (45.79 AU average), although smaller than Pluto, is the largest known object in the classical Kuiper belt (that is, a Kuiper belt object not in a confirmed resonance with Neptune).
Makemake is the brightest object in the Kuiper belt after Pluto.
It was assigned a naming committee under the expectation that it would prove to be a dwarf planet in 2008.
Its orbit is far more inclined than Pluto's, at 29°.Haumea (43.13 AU average) is in an orbit similar to Makemake, except that it is in a temporary 7:12 orbital resonance with Neptune.

It was named under the same expectation that it would prove to be a dwarf planet, though subsequent observations have indicated that it may not be a dwarf planet after all.

===
Scattered disc ===
The scattered disc, which overlaps the Kuiper belt but extends out to about 200 AU, is thought to be the source of short-period comets.
Scattered-disc objects are thought to have been ejected into erratic orbits by the gravitational influence of Neptune's early outward migration.
Most scattered disc objects (SDOs) have perihelia within the Kuiper belt but aphelia far beyond it (some more than 150 AU from the Sun).
SDOs' orbits are also highly inclined to the ecliptic plane and are often almost perpendicular to it.
Some astronomers consider the scattered disc to be merely another region of the Kuiper belt and describe scattered disc objects as "scattered Kuiper belt objects".
Some astronomers also classify centaurs as inward-scattered Kuiper belt objects along with the outward-scattered residents of the scattered disc.

====
Eris ====
Eris (with an average orbit of 68 AU) is the largest known scattered disc object, and caused a debate about what constitutes a planet, because it is 25% more massive than Pluto and about the same diameter.
It is the most massive of the known dwarf planets.
It has one known moon, Dysnomia.
Like Pluto, its orbit is highly eccentric, with a perihelion of 38.2 AU (roughly Pluto's distance from the Sun) and an aphelion of 97.6 AU, and steeply inclined to the ecliptic plane.

==
Farthest regions ==
The point at which the Solar System ends and interstellar space begins is not precisely defined because its outer boundaries are shaped by two forces, the solar wind and the Sun's gravity.
The limit of the solar wind's influence is roughly four times Pluto's distance from the Sun; this heliopause, the outer boundary of the heliosphere, is considered the beginning of the interstellar medium.
The Sun's Hill sphere, the effective range of its gravitational dominance, is thought to extend up to a thousand times farther and encompasses the hypothetical Oort cloud.

===
Heliosphere ===
The heliosphere is a stellar-wind bubble, a region of space dominated by the Sun, in which radiates its solar wind at approximately 400km
/s, a stream of charged particles, until it collides with the wind of the interstellar medium.

The collision occurs at the termination shock, which is roughly 80–100 AU from the Sun upwind of the interstellar medium and roughly 200 AU from the Sun downwind.
Here the wind slows dramatically, condenses and becomes more turbulent, forming a great oval structure known as the heliosheath.
This structure is thought to look and behave very much like a comet's tail, extending outward for a further 40 AU on the upwind side but tailing many times that distance downwind; evidence from Cassini and Interstellar Boundary Explorer spacecraft has suggested that it is forced into a bubble shape by the constraining action of the interstellar magnetic field.
The outer boundary of the heliosphere, the heliopause, is the point at which the solar wind finally terminates and is the beginning of interstellar space.
Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 are reported to have passed the termination shock and entered the heliosheath, at 94 and 84 AU from the Sun, respectively.
Voyager 1 is reported to have crossed the heliopause in August 2012.The shape and form of the outer edge of the heliosphere is likely affected by the fluid dynamics of interactions with the interstellar medium as well as solar magnetic fields prevailing to the south, e.g. it is bluntly shaped with the northern hemisphere extending 9 AU farther than the southern hemisphere.
Beyond the heliopause, at around 230 AU, lies the bow shock, a plasma "wake" left by the Sun as it travels through the Milky Way.

Due to a lack of data, conditions in local interstellar space are not known for certain.
It is expected that NASA's Voyager spacecraft, as they pass the heliopause, will transmit valuable data on radiation levels and solar wind to Earth.
How well the heliosphere shields the Solar System from cosmic rays is poorly understood.
A NASA-funded team has developed a concept of a "Vision Mission" dedicated to sending a probe to the heliosphere.

===
Detached objects ===
90377 Sedna (with an average orbit of 520 AU) is a large, reddish object with a gigantic, highly elliptical orbit that takes it from about 76 AU at perihelion to 940 AU at aphelion and takes 11,400 years to complete.
Mike Brown, who discovered the object in 2003, asserts that it cannot be part of the scattered disc or the Kuiper belt because its perihelion is too distant to have been affected by Neptune's migration.
He and other astronomers consider it to be the first in an entirely new population, sometimes termed "distant detached objects" (DDOs), which also may include the object 2000 CR105, which has a perihelion of 45 AU, an aphelion of 415 AU, and an orbital period of 3,420 years.
Brown terms this population the "inner Oort cloud" because it may have formed through a similar process, although it is far closer to the Sun.
Sedna is very likely a dwarf planet, though its shape has yet to be determined.
The second unequivocally detached object, with a perihelion farther than Sedna's at roughly 81 AU, is 2012 VP113, discovered in 2012.
Its aphelion is only half that of Sedna's, at 400–500 AU.
===
Oort cloud ===
The Oort cloud is a hypothetical spherical cloud of up to a trillion icy objects that is thought to be the source for all long-period comets and to surround the Solar System at roughly 50,000 AU (around 1 light-year (ly)), and possibly to as far as 100,000 AU (1.87 ly).
It is thought to be composed of comets that were ejected from the inner Solar System by gravitational interactions with the outer planets.
Oort cloud objects move very slowly, and can be perturbed by infrequent events, such as collisions, the gravitational effects of a passing star, or the galactic tide, the tidal force exerted by the Milky Way.

=== Boundaries ===
Much of the Solar System is still unknown.
The Sun's gravitational field is estimated to dominate the gravitational forces of surrounding stars out to about two light-years (125,000 AU).
Lower estimates for the radius of the Oort cloud, by contrast, do not place it farther than 50,000 AU.
Despite discoveries such as Sedna, the region between the Kuiper belt and the Oort cloud, an area tens of thousands of AU in radius, is still virtually unmapped.
There are also ongoing studies of the region between Mercury and the Sun.
Objects may yet be discovered in the Solar System's uncharted regions.

Currently, the furthest known objects, such as Comet West, have aphelia around 70,000 AU from the Sun, but as the Oort cloud becomes better known, this may change.

==
Galactic context ==
The Solar System is located in the Milky Way, a barred spiral galaxy with a diameter of about 100,000 light-years containing more than 100 billion stars.
The Sun resides in one of the Milky Way's outer spiral arms, known as the Orion–Cygnus Arm or Local Spur.
The Sun lies about 26,660 light-years from the Galactic Centre, and its speed around the center of the Milky Way is about 247 km/s, so that it completes one revolution every 210 million years.
This revolution is known as the Solar System's galactic year.
The solar apex, the direction of the Sun's path through interstellar space, is near the constellation Hercules in the direction of the current location of the bright star Vega.
The plane of the ecliptic lies at an angle of about 60° to the galactic plane.
The Solar System's location in the Milky Way is a factor in the evolutionary history of life on Earth.
Its orbit is close to circular, and orbits near the Sun are at roughly the same speed as that of the spiral arms.
Therefore, the Sun passes through arms only rarely.
Because spiral arms are home to a far larger concentration of supernovae, gravitational instabilities, and radiation that could disrupt the Solar System, this has given Earth long periods of stability for life to evolve.
However, the changing position of the Solar System relative to other parts of the Milky Way could explain periodic extinction events on Earth, according to the Shiva hypothesis or related theories.

The Solar System lies well outside the star-crowded environs of the galactic centre.
Near the centre, gravitational tugs from nearby stars could perturb bodies in the Oort cloud and send many comets into the inner Solar System, producing collisions with potentially catastrophic implications for life on Earth.
The intense radiation of the galactic centre could also interfere with the development of complex life.
Even at the Solar System's current location, some scientists have speculated that recent supernovae may have adversely affected life in the last 35,000 years, by flinging pieces of expelled stellar core towards the Sun, as radioactive dust grains and larger, comet-like bodies.

===
Neighbourhood ===
The Solar System is in the Local Interstellar Cloud or Local Fluff.
It is thought to be near the neighbouring G-Cloud
but it is not known if the Solar System is embedded in the Local Interstellar Cloud, or if it is in the region where the Local Interstellar Cloud and G-Cloud are interacting.
The Local Interstellar Cloud is an area of denser cloud in an otherwise sparse region known as the Local Bubble, an hourglass-shaped cavity in the interstellar medium roughly 300 light-years (ly) across.
The bubble is suffused with high-temperature plasma, that suggests it is the product of several recent supernovae.
There are relatively few stars within ten light-years of the Sun.
The closest is the triple star system Alpha Centauri, which is about 4.4 light-years away.
Alpha Centauri A and B are a closely tied pair of Sun-like stars, whereas the small red dwarf, Proxima Centauri, orbits the pair at a distance of 0.2 light-year.
In 2016, a potentially habitable exoplanet was confirmed to be orbiting Proxima Centauri, called Proxima Centauri b, the closest confirmed exoplanet to the Sun.
The stars next closest to the Sun are the red dwarfs Barnard's Star (at 5.9 ly), Wolf 359 (7.8 ly), and Lalande 21185 (8.3 ly).

The largest nearby star is Sirius, a bright main-sequence star roughly 8.6 light-years away and roughly twice the Sun's mass and that is orbited by a white dwarf, Sirius B.
The nearest brown dwarfs are the binary Luhman 16 system at 6.6 light-years.
Other systems within ten light-years are the binary red-dwarf system Luyten 726-8 (8.7 ly) and the solitary red dwarf Ross 154 (9.7 ly).
The closest solitary Sun-like star to the Solar System is Tau Ceti at 11.9 light-years.
It has roughly 80% of the Sun's mass but only 60% of its luminosity.
The closest known free-floating planetary-mass object to the Sun is WISE 0855−0714, an object with a mass less than 10 Jupiter masses roughly 7 light-years away.

===
Comparison with extrasolar systems ===
Compared to many other planetary systems, the Solar System stands out in lacking planets interior to the orbit of Mercury.
The known Solar System also lacks super-Earths (Planet Nine could be a super-Earth beyond the known Solar System).
Uncommonly, it has only small rocky planets and large gas giants; elsewhere planets of intermediate size are typical—both rocky and gas—so there is no "gap" as seen between the size of Earth and of Neptune (with a radius 3.8 times as large).
Also, these super-Earths have closer orbits than Mercury.
This led to the hypothesis that all planetary systems start with many close-in planets, and that typically a sequence of their collisions causes consolidation of mass into few larger planets, but in case of the Solar System the collisions caused their destruction and ejection.
The orbits of Solar System planets are nearly circular.
Compared to other systems, they have smaller orbital eccentricity.
Although there are attempts to explain it partly with a bias in the radial-velocity detection method and partly with long interactions of a quite high number of planets, the exact causes remain undetermined.

==
Visual summary ==
This section is a sampling of Solar System bodies, selected for size and quality of imagery, and sorted by volume.
Some large objects are omitted here (notably Eris, Haumea, Makemake, and Nereid) because they have not been imaged in high quality.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==

"Solar System" .
Encyclopædia Britannica.
25
(11th ed.).
1911.
pp.
157–158.

A Cosmic History of the Solar System
A Tediously Accurate Map of the Solar System (web based scroll map scaled to the Moon being 1 pixel)
NASA's Solar System Exploration (Archive)
NASA's Solar System Profile
NASA's Solar System Simulator
NASA
Eyes-on-the-Solar-System
NASA/
JPL Solar System main page
Rose is a given female name.
It is a late Latin name derived from rosa, meaning "rose".
Nicknames are Rosa, Rosalie, Rosina, Rosaria, Rosie, Rosalina.
Similar names are Rosanna, Roseanne, Rosamunde.

==
History ==
Rose was originally a Norman form of a German name Hrodheid, composed of the words Hrod ("fame") and Heid ("kind", "type").
It was originally spelled (by the Normans)
Roese or Rohese.
It was used in England, Italy, and France throughout the Middle Ages, and its popularity increased during the 19th century while still regarded as being a flower name.
The name of the flower has the etymology of Old English rōse from the Latin rosa; phonetically linked to the Greek rhódon, which is independent of the etymology of the surname
Rose.
Distinctions can sometimes be made between individuals who derive this given name after the surname and those who are named after the flower.
Rhoda, as in Acts 12:12-15, is the Greek equivalent.

Rosalia was the name of a 12th-century Sicilian saint.

St. Rose of Lima was the first person born in the Americas to be canonized.

==
Name Day ==
Czech:
13 March
Slovak: 4 September
Italian:
4 September
Polish:
4 September, 7 February, 27 January
Hungarian: 4 September, 23 August, 30 August


==
Other language variants ==
Czech:
Rosalie, Rosarie, Růžena
Danish: Rosalie
Dutch:
Roos, Rosa, Rosalie
French: Rose
, Rosalie
Galician:
Rosalía
Greek:
Rhodē  ˁΡόδη
Hungarian:
Rozália
Irish
: Róisín
Italian: Rosalia, Rosaria, Rusalia
Latvian: Roze, Roza, Rozālija, Rozīte
(diminutive)
Portuguese:
Rosa, Rosália, Rosária,
Rosy , Rose (mainly in Brazil, e.g. Rose de Freitas), Rosinha (pet form)
Polish: Rozalia, Róża
Serbo-Croatian: Ruža, Ružica, Rozalija
Slovak: Rozália, Remmie, Ružena
Spanish: Rosalía,
Rosa


==
People ==
Rose of Viterbo (1233–1251), Italian saint
Mary Tudor, Queen of France (1496–1533), sister of King Henry VIII of England, was known as "Mary Rose"
Rose (singer) (born 1978), French singer songwriter
Rose-Alexandrine Barreau (1773–1843), French soldier
Rose Byrne (born 1979), Australian actress, best known for her role on the American television series Damages
Rose Chen Aijie, Chinese saint
Rose Cleveland
Rose Philippine Duchesne (1769–1852), French-American saint
Rose Dugdale (born 1941), English heiress who joined the Provisional Irish Republican Army
Rose Fan Hui, Chinese saint
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy (1890–1995), the mother of American president John F. Kennedy and his brothers, Robert F. Kennedy and Senator Ted Kennedy
Rose Gaffney (1895–1979),
environmental activist
Lady Rose Gilman, member of the British Royal Family
Rose Hart (born 1942), a Ghanaian track and field athlete
Rose Henderson (1871–1937), Canadian political and social activist
Rose Hill (1914–2003), British actress
Rose Hilton (1931–2019), English painter
Rose Hobart (1906–2000), American actress
Rose Kennedy (1890-1995), American philanthropist, socialite, and a member of the Kennedy family
Rose Marie "Rosemary" Kennedy (1918-2005), a member of the Kennedy family.

Rose Kim (given name also spelled "Rosa" or "Nosa"), Korean saint
Rose Laurens (1953–2018), French singer-songwriter
Rose Leslie (born 1987), Scottish actress
Rose Leveson-Gower (1890–1967), British aristocrat
Rose Marie (1923–2017), American actress
Rose McGowan (born 1973), American actress
Rose McIver
(born 1988), New Zealand actress
Rose Mooney-Slater (1902–1981), American physicist
Rose Mortem, American musician and fashion designer
Rose Nabinger, German singer-songwriter
Rose Napoli, Canadian playwright and actor
Roseline Osipitan, Nigerian businesswoman and Yoruban princess
Rose Pacatte, American film critic and Catholic nun
Rose Pere (1937 – 2020), Māori New Zealand educationalist and spiritual leader
Roseanne Park, stage name
Rosé, New Zealand-born K-pop singer of Blackpink
Rose Porteous (born 1948), Filipino-born Australian socialite
Rose Rollins (born 1981), American actress
Rose Schneiderman (1882–1972), Polish-born American labor organizer and socialist
Rose Stone (born 1945), African-American singer and keyboardist for Sly & the Family Stone
Rose Venkatesan,
Indian transgender talk show host
Rose Wilder Lane (1886–1968), American journalist and political theorist, and the daughter of
Laura Ingalls Wilder
Rose Zhao, Chinese saint
Rose Zhang, American golfer
Darcy Rose Byrnes (born 1998), American actress
Pernille Rose Grønkjær (born 1973),
Danish director
Julianna Rose Mauriello, American actress
Kathleen Rose Perkins (born 1974), American actress
Amber Rose Revah (born 1968), American actress
Rose, stylist and cast member on Love & Hip Hop:
New York


==
Fictional characters ==
Rose
(Keeping Up Appearances)
Rose (Two and a Half Men)
Rose (Titans character)
Rose (Marvel Comics), a persona used by several characters in Marvel Comics
The Rose (comics) or Richard Fisk, a character in Marvel Comics
Rose, a character in the Japanese anime Dragon Crisis!

Rose, one of the main characters in the role-playing video game
Legend of Dragoon
Chairman Rose, a character from the game Pokémon Sword and Shield
Laterose, known as simply Rose, a fictional character from Redwall
Rose/Huntsgirl, a supporting character and Jake Long's main romantic interest, sweetheart, and official girlfriend in American Dragon:
Jake Long
Rose (Street Fighter), a character from the Street Fighter video game series
Rose DeWitt Bukater, one of two main characters in
Titanic
Rose Cameron, a recurring character in Netflix series Outer Banks (TV series)
Rose Canton of Rose and Thorn, a Golden Age DC Comics villainess
Rose Da Silva, a character from the 2006 film Silent Hill
Rose Granger-Weasley, daughter of Ronald Weasley and Hermione Granger in the Harry Potter books
Rose Hathaway, the main character of the Vampire Academy series
Rose Henderson (Rose Nadler), a character from ABC TV show Lost
Rose Lalonde, a character from the webcomic Homestuck
Rose Nylund, a character in the TV series
The Golden Girls
Rose Ortiz, the pink ranger from Power Rangers Operation Overdrive
Rose Quartz (Steven Universe), a character from the animated series Steven Universe
Rose Sargent, from the musical Rose of Washington Square
Rose Taylor, a character from the TV show 7th
Heaven
Rosé Thomas, a character in the Japanese anime and manga series Fullmetal Alchemist
Rose Tico, a character in Star Wars: The Last Jedi
Rose Tyler, a companion of the Doctor in the BBC series Doctor
Who
Rose Lavillant, a character in Miraculous: Tales of Ladybug & Cat Noir
Rose Walker, a character in the Sandman comics series
Rose Wilson, daughter of Deathstroke (Slade) in the DC Comics universe


==
See also ==
Rose (surname)
Roser (name), given name and surname


==
References ==
The Last of the Jedi is a series of young adult science-fiction novels written by Jude Watson from 2005 to 2008.
The series is set in the fictional Star Wars Legends  (formerly known as the Star Wars Expanded Universe and discarded from the canon in 2014), the series is set in the time period between the end of Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and a few years prior to Episode IV – A New Hope.
This series follows the life of Obi-Wan Kenobi, following the events of Revenge of the Sith until he finds ex-Padawan Ferus Olin.
The remainder of the series focuses on a small band of surviving Jedi.

==
Summary ==
A few months after the events in Revenge of the Sith, Obi-Wan Kenobi finds himself settling into his exile on Tatooine.
In between guarding baby Luke Skywalker, he finds himself becoming accustomed to the life of a hermit, regretting the loss of Anakin Skywalker and brooding about the Jedi lives that were lost.
But when he hears that the former Jedi apprentice Ferus Olin is alive and a wanted fugitive on the planet Bellassa, he feels compelled to help save him.
He eventually goes and finds himself alone, without backup, and facing the scrutiny of the newly formed Empire.
===
The Desperate Mission (2005) ===
The Empire has risen.
The Jedi Order has been destroyed.
As far as Emperor Palpatine is concerned, the Jedi are all but extinct.
But on the remote planet of Tatooine, one Jedi Master remains: Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Devastated by the loss of his fellow Jedi—and the betrayal of his former apprentice Anakin Skywalker—
Obi-Wan has been left with one last task:
To watch over and protect a young child named Luke.
Obi-Wan finds out that a former Jedi apprentice has survived, Ferus Olin.
Obi-Wan must make a painful decision: whether to stay on Tatooine or go on one last desperate mission—right into the heart of the Empire.
When Obi-Wan decides to search for Ferus Olin, a known Padawan that left the Order, he gets wrapped up in the problems of the planet Bellassa under the influence of the Empire.

Will Obi-Wan help this desperate planet or will he rescue Ferus and go?
===
Dark Warning (2005) ===
Obi-Wan Kenobi is on a mission.
Along with the 
former Jedi apprentice Ferus Olin and a headstrong 
kid named Trever, he is trying to keep the Jedi's most
important secret safe from the inquisitive Empire.

With Boba Fett on their trail and time running out,
Obi-Wan, Ferus and Trever must make some daring
and desperate escapes...into even more Danger.

Along the way, they discover some incredible
news:
Obi-Wan and Yoda are not the only Jedi to
have survived the Emperor's annihilation of the
Jedi.
There is at least one other...and he is hiding
in the caves of Ilum, a place where nightmares
become reality and dark warnings
tell of conflicts yet
to come.

===
Underworld (2005) ===
As a Jedi apprentice, Ferus Olin had to leave the Jedi Temple in disgrace.
Now he must return to redeem himself—and save the future of the Jedi Order.
The Empire now controls the temple and everything inside...
including, it is rumored, an imprisoned Jedi.
Ferus and his street kid partner, Trever, must plunge into the depths of Coruscant in order to free this Jedi, exposing themselves to a dark underworld where both thieves and refugees hide from the Emperor's wrath.
Breaking into the Temple isn't going to be easy... and surviving the underworld is going to be even harder.
Characters include Ferus Olin and Trever Flume


=== Death on Naboo (2006) ===
Ex-Jedi Ferus Olin has been imprisoned by the Empire.
His crime?
Trying to save the Jedi Order.
The sinister Empire won't be able to hold Ferus for long—not when he has a friend on the inside.
But escaping is only part of the problem.
Ferus's quest is going to take him to the planet of Naboo, where a secret vital to the survival of the Jedi and the entire galaxy is being kept…and is in danger of being revealed.
In order to keep this secret, Ferus will have to face the ruthless Inquisitor Malorum.
A battle will be fought—and lives will be lost.

===
A Tangled Web (2006) ===
Since Palpatine's takeover, he believes his power is absolute.

He controls everything, including the senate.

He is the leader of the evil Sith.

And now he wishes to control Ferus.

But Ferus does not want to help him, until Palpatine threatens those people closest to his heart.
This leaves Ferus with no option but to help Palpatine.
Palpatine wishes to use Ferus as an undercover agent – a double-agent.
But can Ferus do this and keep his allegiance to the Jedi Order?

This book was released in August 2006.

===
Return of the Dark Side (2006) ===
Things go wrong when Palpatine comes to Samaria, ordering Ferus, who is a double agent, to kill his companions.
Years ago, when they were both Jedi apprentices, Ferus Olin and Anakin Skywalker were rivals.
Now their paths are about to cross again....
Abandoning the Jedi Order saved Ferus's life.
As a result, he is the only one who can track down and save Jedi who have survived the rise of the Empire.
He has Rebellion on his mind, and hopes to bring about the fall of the Emperor.

Only Darth Vader stands in his way.
Ferus might not realize it, but his old rival is now his new deadly enemy.

===
Secret Weapon (2007) ===
It begins on the planet Bellassa, where parts of a secret weapon is being built by the Galactic Empire, with Darth Vader and Grand Moff Tarkin overlooking the process to make sure that it remains secret.
They are also joined by Ferus Olin, a former Jedi apprentice and rebel leader.
Ferus joins the dark side in the same way Anakin was seduced by the dark side, and Palpatine promises to give him the power over life and death.

===
Against the Empire (2007) ===
Power grows, rebels face a choice: give in... or fight.
Some form pockets of resistance on battleground planets .
Some go undercover, trying to fight the Empire from the inside, and others watch and wait.
For Ferus Olin, hatred for the Empire is personal.
The things that have been closest to him have been destroyed.
The order he once belonged to has been decimated.
And the future isn't looking much brighter...
Unless a true rebellion can be born.

Ferus Olin is so decimated by Roan's death that the only thing that keeps him going is the fact that the Emperor has promised to teach him in the ways of the dark side.
He believes that this will make him strong enough to kill Darth Vader.
He only lives for Revenge.
The Emperor has also put him in charge of finding possible Force adepts.

During their last mission, in which Roan was killed Amie Antin was captured and this has left Wil, the new leader of the eleven heartbroken.
Ferus arranges a plan to have her taken back before she is transferred off planet.
He calls his own strike force of Ry-Gaul and Solace formerly known as Fy-Tor-Ana.
Clive Flax is also on the team.

Ferus goes through lesson one which Palpatine does not attend.
He tells him he does not need a lightsaber; only to let his anger flow through him instead of accepting it and releasing it like a Jedi would.
He destroys the room much like Vader did after he learned of Padme's fate.

Vader meets with the evil scientist Jenna Zan-Arbor because he has learned that she has found a way to erase memory.
She can erase certain memories and Vader wants the ones of Padme and Obi-Wan erased.
She was always greedy and she accepts Vaders High price.

Trever Flume has enlisted in the Naval academy that Lune was taken to.
Lune is a Force adept and naturally landed in his advanced class.
Trever is there to get him out, but during their escape they are caught and Lune is taken to his dad, Bog Divinian.
Bog offers Lune to be used as a test subject for Zan-Abor's experiments, because he was to get in good with the Emperor and he also wants Lunes memories of his mother, Astri Oddo, erased.

The instructor Maggis, helps Trevor escape because he is sick of the Empire.
They ultimately save Ferus and Lune at the medical facility.

Ferus was promoted to Head inquisitor and was sent to work over Hydra, the former head after Ferus took Malorum out.
He gets a look at the list of possible Force adepts.
He finds promising subjects and ignores the report about the little girl on Alderaan.
This is probably Leia, but Ferus does not know it.

Ferus first had to see Roan's family and tell them of his death.
Contrary to his belief they did not blame him, but took him into consideration as well.
Overtaken by grief, Ferus leaves the room and is met by Roan's first cousin.
He learns that she turned down a job at a large medical facility.
He asks her to take the job because he believes he can get information on Vader's identity.
He believes this is the key to defeating him.
She takes the job and gets him in.
This may be the same facility that Vader was created at, because there was said to be a terrible scream at the end of the Clone Wars.
Ferus lets his anger get to him and almost turns his back on Lune!
He used the Force to distract Zan Arbor and escapes with the boy.
He returns him to his mother back on Coruscant.

Amie was successfully rescued, but Flame was injured in the process.
Clive thinks he's seen her before and does not trust her.
He ventures to her homeworld to find some answers
but before he can get them, his contact was killed.
He asks Astri to help him, and she accepts the distraction.

Ferus makes a contact with Obi-Wan by which he is instructed to file a report dismissing the importance of the little girl on Alderaan.
He does not want to waste his time because, again, he does not understand and Obi-Wan won't tell him.
And in order to file the report he has to go to Alderaan and pretend to investigate.
But he feels the pain in Obi-Wan's heart and decides to leave immediately.
===
Master of Deception (2008) ===


===
Reckoning (2008) ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
CargoBay Listing
CargoBay
Listing
CargoBay
Listing
Official CargoBay listing
Alderaan () is a fictional planet featured in the Star Wars franchise.
It is blue-green in appearance, depicted as a terrestrial planet with humanoid inhabitants, and characterized by a peaceful culture.
It is the home planet of Princess Leia Organa, one of the lead characters in the film series.
In the original 1977 film, Alderaan is destroyed by the Death Star's superlaser.

== Depiction ==
Early drafts of the Star Wars story include references to at least two planets which later evolved into the concept of Alderaan.
Star Wars author George Lucas included a planet called Alderaan in early treatments; in The Star Wars (1973), Alderaan is a city-planet and the capital planet of the galaxy (prefiguring the planet Coruscant which later featured in the films).
The draft script opens with a scene in which an "eerie blue-green" planet called Aquilae is threatened by an armed space fortress.
In Lucas's 1975 draft, Adventures of the Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I:
The Star Wars, the capital planet of Alderaan is described as a floating city in the clouds, "suspended in a sea of cirrus methane".
A planet described in Lucas's draft script as being "under siege by the Imperial Legions of Alderaan" and which is later destroyed is named as Ogana Major.
Early sketches commissioned by Lucas from conceptual illustrator Ralph McQuarrie show a design which very closely resembles Cloud City, as featured in the later sequel, The Empire Strikes Back.
In Lucas's third draft, the Imperial City of Alderaan has become the home world of the Sith Lords, and Darth Vader holds Princess Leia captive here.
Lucas continued to hone his script, aided by screenwriters Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz; names of planets and characters were revised and the narrative was improved, and by the fourth draft, scenes on the Imperial capital planet had been moved to a space station called the Death Star and the peaceful world destroyed by the Empire had taken the name Alderaan.
The on-screen depictions of Alderaan in the Star Wars films are scant; the distant planet is seen momentarily in Star Wars (1977) prior to its destruction, and in Revenge of the Sith (2005) a short scene shows a city amid a snow-covered, mountainous landscape.

===
Film ===
Alderaan was originally featured in the first film, Star Wars, released in 1977.
The opening scene depicts the capture of a small spaceship from Alderaan, the Tantive IV, by the Galactic Empire, and introduces the character of Princess Leia Organa, a princess of the Royal House of Alderaan who is played by Carrie Fisher.

Alderaan appears in a later scene in the film, but is only shown on-screen in a distant view from space as the Empire's gigantic space station, the Death Star, moves into orbit around the planet.
The battle station's commander, the Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing) orders the Death Star's superweapon to be fired at the planet.
Alderaan explodes instantly in a ball of fire.
It is later shown that the shattered planet has been reduced to a cloud of asteroids as the Millennium Falcon spaceship attempts to visit the planet.
The destruction of Alderaan meant that it was not depicted in subsequent Star Wars films until the series of prequel films was produced.
The planet made its first on-screen appearance since 1977 in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005), appearing briefly at the end of the film.
The adoptive father of Princess Leia, Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) is seen piloting a starship to the planet's surface, which is shown as a mountainous, alpine region covered in snow.
Landing his ship in a citadel among the mountains, he brings the newborn Princess Leia into his royal palace.
The backdrop for these scenes was created by compositing landscape footage of Grindelwald in Switzerland with CGI images of the city.
The planet is not featured in the 2016 film Rogue One, but the character Bail Organa makes an appearance, stating that he will return to Alderaan to wait for his daughter, Leia, to bring the Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi.
This precedes the narrative of the 1977 film, A New Hope.
It is assumed he dies when the Death Star destroys the planet.

===
Television ===
In an episode of the animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars entitled "Assassin", Ahsoka Tano has premonitions of Padmé's death on Alderaan.

The mercenary Carasynthia "Cara" Dune, in The Mandalorian, is a former Republic Shock Trooper from Alderaan, according to Moff Gideon, which she later confirms.

===
Comics ===
The comic series
Star Wars: Princess Leia (2015) deals with Princess Leia and Evan (a female rebel pilot also native from Alderaan), rescuing survivors from Alderaan's destruction.
It also features a brief flashback to Leia's childhood on the planet and her relationship with her adoptive father Senator Bail Organa.
In Star Wars #33 (2017), Leia tells Luke that sometimes she can see Alderaan among the stars as, from certain perspectives in the galaxy, its light has not ceased to emit.

===
Legends ===
Alderaan is mentioned frequently and also serves as a location in several works in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, the collection of books, comics and other material considered outside official canon, now branded Star Wars Legends.
In various stories, Alderaan is presented as the home of the characters Tycho Celchu, and of Ulic Qel Droma who fought in the Great Sith War in 4000 BBY.

====
Radio drama ====
The 1981 NPR/BBC  radio drama adaptation of Star Wars features scenes set on Alderaan, in which Princess Leia discusses her mission to acquire the Death Star plans from agents of the Rebel Alliance with her father, Bail Organa (Prestor Organa).
In a later scene, she is confronted by the Imperial commander Lord Tion and accused of treason.
It is established that Alderaan has a strict policy against weapons.

====
Novels ====
In Michael A. Stackpole's 1998 novel, I, Jedi, Alderaan features as the sanctuary of the Caamasi when their home world of Caamas is devastated by the Galactic Empire.

Alderaan is featured in a 1991 role-playing game, Graveyard of Alderaan (part of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game).
It describes how, after the Clone Wars, Alderaan's massive war machine was dismantled, and the weapons were placed aboard an armory warship called Another Chance.
The ship was programmed to continually jump through hyperspace until called home by the Alderanian Council.
Bill Slavicsek, who wrote the game's sourcebook, later drew from it for his edition of A Guide to the Star Wars Universe.

====
Comics ====
In the Dark Horse comic Dark Empire (1991–1992), New Alderaan is a Rebel Alliance colony planet populated by Alderaanians who were off-world when Alderaan was destroyed.
Mon Mothma's daughter lives there.

== Description ==
In Alan Dean Foster's 1976 novelization of the original film, Alderaan is described as a "small green gem of a world".

The planet appears more substantially in Star Wars reference guides to fictional locations.
According to Kevin J. Anderson's The Illustrated Star Wars Universe (1995) and Wallace, Kolins and McKinney's Star Wars: The Essential Guide to Planets and Moons (1998), Alderaan is covered by wild grasslands, plains, forests and mountain ranges.
The planet has no ocean, but has a semi-frozen polar sea, and thousands of lakes and rivers.
It is rich in biodiversity, populated by a wide variety of flora and fauna, such as the nerf and the thranta.
Human life on the planet is evidenced by a number of cities, built to harmonize with the natural environment such as on canyon walls, on stilts along the shoreline or under the polar ice.
The capital city, Aldera, has been built on a small island in the center of a caldera.
The Alderaanian people value arts and education highly, and place high importance on their participation in the Galactic (later Imperial) Senate and the promotion of peace through demilitarization.
The largely democratic society is formed as hereditary constitutional monarchy, ruled by the King or Queen of Alderaan from the Royal House of Antilles and later, due to marriage, the House of Organa.

The planetary government is the High Council of Alderaan, presided over by a First Chairman and Viceroy.

==
Cultural analysis ==
The destruction of Alderaan is considered by some as an artistic depiction of the danger of nuclear weapons during the Cold War and some claim it is used as a pop-culture example of inadequate political and military action leading to negative effects.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars planets and moons
Star Wars:
The Han Solo Trilogy, Volume 3 – Rebel Dawn
Star Wars: X-Wing, Book 4 –
The Bacta War


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==
Star Wars:
Roleplaying Game – Coruscant and the Core Worlds, hardcover 2003, by Craig R. Carey, Chris Doyle, Jason Fry, Paul Sudlow, John Terra, Daniel Wallace, ISBN 0-7869-2879-4
Windham, Ryder (2015).
Ultimate Star Wars.
DK.
ISBN 9781465436016.

==
External links ==
Alderaan in the StarWars.com Databank
Alderaan on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds is a real-time strategy video game set in the Star Wars universe.
It was developed by Ensemble Studios and LucasArts.
It was released on November 11, 2001.
An expansion pack, Clone Campaigns, was released on May 14, 2002, adding two new factions and campaigns.
Later that year, both Galactic Battlegrounds and Clone Campaigns were released in a box set, Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds Saga.

The games were built on the Genie engine, the same one used in Age of Empires and Age of Empires II.

==
Gameplay ==
The player starts the game with a Command Center, a scout, and three workers (in a normal random map game) for whichever of the six original factions they choose.
The player searches and gathers resources such as Food, Carbon, Nova Crystals, and Ore and then uses the resources in order to create new buildings, combat units, and workers.
Food is used for low-end units and troopers, as well as the work force.
Carbon is used in place of Wood in Age of Empires 2 for buildings and artillery.
Nova Crystals create the more high-end units and can be gathered through getting special "holocrons" (similar to Relics in Age of Empires 2).
Ore is used for defensive structures as well as the Gungan unique unit Fambaa.
The player can build separate units at separate buildings designed specifically for different types of units.
The player can advance through the four Tech Levels by paying a certain amount of resources.
When a player advances a Tech Level, more units, buildings, and upgrades become available.

There are a total of seven military structures in the game.
These are the Troop Center, the Shipyard, the Mech factory, the Jedi Temple or Sith Temple depending on the faction, the Heavy Weapons Factory, the Airbase, and the Fortress.
The Troop center produces 'cannon fodder' early game units.
These are the Grenadier, the Anti-Air trooper, the Mounted Trooper, and the ubiquitous Trooper.
The Shipyard produces ships, these being the Frigate, the Destroyer, the Cruiser, and the Anti-Air Frigate.
The Mech Factory produces Scouts, Assault Mechs, Strike Mechs, and Mech Destroyers.
The Jedi Temple or Sith Temple is a depository for Holocrons and produces Jedi Padawans/Sith Apprentice and Jedi Knights/Sith Knights as well as Jedi Masters/Sith Masters.
The Airbase produces aircraft such as fighters, bombers and transports, and the Heavy Weapons Factory produces pummels, artillery, anti-air mobiles, basically the big guns needed to mount a full-scale assault.
The Fortress serves as a defensive structure and produces the civilization's unique unit and an anti-jedi Bounty Hunter, as well as long-range cannons, and the massive Air cruiser.
It fires high-damage, area-of-effect shells at air, sea or ground targets over long reload times while being durable and having passive shielding.
It is the most directly powerful unit in the game (not including cheats.)

If Victory is set to standard, the player can win in three different ways.
The player may win by destroying all of the enemies buildings and units with their army.
Also, the player can use a Jedi/Sith to bring all of the Holocrons to the Jedi/Sith Temple and preserve them for 200 "days".
The final way to win is to build a monument that is only available at Tech Level 4.
If the monument stays standing for 300 days, then the player wins.

===
Campaigns ===
Tutorial -
The campaign sees the player assume the role of Chewbacca's father, Attichitchuk.
In this campaign, the player gradually learns the game's play mechanics as Attichitchuk marshals a Wookiee army to force the Trade Federation off Alaris Prime.

Trade Federation - The campaign has the player assume the role of OOM-9, a droid ground commander leading the Trade Federation's actions during the blockade of Naboo in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace which includes a conquest of Theed city, the capital of Naboo.
The campaign also features the movie's ground battle between the Trade Federation and the Gungans but as an alternate history simulation wherein Darth Maul has killed
Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi
while Federation droid ships destroy the Naboo starfighters.

Gungans - The Gungan campaign begins millennia in the past as a sub-faction of Gungans under the command of Boss Gallo
try to unite the other warring tribes under a single banner, then continues as the Gungans fight back against the Trade Federation invasion.
It also features a bonus mission featuring The Phantom Menace's climactic ground battle, and the Naboo's assault against Trade Federation forces in Theed.

Galactic Empire - The Imperial campaign begins just after the events of A New Hope, as Darth Vader personally leads the assault on the Rebels' Massassi Ruins base and captures General Jan Dodonna.
The rest of the campaign focuses on suppressing other Rebel bases, including a mission to protect an AT-AT prototype, with a cameo by The Empire Strikes Back
character General Veers (a colonel in the mission).
The campaign's last mission is the Imperial attack on Hoth, where the player has a chance to destroy Echo Base and prevent Han Solo and company's escape.
The bonus missions depict the Empire's hostile takeover of Bespin and an alternate retelling of the Battle of Endor where the Empire routs the Ewoks.

Rebel Alliance -
The Rebel campaign is mostly set between the events of A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back.
It features the Rebels' efforts to recover a Jedi artifact, the Vor'Na'Tu, while fending off Imperial forces.
The bonus missions include the Battle of Hoth, the ground phase of the Battle of Endor, and a mission to attack an Imperial asteroid base.

Wookiee -
The mission features Chewbacca's efforts to liberate Kashyyyk from Trandoshan slavers and the Empire.
Its bonus mission is the liberation of Kessel.

==
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns ==
Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds Clone Campaigns is an expansion pack that was released two days before the theatrical release of Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones on May 14, 2002.
It introduced two playable factions and campaigns: that of the Confederacy of Independent Systems and the Galactic Republic.
Clone Campaigns added more units, such as the Decimator and the Air Cruiser, support for movable power supplies, and more.
Clone Campaigns occurs during the first months of the Clone Wars.

===
Confederacy campaign ===
In the Confederacy campaign, the hero is Chiss warrior Sev'rance Tann, and guided by Count Dooku.
The player's goal is to capture the energy-mining platforms of the Galactic Republic so that they can effectively hold Coruscant hostage, and take control of the Decimators, a secret weapon developed by the Republic.

The campaign begins with the Battle of Geonosis as Tann's forces clear an escape route for Count Dooku.
After rebuilding the Separatist army, Count Dooku directs her to Tatooine, where she finds Boorka the Hutt.
In exchange for destroying a Republic outpost, she is given information regarding the location of a Decimator testing base on Eredenn Prime.
General Tann manages to capture the base and the Decimators, but their Wookiee manufacturers include a fail-safe locking code and prevent the CIS from using them.
However, Tann manages to also capture a Data Droid, which she takes with her to the Wookiee colony on Alaris Prime.
Alaris Prime soon serves as one of many probing attacks by the CIS on Wookiee territory before the Battle of Kashyyyk.
After destroying the Wookiee Decimator facilities, Tann makes the droid unlock the Decimators.
At this point the objective is revealed: Sarapin, a world providing much of the Republic's power.
The Decimators' firepower enables Tann to crush the Republic defenses and kill the base's commander, Jedi Knight Jor Drakas.

===
Republic campaign ===
The Galactic Republic campaign begins at the Battle of Geonosis.
Jedi Master Echuu Shen-Jon leads a force of clone troopers and Jedi including his young Padawan, Stam Reath, in destroying Trade Federation core ships.
The mission is successful, but Reath is brutally killed by Sev'rance Tann, sinking Echuu into depression.
The campaign follows the climax of the CIS campaign.
The Jedi Council sends Shen-Jon to the planet along with his new padawan, Stam Reath's sister Naat, to reactivate Sarapin's energy platforms.
The wreckage of a Decimator found on the planet reveals the usage of stolen Republic technology.
The Republic forces successfully take back Sarapin and
Shen-Jon interrogates CIS officer Zian Finnis, who gives away the Confederacy's presence on Tatooine.

Shen-Jon goes to Tatooine and strikes an alliance with Jabba the Hutt, who tips him off about the CIS' alliance with Boorka the Hutt (a rival in the planet's criminal industry).
After defeating a band of Tusken Raiders and the combined Confederate and mercenary forces, Echuu discovers some supply crates destined for the distant world of Krant.
Shen-Jon and Reath head to the planet and destroy a Trade Federation mining camp on Krant's moon, creating a staging area for the invasion of Krant.
Wookiee stragglers assist the Republic forces in destroying the CIS Decimator factories, but Tann catches Reath and challenges Shen-Jon to a duel.
The Jedi Master kills the Chiss commander, but his brush with the Dark Side of the Force leaves him with enough guilt to go on a self-imposed exile.
Echuu later meets with Princess Leia on Krant during the Rebel campaign, where Darth Vader kills him.

The last mission follows the Rebel Alliance in their conquest of Coruscant's Imperial Palace, a few years following the Battle of Endor.

==
Development ==
Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds was developed by LucasArts by licensing the Genie game engine from Ensemble Studios.

The game, as well as the Clone Campaigns expansion pack, was designed and directed by Garry M. Gaber.

== Reception ==


===
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds ===
In the United States, Galactic Battlegrounds sold 225,000 copies and earned $9.8 million by August 2006, after its release in November 2001.
It was the country's 94th best-selling computer game during this period.
Combined sales of all versions and expansions of Galactic Battlegrounds reached 480,000 units in the United States by August 2006.Star
Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds received generally positive reviews.
GameRankings gave the game a score of 77.33%, while Metacritic gave it 75 out of 100.
GameSpot gave the game an 8.2/10, calling it "perfect for a generation of gamers raised on Star Wars".
However, Brian Gee of Game Revolution gave the game a "C" and said that it "doesn't feel very Star Wars".
Carla Harker reviewed the PC version of the game for Next Generation, rating it four stars out of five, and stated that "Age of Empires and Star Wars?
Bring it on."

===
Clone Campaigns ===
The Clone Campaigns expansion pack was met with positive to average reception; GameRankings gave it a score of 73.78% while Metacritic gave it 71 out of 100.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds at MobyGames
Star Wars Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns at MobyGames
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (often abbreviated KOTOR) is a role-playing video game set in the Star Wars universe.
Developed by BioWare and published by LucasArts, the game was released for the Xbox on July 19, 2003, and for Microsoft Windows on November 19, 2003.
The game was later ported to Mac OS X, iOS, and Android by Aspyr, and it is playable on the Xbox 360 and Xbox One via their respective backward compatibility features.

The story of Knights of the Old Republic takes place almost 4,000 years before the formation of the Galactic Empire, where Darth Malak, a Dark Lord of the Sith, has unleashed a Sith armada against the Galactic Republic.
The player character, as a Jedi, must venture to different planets in the galaxy to defeat Malak.
Players choose from three character classes (Scout, Soldier or Scoundrel) and customize their characters at the beginning of the game, and engage in round-based combat against enemies.
Through interacting with other characters and making plot decisions, players can earn Light Side and Dark Side Points, and the alignment system will determine whether the player's character aligns with the light or dark side of the Force.

The game was directed by Casey Hudson, designed by James Ohlen, and written by Drew Karpyshyn.
LucasArts proposed developing a game tied to Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones, or a game set thousands of years before the prequels.
The team chose the latter as they thought that they would have more creative freedom.
Ed Asner, Ethan Phillips, and Jennifer Hale were hired to perform voices for the game's characters, while Jeremy Soule composed the soundtrack.
Announced in 2000, the game was delayed several times before its release in July 2003.

The game received critical acclaim upon release, with critics applauding the game's characters, story, and sound.
It was nominated for numerous awards and is considered one of the best video games ever made.
A sequel, Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords, developed by Obsidian Entertainment at BioWare's suggestion, was released in 2004.
The series' story continued with the 2011 release of Star Wars: The Old Republic, a massively multiplayer online role-playing game developed by BioWare.

==
Gameplay ==
Players choose from three basic character classes (Scout, Soldier or Scoundrel) at the beginning of the game and later choose from three Jedi subclasses (Guardian, Sentinel or Consular).
Beyond class, a character has "skills" stats, tiered "feats," and later on, tiered Force powers, similar to magic spells in fantasy games.
Feats and Force powers are generally unlocked upon level-up, while the player is given skill points to distribute among their skills every level.

Combat is round-based; time is divided into discrete rounds, and combatants attack and react simultaneously, although these actions are presented sequentially on-screen.
The number of actions a combatant may perform each round is limited.
While each round's duration is a fixed short interval of real time, the player can configure the combat system to pause at specific events or the end of each round, or set the combat system to never automatically pause, giving the illusion of real-time combat.
Combat actions are calculated using Dungeons & Dragons rules, particularly the d20 System.
While these are not displayed directly on the screen, the full breakdown for each action (including die rolls and modifiers) is accessible from a menu.

For much of the game, the player can have up to two companions in their party.
These companions will participate in combat.
They can be manually controlled by the player, or act autonomously if the player does not give them any input.
Outside of combat, the companions will randomly engage the player or each other in dialogue, sometimes unlocking additional quests.
They will also participate in conversations the player has with other non-player characters.

Non-combat interaction with other characters in the game world is based upon a dialogue menu system.
Following each statement, the player can select from a list of menu responses.
The dialogue varies based on the gender and skills of the main character.

The alignment system tracks actions and speech—from simple word choices to major plot decisions—to determine whether the player's character aligns with the light or dark side of the Force.
Generosity and altruism lead to the light side, while selfish or violent actions will lead the player's character to the dark side, which will alter the character's appearance, turning their eyes yellow and their skin pale.

In addition to the standard role-playing gameplay, there are several minigame events that come up over the course of the game.
The player can participate in swoop racing to earn money, and sometimes interplanetary travel will be interrupted by enemy starfighters, which begins a minigame where the player controls a turret to shoot down the opposing starcraft.
The player can also engage in a card game known as pazaak, which is similar to the game of blackjack, to gamble money.

==
Synopsis ==


===
Setting ===
Knights of the Old Republic takes place approximately 4,000 years before the rise of the Galactic Empire, and covers the era following the conclusion of the Star Wars:
Tales of the Jedi comics, during the early years of the Galactic Republic.
The backstory of the game involves the Mandalorian warrior society invading the Republic in a pan-galactic conflict known as the Mandalorian Wars, essentially to test their prowess.
The Jedi were hesitant to get involved, but a pair of renegade Jedi Knights, Revan and Malak, led a group to war anyway, leading the Republic to victory.
Afterward, Revan and Malak disappeared into the Unknown Regions, returning a year later with a Sith armada and launching an invasion against the Republic themselves.
Malak, Revan's apprentice, eventually succeeded his former master as Dark Lord of the Sith after Revan was seemingly killed in an ambush by the Jedi.
Malak's aggression has left the Jedi scattered and vulnerable; many Jedi Knights have fallen in battle, and others have sworn allegiance to Malak.

===
Plot ===
The game opens with the player's character—the player can choose a face and be male or female (canonically male)—awakening aboard a Republic ship, the Endar Spire, which is under attack by Malak's forces over the city world of Taris.
Republic soldier Trask Ulgo soon arrives and informs the player character that they are under attack.
Fighting their way to the escape pods, Trask and the player character are soon confronted by Sith Lord Darth Bandon.
With no other options, Trask sacrifices himself while the player continues to make their way to the escape pods.
The player character meets Carth Onasi, a skilled pilot and Republic war hero, and they escape the doomed warship.

Crashing on the surface of Taris, the player character is knocked unconscious, and Carth pulls them away from the wreckage.
After suffering a strange vision, the player character awakens in an abandoned apartment with Carth, who explains that Taris is under martial law by Malak's forces who are searching for the Jedi Knight Bastila Shan, known for her mastery of battle meditation, a Force technique which strengthens one's allies and weakens one's enemies during battle.
Carth and the player character search for her and meet new companions along the way, such as the Twi'lek street urchin Mission Vao and her Wookiee companion Zaalbar.
The group finds and rescues Bastila from the Black Vulkar gang.
With the help of utility droid T3-M4 and Mandalorian mercenary Canderous Ordo, the group escapes Taris aboard the star freighter Ebon Hawk, moments before Malak's fleet decimates the planet's surface in a vain effort to kill Bastila.

While taking refuge at the Jedi Academy on Dantooine, the player's character trains to be a Jedi, discovers a "Star Map," and learns of the "Star Forge," the probable source of Malak's military resources.
The player's character and their companions search planets across the galaxy—Dantooine, Manaan, Tatooine, Kashyyyk, and Korriban—for more information about the Star Forge, gaining new companions along the way such as the Cathar Jedi Juhani, assassin droid HK-47, and 'Grey' Jedi Jolee Bindo.
After discovering three more Star Maps, the player's party is captured by Darth Malak and brought aboard his flagship, where Malak reveals that the player character is in truth an amnesiac Darth Revan; the Jedi Council wiped their memories after their presumed death at Malak's hands in the hopes that Bastila could lead them to the Star Forge through her bond with them.
Bastila sacrifices herself so the player can escape, and is subsequently turned to the dark side by Malak.

On the light side route, the player kills or redeems Bastila, defeats Malak, destroys the Star Forge, and is hailed as a saviour and hero.
On the dark side route, the player allies with Bastila, overthrows and kills Malak, takes control of the Star Forge for themselves, and reclaims their title as Dark Lord of the Sith.
===
Characters and locations ===
Eventually joining the main character's quest are veteran Republic pilot Carth Onasi, the Twi'lek teenager Mission Vao and her Wookiee companion Zaalbar, the Jedi Bastila Shan, 'Grey' Jedi Jolee Bindo, utility droid
T3-M4, Mandalorian mercenary Canderous Ordo, and assassin droid HK-47 if he is bought.
Juhani, another Jedi, may also join the party if she is not killed fighting the main character.
Several of these characters, including Canderous Ordo, HK-47, and T3-M4, also appear in the sequel, Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords as companion characters.
Republic soldier Trask Ulgo is also playable briefly on the Endar Spire.
Antagonists include Black Vulkar gang leader Brejik, crime boss Davik Kang, bounty hunter Calo Nord, Zaalbar's brother Chuundar, Sith apprentice Darth Bandon, Admiral Saul Karath, Sith Overseer Uthar Wynn, Rakatan tribe leader
The One, and Darth Malak, the Dark Lord of the Sith.
On several planets, the main character deals with Czerka Corporation, a company operating on several planets that allied itself with the Sith, engaged in the slave trade and other nefarious practices.
Major allies who help the player's party along the way are Hidden Bek gang leader Gadon Thek, Jedi Masters Vandar Tokare and Zhar Lestin, game hunter Komad Fortuna, Zaalbar and Chuundar's father Freyyr, Uthar's Sith apprentice Yuthura Ban, Republic representative Roland Wann, the Rakatan tribe "The Elders," and Republic Admiral Forn Dodonna.

Action takes place on the planets
Tatooine, Dantooine, Kashyyyk, Korriban, Manaan, Rakata Prime, and Taris; aboard the Republic cruiser Endar Spire and Saul Karath's ship Leviathan; and on the Star Forge space station.
A space station near Yavin is a playable location in the PC, Mac OS X, and mobile versions of the game and is available to Xbox players via download from Xbox Live.
Travel between these locations happens aboard the freighter Ebon Hawk, which is also a playable location.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In July 2000, BioWare announced that they were working with LucasArts to create a Star Wars role-playing video game for the PC and next-generation consoles.
Joint BioWare CEO Greg Zeschuk commented that "The opportunity to create a richly detailed new chapter in the Star Wars universe is incredibly exciting for us.
We are honored to be working with the extremely talented folks at Lucas Arts, developing a role-playing game based upon one of the most high-profile licenses in the world.
"
The game was officially unveiled as Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic at E3 2001.
At this point, the game had been in development for around six months.
"
Preproduction started in 2000, but the discussions started back in 1999," LucasArts' Mike Gallo said, "The first actual e-mails were in October or November of '99.
That's when we first started talking to BioWare.
But some really serious work finally started at the beginning of 2000.
"

The thing that seems to stand out is that the current game is almost exactly what we envisioned almost three years ago.

The decision to set the game four thousand years before Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace was one of the first details about the game made known.
LucasArts gave BioWare a choice of settings for the game. "
LucasArts came to us and said that we could do an Episode II game," BioWare CEO Raymond Muzyka said.
"
Or LucasArts said we could go 4,000 years back, which is a period that's hardly been covered before."
BioWare chose to set the game four thousand years before the films as it gave them greater creative freedom.
They aimed to create content similar to that from the films but different enough to be a definite precursor.
Concept work had to be sent to "the ranch" to be approved for use.
Muzyka noted that very little of their content was rejected: "It was more like, '
Can you just make his head like this rather than like that.'
So it was all very feasible.
There were good suggestions made and they made the game better, so we were happy to do them.
It was a good process really
and I think we were pleasantly surprised how easy LucasArts was to work with."
Zeschuk said that "Overall, we were really happy with the results.
We felt like we had enough freedom to truly create something wonderful.
"Gallo said that BioWare and LucasArts were aiming for a gameplay time of around sixty hours: "Baldur's Gate was 100 hours of gameplay or more.
Baldur's Gate 2 was 200 hours, and the critical-path play through Baldur's Gate 2 was 75 hours...
We're talking smaller than that
[for Knights of the Old Republic], dramatically, but even if it's 60 percent smaller, then it's still 100 hours.
So our goal for gameplay time is 60 hours.
We have so many areas that we're building--worlds, spaceships, things like that to explore--
so we have a ton of gameplay.
"Project
director Casey Hudson said that one of the greatest achievements and one of the greatest risks was the combat system.
"
We wanted to create something that combined the strategic aspects of our Baldur's Gate series and Neverwinter Nights but which presented it through fast, cinematic 3D action," Hudson said.
"
That required us to make something that hadn't really been done before."
Creating the system was a daunting task, because of the many factors to cover, which were difficult to visualize.
The developers intended to make the game have more open-ended gameplay.
Gallo compared some situations to Deus Ex: "You have several ways to get through an area and you might need a character who has a specific skill to do that."
===
Technical ===
LucasArts and BioWare settled on developing Knights of the Old Republic for the PC and Xbox.
The Xbox was chosen over other consoles because of BioWare's background of developing PC games and greater familiarity with the Xbox than other consoles: "We could do the things we wanted to do on the Xbox without as much effort as we'd need to do it on the PS2 or GameCube," Gallo said.
Other factors included the console's recent success and the opportunity to release one of the Xbox's first RPGs.
BioWare had previously developed MDK2 for the Dreamcast and PlayStation 2.
Hudson said that "Having experience in developing for other consoles gave us the proper mindset for implementing this game on the Xbox, and, by comparison, the Xbox was relatively easy to develop for.
"Hudson did, however, note that there were some challenges during development.
One of the difficulties was in deciding how much graphical detail to provide. "
Since our games generally have a lot of AI and scripting, numerous character models, and huge environments, we stress the hardware in a very different way than most games," Hudson said.
This made it difficult to predict how well the game would run.
The game uses the Odyssey Engine, based on the Aurora Engine (previously developed by BioWare for use in Neverwinter Nights) but completely rewritten for Knights of the Old Republic.
It was highly detailed for its time:
grass waves in the wind
, dust blows across Tatooine and puffs of sand rise as the player walks across the seabed.
The choreography for the character animations was done using 3DS Max.
Hudson noted that the differences between consoles and PCs mean that the graphics would have to be modified.
"
You typically play console games on a TV across the room while PC games are played on a monitor only inches away.
"
Console games put effort into close-up action and overall render quality; PC games emphasize what can be done with high resolutions and super-sharp textures.
Hudson also noted that the difference between a game controller and mouse-and-keyboard setup influenced some design decisions.
The PC version features an additional location the player can visit and more NPCs, items, and weapons; these additions were later made available on the Xbox version through Xbox Live.
The PC version supports higher display resolutions (up to 1600x1200) and has higher-resolution textures.

===
Sound ===
While the main game, graphics engine and story were developed by BioWare, LucasArts worked on the game's audio.
Knights of the Old Republic contains three hundred different characters and fifteen thousand lines of speech.
"
One complete copy of the Knights of the Old Republic script fills up 10 5-inch binders," voice department manager Darragh O'Farrell noted.
A cast of around a hundred voice actors, including Ed Asner, Raphael Sbarge, Ethan Phillips, Jennifer Hale, and Phil LaMarr was assembled.
"
Fortunately, with a game this size, it's easy to have an actor play a few different characters and scatter those parts throughout the game
so you'll never notice it's the same actor you heard earlier," O'Farrell said.
Voice production started six months before the game's beta release.
The voice production team were given the script 90% complete to work with.
"
There were a few changes made during recording, but most of the remaining 10 percent will be dealt with in our pickup session," O'Farrell said, "The pickup session is right at the end of the project, where we catch performance issues, tutorial lines, verbal hints, and anything else that we might have overlooked."
A game the size of Knights of the Old Republic would typically take seven weeks to record;
two weeks of recording all-day and all-night meant LucasArts was able to record all voices in five weeks.
Actors were recorded one at a time, as the non-linear nature of the game meant it was too complicated and expensive to record more than one actor at a time.
Most of the dialogue recorded was spoken in Galactic Basic (represented by English); however, around a tenth of the script was written in Huttese.
Mike Gallo used Ben Burtt's Star Wars: Galactic Phrase Book & Travel Guide to translate English into Huttese. "
The key to recording alien dialogue is casting the right actor for the part," O'Farrell said, "Over the years I've had actors take to Huttese like a fish to water, but the opposite is also true.
In the past I've had to line-read (when an actor copies my performance)
150-plus Huttese lines to an actor in order to make it work.
"Award-winning composer Jeremy Soule was signed to compose the game's score.
"
It will be a Star Wars score, but it will all be original, and probably the things that will remain will be the Force themes and things like that," Gallo said.
Soule was unable to write a full orchestral score for Knights of the Old Republic due to technical limitations: "At the time we only had an 8 megabit per second MIDI system.
That was state of the art...
I had to fool people into thinking they were hearing a full orchestra.
I'd write woodwinds and drums, or woodwinds, horns and drums, or strings and drums and brass.
I couldn't run the whole orchestra at once, it was impossible."
===
Release ===
When announced at E3 2001, Knights of the Old Republic was initially scheduled for a late 2002 release.
In August 2002 it was announced on the game's forums that its release had been delayed: the Xbox version was to be released in spring 2003 and the PC version in summer 2003.
A further delay was announced in January 2003, with both versions of the game expected to be released in fall 2003.
Zeschuk attributed the delay to BioWare's focus on quality: "Our goal is to always deliver a top-notch gameplay experience, and sometimes it can be very difficult to excel in all areas.
We keep working on tackling each individual issue until we feel we've accomplished something special.
"The
Xbox version of Knights of the Old Republic went gold on July 9, 2003, with a release date of July 15.
It sold 250,000 copies in the first four days of its release, making Knights of the Old Republic the fastest-selling Xbox title at the time of its release.
Following the game's release, it was announced that free downloadable content would be available through Xbox Live at the end of the year.
The PC version of the game went gold on November 11, 2003, and was released on November 18.
It was re-released as part of the Star Wars:
The Best of PC collection in 2006.The game was released on Steam on May 14, 2012, for Mac OS X.
The game was released for the iPad on May 30, 2013.
The iPad version includes the Yavin Station DLC that was previously released for Xbox and PC.
The game was released as DRM-free download on GoG.com in October 2014.The game was also launched on Android's Google Play Store on December 22, 2014.In October 2017, Microsoft made the Xbox One console backward compatible with the Xbox version of the game, as part of a 13-game curated catalogue.

Both Eurogamer and Jason Schreier have stated that a remake of Knights of the Old Republic is in development at Aspyr as of April 2021.

== Reception ==


===
Sales ===
After its release on July 15, 2003, the first Xbox shipment of Knights of the Old Republic sold out within four days on shelves, which amounted to 250,000 sales during that period.
This made it the console's fastest-ever seller at the time of its launch.
The game ultimately sold 270,000 copies in its initial two weeks and was ranked by The NPD Group as the #2 best-selling console game of its debut month across all platforms.
It fell to the 8th position on NPD's sales chart for August and was absent by September.
Worldwide sales reached 600,000 copies by October.
In the United States alone, the Xbox version of Knights of the Old Republic sold 1.3 million copies and earned $44 million by July 2006.
It also received a "Silver" sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association, indicating sales of at least 100,000 copies in the United Kingdom.
Following its launch in November 2003, the computer version of Knights became the third-best-selling computer title of its debut week, according to NPD.
Although it dropped out of NPD's weekly top 10 by its third week, it claimed sixth place in computer game sales for November overall, and ninth for December.
It returned to the weekly top 10 during the December 28 – January 3 period but was absent again on the next week's chart.
NPD ultimately declared it the 17th-best-selling computer game of 2004.
By August 2006, the computer version had sold 470,000 copies and earned $14.7 million in the United States alone.
Edge ranked it as the country's 32nd-best-selling computer game released between January 2000 and August 2006.Total sales of the game's Xbox and computer releases surpassed 2 million copies by February 2005 and 2.5 million by May and reached nearly 3 million by March 2006.
As of 2007, Knights of the Old Republic had sold 3.2 million units.

===
Critical reviews ===
Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic received "universal acclaim" according to review aggregator Metacritic, and won numerous awards, including Game Developers Choice Awards' 2004 game of the year, BAFTA Games Awards' best Xbox game of the year, and Interactive Achievement Awards for best console RPG and best computer RPG.
GameSpot named it the best Xbox game of July 2003, and best computer game of November 2003.Knights of the Old Republic has seen success as the game of the year from many sources including IGN, Computer Gaming World, PC Gamer, GMR, The Game Developers Choice Awards, Xbox Magazine, and G4.
Computer Games Magazine named it the best computer game of 2003, and presented it with awards for "Best Original Music" and "Best Writing."
The editors wrote, "The elegance and accessibility that BioWare made part-and-parcel of this game should be the future standard for this genre."
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, the PC version received an average score of 93 based on 33 reviews.
In total, the game has won over 40 game of the year awards from various publications.
Interactive Achievement Awards awarded it for Best Story and Best Character Development.
IGN gave KotOR additional awards in Best Sound (Xbox category), Best Story (PC category), Xbox RPG of the Year 2003, PC RPG of the Year 2003, Xbox Game of the Year 2003, PC Game of the Year 2003, and Overall Game of the Year 2003 across all platforms.
In 2007, IGN listed it at #27 on its list of the Top 100 Games of All-Time.
In 2010, IGN placed the game at #3 on its Best games of the Decade (2000–2009), beaten by Shadow of the Colossus and Half-Life
2.At
the 2004 Game Developers Choice Awards, HK-47 won the category of "Original Game Character of the Year."
===
Legacy ===
In 2007, the plot twist in KotOR was ranked number two in Game Informer's list of the top ten video game plot twists of all time and number 10 on ScrewAttack's "Top 10 OMGWTF Moments.
"
The game is also part of The Xbox Platinum Series/Classics for sales in excess of 1 million units.
The Los Angeles Times listed Knights of the Old Republic as one of the most influential works of the Star Wars Expanded Universe.
In 2010, Game Informer named the game the 54th best game on their Top 200 Games of All Time list.
In November 2012, Time named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time.
In early 2017, plot elements from the game were referenced in the animated TV series Star Wars Rebels such as the Mandalorian Wars and the ancient Sith planet Malachor.
Additionally, Darth Revan was set to appear in the "Ghost of Mortis" arc in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars
but this was cut though a deleted scene of it does exist.

In 2019, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Lucasfilm was looking into developing movies or television series in the Knights of the Old Republic era, but that no plans had yet been made.
BuzzFeed News reports that Laeta Kalogridis will write a Star Wars movie that's based on the Knights of the Old Republic video game series.
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker - The Visual Dictionary, a book guide to the 2019 film Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker, contained a reference to one of the Sith Legions of the Sith Eternal organization led by Emperor Palpatine named after Darth Revan.

==
See also ==
List of Star Wars video games


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Kane, Alex (2019).
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
Boss Fight Books.
ISBN 978-1-940535-21-0.
==
External links ==
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic at StarWars.com
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic at BioWare
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic at IMDb
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic at MobyGames
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Planets in science fiction are fictional planets that appear in various media of the science fiction genre as story-settings or depicted locations.

Before Galileo turned his telescope to the heavens, the planets of the Solar System were not widely recognized as worlds, or places where a person could potentially set foot; they were visible to observers merely as bright points of light, distinguishable from stars only by their motion.

In the system of Claudius Ptolemy (fl.
c. 150), the Alexandrian astronomer whose works were the basis of all European astronomy throughout the Middle Ages and Renaissance, the planets were lights set into a series of transparent spheres turning around the Earth, which was the center of the one and only universe.
Dante (1265–1321), in his Paradiso, describes the ascent of his narrator through the spheres of the Moon, the planets from Mercury to Saturn, and thence to the sphere of the fixed stars and the heavens of the angels.
Dante implies that the light of the planets is a combination of light imparted by Divine will and the radiance of the blessed souls that inhabit the spheres.
These planets are, however, entirely ethereal; they have light but no physical form and no geography.

==
Planets as places ==
Ludovico Ariosto, in his epic Orlando Furioso (1513), jestingly sent his hero Astolfo to a Moon where everything lost on Earth eventually turns up, guarded by Saint Peter; but it was not until Galileo discovered (1609–1610) that the Moon had surface features, and that the other planets could, at least, be resolved into disks, that the concept that the planets were real physical bodies came to be taken seriously.
In 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus had already posited that the planets orbited the Sun as the Earth does; combined, these two concepts led to the thought that the planets might be "worlds" similar to the Earth.
Public expression of such concepts could be dangerous, however; Giordano Bruno was martyred in 1600 for, among other things, imagining an infinite number of other worlds, and claiming that "Innumerable suns exist; innumerable Earths revolve about these suns ...
Living beings inhabit these worlds" in De l'infinito universo e mondi ("Concerning the Infinite Universe and Worlds", 1584).At the time, such speculation was of a rather rarefied sort, and was limited to astronomers like Christiaan Huygens who wrote a book, Cosmotheoros (1698) considering the possibility of life on other planets; or to philosophers like Campanella, who wrote in defense of Galileo.
The concept of life on distant planets was not, however, much utilized in fiction.
The most popular target of 17th century "science fiction" was the Moon ("visited" in fiction by Kepler, Godwin, Cyrano, and Defoe).
Oddly, none of these fictions made use of the lunar maps contemporaneously created by Hevelius, Riccioli and others.

It was quite some time before such "extraordinary voyages" went beyond the lunar sphere.
Eberhard Kindermann sent an airship to the planets in 1744 in Die Geschwinde Reise auf dem Lufft-schiff nach der obern Welt ("The Airship's Speedy Journey to the Upper World"); while a traveller from the star Sirius passes inward through the Solar System, stopping at various planets in Voltaire's Micromégas (1752); followed by another outward voyage in Marie-Anne de Roumier-Robert's Voyage de Milord Céton dans les Sept Planètes ("Lord Seton's Voyage Among the Seven Planets", 1765).
These stories were generally unscientific and tended towards the satirical rather than the purely entertaining; their subject-matter was probably inspired by the popular writings of Fontenelle, notably his Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes ("Conversations on the Multiplicity of Worlds", 1686).With
the rapid developments in the magnifying and resolving power of telescopes in the course of the 19th century, it finally became possible to distinguish surface features on other planets and even to draw maps of some of them, notably Mars.
In 1877, Asaph Hall reported two moons of Mars and Giovanni Schiaparelli found the surface of Mars to be adorned with continents, seas, and channels, and a very suitable habitat for life.
From the beginning of the 1880s, fictions – some more, some less scientific – involving travels to and from Mars began to be produced in great quantities, even though the observations of Percival Lowell required reassessment of Mars as a more marginal desert planet.
Mars remained a favored destination for fictional travellers down to the early 1960s (see Mars in fiction).
Since probes revealed the absence of any indications of intelligent life on Mars, the science fictional Mars has changed to a possible future home for the human race, e.g. through terraforming.

Venus was never quite so popular as Mars, probably because it obdurately refused to display any surface features (it is covered with sulfuric acid clouds only dimly translucent to visible light), making any statement about its nature disturbingly speculative.
In 1918, chemist Svante Arrhenius, deciding that Venus' cloud cover was necessarily water, decreed in The Destinies of the Stars that "A very great part of the surface of Venus is no doubt covered with swamps" and compared Venus' humidity to the tropical rain forests of the Congo.
Venus thus became, until the early 1960s, a place for science fiction writers to place all manner of unusual life forms, from quasi-dinosaurs to intelligent carnivorous plants, and where hostile interactions with Venusian natives were reminiscent of European colonial projects in Africa and Asia (see Venus in fiction).
In fact Venus's surface is hot enough to melt lead, and it is extremely hostile to life.

Various planets of the Solar System were used as settings for science fiction stories in the first half of the 20th century; but dissatisfaction with the limits imposed by science led many writers early on to forsake the Solar System for fictional planets around distant stars.
As increasing knowledge of the Solar System made the prospects of life in the vicinity of Earth marginal at best, the extrasolar planet has become almost the only venue for contemporary science fiction.

In many works of science fiction, planets are only described casually, as points of origin and departure, or as interchangeable backdrops for space battles.
This is particularly true of space opera.

In other works, the planet is the center stage, the primary scene of events, and particular attention is paid to its environment and any culture that may exist there.

Adventure stories that stick to a single, well-described planet are sometimes called planetary romances; some of these planets are not very realistic and are effectively fantasy worlds.

Planets may be treated in different ways depending both on the interests of the author and the genre
he or she is writing in.
In some stories, a planet is mainly considered as an object in space: the interest of the fiction depends upon its astronomical characteristics, such as its mass, its geological composition, its atmosphere, how many moons it has and what size they are, how close it is to its sun (or suns) and how hot they are.
Such considerations are found prominently though not exclusively in the hard science fiction genre.

In other stories, a planet is considered as a world or setting.
Such a planet will be described from the point of view of a person dwelling on it, rather than from the point of view of an outside observer: the fiction may describe its geography, its history, and the social and cultural characteristics of its civilizations.
Since authors usually adopt human protagonists, such planets are typically described as very hospitable to human life and, other than in geography, nearly indistinguishable from Earth; Brian Stableford calls such planets "Earth-Clones".
Conversely some fictional worlds are never more than marginally habitable, which has a profound effect on societies that developed or moved there.
Numerous examples of this are to be found in the Known Space stories of Larry Niven.

In some works of fiction, such as Pournelle's CoDominium or Card's Ender's Game series, certain planets are settled by specific ethnic groups.
However, in novels set in distant futures, e.g. Dune, the inhabitants have usually forgotten about the original settlers.

While some authors choose to treat a planet in depth, considering it to have a wide diversity of geography, climate, politics and culture, others prefer to characterize their planets by some single global characteristic.
Many of these uniform settings have become stereotypes, used in a variety of science fictional works.
Such stereotypes include: the planet covered by a single city; the planet whose surface is entirely desert; the planet covered by ocean, with no landmasses; the planet on which it is perpetually winter; the planet that is self-aware; and the planet which has been artificially constructed.

Other planets appear in humorous or comical settings, sometimes spoofing more conventional science fiction.
Such planets are often described with no pretense to scientific accuracy; their strange characteristics are primarily intended to amuse.

For the Star Trek universe, a detailed planetary classification system has been devised; it is not actually used by scientists.

==
Planet lists ==
For planets from specific fictional milieux, use the following lists and categories:


===
Literature ===
Alliance–Union Universe (Cherryh) – Alliance–
Union
Universe#Sentient
alien species
Clement, Hal – Hal Clement
CoDominium (Pournelle) – CoDominium
Dorsai (Dickson) –
Planets of the Childe Cycle
Dune (Herbert) –
Dune planets
Heritage Universe (Sheffield) –
Heritage Universe
Hyperion (Simmons) – Planets of the Hyperion Cantos
Known Space (Niven) – Known Space
Lensman Series (Smith) –
Lensman
Night's Dawn (Hamilton) – Planets and habitats of the Night's Dawn trilogy
Noon Universe (Strugatsky) –
Noon Universe, Minor Planets of Noon Universe
Oikumene (Vance) – Demon Princes
The Three Worlds Cycle (Irvine) – The Three Worlds
Time Quartet (L'Engle)
– Places in the works of Madeleine L'Engle
Uplift (Brin) –
List of Uplift Universe planets
"Vorkosiverse" (McMaster Bujold) - Planets in the Vorkosigan Saga's common fictional universe
Worldwar/Colonization series (Turtledove) – Planets controlled by the Race


===
Comics ===
DC Comics – Category:DC Comics planets, List of locations of the DC Universe#Planetary systems
Marvel Comics – Features of the Marvel Universe#Planets


===
Film and television ===
Andromeda – List of Andromeda star systems
Babylon 5 –
Civilizations in Babylon 5
Battlestar Galactica –
Twelve Colonies
The Chronicles of Riddick –
The Chronicles of Riddick planets
Doctor
Who – Category:
Doctor
Who planets
Fireball XL5 – Fireball XL5 Planets
Lexx – Lexx planets, Fire and Water (Lexx)
Star Wars – Category:
Star Wars planets, List of Star Wars planets and moons
Stargate – List of Stargate planets


===
Animation ===
Shadow Raiders – List of Shadow Raiders planets
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
– Locations in
Dimension X


===
Computer/video games ===
Phantasy Star – Algol
(Phantasy Star)#Common elements
Warcraft – Warcraft (series)#Location
Lost Planet (series)
Halo – Halo
(video game)#Setting
Borderlands (series)
Destiny (series)


===
Other games ===
Traveller


==
Planet types ==
For a more scientific approach to classifying planet types from Orion's Arm

Non-Luminary World Classification Scheme
CADRS Planetary Classification System,
The


===
Ice planets ===
Ice planets have figured prominently in science fiction, such as Hoth, an ice planet featured in The Empire Strikes Back, or Gethen, an ice planet in the novel
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin.

An ice planet named Fichina is featured in the Star Fox video game series.

Ancient Mesa (Ancient Mare in the Japanese version) is a venue in F-Zero Maximum Velocity.
Its tracks includes the Split and Skating Circuits.
Another ice planet appears in the name of White Land in every other F-Zero games.
Described as covered in crystals in the first game, its appearance in the anime F-Zero: Falcon Densetsu and the games based on this media shows ice and snow as the dominant features of this venue.

===
Lava planets ===
Lava worlds can be seen occasionally in science fiction.
In Star Wars, one such planet is Mustafar, with its heat caused by tidal forces from nearby gas giants.
Mustafar scenes take place in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.

A lava world called Solar is also featured in Star Fox 64.

A venue named Fire Field appears in the F-Zero franchise, where it is the last track of the King League in the first game.
It is also notable for being one of the few venues to appear in every game of the franchise.

The Pyronite homeworld in Ben 10 is a planet-like star called which has multiple active volcanos.

Excalbia is a planet with a mostly molten lava surface, featured in Star Trek:
The Original Series (episode The Savage Curtain).
Silicon-based beings native to the planet (Excalbians) create a habitable earthlike area on the surface.
There, Kirk and Spock, along with replicas of Abraham Lincoln and Surak are pitted against replicas of four historical figures considered "evil" by the Federation.
Ostensibly this is so that they can gain an understanding of the concept of "good vs. evil"


===
Ocean planets ===
In Bioware's Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, Manaan is an ocean world inhabited by the amphibian Selkath and source of the healing substance kolto.
The only area seen to protrude above Manaan's ocean surface is Ahto City, constructed by the Selkath to help with trade with the rest of the galaxy.

In Olaf Stapledon's Last and First Men, Venus is presented as an ocean planet lacking atmospheric oxygen.
It is home to a semi-intelligent form of marine life deriving energy from nuclear power rather than metabolism.
These beings are exterminated and human beings (genetically engineered into a flying species) settle the planet.

In C. S. Lewis's Perelandra, Venus is an ocean planet with floating islands.

Stanisław Lem's Solaris is a planet entirely covered by a sentient ocean.
The protagonists in vain try to communicate with the ocean.

Jack Vance's The Blue World takes place on a planet entirely covered by ocean.
The survivors of a crashed prison ship make their homes on giant floating plants.
The ocean is also home to giant, semi-intelligent squid-like predators.

Kamino in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones, an ocean planet inhabited by an indigenous sentient species.

Thalassa in The Songs of Distant Earth, a novel by Arthur C. Clarke.
The planet was settled by colonists from the Earth in the 28th century, who created a utopian culture.

Hydros in The Face of the Waters by Robert Silverberg is an ocean planet populated by people who live on artificial floating islands.

Earth after melting the polar ice caps in Waterworld by Kevin Costner (an unlikely scenario under currently known parameters).

Alpha, a planet orbiting Alpha Centauri in Foundation and Earth by Isaac Asimov, settled by remnants of the population of the dying Earth.
Its only dry land is an island 250 kilometers long and 65 kilometers wide.

Jonathan L. Howard's Russalka Chronicles novels are set on the ocean planet Russalka, named after the mythical mermaid by its Russian colonists.

Shin-Tethys in Charles Stross's novel Neptune's Brood.
The ocean is much deeper than any on Earth, making it only slightly more dense than Earth despite a greater radius.
It is also younger than Earth, making its crust much richer than Earth's in uranium-235, the planet's major export.

2181 Despoina in Mass Effect 3, the hiding place of the Leviathans.
Its ocean surface is littered with crashed and floating vessels, destroyed to keep the planet's inhabitants a secret.

In the Star Trek: Titan novel Over a Torrent Sea by Christopher L. Bennett, the crew of Titan commanded by Capt.
William T. Riker discover a water world inhabited by sapient "Squales", resembling cetaceans with tentacles, who use the other organisms in their environment as tools and are very fearful of anything artificial since they have never encountered metals or plastics before.
The crew must learn to communicate with the Squales to warn them to evacuate the region of a coming asteroid impact.

Hal Clement's last novel Noise depicts a planet whose ocean is megametres deep.

The Star Fox (series) video game has two ocean planets named Aquas and Zoness.

The F-Zero video game franchise has a venue known as Big Blue and is said to have 99% of its planet covered in water.
It is the second track of the Knight League in the first game.

In Interstellar, a fictional planet entitled Miller's Planet is depicted as an ocean planet with a thin water layer that faces constant giant 5,000 ft tall tidal waves that periodically sweep the planet's surface.

In Sword of the Stars, Muur, the homeworld of the cetacean-like Liir is almost entirely covered in water.

Subnautica is a survival game that takes place on an ocean planet named 4546B. Much of the planet
is a deep-watered ecological deadzone supporting only planktonic lifeforms; the setting of the game takes place on the crater rim of a dormant, underwater volcano that is able to support one of the only concentrations of diverse life on the planet.

===
Desert planets ===


====
Mars as a desert planet ====
Before, and certainly after, the results sent back by the Viking landers, some science fiction set on Mars portrayed it as a desert planet.
Science fiction stories that do so include:

The setting of Barsoom franchise by Edgar Rice Burroughs is a habitable (but dying) Mars covered in an arid desert, inhabited by several intelligent species.

The anime series Cowboy Bebop repeatedly portrayed Mars as a prominent colonized world in the 21st century.
It serves as a central hub for the solar system after Earth was left mostly uninhabitable following the warp gateway disaster.

Leigh Brackett's Martian stories, in which Mars is largely desert with sporadic oases of civilization.

Larry Niven's "Known Space" novels and short stories (including Eye of an Octopus and Protector), where water is completely alien to the biochemistry of the planet's inhabitants.

Ray Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles collection of short stories depict Mars as a mostly hospitable desert home to first an indigenous Martian civilization, who are displaced by an encroaching homo sapiens population.
The stories use a "Cowboys vs Indians" theme which benefits from the red desert backdrop of Mars.

Kim Stanley Robinson's Mars trilogy, where Mars is gradually terraformed from a frozen desert planet to a more hospitable Earthlike environment.

Martian Time-Slip, by Philip K. Dick, in which Mars has been colonized by Earth's UN; scarce water is closely apportioned, and the president of the Water Workers Union is one of the more powerful figures.

The 2000 film Mission to Mars is about a difficult rescue attempt following a disaster during the first manned NASA voyage to this red wasteland that is Mars; humanoid Martians are discovered to have once been native inhabitants, and the Cydonia Mensae 'face formation' is used as a major plot device.

The 2000 film Red Planet is about a terraforming expedition from Earth to Mars gone awry due to voracious indigenous Martian insects; Earth's Australian and Jordanian deserts were used as filming locations.

In the Star Trek universe, Mars is the first planet to be terraformed by the people of Earth, and by the 24th century its orbital Utopia Planitia Shipyards are a key Starfleet facility.

The Sands of Mars by Arthur C. Clarke
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, also by Philip K. Dick, set primarily on Mars.
Drafted colonists, such as those in the ironically-named Fineburg Crescent region, relieve the bleakness of Martian life by huddling in "hovels" and taking psychedelic drugs.

Total Recall, in which Mars is inhabited by mutants and labourers, and air is supplied at a tax.
Arnold Schwarzenegger is the protagonist and Ronny Cox the antagonist.

An ancient structure later determined to be a terraforming device is central to the plot at the end.

In Andy Weir's novel The Martian (2011), which inspired the 2015 film of the same name, astronaut Mark Watney is left for dead on Mars, but manages to survive for circa one year and six months, until NASA is able to send his fellow crew mates back to retrieve him.

Ian McDonald's novel Desolation Road depicts Mars as a desert planet before being colonized by humans.

====
Fictional desert planets ====
Other desert planets have been used as story motifs in fictional works:


===
Swamp planets ===
Amphibios 9 from Futurama


===
Jungle planets ===
Catachan - one of the most famous planets from the Warhammer 40,000 universe, an extremely hazardous place to live, with dense rainforest covering most of the land on the planet.
The wildlife of Catachan is infamously hostile to human life, as both animals and plants are often venomous, poisonous, giant, predatory, or stealthy.
As a result, only the fittest Catachans survive to adulthood, many of them becoming a part of Astra Militarum's Catachan Jungle Fighters regiment.

===
Forest planet ===


==
Alphabetical list ==
Contains planets not found in the preceding lists.

===
A ===
Abydos – The first world that humans were brought to as slaves to the Goa'uld Ra.

Aegis VII –
The setting for the video games Dead Space and Dead Space: Extraction.

Aerilon — One of the Twelve Colonies of Kobol in the Battlestar Galactica universe; primarily an agricultural world.
It was known as the "food basket" of the Twelve Colonies prior to the Cylon attack.

Aldabra – A grassy planet in the Andromeda Galaxy, which first appeared in Ben 10: Ultimate Alien.
It is the home of the Geochelene Aerios and Galapagus, one of Aggregor's prisoners.

Aldébaran-4 —
From the ongoing series of graphic novels "Les Mondes d'Aldébaran" by Léo.

Altair IV — From the movie Forbidden Planet, formerly inhabited by the mysteriously extinct race of Krell.

Amel — A planet in the Frank Herbert novel The Godmakers, where all the religions of the universe co-exist with no conflict, under the Ecumenical Truce.

Antar — The home planet of the alien-human hybrids who are the main characters in the TV show "Roswell" and the book series "Roswell High".

Arieka — Setting of China Miéville's Embassytown, where the titular human town lies in the middle of an alien city inhabited by a race known as the Ariekei (or 'Hosts' to humans born in the planet).

Arrakis - Desert planet in Frank Herbert's Dune series.
The only known place where the spice melange can be produced.

Athena — A planet in Tom Godwin's Space Prison (aka The Survivors) and The Space Barbarians, claimed by the Gern Empire and colonized by Terran slave labor before being liberated by the Ragnarokans.

Athos – exclusively male-populated and homosexual planetary colony in Ethan of Athos (1986) by Lois McMaster Bujold.

Aurelia and Blue Moon —
An attempt at theorizing what a habitable planet orbiting a red dwarf star and a habitable gas giant moon could actually be like.

Avalon – Setting of The Legacy of Heorot and Beowulf's Children by Larry Niven, Jerry Pournelle and Steven Barnes.

Azeroth - The main setting for the video games World of Warcraft, a planet inhabited by numerous sapient creatures, such as humans, orcs, or dragons.

===
B ===
Ballybran — A planet in Anne McCaffrey's Crystal Singer series.
Ballybran is a toxic world where the inhabitants must form a symbiotic relationship with a spore to survive.

Belzagor — A planet colonized by Earth, whose natives are the elephant-like nildoror, in Downward to the Earth by Robert Silverberg.

Big Planet — An enormous but not very dense planet, settled by Earth colonists and divided into a large number of colorful social groupings, in the novels Big Planet and Showboat World by Jack Vance.

Botany —
An Earth-like agricultural world to which prisoners and slaves are transported in the Catteni Series by Anne McCaffrey.

Bronson Alpha and Bronson Beta — Planets that enter the solar system in Philip Gordon Wylie and Edwin Balmer's novel When Worlds Collide.
Bronson Alpha collides with the Earth, destroying it.
Bronson Beta is settled by survivors of the catastrophe in the sequel After Worlds Collide.

=== C ===
Caladan - The Atreides homeworld in Dune.
Mostly water with dense forests and green meadows.

Caprica — One of the Twelve Colonies of Kobol in the Battlestar Galactica universe; a lush blue-green Earth-like world that was regarded as the cultural, scientific, and technological capital of the Colonies prior to the Cylon attack.

Castiana – A planet from Stargate SG-1, known by the Ancients as Taoth Vaclarush, was an Ancient city that could hold the key to finding the Sangreal.

Celeschul —
An Earth-like planet mostly populated by humans and squid-like Schuul, which appears in the webcomic Schlock Mercenary.

Chiron — A planet orbiting the star Alpha Centauri in the computer game Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri.

Chorus — The main setting of seasons 11-13 of the Rooster Teeth series Red vs. Blue.

Chthon — The titular prison planet in Piers Anthony's novel Chthon.

Chu – Homeworld of Sailor Iron Mouse in the manga and anime series Sailor Moon.

Cocoon – Homeworld of Sailor Heavy Metal Papillon in Sailor Moon.

Corneria —
An Earth-like planet, from the Star Fox series.
Home of Fox McCloud and the Star Fox Team.

Coronis – Homeworld of Phobos, Deimos, and Sailor Lead Crow in Sailor Moon.

Cyteen — A planet notable for its cloning research, from C. J. Cherryh's Alliance-Union Universe novels.
=== D ===
Darkover — Marion Zimmer Bradley's Darkover series (medieval culture and psi powers).

Darwin IV — Planet in the art of Wayne Douglas Barlowe.

Death Wind – A planet featured in the first F-Zero game, named for its endless windstorms.
It is also the home planet of Pico, pilot of the Wild Goose.

Demeter—
The destination of the crew of the Earth*Star Voyager.

Deucalion -
The setting of the novel Deucalion by Brian Caswell.

Dosadi — The setting for Frank Herbert's novel The Dosadi Experiment.

Downbelow —
The planet in C. J. Cherryh's novel Downbelow Station and home of the Hisa.

Dragon's Egg — A neutron star on which intelligent life develops in the book of the same name by Robert Forward.

Droo - The starting planet in Simple Rockets 2.
===
E ===
Eayn —
A moon orbiting the gas giant Chu'ot (HD 69830 d) in the Y'Deio system in the Halo series.

Emm Luther – A planet with a single continent, ruled by a theocratic government, in the novel Night Walk by Bob Shaw.

Erna — A seismically active planet with psychically malleable quasi-sentient natural forces called the Fae in Celia S. Friedman's Coldfire Trilogy.

Erythro — Barren planet in Isaac Asimov's Nemesis novel.

Eternium - Homeworld of the nibblonians, a powerful race of aliens in futurama.

Eternia —
He-Man's planet in Masters of the Universe.

Etheria —
She-Ra's planet in She-Ra: Princess of Power.
=== F ===
Far Away —
A planet in Peter F. Hamilton's Commonwealth Saga which has been sterilized by a solar flare and is characterized by a triangle of stratospheric mountains.
The alien known as the Starflyer originated here when a ship called the Marie  [sic]
Celeste crashed on Far Away.

Fhloston — Planet in the movie
The Fifth Element.

Finisterre — A hostile planet in C. J. Cherryh's Finisterre universe novels.

Fiorina 'Fury' 161 — Mining station penal colony on which Alien 3 is set.

Fleed - The home planet of Duke Fleed, its crown prince in UFO Robo Grendizer.

Floria - A planet in the Kirby Super Star sub-game
Milky Way Wishes.
It is completely flat and covered with plants and trees on its northern hemisphere.
The planet's unusual shape causes its seasons to be in constant flux.

Fortuna - Tropical planet from the Star Fox series inhabited by dinosaur-like creatures.

Furya — Home planet of Riddick as part of discussion and flashback in The Chronicles of Riddick.
===
G ===
G889 —
A planet 22 light-years from Earth in the television series Earth 2.

Garmilas - The home planet of the Garmilas in the Space Battleship Yamato anime series.
Notably located next to Iscandar.
Known as Gamilon in the English version.

Gaia — The first planet of the star Betelgeuse, inhabited by the Syreen people in the Star Control computer game series.

Gallifrey – The Doctor's home planet in the science-fiction series "Doctor Who".

Ganesha — A planet of the star Tau Ceti in L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Gehenna —
The planet in C. J. Cherryh's novel Forty Thousand in Gehenna and home of the Caliban.

Genesis — A forerunner planet in Halo 5: Guardians.

Gor — An inhabited counter-Earth in John Norman's Gor series, marked by slavery and rigid gender roles.

Gorta —
A planet circling Proxima Centauri, home of the hostile aliens called Furons in the video game Destroy All Humans!.

Gurun — Home planet of Majka, main character in the Slovak TV-series Spadla z oblakov.
===
H ===
Halvmörk — A twilight planet in Harry Harrison's novel Wheelworld.

He —
A planet sent out of its orbit by spindizzys in James Blish's novels Earthman Come Home (1955) and
The Triumph of Time (1958); collected in Cities in Flight (1970)
Helghan — a planet of Alpha Centauri with a very hostile environment in the Killzone video game series.

Helliconia — A planet orbiting a binary star in the trilogy of the same name by Brian Aldiss.
On Helliconia, with a 3,000-year "Great Year", civilizations rise and fall with the change of seasons.

Hesduros — A Sangheili colony from the Halo series.

Hesikos — A high eccentricity asteroid in Angus McVicar's The Lost Planet series.

Hiigara — A lush planet in the Homeworld videogame, which the player must seek.

Hocotate — The home planet of Olimar, the main character in Pikmin and Pikmin 2.

Homeworld — Home planet of Gem race, ruled by White, Yellow, Blue and Pink Diamond in Steven Universe.

Hydros — A water-covered planet, whose population lives only on artificial floating islands, in Robert Silverberg's novel The Face of the Waters.
===
I ===
Iomere — A planet in the Yonmaran system.
One of its moons, Vieneo is the setting of Rise:
The Vieneo Province
Ireta — A planet in Anne McCaffrey's Planet Pirates series, inhabited by both people and dinosaurs, and so also called Dinosaur Planet – the name of the novel in which it first appears.

Iris - a paranormal trans-neptunian giant planet featured throughout the Gemini Home Entertainment YouTube horror series.
It can transform its surface into a resemblance of an eyeball.

Irk – the homeworld to the Irken race, a highly self praising militant alien race from Invader Zim.
It is also ZIM's home world.

Iscandar - Home of Queen Starsha and the Cosmo Cleaner DNA in Space Battleship Yamato.

Ishtar — A planet in orbit around three suns (a yellow dwarf, red dwarf, and a red giant) whose northern hemisphere undergoes catastrophic heating every thousand years as it draws near to one of them.
From Poul Anderson's novel Fire Time.

Isis — A planet of the star Procyon inhabited by an intelligent species resembling a cross between an elephant and a dachshund in L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Iszm — A planet in Jack Vance's novel The Houses of Iszm, a world on which bioengineering of plants is the dominant technology form (as opposed to mechanical engineering on Earth).
Houses on Iszm are trees with room-sized pods; all furnishings are integrated as part of the growth.

===
J ===
===
K ===
Kerbin – The home planet of the Kerbals in Kerbal Space Program.

Kharak — A desert planet in the game Homeworld, destroyed by an enemy race after space travel is developed.

Kinniku - Home of the strongest clan of Chojin (superhumans), the Kinniku clan in Yudetamago's Kinnikuman manga and anime franchise.
Known as Muscle Planet in English versions.

Kinmoku – homeworld of the Sailor Starlights and Princess Kakyuu in the manga and anime series Sailor Moon.

Kobaïa — a fictional planet invented by Christian Vander, the leader of the French Zeuhl band Magma.

Kobol — a planet in the Battlestar Galactica universe.

K-PAX — A utopian planet in the novel and film of the same name, which might be a delusional invention of the main character, who claims to originate from the planet.

Krankor — The home planet of the supervillain Phantom in the Japanese television series Planet Prince.

Kregen —
An earthlike planet orbiting Antares, in Kenneth Bulmer's Dray Prescot series.

Krishna — A planet of the star Tau Ceti inhabited by warlike humanoids, the main setting of L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Krull — Sword and sorcery-themed world from the movie of the same name.

Kulkulkan —
A planet of the star Epsilon Eridani inhabited by intelligent dinosauroids and Earth colonists in L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Kulthea — Principal planet in the Shadow World role-playing game.

Kyrian —
Constellation JR24 planet featured in Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets, housing an access point to an extra-dimensional bazaar named "Big Market".
===
L ===
Lagash — A planet in the story Nightfall by Isaac Asimov, in a globular cluster, and in a system with six suns.
The orbit of the planet is such that all sides of it are almost always illuminated by at least one sun; only once in every 2,049 years is Lagash oriented in such a way that one of the suns is eclipsed by a dark companion body.
Only at such times are the stars visible from Lagash's surface.
In the novel developed from the short story, the planet was called Kalgash.

La-Metal — A dying planet whose orbit changes drastically once in a millennium; the home of Queen Promethium and her daughters in the manga and anime of Leiji Matsumoto.

Lamarckia —
A planet in Greg Bear's novel Legacy, whose continent-sized superorganisms mimic Lamarckian evolution.

Land and Overland — Twin planets revolving about a common center of gravity, sharing a common atmosphere and connected by an hourglass-shaped atmospheric tunnel.
The setting for Bob Shaw's The Ragged Astronauts, The Wooden Spaceships and The Fugitive Worlds.
Travel between the two planets occurs by hot air balloon.

Leera — Home of the amphibious Leerans in the Animorphs book series.

Lethe – homeworld of Sailor Lethe in the manga and anime series Sailor Moon.

Lithia — A planet peopled by an alien species with a well-developed natural ethics but no form of religion, in James Blish's novel A Case of Conscience.

LittleBigPlanet – Planet featured in the video game franchise of the same name
Lumen — The Planet of Light in the British puppet TV series Space Patrol.

LV-223 —
The moon featured in the 2012 Ridley Scott film, "Prometheus.
"
It is part of a larger system of otherwise unnamed moons orbiting a likewise unnamed planet, and hosted the advanced race known as the Engineers, which, according to the film, were precursors to the human race.

LV-426,
or Acheron — The planet on which the derelict ship and its deadly cargo are found in the movies Alien and Aliens.

LV-1201 —
Planet in the Aliens vs. Predator 2 video game.

=== M ===
Macbeth — A mineral rich planet from the Star Fox series.

Macragge - an Earth-like civilized planet from the Warhammer 40,000 setting, the homeworld of the Ultramarines chapter.

Magrathea – From the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy series, a planet home to the world-building enterprise of the Magratheans.

Majipoor — A large planet which is the setting for a science fantasy series by Robert Silverberg.

Mau – homeworld of Luna, Artemis, and Sailor Tin Nyanko in the manga and anime series Sailor Moon.

Medea — Harlan Ellison's worldbuilding project.

Mejare and Tarak — Warring planets in the anime Vandread.
Mejare is populated entirely by women, Tarak entirely by men.

Melancholia — A rogue planet that collides with Earth in the 2011 film Melancholia.

Melmac - ALF's home planet
Mermaid – homeworld of Sailor Aluminum Seiren in Sailor Moon.

Metaluna — A war-torn planet visited in the '50s B-movie cult classic This Island Earth.

Midkemia — Planet on which the events of the Riftwar books of Raymond E. Feist take place.

Minerva — Earthlike planet occupying the orbit of Mars in the alternate universe of Harry Turtledove's A World of Difference.

Miron – The homeworld of Bleep, Blink, and Twink in the British children's series Bleep and Booster.

Mist Flow is featured in the F-Zero GP Legend and F-Zero Climax games as a planet completely covered in fog, obstructing the field view of the racers.

Mnemosyne – homeworld of Sailor Mnemosyne in Sailor Moon.

Mobius – The home planet of Sonic the Hedgehog and other characters from the franchise in the Sonic the Hedgehog animated series, Sonic Underground, Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog, and the Sonic the Hedgehog comics from Archie Comics.
In the Archie comics, Mobius is described as being a post-apocalyptic version of Earth, and is known to have several counterparts in alternate dimensions, including the mirror universe Moebius.
In various Sonic media, Sonic's home planet is typically either Earth or an unnamed alien planet.

Mongo — The planetary setting for the Flash Gordon adventure comic.

Mondas - The home planet of an early version of the Cybermen.
Seen in the audio play, Spare Parts
Mor-Tax, Morthrai and Qar'To —
Planets named in the television series War of the Worlds.
Mor-Tax, a planet orbiting a dying star in the Pleiades, is a paradise planet, the homeworld of the aliens invading Earth.
Morthrai, first mentioned in the second season, may be another name for Mor-Tax.
Qar'To is another planet in the same system as Mor-Tax, inhabited by a different species.

Muloqt — A Kig-Yar interplanetary colony from the Halo series.

Mül —
Constellation QN34 planet featured in Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets.
===
N ===
Nacre — A planet populated primarily by fungi, including an intelligent variety; from Piers Anthony's novels Omnivore, Orn and OX.

Namek — The homeworld of the Namekians from Dragon Ball Z.
It is eventually destroyed after the battle between Frieza and Goku
New Amazonia – matriarchal and primarily homosexual planetary colony in Carnival (2006) by Elizabeth Bear.

New Earth (Planet Bob) –
The Earth-like planet created in the Titan AE animated movie.

New Terra —
In the computer game Outpost 2, New Terra is the world chosen by humanity as its last hope for survival, colonized by the last survivors of Earth in starship Conestoga.

Nibiru —Also known as Planet X.
Nidor — A cloudy, oceanic planet in stories by Robert Silverberg and Randall Garrett.

Nihil — An additional planet of Earth's solar system; due to a flaw in space, the planet is invisible except at close range, although it can see most of the other planets.
The inhabitants attempt to conquer Earth during the 30th century.
From the novel Beyond the Spectrum by Martin Thomas.

Nirn —
Nirn is the name of the planet where The Elder Scrolls games are set in.

Nessus — Nessus, a planetoid location in the video game Destiny 2, based on the below Centaur


===
O ===
Oa
the Living Planet — A sentient planet in the Amalgam Comics series.

Oddworld - an arid planet composed of three separate layers of planetary crust, inhabited by three sapient species, Mudokons, Glukkons, and Sligs, the center of the Oddworld franchise.

Omega — A prison planet where one of the only ways to get ahead in society – or survive – is by committing murder and other crimes.
From Robert Sheckley's The Status Civilization.

Omicron: A Cybertronian colony from the Beast Wars series.
Protoform X (who was later to become the Predacon warrior Rampage) is stated to have committed mass murder on the colony, possibly wiping nearly all of its population out single handedly.
Next to nothing else is revealed about this world.

Omicron Persei 8 – Homeworld of the Omicronians Lrrr and Ndnd from the television show Futurama.

Optera — The homeworld of the Invid in the anime Robotech.

Ormazd — A planet of the star Lalande 21185 inhabited by humanoids organized into female-dominated hive societies in L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Orthe — A post-holocaust planet that has reverted to a quasi-medieval way of life, in Mary Gentle's Golden Witchbreed and Ancient Light.

Osiris — A planet of the star Procyon inhabited by a spacefacing dinosauroid species in L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Oth — An Earth-like planet from the webcomic Schlock Mercenary, which is the homeworld of the one-eyed Unioc race.
===
P ===
Pandarve — A living, sentient planet, considered to be a goddess, in the Storm comic book.

Pandora –
The setting for Frank Herbert and Bill Ransom's Pandora Sequence: The Jesus Incident (1979), The Lazarus Effect (1983) and The Ascension Factor (1988).

Pandora – A so-called "treasure planet" featured as the setting of the 2009 video game Borderlands.

Pandora - The 3-D planet from Futurama.

Pax — A planet with sentient plants in Sue Burke's Semiosis.

Peaceland – Home planet of the Sakimori family who fled to Earth after it was destroyed, in the 1973 Japanese TV series Ryusei Ningen Zoon (Meteor Man Zone).

Perdide — A planet that serves for much of the setting of the 1982 French animated science fiction movie Les Maîtres du Temps (Time Masters), by René Laloux.

Pern — A planet pelted by a deadly spore (called Thread), capable of eating anything but rock and metal, for periods of fifty years every two to four centuries in Anne McCaffrey's Dragonriders of Pern novels.
The people of Pern live in caves or stone houses and ride genetically engineered flying reptiles ("dragons") capable of incinerating the spore in midair.

Petaybee — A living planet, becoming sentient, in Anne McCaffrey and Elizabeth Ann Scarborough's Petaybee Series.

Pharagos — A fantasy planet in the Dungeons & Dragons role-playing game.

Picon — One of the Twelve Colonies of Kobol in the Battlestar Galactica universe; the colonial military hub and the colony primarily responsible for building Battlestar's and other ships prior to the Cylon attack.

Planet Lucie —
An uninhabitable planet orbiting the Big Nothing, which becomes inhabitable after a billion years, in the 2015 Hard Sci-Fi movie,
The Big Everything.

Planet of Rat —
A planet the character New Rat City offers to take the player in the 2012 Twine game Rat Chaos.

Planet X —
A planet of indeterminate location that is the sole known source of Illudium Phosdex, the "shaving cream atom", in the 1952 Merrie Melodies sci-fi parody Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century.

Planet X — an inhabited planet of unknown location in the Tom Swift, Jr. juvenile "Tom Swift and the Visitor from Planet X" (1961).

Planet X — a planet, light years away, ruled by the tyrant "Kurrgo, the Master of Planet X" in Fantastic Four #7 (Oct. 1962) and episode #9 of Fantastic Four (1967 TV series).

Planet X:
A fictional world beyond Pluto that appears in Invasion of Astro-Monster
aka
Monster Zero
aka Godzilla vs. Monster Zero.
The planet is largely barren on the surface, with extensive tunnels and advanced technology, which has little water, a fact which causes its people to attempt to invade Earth using first King Ghidorah, and later Godzilla and Rodan as mind-controlled weapons.
The planet's populations are depicted as largely despising human emotion – violators of this taboo are summarily executed.
The members of the species that had made their way to Earth appears to have been simultaneously destroyed when the leader of the civilization activated some form of self-destruct mechanism.
It is suggested at the film's end that the planet still exists and that there is still a remaining population present there.
An alternate version of Planet X reappears in the video game Godzilla: Monster of Monsters for the Nintendo Entertainment System, depicted as fully mechanical, and having brought together a Legion of Space Monsters with which to invade Earth.
The planet's inhabitants leave it behind when Godzilla, Mothra, and the forces of Earth successfully defeat their armies and monsters.
A third version of the people of Planet X, potentially from yet another version of Planet X appear in the video game Godzilla:
Destroy All Monsters Melee, calling themselves the Vortak, and appearing virtually identical to their movie incarnation.
They again take control of a force of monsters which the player – in the form of the only monster not successfully placed under mental control of the Vortak – must defeat.

Polyphemus and Pandora —
A gas giant and its inhabited moon in the film Avatar (2009).

Pop Star —
A planet shaped like a five-pointed star that serves as the main setting of the Kirby series.

Prysmos —
A planet orbiting three stars in the cartoon Visionaries: Knights of the Magical Light.

Pyrrus — An inhabitable planet whose ecosystem, consisting of psychic plants and animals, seems to be unremittingly hostile to human life.
From Harry Harrison's Deathworld trilogy.

=== R ===
Ragnarok — A planet in Tom Godwin's Space Prison (aka The Survivors) and The Space Barbarians.
Ragnarok's inhabitants suffered from high gravity, temperature extremes, Hell Fever, unfriendly wildlife such as prowlers and unicorns, and a dearth of natural resources.

Reach – A human colony in the Epsilon Eridani System in the Halo video game series.

Regis III — A planet populated by evolving machines in Stanisław Lem's novel The Invincible.

Remulak —
A planet from the Saturday Night Live skit "Coneheads."

Requiem – An artificial planet constructed by the ancient Forerunner in the Halo game series.

Reverie —
A planet with extreme social division between the haves and have-nots, in Bruce Sterling's The Artificial Kid.

Riverworld —
The title planet of Philip José Farmer's Riverworld series, where all humans in history are reincarnated along a spiral river.

Rocheworld —
A pair of twin planets that almost touch in the book of that name by Robert Forward.

Rosetta – Home planet of Rosemary and Takeshi Shishidou, who fled to Earth when it was invaded by the Black Star Army; in the 1979 Japanese TV series Honou no Choujin Megaloman (Megaloman: Superman of Flame).

Rubanis —
A megalopolitan planet plagued by constant traffic congestion, appearing in several volumes of the French comic book series Valérian and Laureline, particularly in The Circles of Power.

Rylos – Planet (along with Earth) defended by Alex Rogan in The Last Starfighter.

Ryn — An Earthlike planet in Edmund Hamilton's novel The Haunted Stars.
Orbits the star Altair, was once the center of an interstellar empire, and is now mostly covered in a forest of once-domesticated trees.

===
S ===
Sangre — A planet ruled by a cannibal elite in Norman Spinrad's The Men in the Jungle.

Sartorias-deles —
An iron-age magical planet on which most of Sherwood Smith's stories take place.

Sauria —
A planet in the video game
Star Fox Adventures, where Fox McCloud meets Krystal; revisited in Star Fox: Assault, where Fox and Krystal meet up with a fully-grown Prince Tricky after Team Star Fox clears the area of the Aparoid menace.
Also called "Dinosaur Planet".

Secilia — A fictional planet in RayStorm.

Seiren – A planet where 90 percent of the population is women.

Sera — A once-glorious civilized world devastated by wars in Gears of War.

Shikasta — Doris Lessing's Shikasta (cosmic consciousness)
Shora —
Joan Slonczewski's A Door into Ocean (waterbound culture)
Skaro — A fictional planet, home to the Daleks, Kaleds and Thals Doctor Who.

Silence –
A venue in the F-Zero franchise known for being a soundless planet.
Its track is the last course of the Knight League in the first game.

Smoke Ring — Not a planet, but a habitable gas ring around a neutron star in Larry Niven's novels The Integral Trees and The Smoke Ring.

Solaris — A planet covered by a single sentient organism in the book of that name by Stanisław Lem.

Soror — The "Planet of the Apes" in the book of that name by Pierre Boulle and the related films and television shows.

Space Base Bullamanka —
An Australia-like planet where a LARP version of Squid-Tac-Toe is played from 3-2-1 Penguins!.

Stroggos – The planet on which the games Quake II and Quake IV take place.

Sur'Kesh —
The homeworld of the Salarians from the Mass Effect series.
It is located in Pranas system.
Sur'Kesh is described as being covered in thick jungle.

Synobazz - Featured in F-Zero Maximum Velocity as a venue shrouded in mystery.
This giant marsh is the home of an old aristocratic, enigmatic society.
Its tracks includes the Explosive and Championship Circuits, the latter of which is unique as it is the only track in the game where the player can save a ghost as well as a replay.

===
T ===
Takis — The home planet of Dr. Tachyon.

Tallon IV – Planet from Metroid Prime.
Once home to the ancient Chozo civilization, now inhabited by space pirates' mining operation.

Tanis — Destination of the sleeper ship Elysium in the film Pandorum.

Targ — The planet on which the computer game Mercenary and its sequels take place.

Tau Volantis - The main setting for Dead Space 3.

The game's characters mistake the planet for the Marker Home World.

Within Dead Space lore,  the inhabitants of Tau Volantis found the Markers and used them as an energy source Two Million years before humanity would do the same.

It is located in an unknown system.

The planet was originally an Ocean planet before the Convergence Event forces the Tau Volantians to build a machine to freeze the planet, halting Convergence and rendering the planet as an Ice planet.

Telos - Home planet of the Cybermen seen in The Moonbase, The Tomb of the Cybermen, The Wheel in Space, and The Invasion.

Tencton — the home planet of extraterrestrials in the series and movie Alien Nation.

Terminus is a planet at the edge of the Galaxy in Isaac Asimov's Foundation Series, home of the Foundation (later capital of the Foundation Federation).

Thalassa — A watery planet colonized by Earth, and revisited by a ship travelling to the planet Sagan 2 in Arthur C. Clarke's novel
The Songs of Distant Earth.

The Third Planet from the Black Hole:
A fictional world mentioned in Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla in 1974.
The planet is home to a form of ape-like creatures which can take on a disguise to resemble humans that typically fades after death.
The planet is slowly being sucked into a black hole, which forced their species to attempt to conquer Earth by the use of a mechanical doppelganger of Godzilla; Mechagodzilla.
They return in 1978's Terror of Mechagodzilla having reconstructed the machine and enlisting the aid of a scientist whose daughter they saved in order to gain the services of a massive kaiju named Titanosaurus, in an attempt to defeat Godzilla and finally begin their invasion of Earth as their own world is now in critical danger.
Their fate is left ambiguous after Terror of Mechagodzilla.
An alternate version of the species appears in the Dark Horse Comics run of Godzilla, with similar intentions for the conquest of Earth and for similar reasons.
In the comics, they help to develop Cybersaur (a Mechagodzilla stand-in) and the All-Terraintula, a spider-like mecha.
Both were designed for the purpose of battling Godzilla, whom they perceived as their greatest threat to conquest of Earth.

Thor —
A planet of the star Epsilon Eridani inhabited by an intelligent native avian species and Earth colonists in L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Thoth — A planet of the star Procyon inhabited by a species of anarchic, bisexual "teddy bears" in L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Thra — The world of The Dark Crystal.

Tiamat — An oceanic planet whose sun orbits a black hole, socially divided into two moieties (Summer and Winter), ruled by a queen with abrupt changes in social conditions every 150 years.
From Joan D. Vinge's The Snow Queen.

Tirol — The homeworld of the Robotech Masters in the anime Robotech.

Titan — The setting of the Fighting Fantasy gamebooks; not to be confused with the Saturnian satellite Titan.

Tormance —
A planet orbiting Arcturus in David Lindsay's novel, A Voyage to Arcturus.

Tralfamadore — A planet populated by the phlegmatic Tralfamadorians in the works of Kurt Vonnegut.

Tran – The main setting of Jerry Pournelle's Janissaries series.

Tranai – The utopian planet from Robert Sheckley's novella A Ticket to Tranai, where very unorthodox methods, such as legalizing street robbery and granting each citizen a right to murder the planet's president, are practiced to maintain a free society.

Trantor is a planet in Isaac Asimov's Foundation Series and Empire series of science fiction novels.

Tristane – A planet in Nina Allan's novel, The Rift
Tschai — The sole planet of Carina 4269,
212 light-years from Earth, slightly larger than Terra and populated by three alien races, one sentient native species and various human races, as described in "Planet of Adventure" by Jack Vance.

Twinsun — A planet lit by two fixed suns, both fixed relative to it, in the Little Big Adventure computer games.
Twinsun has three climates: the poles are hot and desert, the equator is cold and Arctic, and between them lie temperate lands.

===
U ===
Ultron — The home planet of Thermoman from My Hero


===
V ===
Valyanop —
A KIg-Yar interplanetary colony from the Halo series.

Vekta — Setting of the video game Killzone.

Vegeta – Home world of the Saiyans in Dragon Ball Z before being destroyed by Freeza
Venom – A harsh decaying world from the Star Fox (series)
Vinea — Setting of many of the Yoko Tsuno graphic novels
Vishnu — A planet of the star Tau Ceti inhabited by two primitive intelligent species, the ape-like Romeli and the centaur-like Dzlieri, in L. Sprague de Camp's Viagens Interplanetarias series.

Vhilinyar —
Setting of many books in the Acorna series


===
W ===
Wait-
Your-Turn — A planet inhabited by vacuum-cleaner-like aliens from 3-2-1 Penguins!.

Water-O —
The water-covered planet from the cartoon series TigerSharks.

Worlorn – A wandering planet that is the setting for George R. R. Martin's novel Dying of the Light.

Wormwood —
In the role playing game Rifts, a chaotic planet in another plane.
Wormwood is alive, and its inhabitants can draw on its life force.
===
Z ===
Zahir – A hollow planet appearing in the comic book series Valérian and Laureline.

Zarathustra – The setting for the Fuzzy books of H. Beam Piper's Terro-Human Future History.

Zarkon – Home planet of Philo, TV-station engineer in the film UHF.

Zavron – Home planet of the Zavronian aliens in the ABC TV sitcom '
The Neighbors'
Zebes – A planet from the Metroid series that was once home to the Chozo bird people but now home to the Space Pirates.

Zeelich – A planet covered by a thick layer of gas clouds above a sea of lava in the computer game Little Big Adventure 2.
Vegetation and civilization occur only on mountains rising above the cloud layer.

Zeist – A planet that is the origin of the immortals in the movie Highlander II:
The Quickening.

Zillikian – A Counter-Earth in the Bunduki series by J. T. Edson.

Zyrgon -
A planet ruled by the galactic "Law-Enforcers" in novels by Robin Klein, adapted as a television series.
==
Other lists ==


===
Parallel Earths ===
These planets are identical or nearly identical to Earth physically, but have a history that differs to some degree from that of our Earth.

Strangereal — From the Ace Combat series featuring different countries and continents.

Terra Obscura —
In the Terra Obscura comic book.

===
Planets of the Solar System ===
Solar System in fiction:
Real planets of the Solar System have that have been utilized or characterized in a variety of fictional ways (e.g. Edgar Rice Burroughs' Barsoom, a fictional version of Mars).

Fictional planets of the Solar System
: Planets said to be located within the Solar System that, in reality, may not exist, do not exist, or have never existed.

===
Artificial planets ===
Some writers, scientists and artists have speculated about artificial worlds or planet-equivalents; these planets include:

Dyson sphere — Freeman Dyson
Gaea — John Varley
Globus Cassus —
Christian Waldvogel
Hegira — An artificial planet in the novel of the same name by Greg Bear.

Kobold — An artificial environment made by the protector Jack Brennan in the novel Protector by Larry Niven.

"Obelisk planet" — Stargate Universe
Onyx —
A Forerunner created shield world which is the main setting of the novel.

Orbital (The Culture) – from Ian Bank's "Culture" series; 10 million kilometer rings which spin to simulate gravity and orbit a star like a planet.

Pendor — Elf Sternberg
Planet X — an artificial planet in the video game Escape From The Planet Of The Robot Monsters (1989)
Ringworld — Larry Niven
Septerra — A planet with seven layers of floating continents.
From the video game Septerra Core.

Shell World
(Culture) - Planet sized objects which contain many layers of concentric shells, each of which is a habitable environment with a complete atmosphere.
Heat and light provided by fusion reactors attached or rolling across each "ceiling".

Strata — a novel by Terry Pratchett, includes an unnamed artificial flat world.

===
Fantastic planets ===
Some invented planets have physically impossible shapes, and may be regarded as fantasy worlds:

Discworld — A flat, disc-shaped "planet", supported on the backs of giant elephants riding on a turtle, in Terry Pratchett's Discworld series.

World of Tiers — A planet-sized step pyramid with a different environment on each step, in Philip José Farmer's book series of the same name.

===
Comic planets ===
These planets are not so much carefully constructed worlds as they are humorous backgrounds or gag references in various comedy shows and games:

Arazon — A prison planet featured in the comic novel Bikini Planet by David S. Garnett.
It is colliquially known as "Clink".

Dave and Alvin –
Twin planets in solar orbit beyond Pluto on the TV show ALF (Episode #24, Weird Science).

Druidia — Home of the Druids, ruled by King Roland and Princess Vespa in the film Spaceballs.

Freleng — Zadavia's and Optimatus' homeworld in the animated series Loonatics Unleashed.
The name is an homage to animator Friz Freleng.

Gordon —
A planet visited in the British Claymation series Rex the Runt.
All the inhabitants of the planet are sapient plant-pots who are all called Gordon, with the exception of one named John.
The planet is referenced frequently but is never actually seen.

Hideaway — An "entertainment planet" appearing in the comic novel Bikini Planet by David S. Garnett, and briefly in the precursor novel Stargonauts.

Htrae — A version of Earth in which everything is backwards, in the sci-fi television comedy Red Dwarf.

Jupiter Two — A planet mentioned by name in Spaceballs.
It is mentioned as being close to Druidia, but it is not actually shown on-screen.

Koozebane — A mysterious planet full of weird aliens, encountered several times in the television puppet comedy
The Muppet Show.

Kukurikabu — A scalene ellipsoid planet from the Philippine comedy-fantasy series, Kokey @
Ako.
It is populated by the Kukurikabukan race.

Marklar — A planet that appeared in four episodes of the animated television series South Park, most prominently in Starvin' Marvin in Space, where all nouns are replaced by the word 'Marklar'.

Melmac — The home planet of the alien Gordon Shumway in the television situation comedy ALF.

Ork — The home planet of the humanoid alien Mork in the television situation comedy Mork & Mindy.

Planet X —
The women-only planet of Queen Zombina in the parodic musical Zombies from The Beyond (1995).

Planet X — the source of Alludium Phosdex, the shaving cream atom, in the 1953 animated short comedy film Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century.

Remulak — The home planet of the aliens in the comedy sketches (and film)
The Coneheads.

Rigel IV —
The home planet of drooling aliens Kang and Kodos on the animated comedy The Simpsons.

Rimmerworld —
A planet populated by millions of clones of Arnold Rimmer who had spent six hundred years alone on this planet, creating clones of himself in a failed attempt to create a girlfriend.
From Red Dwarf.

Shroob planet —
The (assumed) homeworld of the alien Shroobs in the video game Mario & Luigi: Partners in Time.

Skyron — Planet in the Andromeda Galaxy, home of immense blancmanges, in a Monty Python's Flying Circus comedy sketch.

Spaceball — Planet of the Spaceballs, ruled by President Skroob in the movie
Spaceballs, where it has no atmosphere.

Sushi — A metafictional planet mentioned in Ed, Edd n Eddy, mentioned as the setting for the (fictional) horror film
I Was a Teenage Appetiser from Planet Sushi: The Second Coming.

Thargoidia — The homeworld of the Thargoids in the Captain Kremmen series by Kenny Everett.
The city of Gortadia is the planetary capital city.

Thribb — A planet seen in an episode of Rex the Runt.
The planet itself is merely an asteroid with a lecture hall at its north pole, and the inhabitants all resemble the Easter Island Statues.

Vega –
In the film Spaceballs, the spaceship Eagle-5 crash-lands on the desert-moon of Vega after running out of fuel.

Xenon — The home planet of Roger Wilco, janitor, in the humorous computer game series Space Quest.

Yekok – home planet of protagonist, Kokey from the Filipino series Kokey @
Ako.

Yugopotamia — A comic "opposite" planet in the Oort cloud mentioned in the animated comedy The Fairly OddParents.
==
Books ==
Comins, Neil F.
What If the Moon Didn't Exist.

Gillette, Stephen.
World-Building.
Writer's Digest Books.

Stableford, Brian.
The Dictionary of Science Fiction Places.

== See also ==
Exoplanet
Hypothetical planet
Planetary habitability
Terrestrial planet
===
Similar fictions ===
Fantasy world
Fictional country
Fictional universe
List of fantasy worlds
Solar System in fiction
Stars and planetary systems in fiction


===
Fan fiction ===
Alternate universe
Expanded universe


=
= References ==
Finn (Designation FN-2187) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.

The character first appeared in the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens as a First Order stormtrooper who, shocked by the Order's cruelty in his first combat mission, flees and joins forces with Rey and later the Resistance.
He is portrayed by English actor John Boyega, who reprised the role in Star Wars: The Last Jedi and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Boyega's performance and the character have received praise.
For his performance in The Force Awakens, Boyega won the BAFTA Rising Star Award, and was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor.

==
Casting and creation ==
The idea for the character, whose name during early pre-production was Sam, came from screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan.
Colleague Michael Arndt, who prepared an early draft of The Force Awakens, said:
And then we were struggling to figure out who the male lead was going to be.
I remember we talked about pirates and merchant marines and all this stuff, and finally Larry [Kasdan] got pissed at all of us
and he's just like, "
You guys, you're not thinking big.
What if he's a stormtrooper that ran away?"

For the roles of Finn and other new Star Wars characters for The Force Awakens, director J. J. Abrams intentionally looked for unknown actors, as he wanted audiences "to meet these characters [in the film] and not feel like it’s him from that thing
, it’s her from that thing.
"
Boyega, who had impressed Abrams in his debut role in British sci-fi film Attack the Block (2011), was invited to audition for the role of Finn, a process which lasted seven months before he was finally cast.
Kathleen Kennedy, one of the producers of The Force Awakens, stated: John Boyega was somebody we'd known of because of Attack the Block.
And we'd been sort of putting him on the top of our list right from the beginning.
But, then again, we went on a massive search just to see who was out there, and we kept coming back to realizing that John would be the perfect Finn.

Finn's stormtrooper code name, FN-2187, is a reference to the number of the cell in which Princess Leia was detained in the original 1977 film Star Wars. "
Cell 2187", in turn, references Arthur Lipsett's short film 21-87.Abrams stated that it was intentional that Finn was given no last name in promotional materials for The Force Awakens, suggesting that his full name and background would be revealed in future films.
However, the film itself revealed that "Finn" is an adopted name, derived from his stormtrooper number.

In 2021 whilst promoting the film Cherry, Marvel Cinematic Universe actor Tom Holland revealed he had also auditioned for the role of Finn before Boyega was cast.

==
Appearances ==


===
The Force Awakens ===
Finn, originally designated "FN-2187", is an ex-First Order stormtrooper who served under Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie) and Kylo Ren (Adam Driver).
He was taken from his family at a young age and sold to the First Order to become a part of their ever-expanding army.
He was trained for most his life to be an effective, loyal, and merciless soldier.

In spite of his training, Finn becomes disillusioned with the First Order during his first combat mission on the planet Jakku.
He is traumatized when a fellow stormtrooper dies in front of him, and is later horrified when Ren, having failed to secure the map that will lead to the missing Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), orders his squadron to massacre a village of Jakku civilians.
The other stormtroopers follow Ren's order without hesitation.
Finn, however, lowers his weapon, aghast, in a silent but firm refusal.
While on Jakku, Phasma and Ren both notice Finn's inability to kill, and Phasma later instructs him to report for reconditioning to better follow her orders.
Instead of heeding her word, Finn resolves to flee the First Order, and convinces the captured Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) to aid him in his escape.

With Poe piloting a stolen TIE fighter, the two escape from aboard the Finalizer—the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer where Poe was being held prisoner.
While piloting, Poe dubs FN-2187 "Finn" (from the "FN" in his designation), which the otherwise nameless stormtrooper embraces.
Moments after, their TIE fighter is shot down by the Finalizer's turrets and crash-lands back on Jakku.
When Finn comes to, he searches for Poe in the wreckage, but is only able to find the pilot's jacket before the shattered hull of their ship is swallowed by an enormous sinkhole.
Finn assumes that Poe is dead.
Alone, Finn decides to search for civilization, and dons Poe's jacket in place of his own stormtrooper armor.

Poe's astromech droid BB-8, now in the care of the junk scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley), recognizes the jacket that Finn is wearing belongs to Poe.
Rey assumes Finn to be a member of the Resistance after mentioning that BB-8 has a partially completed map leading to Luke.
Finn goes along with her mistaken assumption, hoping that she will help him get BB-8 to the Resistance.
The three of them escape the First Order on the Millennium Falcon with help from Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).
Han takes them to his friend Maz Kanata (Lupita Nyong’o) on Takodana, who promises to take them to the Resistance.
Finn decides to continue to flee the galactic conflict, but changes his mind when the First Order launches a preemptive strike on the capital of the New Republic and Ren's forces find them and take Rey prisoner.

Finn flies to the Resistance base, where he discovers that Poe is still alive and meets General Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), C-3PO (Anthony Daniels), and the hibernating R2-D2 (Kenny Baker).
Finn reveals some details about the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, and claims to be able to disable their shields.
When he arrives on the planet with Han and Chewbacca, however, Finn reveals that he only worked in the base's sanitation section.
Nevertheless, the team takes Phasma hostage and Finn forces her at gunpoint to disable the shields.
This allows the Resistance to attack, led by Poe.
They meet up with Rey, who has freed herself from captivity.
Later, Finn watches in horror with the others as Ren kills Han.
Ren confronts Finn and Rey in the woods, claiming that their fight is not over.
Finn picks up Luke’s old lightsaber after Rey is knocked out by Ren and tries to fight him, but Ren easily overpowers him and knocks him unconscious.
Rey stops Ren from killing Finn, and she and Chewbacca escape Starkiller Base in the Millennium Falcon and bring the comatose Finn to the Resistance base for medical care.

==== Related works and merchandising ====
Finn is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Finn is also a point of view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
Finn is a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0, voiced by Boyega.

===
The Last Jedi ===
Finn awakens from his coma aboard the main Resistance cruiser, and immediately demands to know where Rey is, learning that Leia has a beacon that will lead Rey back to her when necessary.
Later, following the attack on the cruiser that killed most of the Resistance's main leadership and rendered Leia unconscious, Finn takes the beacon and attempts to board an escape pod in the hopes of keeping both himself and Rey out of danger.
Before he can board the pod, he is found by Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran), a maintenance worker whose sister Paige, a bomber for the Resistance, has recently died in an attack on the First Order.
Seeing Finn trying to escape, Rose stuns him and intends to turn him in for desertion, but stops when Finn tells her that the First Order has found a way to track the cruiser through lightspeed.
She tells Finn that she might be able to disable the tracker, and Finn says that, having worked aboard a Star Destroyer, he would be able to find where the tracker is.
Rose and Finn run their plan by Poe, who contacts Kanata for help, but she claims that she is too busy and instructs them to find a "master code breaker" in a casino in Canto Bight, a resort city on planet Cantonica.
Operating against acting Resistance leader Vice Admiral Holdo’s
(Laura Dern) wishes, Finn and Rose, along with BB-8, steal a ship and go to Canto Bight.

Finn is initially entranced by the lavish lifestyle of the casino, but becomes disillusioned when Rose tells him that most of the people there have become wealthy by dealing arms to the First Order.
While they find the master code breaker, they are unable to recruit him as they are arrested and jailed for a parking violation.
In their cell they meet DJ (Benicio Del Toro), a thief and codebreaker who offers to help them; they refuse, but he nonetheless breaks them out of their cell.
Finn and Rose escape from the prison, where they set free a horde of horse-like racing creatures called Fathiers, escaping atop one of them.
Outside the casino they are greeted by BB-8 and DJ, having stolen a ship together.
DJ agrees to help them, despite Finn’s misgivings.
Eventually, Finn, Rose, and DJ arrive aboard the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy and disguise themselves as First Order officers; Finn finds the location of the tracker and DJ breaks them in, but before Rose is able to disable the tracker they are caught by Phasma.
Upon being captured, DJ, having overheard the Resistance's plan of escaping to Crait via transports, secretly tells the First Order of the plans in exchange for money and his freedom, and Finn and Rose are to be executed.
Before they are, Holdo rams the Resistance cruiser into Supreme Leader Snoke’s
(Andy Serkis) flagship at lightspeed, damaging the ship and sending it into chaos.
Finn has a one-on-one fight with Phasma, ending with him proudly declaring himself "rebel scum" before Phasma falls to her demise.
BB-8, aboard a First Order AT-ST, rescues Finn and Rose from Stormtroopers and the three of them very narrowly escape to Crait aboard a damaged shuttle.

As the First Order prepares an attack on the formerly abandoned Rebel base on Crait, Finn recognizes the weaponry that they plan to use to destroy the blast doors and leads a small strike on the First Order with the intention of disabling the cannon.
The attack goes poorly, and Poe orders all fighters to retreat, but Finn is determined to destroy the cannon and flies directly into the blast, planning to sacrifice himself to defeat the First Order.
At the last second, Rose stops him by ramming her speeder into his, pushing him out of the blast.
Finn asks her why she stopped him, and she tells him that wars are won "not by fighting what we hate, but saving what we love;" she then kisses him before falling unconscious.
Finn brings her body back to the Rebel base and summons a medic for her.
When Luke appears on Crait, Finn's first instinct is to send forces to help him, but Poe realizes that Luke is stalling to give the Resistance time to escape.
Finn and Poe lead the Resistance off the planet.
Finn finally reunites with Rey, and embraces her before boarding the Millennium Falcon.
Finn is last seen putting a blanket over the still unconscious Rose.

====
Related works and merchandising ====
Finn is a playable Hero in Star Wars Battlefront II, voiced by Boyega.
He was added through the DLC of The Last Jedi.
Finn's outfit in The Rise of Skywalker update.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
Finn, along with Poe, intercepts a message from a First Order mole that Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) has come back to life and is planning an attack on the Resistance and the New Republic in the form of the Final Order, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers designed by the Sith Eternal.
Finn then leaves along with Rey, Poe, C-3PO, and Chewbacca to the desert planet of Pasaana, where with the help of Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams)
they locate a dagger that contains a clue to a Sith wayfinder, a compass to the Sith planet Exegol.
Throughout the whole journey, Finn clearly has something he wants to tell Rey, but is unable to find the time to tell her.
Their journey takes them to Kijimi, where the location of the wayfinder is extracted from C-3PO's memory files, and later to the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast, where Finn and Poe go to rescue Chewbacca, who was taken by the First Order.
In the process, Finn and Poe are captured by Stormtroopers and set to be executed, but they are rescued by General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson), who reveals that he is the mole.
Going free, Finn and Poe rescue Rey aboard the Millennium Falcon and head to the Endor system, where the wayfinder is located among the wreckage of the second Death Star.

On Kef Bir, they encounter a group allied with the Resistance, led by a woman named Jannah (Naomi Ackie).
Finn gets to know Jannah, who reveals that she and the entire settlement on Kef Bir are former Stormtroopers who mutinied after a battle.
Finn tells her that he left the Order as well, and suggests that the Force brought them together and caused them all to leave the Order.
Finn and Jannah follow Rey aboard the wreckage to try and stop her from confronting Ren, but she does so and nearly kills him before healing him and leaving aboard Ren's ship.
Without Rey or the wayfinder, Finn, Poe, and Jannah return to the Resistance base, where they learn that Leia has died.
Poe is named Acting General, and Poe appoints Finn as Co-General.

Finn learns of Exegol's whereabouts based on Rey's transmissions, and he and Poe lead a strike against the Sith Eternal forces, with Finn and Jannah specifically leading a ground attack on the surface of the Steadfast to take out their navigation.
As the attack nears its end, Finn and Jannah are left on the surface of the damaged Resurgent Star Destroyer, but are ultimately rescued by Lando and Chewbacca in the Millennium Falcon and the rest of the Resistance fleet; Finn attributes his faith in his being rescued to a belief in the Force.
Following the successful attack, Finn celebrates among the Rebels on the Resistance base, reuniting with Rey and Poe.

===
The Lego Star Wars Holiday Special ===
Finn, having revealed what he was going to tell Rey to be of his own realization of being Force sensitive, is now training under her as her Jedi Padawan.
Rey accidentally hurts Finn's feelings during a training session, making Finn use a wooden toy lightsaber instead of her own.
Rey seeks out a path leading her to the World Between Worlds, allowing her to travel through time.
Meanwhile, Finn plans for Life Day celebrations with Poe, Jannah, Rose and Lando, as they await the arrival of Chewbacca's family.
During her travels, Rey learns from Yoda's ghost that patience and understanding is an important part of teaching a Padawan; Finn is shown to have prevented the Life Day tree from falling by using his wooden lightsaber.
When Rey returns home, she allows Finn to slice the Life Day roast with her lightsaber.
By mistake, Finn slices all the way through the table, but Rey reassures him that she'll help him get better.

==
Character ==
When asked about Finn's character traits, Boyega replied, I think the element of having to step up to a bigger calling, when your circumstances don't particularly reflect that.
Because I'm young, at the beginning of my life; you haven't really achieved much, and then you have to do that whole adulthood thing, get responsible,
work and all of that stuff, no more mommy and daddy taking care of things.
I feel like it's the same kind of journey that Finn has when he leaves the First Order.
He leaves a curriculum, he leaves a system and embarks on his own journey.
He also noted that initially "most of his decisions are based on adrenaline.
Like, 'Okay, you know what?
I'm just going to get this blaster and run away.'

" Boyega further noted that "[n]ot only is the character in over his head and someone who is just dropped into an extraordinary circumstance, the scenes and the script prove that
and it's not a problem that can just be erased.
"Finn was originally going to be accompanied to Canto Bight by Poe in The Last Jedi, but writer/director Rian Johnson found the storyline flat when he realized their dialogue was interchangeable.
This led to the creation of the character Rose Tico, who would challenge and contrast with Finn.
In The Rise of Skywalker, Finn tries to tell Rey something which he does not want to say in front of Poe, but this thread is never resolved within the film.
This was implied to involve him confessing he loved her, but Boyega denied this on Twitter.
The novelization of the film reveals that Finn is Force-sensitive, implying this to be what he intended to tell Rey.
Abrams later confirmed that Finn was indeed Force-sensitive shortly after the film's premiere.
The novelization also states that Rey believes this as well, speculating on the kind of Jedi he could become.

== Reception ==
The character and Boyega's portrayal were praised; reviewer Jamie Graham wrote, "of the new triangle of characters, Boyega brings intensity and surprisingly honed comic timing."
Reviewers also praised Finn's relationships with the other characters: The dynamic between Rey and Finn is something new for Star Wars, with her bright-eyed heroism complementing Boyega's roguish wit...
Gone is the clunky dialogue of the prequels—instead, it's replaced by some seriously clever writing that often leads to nice little moments, many with Han and Finn.
Drew McWeeny of HitFix notes, "Boyega has this great combination of self-interested fear and reluctant heroism that he plays beautifully, and he charts Finn's evolution as a person expertly here."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described the character as "bracingly comic and cunning".
Robbie Collin writes that Boyega has a "(very funny) half-brave, half-anxious, would-be-heroic schtick" and notes that despite being "brave, charming, and funny", Finn "only wants to be thought of as the daring freedom-fighter
he's not quite sure he's cut out to be."
Some reviewers were less than positive, however.
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote that "Boyega's Finn is the new movie's one weak link, a character who vacillates between noble impulses and cowardice until our interest drops away.
The performance is fine
but it's just fine, with little of the iconic bite a Wagnerian cartoon like this needs.
"The
character was also subject to racist reactions by some fans online, to which Boyega responded, "I'm not going to lose sleep over people."
After the first trailer premiered, Boyega responded to critics with, "To whom it may concern ...
Get used to it", and further commented that, "All the films I've done have had a secret commentary on stereotypical mentalities.
It's about getting people to drop a prejudiced state of mind and realise, 'Oh shit we're just watching normal people.'
"
In response to those who desired to boycott the film over their disagreements with the existence of a black stormtrooper, Boyega replied, "I'm proud of my heritage, and no man can take that away from me.
I wasn't raised to fear people with a difference of opinion.
They are merely victims of a disease in their mind.
"In
2016, Boyega was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Finn.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Finn in the StarWars.com Databank
Finn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Finn on IMDb
Lego Star Wars:
The Video Game (sometimes simply called Lego Star Wars) is a Lego-themed, action-adventure video game based on the Lego Star Wars line of toys, and the first installment in the Lego video game franchise developed by Traveller's Tales, which would develop all future Lego titles from that point on.
It was first released on 29 March 2005, and is a video game adaptation of the Star Wars prequel trilogy:
The Phantom Menace (1999), Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005), with a bonus level from A New Hope (1977).

It is the only Traveller's Tales developed Lego title that was rated Everyone by the ESRB for consoles, with most subsequent handheld versions of Traveller's Tales LEGO video games receiving such a rating; while further console versions of Traveller's Tales LEGO video games received the Everyone 10+ rating.

It was developed by Traveller's Tales for the Microsoft Xbox, Sony PlayStation 2 video game consoles, and Microsoft Windows personal computers, with Griptonite Games developing the Nintendo Game Boy Advance version.
These initial versions were published in April 2005.
A Mac version, developed by Aspyr, was released in August 2005.
A Nintendo GameCube version of the game was released on 25 October 2005.
All versions were published by Eidos Interactive and Giant Interactive Entertainment, with Star Wars assets licensed through LucasArts.

==
Gameplay ==
Gameplay in Lego Star Wars is geared towards family play, and does not feature a game-over scenario.
Given a specific set of characters in each scenario, based on a scene from each of the movies, up to two players can control them, using their different abilities.
By walking up to another friendly character, the player can switch control over to that character; this interaction is necessary in order to use another character's abilities to complete certain puzzles.
Lego Studs, small coin-like collectibles which serve as the game's currency, can be collected by finding them, smashing or using the force on certain objects, or defeating enemies.
Studs increase in value based on color
, silver is the least valuable at only 10 points, going up to gold, valued at 100 points, blue at 1000, and the rarest, purple worth 10,000.
Players also have a health meter consisting of four hearts that gets depleted if they get injured or shot at.
When they lose all their hearts, their character is broken apart and they lose studs (
as opposed to lives).
These studs can be spent on unlocking new characters for Free Play mode, hints for playing the game, and cheats.
Certain segments of the game feature players controlling spaceships flying on a flat plane.
There are also several minikit canisters hidden throughout each level that, when collected, combine to form a vehicle.

When the player first starts the game, they must first complete Chapter I of The Phantom Menace
("Negotiations").
However, once that Chapter is completed, the player may choose to play any unlocked levels from the other two movies in their desired order.

Completing all the game's levels with full stud bars will unlock an additional chapter based on the opening scene of A New Hope, which features a 'prototype' Darth Vader, who uses Anakin's fighting style, and a Stormtrooper whose movements are identical to the Clone Troopers (both of these are remodeled in the next game).

The background music is the same music used in the Star Wars movies, but as the game was released before Episode III's soundtrack, music from the original trilogy (1977, 1980 and 1983) was used for that movie's levels.
For instance, the alternate soundtrack for the "Binary Sunset" was used in the second Chapter of Episode III, while "The Battle of Endor I" was used in Chapter VI, "Princess Leia's Theme" for chapter V and
"The Battle of Yavin" was used in Chapters 1 and 3.
In The Complete Saga, the tracks that played during gameplay of that episode were replaced with ones from Episode III, although the original trilogy music remained in that episode's cutscenes.

===
Characters ===
Lego Star Wars contains a total of 59 playable characters for LEGO Star Wars; 56 in the GameCube, PS2, Xbox, and PC versions.
The three missing are Gungan, Tusken Raider, and STAP, playable in the GBA version, though the Gungan and STAP are only available through cheat codes.
The playable characters are modeled like actual Lego parts and, on dying, they fall to pieces and also lose studs.
There is a wide variety of characters included in the game, all of which are unlocked by completing levels or by purchasing them at Dexter's Diner.
Characters are divided into groups according to certain skills.
For instance, Jedi and Sith can double-jump, use lightsabers, and have control of The Force, which they can use to activate or lift Lego objects or defeat certain enemies.
Darth Maul has a double-ended lightsaber which improves his defence from laser fire.
Jar Jar Binks, General Grievous and his bodyguard have the super-jump, which allows them to reach obstacles that the Jedi and Sith can not jump to.
Characters like Padmé Amidala and clone troopers, who carry blasters, have the ability to grapple to reach higher places.
Droids, while unarmed, can travel through the game without being intentionally attacked by enemy characters.
Protocol droids and astromech droids can open special doors.
Characters such as Boba Fett and Young Anakin can fit into tight places.
Every character, other than the PK Droid, Gonk Droid (whose only ability is that they are never killed by enemies), and Chancellor Palpatine, has a special ability.

Unlocked characters can be imported into the game's sequel, Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy, as an extra called "use old save", which costs 250,000 Lego Studs, and can be used in its character creator function.

Because the game is based on the Prequel Trilogy (1999, 2002, 2005), Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Lando Calrissian and other characters from the original Star Wars Trilogy (1977, 1980 and 1983) are not shown, and appear in the sequel Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
However, if the player unlocks the last level (an episode 4 preview), Darth Vader, a stormtrooper, a rebel trooper and Princess Leia become available.
Original trilogy characters Chewbacca, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Yoda, C-3PO, and
R2-D2 are unlockable in the game since they appear in the prequel trilogy also.

===
Free Play ===
Once a non-vehicle level has been cleared in Story Mode, the player may play through that level again in Free Play Mode.
In this mode, players can choose to play through the level with their choice of unlocked characters randomly selected by the program based on their abilities.
At any point, the player can rotate instantly between each of the chosen characters to access areas not accessible during the Story Mode and obtain hidden extras.
No story cut scenes appear in this mode.

===
Dexter's Diner ===
Dexter's Diner is the area where the player chooses what level to enter, or they can enter the Parking Lot to view any vehicles whose parts they have found and pieced together.
The parts to these vehicles are contained in 10 mini-kit canisters which are hidden throughout each level.
Battles often take place in the Parking Lot between canon-good and canon-evil characters, such as Jedi and Sith, respectively.
At the diner counter, the player may purchase, or enter codes, to unlock extras in exchange for Lego studs they have collected by playing through the levels.
===
Game Boy Advance version ===
The Game Boy Advance version behaves differently than the console versions.

It is played from an isometric perspective with only one player, who controls one of 15 playable characters through story scenarios across the prequel trilogy, battling enemies, completing objectives and getting from one place to another.

The levels are not evenly divided across the three Episodes, with Episode II having the fewest levels.

Each level is divided into multiple sections that serve as checkpoints should the player's character fall apart, and players are given a longer health meter that they must prevent from depleting to continue.

Each character possesses a special ability that is constrained by a stamina meter not found in the console version.

Players can also find Jawas in certain levels who can award the player health or stamina upgrades, as well as a maintenance droid that can save them once from death once at the price of currently collected studs in a level.

All boss battles are primarily against villains with lightsabers, and call for heavy button mashing to win, especially when players can exclusively get caught in lightsaber blade locks that must be won to inflict extra damage.

Other characters have different attack abilities that are not in the console versions, such as blaster-wielding characters able to fire charged shots and astromech droids being able to drop proton mines that would damage enemies on contact.

Players are also encouraged to use other characters' abilities in free-play to discover secret areas and find Death Star plans, which replace minikits in the console version.

At the end of each level, players are rewarded and ranked for how many enemies they defeated,
how many blaster bolts they deflected, how many studs they collected and how many Death Star plans they found.

==
Plot ==
The plot of the game is a humorous retelling of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones, and Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, as well as a bonus level with the opening of Star Wars:
Episode
IV - A
New Hope from the viewpoint of Darth Vader aboard the Tantive IV.

==
Development ==
In 2003, Traveller's Tales started the work on the game with assistance from Lego Interactive, who would also publish the game.
After The Lego Group left the gaming industry and closed down Lego Interactive in 2004, a small team of former Lego Interactive employees went on to found their own publishing company, Giant Interactive Entertainment, and would be able to publish all future Lego titles, including Lego Star Wars: The Video Game.
After the huge success of the game, Traveller's Tales downright bought Giant, and renamed them to TT Games Publishing.

== Reception and legacy ==
Lego Star Wars received generally positive reviews.
The PC version received a score of 77/100 from Metacritic and the game maintained a consistently high position at the top of the UK charts in May 2005.Lego
Star Wars was the thirteenth best-selling game of 2005.
Figures released by The NPD Group show the PlayStation 2 version as the tenth best-selling single-platform title of 2005.
The game's worldwide sales total exceeded 3.3 million copies in March 2006 and 6.7 million in May 2009.
In the United States, the game's Game Boy Advance version alone sold 580,000 copies and earned $17 million by August 2006.
During the period between January 2000 and August 2006, it was the 49th highest-selling game launched for the Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS or PlayStation Portable in that country.
The PlayStation 2 version of Lego Star Wars:
The Video Game received a "Double Platinum" sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA), indicating sales of at least 600,000 copies in the United Kingdom.
By July 2006, the PlayStation 2 version had sold 1 million copies and earned $34 million in the United States alone.
Next Generation ranked it as the 54th highest-selling game launched for the PlayStation 2, Xbox or GameCube between January 2000 and July 2006 in that country.
It was one of The Best-Selling PS2 Games with more than four-fifths of the copies sold on the PlayStation 2.

IGN rated the game 8 out of 10 saying, "If you're a parent, LEGO Star Wars:
The Video Game should be at the top of your child's birthday list.
It has everything a family-oriented title needs: it has personality, puzzles, cooperative modes, replay value, low violence, a lack of frustrating difficulty, and most importantly, it has Darth Vader.
And that's what makes it enjoyable for adults too, because let's face it; Darth Vader makes everything better -- it's a fact."

The game's sequel, Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy, was released in September 2006, while a compilation, Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, was released in November 2007 and Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars was released in March 2011.
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, based on the 2015 film of the same name, was released in June 2016, and Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga, which will depict all nine films in the Skywalker Saga, including the three featured in Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, will be released in 2021.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Lego Star Wars: The Video Game at MobyGames
Below is a list of actors and actresses that are part of the voice cast of the American 3D CGI animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars and its corresponding film.

The show's main voice actors have included: Matt Lanter, James Arnold Taylor, Ashley Eckstein, Dee Bradley Baker, Catherine Taber, Tom Kane, Anthony Daniels, Ben Burtt, Ian Abercrombie, Corey Burton, Terrence C. Carson, Nika Futterman, and Matthew Wood.

Actors from the live-action films who returned to reprise their roles for the show include: Wood as the B1 Battle Droids and General Grievous, Ahmed Best as Jar Jar Binks (although Binks was voiced by Phil LaMarr in three early episodes), Daniels as C-3PO, Burtt as R2-D2, Chewbacca, and Darth Vader's breaths, Daniel Logan as the young Clone Trooper Cadets and Boba Fett, Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, and Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker, respectively.
Additionally, Samuel L. Jackson and Christopher Lee reprised the roles of Mace Windu and Count Dooku in the animated film, respectively, but not in the television series.

Actors who appear by original recordings from Revenge of the Sith to represent their characters in the final season episode "Shattered" include: Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, Jackson as Mace Windu and Ian McDiarmid as Palpatine.
The characters of Ahsoka and Darth Maul appear by motion capture of Lauren Mary Kim and Ray Park—who reprises his role from The Phantom Menace—in the episode "The Phantom Apprentice", whilst Eckstein and Sam Witwer retain the voice talent.

== Cast ==


==
Notes ==


==
See also ==
List of Star Wars cast members
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Full cast and crew of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at the Internet Movie Database
Star Wars:
The Old Republic is a massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) based in the Star Wars universe.
Developed by BioWare Austin and a supplemental team at BioWare Edmonton, the game was announced on October 21, 2008.
The video game was released for the Microsoft Windows platform on December 20, 2011 in North America and part of Europe.
This story takes place in the Star Wars universe shortly after the establishment of a tenuous peace between the re-emergent Sith Empire and the Galactic Republic.
The game features eight different classes.
Each of the eight classes has a three act storyline that progresses as the character levels up.
Players join either the Republic or the Sith, but players may possess a morality at any point along the light/dark spectrum.
Different classes favor different styles of gameplay, and the game features extensive customization options, fully voiced dialogue, companion characters, and dialogue options similar to BioWare's other role-playing games.

Although not officially disclosed, based on estimates, it is one of the most developmentally expensive games made.
The game had one million subscribers within three days of its launch, making it the world's "fastest-growing MMO ever", however, in the following months the game lost a fair share of its subscriptions, but has remained profitable.
The game has since adopted the hybrid free-to-play business model with remaining subscription option.
The game was met with positive reception upon release and has received several updates and expansion packs.
Several books and comics based on the game have been released.
It is estimated that the game made $139 million in additional revenues on top of the subscription income in 2013.
In an earnings call to investors in October 2019, Electronic Arts announced that Star Wars:
The Old Republic was closing in on a billion dollars in lifetime revenue, making it a huge financial success based on the reported $200 million development budget.

==
Plot ==
This story takes place in the Star Wars  fictional universe shortly after the establishment of a tenuous peace between the re-emergent Sith Empire and the Galactic Republic, 300 years after the events of the Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic games, and more than 3,600 years before the events in the Star Wars films.
The Jedi are held responsible for the success of the Sith during the devastating 28-year-long Great Galactic War (which led to the Treaty of Coruscant prior to the "cold war"), and thus choose to relocate from Coruscant to Tython, where the Jedi Order had initially been founded, to seek guidance from the Force.
The Sith control Korriban, where they have re-established a Sith Academy.
The game's "Return" cinematic trailer depicts the events where Korriban is re-conquered by the Sith.

During these events, a smuggler named Nico Okarr is being led to his prison cell in a jail orbiting Korriban by a Jedi, Satele Shan, and her master, Kao Cen Darach.
Suddenly, a Sith named Darth Malgus, and his master Vindican, along with several Sith troops, attack the base.
Satele, a trooper named Jace Malcom, and Okarr escape the attack, but Darach is cut down by Malgus.
Malgus then kills Vindican, who was wounded by Darach.

10 years later, new conflicts have arisen.
In the "Hope" cinematic trailer, Satele and some troops destroy a Sith party that includes Malgus.
Malcom, who has become the troop's commander, states that, despite the losses, there is still hope amongst even "a single spark of courage".
Later in the "Deceived" cinematic trailer, however, Malgus, having appeared to survive the earlier attack albeit with a mask covering his nose and mouth, leads an army of Sith into the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, killing many Jedi including the Jedi Master Ven Zallow and Corivri Shan.

After the death of Jedi Grand Master Zym, Master Satele Shan is named the new Jedi Grand Master.
The game itself is set in the cold-war soon after these events, with the Jedi Order and Galactic Republic struggling to maintain their control of the core worlds while the Sith plot their downfall and the expansion of the Sith Empire.
The conflict opens on many fronts and across many planets, while native factions are engaged in political struggles or civil war.

BioWare stated, prior to release, that the game would have a significant focus on the storyline.
Each of the eight classes has a three act storyline that progresses as the character levels up.
A collaborative effort between BioWare, LucasArts, EA Games and Dark Horse Comics has resulted in webcomics entitled Star Wars:
The Old Republic – Threat of Peace and Star Wars:
The Old Republic – Blood of the Empire
, the purpose of which is to establish the backstory as the game opens and closes.

==
Gameplay ==
Players join as members of either of the two main factions – the Galactic Republic and the Sith Empire.
Although each faction is led by a benevolent or malevolent leader, it is emphasized that an individual member may possess a morality at any point along the light/dark spectrum.
The project's key focus is to differentiate between the player's faction and morality.
For instance, a member with ties to the Galactic Republic may belong to the dark side while attempting to achieve their own ends, which may be misaligned or dissimilar from the Republic's vision.

Player advancement occurs by a combination of mission completion, exploration, and defeating enemies.
New skills, unlocked by level, are taught by trainers and can be learned in game at a multitude of locations.
Heroic missions exist that require the cooperation of multiple players to complete objectives, and can be repeated normally on a daily basis.

While each class in The Old Republic favors a certain play style (ranged/melee damage, healing or support skills, or tanking), customization combined with companion characters allow for a class to be able to tackle many different situations, with or without the support of other player characters, and without requiring specific other classes in order to move forward.

Players' choices permanently open or close storylines and affect players' non-player character (NPC) companions.
It is intended that the game should provide more context for characters' missions than any previous MMORPG.
Every character in the game, including the player character, features full voice dialog to enhance gameplay, and interactions feature a dialogue system similar to that used in the Mass Effect series.
Players are able to choose from a variety of NPCs, although spending time with a single companion will help more in developing story and content than dividing time among several, and may even develop a love interest.
It is possible for players to "blow it big time" if they fail to meet NPCs' expectations.
Players also have access to several planets, including Korriban, Ord Mantell, Nal Hutta, Tython, Coruscant, Balmorra, Alderaan, Tatooine, Dromund Kaas, Taris, Belsavis, Voss, Hoth, Corellia, Ilum and Quesh, and the moon Nar Shaddaa.
The planet Makeb was added in Patch 2.0, along with the Rise of the Hutt Cartel expansion pack.
Every player receives their own starship, which was announced at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010.
Footage of space combat was released at Gamescom.
The short clip provided by BioWare revealed that space combat would be a "tunnel shooter".
A tunnel shooter, otherwise known as a scrolling shooter or rail shooter, is a flying game where the player is on a predetermined track.
Game play includes moving right and left on the X axis and up and down on the Y axis; however, players do not have control of the speed of their space craft.
Jake Neri, LucasArts Producer, told PC Gamer in their October 2010 issue that their goal was to "capture the most cinematic moments that we can create.
We want players to get in and feel like they're in the movies.
It's about highly cinematic, controlled combat moments ... very heroic, action-packed, exciting, visceral and dangerous encounters that'll make you pee your pants."

With the December 2013 release of the free expansion, Galactic Starfighter (GSF), players now have a free flight PVP space combat experience, with multiple ships and roles independent of other aspects of the game.

Like many other MMORPGs, the game features dungeons and raids in the form of Flashpoints and Operations respectively.

===
Species ===
A range of playable species are available for the player to choose from, some limited to their factions.
Both sides can play Human, Cyborg (human-based), Twi'lek or Zabrak (whose appearances are initially different depending on which side the character is from).
The Republic-only races are the Miraluka and Mirialan, while the Empire-only races are the Chiss, Rattataki and Sith Pureblood.
Humans and Zabrak can pick any class available, while the other species are restricted to limited choices of classes by default.

More playable species are said to be available in the future through major updates and the Legacy system with the ability to use other classes' abilities through this system.
The Cathar were added to the game during Patch 2.1, and is available to all players who unlock the species through the Cartel Market.
The Togruta race was announced in January 2015 as a new playable race to be made available in 2015.

The release of the expanded "Legacy" system in April 2012 allows for species to be able to play all classes (both Empire and Republic) by unlocking that species with an infusion of in-game money or by levelling a character of that race to level 50.
Under this system, for example, a player may choose Chiss, which by default can only choose the non-Sith classes on the Empire side, as a new Sith character.
Likewise, a Sith Pureblood, which by default can only choose the Force-powered classes, could choose to be a non-Force class.
Along the same vein, both species, which are restricted to the Empire, could even choose the option of fighting for the Republic, including training as a Jedi.
By the same method, unlocking the Zabrak species allows users to play both appearances regardless from which side the character is from.

===
Classes ===
Each faction contains different classes, each with a distinct backstory and a branching storyline affected by players' moral choices.
Classes are exclusive to one faction or the other.
However, the classes of one faction mirror the classes of the other (for example, Jedi Knight and Sith Warrior).
Eight classes exist: the Bounty Hunter, Sith Warrior, Imperial Agent, and Sith Inquisitor for the Sith Empire; and the Trooper, Smuggler, Jedi Knight, and Jedi Consular for the Galactic Republic.
Although each class has a distinct storyline, they are integrated with the game's overall arc.
Each class may also choose from two advanced classes, resulting in a total of 8 advanced classes per faction.
Advanced classes share the same storyline as their base class.
Lightsaber and blaster colors are not faction or class restricted, but some are restricted based on level and/or Lightside or Darkside alignment.
For example, some lightsabers can only be bought if Light or Darkside aligned.

===
Ships ===
Each class has their own starship, which serves as the player's base of operations.
Bounty Hunters have the D5-Mantis patrol craft.
Sith Warriors and Sith Inquistors have the Fury.
Imperial Agents have the X-70B Phantom.
Smugglers have the XS Freighter.
Troopers have the BT-7 Thunderclap.
Jedi Knights and Jedi Consulars have the Defender.
Certain pieces of these ships can be upgraded, allowing them to perform better in space combat missions.
===
Companions ===
The game features a passive form of crafting, known as Crew Skills, in which a player's companions carry out gathering and crafting tasks asynchronously to the player's adventures out in the world.

Each class gets five companions via their storyline.
The player can assign up to five companions to perform up to 3 various skills.
Crafting skills allow the player's companions to create items, and the player can reverse engineer many items to possibly learn to make a better version.
The item is destroyed in the process, but the player gets some of the materials back.
Gathering skills allow the player or their companions to gather resources out in the world.
Mission skills allow the player's companions to perform acts on the player's behalf, gaining the player Light or Darkside influence and other rewards, such as medical items or companion gifts.
During E3 2011, a video was shown with gameplay footage of the Bounty Hunter, along with a Jawa companion named Blizz.
The developers stated during the chat that only the Bounty Hunter would be able to get Blizz and that other classes would have unique companions as well, including some companions that are force users.
It was also shown that companions would have a similar character screen as the players and can have gear just like a player character.

BioWare announced same-sex romance options with companions or other NPCs before release.
The options were implemented for some non-companions in Rise of the Hutt Cartel, and expanded with Shadow of Revan.
Options for some new companions were implemented in Knights of the Fallen Empire, and expanded for some new and original companions with Knights of the Eternal Empire up to marriage.

During patch 1.5, HK-51 was added for all classes on both Empire and Republic factions.
He was the first companion added to every classes, and can be obtained through a questline.
He is an assassin droid based on the popular HK-47 from the original Knights of the Old Republic series.

A female Ewok companion, Treek, was implemented in patch 2.3 and is available to all classes.
This companion requires either a purchase from the Cartel Market or a 1,000,000 credit fee along with a Legacy Level of 40.
=== Subscription ===
The Old Republic required a monthly subscription to play, following a month of play included with the initial purchase.
Options are available to pay for one month, two month, three month, or six month blocks, with discounted rates for multiple month blocks.
Payment is by credit card or time card.
The free-to-play version integrates most of the primary features in the game, but has several restrictions, such as credit limits and reduced leveling speed.

After launch, the game's subscribers rose to 1.7 million by February 2012.
By May 2012, those numbers fell to 1.3 million.
By July 2012, the subscriber base fell below 1 million, prompting EA to convert the game to free-to-play.
EA stated that 500,000 subscribers were needed to make the game profitable saying that they were "well above"
that number, By May 2013, subscriptions had fallen below 500,000 but at the time, stabilized there.
On November 15, 2012, the free-to-play option went live on all servers.
As of August 2014 the game has over one million monthly players.

==
Development ==
The Old Republic is BioWare's first entry into the massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) market, and is the third Star Wars MMORPG after Star Wars Galaxies, which was shut down in December 2011, the same month SWTOR was released and
Clone Wars Adventures, which was shut down in March 2014.
The development saw the entirety of BioWare Austin working on the game.
BioWare had long been interested in working on a MMORPG, but waited until they had "the right partners, the right team, and the right I.P." A major focus in the game is on developing characters' individual stories and, in October 2008, BioWare considered this game to have more story content than all of their other games combined.
The writing team worked on the project longer than any of the game's other development teams.
An October 2008 preview noted some of the 12 full-time writers had been working on The Old Republic for more than two years at that point.
Although BioWare has not disclosed development costs, industry leaders and financial analysts have estimated it to be between $150 million and $200 million or more, making it, at the time, the most expensive video game made, though if marketing costs are included, it is eclipsed by Grand Theft Auto V, with an estimated cost of $265 million.
The game had 1 million subscribers within three days of its launch, making it the world's "fastest-growing MMO ever".
However, in the following months the game lost a fair share of its subscriptions, but has remained profitable.
The game has since adopted the hybrid free-to-play business model with remaining subscription option.
It is estimated that the game made $139 million in additional revenues, in addition to the subscription income, in 2013.The game's first cinematic trailer, "Deceived", was shown at the Electronic Arts 2009 E3 Press Conference on June 1, 2009.
A public live demo was shown for the first time at the Gamescom.
On September 29, 2009, BioWare announced that they would be accepting applications for testers from the game community.
Within minutes, the official website was down due to traffic, and BioWare announced shortly after that the site was being changed in order to accommodate the increase in visitors.
A second cinematic trailer, "Hope", was released on June 14, 2010, that depicts another battle that happened before the game, the Battle of Alderaan.
On June 6, a new trailer "Return" was released at E3 2011 depicting the initial Sith invasion force as it retakes its home world of Korriban.
Game testing was officially announced to be underway on July 9, 2010, for testers from North American territories.

Although released in most regions of the world, EA have said Australasia will be getting the game at a later date.
The reason behind this is to hold back digital and boxed copies for a smooth launch so to avoid any problems encountered during launch.
However, BioWare revealed that the game would not be region or IP blocked, allowing players to purchase the game from other regions.
Additionally, BioWare allowed Australian and New Zealand players to take part in the beta stages of the game.
BioWare community manager Allison Berryman said "Data from this test will be used to inform decisions about the launch of the game in Oceanic regions", however, she was unable to provide any information in regards to the game's launch in those regions.
On October 11, 2011, BioWare announced that Star Wars: The Old Republic would be released globally on December 20, 2011.
However, this 'global' launch only included North America and a part of Europe, as the launch date had delayed for the Asia and Oceanic regions.
On December 21, 2011, BioWare announced that an Australian and New Zealand release date had been set for March 1, 2012.

Early access to the game was granted one week before release, on December 13, 2011, for those who had pre-ordered the game online; access opened in "waves" based on pre-order date.
On January 18, 2012, the first content patch (1.1) was released, adding a new Flashpoint and adding four bosses to an existing Operation.
Patch (1.2) was released on April 12, 2012.
The update included the new Legacy system, a new Flashpoint, Operation, a PVP Warzone, as well as improved character textures and advanced options such as user interface customization.
Guild banks and player character pets are also introduced.
A Weekend Pass Free Trial was made available for new players but has since closed.
Patch 1.3 was released in June 2012.
The game update featured a New Group Finder, the ability to augment every item, and adaptable social gear.
In addition, players will be able to request that their characters are able to transfer to other servers.
Subsequent patches have introduced a 'Cartel Market' where players can purchase virtual currency to spend on cosmetic items in-game.
These items include armour sets, lightsaber colour crystals, mounts, pets and character-perk unlocks.

In January 2012, Star Wars: The Old Republic was officially recognized by Guinness World Records as the "Largest Entertainment Voice Over Project Ever", with over 200,000 lines of recorded dialogue.
This feat is recorded in the Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition book.
On April 26, 2012, BioWare announced that the game was available in the Middle East and remaining European countries who were excluded from the original launch.
On July 21, 2020, the game became available on Steam.

===
Expansion packs ===


====
Rise of the Hutt Cartel ====
In October 2012, BioWare announced The Old Republic's first digital expansion pack, Rise of the Hutt Cartel.
The expansion is centered on the rising threat of the Hutt Cartel, which has arisen to challenge the Galactic Republic and the Sith Empire for control of the galaxy.
The battle with the Hutts is centered on the planet Makeb, which hides a "powerful secret".
Much like the main game, the campaign on Makeb is fully voiced.
The level cap was raised to 55, with the leveling from 50 onwards centered on Makeb.
Rise of the Hutt Cartel was released on April 14, 2013.
Those who pre-ordered the expansion prior to January 7, 2013, were allowed early access on April 9.
In late September, Rise of the Hutt Cartel became free after subscribing to the game.

====
Galactic Starfighter ====
In October 2013, BioWare announced its next expansion, which unlike its predecessor Rise of the Hutt Cartel did not include any story content, however, Galactic Starfighter introduced 12v12 space-based PvP combat on two maps, with 2 'capture-the-flag' combat missions.
Three stock starfighters were made available - a scout, a strike fighter, and a gunship.
More are accessible for Cartel Coins.
Subscribers began their early access on December 3, 2013, with full subscriber awards if they maintained an active subscription on November 1.
"
Preferred access" players, those who do not have an active subscription but have purchased items via the Cartel Market, received their early access on January 14, 2014, with some rewards.
Full access to all players with an account opened on February 4, 2014.
A new 'deathmatch' game style was added with the update, as well as a new starfighter class, the bomber.

====
Galactic Strongholds ====
In January 2014, BioWare revealed plans for 2014 including two expansion packs, with one similar to Galactic Starfighter in scope and one more closely resembling Rise of the Hutt Cartel.
The first is entitled Galactic Strongholds, introducing player housing and flagships for guilds.
Subscribers received early access August 19, 2014, as well as access to the exclusive "Nar Shaddaa Sky Palace"; preferred access players received early access starting in September.
Full access to all players with an account opened in October.

====
Shadow of Revan ====
On October 6, BioWare announced the second planned expansion, entitled Shadow of Revan.
The expansion is centered on the Order of Revan, formerly a fringe group that appeared early in Imperial missions, now a great army seeking to establish a new galactic order, led by the reborn Revan himself.
The campaign raised the level cap to 60, and takes place on two new worlds: Rishi, a tropical pirate haven on the edge of the galaxy, and Yavin 4 (which first appeared in the original Star Wars film), home of an ancient Sith warrior sect called the Massassi.
Shadow of Revan was available for preorder.
Players who preordered before November 2, 2014, received an experience boost that granted twelve times multiplicative experience for class-related missions, seven days of early access, a grand statue of Revan for placement in strongholds, and a free edition of Rise of the Hutt Cartel (to give to another player).
The expansion was released on December 9, 2014.

====
Knights of the Fallen Empire ====
In June 2015, the third expansion for the game, titled Knights of the Fallen Empire, was announced at EA's E3 2015 press conference.
Knights of the Fallen Empire features a renewed focus on cinematic storytelling, as well as new planets, new companions, a dynamic story affected by player choices and a level cap of 65.
A cinematic trailer, titled "Sacrifice", was released along with the initial announcement.
The trailer, made by Blur Studio, received critical acclaim, and was awarded the "Best Trailer of E3" Award by IGN.
The first nine chapters of Knights of the Fallen Empire were launched on October 27, 2015, with additional chapters starting in early 2016.
Subscribers received one level 60 character token.
After the release of Knights of the Fallen Empire, Rise of the Hutt Cartel and Shadow of Revan became free for those subscribing to the game, and access remains on the account if a subscription is canceled.

The release of Knights of the Fallen Empire depicts the story of "The Outlander" - the player character.
The expansion introduced new companion characters available to all classes.
One feature introduced with the expansion was the Alliance system.
It entails recruiting allies, including some companions from other classes that formerly were restricted, from across the galaxy to join the fight against the Eternal Empire.
Players were given the ability to strengthen their rebellion by providing resources to "Specialists" that oversee four areas of operation: Technology, Underworld Trade, Military and Force-Usage.
Most of the early game content was heavily streamlined, allowing players to level up a character by completing solely story and class-specific missions if they so choose.
A solo mode was also introduced for story-critical flashpoints.
The new storyline, featuring primarily solo content, has 13 chapters.

====
Knights of the Eternal Throne ====
In December 2016, Knights of the Eternal Throne was released as the fourth expansion and sixth major update that coincided with the game's five-year anniversary.
It continued the story of the Outlander.
Subscribers received one level 65 character token, with additional tokens available at the cartel store.
The storyline has nine chapters of solo content and it raised the level cap to 70.
The expansion focused on defeating Empress Vaylin and the Eternal Empire.
During the expansion, developers released several key updates and patches that continued the story and added new activities for players to engage in.
====
Onslaught ====
In April 2019, it was announced on the official site that the next expansion, Onslaught, would be released in September 2019.
The expansion was to follow the new story that was begun with Jedi Under Siege.
In August, it was announced that the release date for Onslaught had been moved back from September 2019 to October 22, 2019.
Onslaught's release timeline (nearly three years) was the largest gap between expansions and major game updates which typically occur annually.
This expansion raised the level cap to 75.
==
Other media ==
Chronicle Books released The Art and Making of Star Wars: The Old Republic in November 2011, which chronicles the creation of the game and includes concept artwork and interviews from the development team.
The book was written by former Star Wars Insider editor Frank Parisi and BioWare writing director Daniel Erickson.
The book includes a foreword by Penny Arcade's Mike "Gabe" Krahulik.
Leading up to game's release on December 20, BioWare released music tracks from the game each day which were not included with the soundtrack which came with the Collector's Edition of the game.
The first track released was titled "The Mandalorian Blockade".
Razer released several peripherals based on the game to coincide with the launch date.
The peripherals included custom made keyboards, mice, gaming headsets and mouse pads.
In August 2012, Lego announced plans to release two sets based on the game, the Sith Fury-class Interceptor and the Striker-class Starfighter.
At Star Wars Celebration in 2019, Kathleen Kennedy revealed that Lucasfilm was in the tentative stages of developing an adaptation of Knights of the Old Republic.
In May 2019, Buzzfeed reported that Laeta Kalogridis was writing the first movie in a trilogy based on the game.

===
Comics ===
An internet comic produced by Dark Horse and written by The Old Republic developer Rob Chestney offers backstory to the game.
The story spans ten years from the signing of the Treaty of Coruscant to the events that start the game.
The comic, titled Threat of Peace, was released bi-monthly, and reached its conclusion in March 2010.

A second internet comic titled Blood of the Empire has been released and follows the story of a Sith apprentice on a dangerous secret mission.
It is produced by Dark Horse and written by BioWare's senior writer Alexander Freed.
The story is set 25 years before the Treaty of Coruscant, and offers readers a new perspective of the events leading up to the start of The Old Republic.
A sneak preview of the art was released, followed by the first issue on April 23, 2010.
===
Novels ===
A 256-page novel called Deceived was released by Del Rey on March 22, 2011.
This story, by Paul S. Kemp, tells of Darth Malgus, the Sith Lord responsible for the sacking of Coruscant.
Another novel written by Sean Williams called Star Wars:
The Old Republic:
Fatal Alliance was published on July 21, 2010.
Drew Karpyshyn wrote a novel titled Revan, published on November 15, 2011.
It features Revan, revealing his fate after the Knights of the Old Republic games.
Karpyshyn wrote another novel, The Old Republic:
Annihilation, that was released on November 13, 2012.

== Reception ==
Star Wars:
The Old Republic has received generally positive reviews from critics, with a score of 85 on Metacritic and an 84% on GameRankings.
G4TV gave a review of 5/5 and praised the game for "Top notch music and voice acting" and "hundreds of hours of content".
PC Gamer gave a 93/100, praising the story, voice acting, and the amount of content available.
Gamespy gave a review of 4/5, praising the story lines and companion system but criticising the "standard kill and fetch" quests.
GameSpot gave the game 8.0/10, saying "[The Old Republic] isn't the next step in online role-playing games.
Instead, it's a highly entertaining refinement of what has come before it."
GamesRadar gave the game 8/10 calling it "an extremely satisfying experience that sets the stage for a bright future".
The game has received a 9.0/10 "Amazing" rating from IGN.com.
During Star Wars: The Old Republic's launch week, long queue times were seen on some servers, with BioWare increasing population caps and adding more servers to attempt to resolve them.
Some pre-order users discovered they had invalid registration codes.
After release, at least one reviewer was less favorable as Eurogamer lowered their rating to a 4/10 from its initial high score.
MSNBC awarded Star Wars: The Old Republic as game of the year.
In 2012, The AbleGamers Foundation awarded Star Wars: The Old Republic as their Mainstream Game for 2011 for being able to accommodate gamers with special needs.
It praised the game's features which included many accessibility options, including full subtitles, queue-able actions, multiple action bars, area looting, auto looting, and built-in mouse sensitivity.

===
Portrayal of Vette ===
One character, a slave companion for the Sith Warrior named Vette, drew controversy.
Writing for Kotaku, Mike Fahey, after playing the game, recalled players boasting of their torturing of Vette and her low affection rating for them.
The Daily Mail cited Fahey's article as a source and published a story the following day alleging that the option to treat Vette decently was not popular or encouraged; the paper was criticized for its lack of evidence for its statements and its selective information, Religion Dispatches researched the matter, surveying 369 players to ask them how they acted.
The survey's findings suggested that most players chose the good options and felt uncomfortable doing any evil ones.
They suggested that the presence of characters like Vette influenced the player's actions, making them want to take choices that would gain Affection.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
This is a list of Star Wars video games.
Though there have been many hobbyist-made and freeware games based on the Star Wars movie series and brand, this page lists only the games that have been developed or published by LucasArts, or officially licensed by Lucasfilm.

Platforms: Arcade, Apple II, Atari 2600, Famicom, Nintendo Entertainment System, Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Nintendo 64, Sega Master System, Sega Dreamcast, Game Gear, GameCube, DOS, Microsoft Windows, Macintosh, Classic Mac OS, macOS, PlayStation, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Xbox, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii, Wii U, Game Boy, Game Boy Color, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, iOS, Android, Linux, Stadia.

==
Episode-related titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars games that are based on the feature films.
They are listed in order of release by film.

===
Episode IV:
A New Hope ===
Star Wars (1983–88) –
Arcade
Re-released for: Atari 2600, Atari 5200, Commodore 64, Atari 8-bit family, ColecoVision, BBC Micro, ZX Spectrum, Acorn Electron, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Apple II, DOS, Macintosh, Amiga.

Star Wars (1987) – Famicom
Star Wars:
Attack on the Death Star (1991) – PC-9801, X68000
Star Wars (1991–93) – NES, Game Boy, Master System, Game Gear
Super Star Wars (1992) – SNES
Re-released for: Wii Virtual Console, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita
Star Wars Arcade (1993) –
Arcade
Re-released for: 32X


===
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
===
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1982) –
Atari 2600, Intellivision
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1985/88) –
Arcade
Re-released for: BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST.

Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992)
– NES, Game Boy
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1993) –
SNES
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


===
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ===
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Death Star Battle (1983/84) –
Atari 2600, Atari 8-bit family, Atari 5200, ZX Spectrum
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984/88) –
Arcade, BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST,
GameCube
Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1994) – SNES, Game Boy, Game Gear
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


==
=
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace ===
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999) – Microsoft Windows, PlayStation
Star Wars
Episode I (1999) –
Pinball
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020), Xbox One (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Episode
I: Jedi Power Battles (2000) – PlayStation, Dreamcast, Game Boy Advance
Star Wars
Episode
I: Battle for Naboo (2000) – Nintendo 64, Microsoft Windows
Star Wars
Episode
I:
Obi-Wan's Adventures (2000) –
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox,
Arcade
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Obi-Wan (2001) –
Xbox


===
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2002) – GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: The New Droid Army (2002) –
Game Boy Advance


===
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ===
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005) – PlayStation 2, Xbox, Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance
, Mobile Phone


== Series titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars games that are not based on a particular feature film, and form part of a series.
The list is ordered from the oldest series to the latest.

=== X-Wing ===
Star Wars: X-Wing (1993) – DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s):
Imperial Pursuit (1993) and B-Wing (1993)
Compilation: X-Wing (Collector's CD-ROM) (1994)
Star Wars: TIE Fighter (1994) – DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s): Defender of the Empire (1994)
Compilation:
TIE Fighter (Collector's CD-ROM) (1995)
Star Wars: X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter (1997) –
Windows
Expansions:
Balance of Power Campaigns (1997), and Flight School (1998)
Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance (1999) –
Windows


===
Rebel Assault ===
Star Wars: Rebel Assault (1993) DOS, Mac, Sega CD, 3DO
Star Wars: Rebel Assault II:
The Hidden Empire (1995) DOS, PlayStation,
Microsoft Windows


===
Jedi Knight ===
Star Wars:
Dark Forces (1995) DOS, Mac, PlayStation
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II
(1997)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Mysteries of the Sith (1998)
Windows
Star Wars Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast (2002)
Windows, Mac, Xbox, GameCube
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2019), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy (2003)
Windows, Mac, Xbox
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)


===
Rogue Squadron ===
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron (1998)
Windows, Nintendo 64
Star Wars Rogue Squadron II:
Rogue Leader (2001)
GameCube
Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike (2003)
GameCube


===
Star Wars Racer ===
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars Racer Revenge (2002) – PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation Store (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)


===
Galactic Battlegrounds ===
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds (2001)
Windows, Mac
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns (2002)
Windows, Mac


===
Starfighter ===
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) Windows, PlayStation 2
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter (2002)
Xbox, PlayStation 2


===
Knights of the Old Republic ===
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (2003) Windows, Xbox, Mac, iOS, Android
Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords (2005)
Windows, Linux (SteamOS), Xbox, Mac , Android
Star Wars:
The Old Republic (2011) (MMORPG)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Rise of the Hutt Cartel (2013), Galactic Starfighter (2014), Galactic Strongholds (2014), Shadow of Revan (2014), Knights of the Fallen Empire (2015), Knights of the Eternal Throne (2016), and Onslaught (2019)


===
Star Wars: Galaxies ===
Star Wars Galaxies:
An Empire Divided (2003)
Windows (Shutdown)
Expansion(s):
Star Wars Galaxies:
Jump to Lightspeed (2004)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Episode III Rage of the Wookiees (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Trials of Obi-Wan (2005),Compilation(s):
Star Wars Galaxies: Starter Kit (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
The Total Experience (2005), and Star Wars Galaxies:
The Complete Online Adventures (2006)


===
Battlefront ===
The Battlefront series has been handled by two different developers.

Pandemic Studios

Star Wars: Battlefront (2004) – PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, Mac, Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005) – PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007) –
PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron (2009) – PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons (2009) –
Mobile PhoneEA DICE

Star Wars Battlefront (2015) – PlayStation 4, Windows, Xbox One
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) – PlayStation 4, Windows,
Xbox One
===
Empire at War ===
Star Wars: Empire at War (2006
) Windows, Mac OS X
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Empire at War: Forces of Corruption  (2006
) WindowsCompilation:
Star Wars: Empire at War:
Gold Pack (game and expansion package) (2007)
Windows


===
The Force Unleashed ===
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed
(2008) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Wii, Nintendo DS, iOS
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed – Ultimate Sith Edition (
2009) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II
(2010)
Windows, Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, iOS


===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series ===
Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels (2008) –
Wii
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance (2008) – Nintendo DS
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes (2009) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii
Clone Wars Adventures (2010) – Windows, Mac (Shutdown)


==
Stand-alone titles ==
The following is a list of stand-alone Star Wars games that do not form part of a series, released primarily for consoles, personal computers, handhelds and arcade.
The titles are grouped together depending on the decade in which they were released.

=== 1980s ===
Star Wars: Jedi Arena (1983) – Atari 2600
Star Wars: Droids (1988) – Amstrad CPC,
ZX Spectrum


=== 1990s ===
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire (1996) – Nintendo 64, Windows
Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi (1997) – PlayStation
Star Wars: Yoda Stories (1997) –
Windows
Re-released for: Game Boy Color (1999)
Star Wars: Rebellion (Star Wars: Supremacy – UK) (1998) –
Windows
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade (1998) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Millennium Falcon CD-Rom Playset (1998) –
Windows


=== 2000s ===
Star Wars: Force Commander (2000) –
Windows
Star Wars: Demolition (2000) – PlayStation, Dreamcast
Star Wars: Super Bombad Racing (2001) – PlayStation 2
Star Wars: Bounty Hunter (2002) – GameCube, PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation 3 (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Star Wars: Flight of the Falcon (2003) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars Trilogy:
Apprentice of the Force (2004) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: Republic Commando (2005) – Xbox, Windows
Star Wars: Lethal Alliance (2006) – PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Star Wars: The Best of PC (2006) –
Windows


=== 2010s
===
Star Wars Battle Pod (2014) –
Arcade
Star Wars: Card Trader (2015) –  Card trading
Vader Immortal (2019) –
Oculus Rift, Oculus Quest, PlayStation VR
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order (2019) –
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Stadia


=== 2020s ===
Star Wars: Squadrons (2020) – Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One
Star Wars:
Tales from the Galaxy's Edge (2020) – Oculus Quest
== Games by genre ==
The following games are grouped together because they share the same genre, rather than because they are officially part of the same series.
Excluded are the games listed above.
===
Table games ===
Star Wars Chess (1993) – DOS, Sega CD, Windows
Monopoly Star Wars (1997) –
Windows


===
Pinball ===


====
Physical pinball ====
The Empire Strikes Back by Hankin
(1980)Star Wars by Data East (1992)
Star Wars
Original Trilogy by Sega Pinball (1997)
Star Wars
Episode
I by Williams (1999)
Star Wars by Stern Pinball
(2017)
Star Wars
The Pin by Stern Pinball (2019)


====
Virtual pinball ====
Star Wars Pinball (2013
) Windows, Mac, Wii U, Xbox 360, 3DS, PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Kindle Fire, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (2013)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Boba FettStar Wars Pinball:
Balance of the Force (2013)
Xbox 360,
PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Darth Vader
Star Wars Pinball:
Starfighter AssaultStar Wars Pinball:
Heroes Within (2014)
Xbox 360, PSVita, PS3, PS4, Android, iOS

Star Wars Pinball: Masters of the Force
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Droids
Star Wars Pinball:
Han SoloStar Wars Pinball:
Star Wars Rebels (2015)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Force Awakens (2016)
Star Wars Pinball:
Star Wars: Resistance
Star Wars Pinball:
Might of the First OrderStar Wars Pinball: Rogue One (2017)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi (2018)

Star Wars Pinball:
Ahch-To Island
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi - SurviveStar Wars Pinball:
Solo Pack (2018)
Star Wars Pinball:
Solo
Star Wars Pinball:
Calrissian Chronicles
Star Wars Pinball:
Battle of MimbanA twentieth pinball table, based on the first season of The Mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late October of 2020 and due for a spring 2021 release.

===
Kinect Motion Sensor ===
Kinect Star Wars (2012)
(Kinect) Xbox
360


===
Educational ===
Developed by Lucas Learning:
Star Wars: Yoda's Challenge
Star Wars: The Gungan Frontier
Star Wars: Droid Works (1999)
Windows, Mac
Star Wars:
Pit Droids Windows, iOS
Star Wars Math:
Jabba's Game Galaxy (Developed by Argonaut Games)
Star Wars: JarJar's Journey Adventure Book
Star Wars:
Anakin's Speedway
Star Wars:
Early Learning Activity CenterOther educational:
Star Wars: Jedi Math (2008)
(Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars: Jedi Reading (2008) (Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008)
(Platform/Educational)
Didj
Star Wars: Jedi Trials (2009)
Didj


===
Jakks Pacific-
Plug It
In & Play TV Games ===
Star Wars: Lightsaber Battle Game (2005)
Handheld TV game
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005) – Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars GameKey (expansion)
(2006)
Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (2007)
Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars: Republic Squadron (2009)
Jakks Pacific TV Game


===
Non-video game PC software ===
Star Wars Screen Entertainment (1994) (Screensaver) –
Windows
Star Wars:
Behind the Magic (1998) (CD-ROM encyclopedia) – Windows, Macintosh


==
Mobile titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars titles that are only for mobile operating systems.

Star Wars: Battle For The Republic (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Grievous Getaway (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Battle Above Coruscant (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Lightsaber Combat (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Trivia (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Ask Yoda (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Puzzle Blaster (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Jedi Assassin (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Imperial Ace 3D (2006) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Cantina (2010) –
iOS
Star Wars:
Trench Run (2009) –
iOS
Star Wars Battle of Hoth (2010) –
iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars Arcade: Falcon Gunner (2010) –
iOS
Star Wars: Imperial Academy (2011) –
iOS
Star Wars:
Force Collection (2013) –
Android, iOS
Star Wars:
Tiny Death Star (2013) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Assault Team (2014) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Commander (2014) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Galactic Defense (2014) – Android, iOS
Star Wars Journeys: The Phantom Menace (2014) –
iOS
Star Wars Journeys:
Beginnings (2014) –
iOS
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes (2015) –
Android, iOS
Star Wars: Uprising (2015) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Heroes Path (2015) – iOS
Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions (2015) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Card Trader (2015) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Force Arena (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Puzzle Droids (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Jedi Challenges (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars:
Rise to Power (TBA) –
Android


==
Browser games ==
StarWars.com
Carbon Connection
Force Flight
Garbage Masher
Sharpshooter Clone Training (2008)
Live Fire (2008)
Clones vs. Droids
Ewok VillageDisney.com

Star Wars Rebels:
Ghost Raid – StarWars.com, Disney.com
(2014)
Star Wars Rebels: Rebel Strike – Disney.com (2014)
==
Crossovers ==
In some cases, Lucasfilm has allowed other video game franchises to do their own Star Wars games, resulting in crossover hybrid franchises.

===
Lego Star Wars ===
Lego made video games based on their Lego Star Wars toys, as part of their Lego video games franchise.

Lego main series
Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005):
Windows, Mac, PlayStation 2, Xbox, GameCube, Nintendo DS,
Game Boy
Advance
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006):
Windows, Mac, PlayStation 2,  Xbox, Xbox 360, GameCube, Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011): PlayStation 3, Xbox 360,  3DS, Wii,  Windows, Mac, Nintendo DS, Nintendo, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3,  Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U,  Mac, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita, iOS
Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga (2021):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, Nintendo Switch
Compilation(s): Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007) includes Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, and Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Mac, Nintendo DS, iOS, AndroidMobile game and web browser

Lego Star Wars: The Quest for R2-D2 (2009):
Unity
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault (2011) –
Windows
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault 2 (2012) –
Windows
Lego Star Wars:
Battle Orders (2012) –
Unity
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles (2013) –
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars:
The New Yoda Chronicles (2014) –
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Microfighters (2014) – Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Battles (2020) – Android, iOSLego
Indiana Jones
Lego Indiana Jones:
The Original Adventures (2008), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo and cameos from other Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Windows
Lego Indiana Jones 2:
The Adventure Continues (2009), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring cameos from Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable,
Windows


===
Angry Birds Star Wars ===
Angry Birds Star Wars (2012)
Angry Birds Star Wars II
(2013)


===
Roblox ===
Star Wars (2014-2019):
Windows, Xbox One, Xbox One S, IOS, Android, Oculus Rift (VR) - Sponsors and events for Star Wars Rebels, Rogue One, The Last Jedi, Solo, and The Rise of Skywalker, which contained objectives with in-game virtual prizes (accessories and gears) attached to the events’ respective games, as well as free items in the Catalog (currently known as the Avatar Shop) for 1 ticket or for free.
List of sponsors:
Star Wars Rebels:
Season One (2014)
Star Wars Rebels:
Season Two (2015)List of events:

Universe (2016) - Sponsored by Rogue One: A Star Wars Story
Space Battle (2017) - Sponsored by Star Wars:
The Last Jedi
Battle Arena (2018) - Sponsored by Solo: A Star Wars Story
Galactic Speedway Creator Challenge (2019) - Sponsored by Star Wars:
The Rise of SkywalkerAdditional notes:
Besides the main events, a Disney XD crossover event known as Summer Camp (2015) included a virtual prize of the Star Wars: Rebels character, Chopper, in the form of a tiny shoulder pal.

The event also included promotional billboards of the Star Wars: Rebels TV series in the maps of the events’ respective games.

Similarly to Summer Camp (2015), Disney Infinity 3.0 was also featured as a sponsored event in 2015, and had the maps decorated in the games that were part of the event that included promotional billboards that featured the characters Princess Leia, Darth Vader, Yoda, Anakin Skywalker and Sabine Wren.

While the characters were advertised in billboards in the events’ respective games, none of the actual virtual prizes or free items tied directly into any Star Wars media.

As part of the sponsor, Star Wars Rebels:
Season Two not only included free items, but was also featured on the promotional material of the billboards in the maps of two pre-existing games on the platform, and also included the limited-time branding on the games’ respective thumbnails.

===
Disney Infinity ===
The Disney Infinity series allowed the use of Star Wars characters alongside characters from other franchises owned by Disney, including characters from the Marvel and Pixar films.

Disney Infinity 3.0 (2015):
Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii U, iOS, Android


===
The Sims ===
The Sims 4: Journey to Batuu (2020): Microsoft Windows, Mac, PlayStation 4, Xbox One - Ninth game pack for The Sims 4.
Adds a new destination world called Batuu with a Star Wars-style storyline.
Adds new types of aliens and other Star Wars-inspired outfits, objects and characters.

===
Minecraft ===
Star Wars (2020):
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, Amazon Kindle Fire, Amazon Fire TV, IOS, Android, Oculus Rift, Gear VR - DLC for Minecraft: Bedrock Edition purchasable through the Minecraft Market place.
Adds Star Wars maps, quests, mobs, skins, items and vehicles from the Original Trilogy and The Mandalorian into the game.

==
Cultural impact ==
This category refers to video games from other franchises where the inclusion of Star Wars characters is very minor and restricted only to small easter eggs or unlockable character cameos.

Night Shift (1990) – Platform game featuring action figures of various Star Wars characters.
Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, Mac, PC, Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater series:
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 (2001) – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Darth Maul.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 (2002) – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Jango Fett.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Secret Weapons Over Normandy (2003) – Flight simulation game featuring unlockable X-wing and TIE Fighter.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
, PC
Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction (2005) – Features unlockable character Han Solo.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
Soulcalibur IV (2008) –
Fighting game.
At release featuring Darth Vader exclusively in the PlayStation 3 version, with Yoda exclusively in the Xbox 360 version, and Darth Vader's apprentice Galen Starkiller Marek in both versions.
Months after the release, Darth Vader and Yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable content, each at the version they were absent at release.
Each of the Star Wars characters had his own ending on the "Story Mode".
However, in late 2016, all dlc in SoulCalibur IV was removed from the PlayStation and Microsoft stores due to licensing from the purchase of Star Wars by Disney.

Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings (2009) – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo.
Wii, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS,
PlayStation Portable


== Canceled games ==
Games that were never finished, nor released.

Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Ewok Adventure – Atari
2600 (unreleased)
Star Wars: Battlefront III (2008) PlayStation 3, Windows, Xbox 360
Star Wars: First Assault (2012) (First-person shooter)
Star Wars 1313 (2013)
(Action-adventure)
Star Wars Outpost (2013)
Star Wars: Attack Squadrons (2014)
Star Wars: Battle of the Sith Lords (2015) (Action-adventure)
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic III (Windows, Xbox)
Star Wars: The Force Unleashed III (Windows, Wii U, Xbox One, PlayStation 4)
Project Ragtag (Windows, Xbox One, PlayStation 4)


==
References ==
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D animated science fiction television series produced by Lucasfilm Animation and set in the Star Wars galaxy five years before A New Hope.
It takes place during the Dark Times, when the Galactic Empire is hunting down the last of the Jedi while a fledgling rebellion against the Empire is emerging.
The visual style of the series is inspired by the original Star Wars trilogy concept art by Ralph McQuarrie.
The series features new characters, along with some from the original trilogy and from the previous animated series, The Clone Wars.

The series premiered as a one-hour television film, Spark of Rebellion, on October 3, 2014, on Disney Channel prior to the premiere of the series on October 13 on Disney XD.
The second season premiered on June 20, 2015, with a one-hour television film, The Siege of Lothal.
The third season premiered on September 24, 2016, with the television film, Steps Into Shadow.
The fourth and final season premiered on October 16, 2017, with another one-hour television film, Heroes of Mandalore.
Its final episode aired on March 5, 2018.Dave Filoni, Simon Kinberg and Greg Weisman served as executive producers of season one.
Weisman left the show after season one.
Filoni was also the supervising director for the first two seasons, a role he relinquished after accepting a promotion that expanded his creative role into overseeing all Lucasfilm Animation projects; he chose Justin Ridge to succeed him for season three.
Filoni assumed the role back for the fourth season.

The series has been generally well-received with several award wins and nominations.
Rebels garnered praise for its writing, characters, voice acting, score, and expansion of the franchise's mythology, although it received some criticism for its animation and perceived lack of depth.
The show was nominated for the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Animated Series and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Children's Program.
Rebels became the first recipient of the Saturn Award for Best Animated Series on Television, winning for its final two seasons.

A number of tie-in media have been released to expand upon the series' lore such as the comic book series Kanan, the novel A New Dawn, and the novel series Thrawn.

==
Premise ==
Fourteen years after the fall of the Galactic Republic and the Jedi Order and the rise of the Galactic Empire depicted in Revenge of the Sith, a motley group of rebels unite aboard a freighter starship called the Ghost and begin to conduct covert operations against the Imperial garrison on and around the planet Lothal and other planets that are menaced by the Empire.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Taylor Gray as Ezra Bridger, a teenage con artist who is taken in by Kanan to be trained as a Jedi.

Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, formerly known as Jedi Padawan, Caleb Dume, who survived the events of Order 66.
He is Ezra's mentor and leader of the Ghost Crew.

Vanessa Marshall as Hera Syndulla, a Twi’lek pilot turned Rebel Commander and the daughter of Ryloth freedom fighter Cham Syndulla.

Tiya Sircar as Sabine Wren, a young Mandalorian warrior who's fixated on art.

Steven Blum as Garazeb "Zeb" Orrelios, a former Lasat honor guard member who wants the Empire to pay for enslaving his people.

Dave Filoni as Chopper (
credited as "Himself" prior to the series finale), Hera's astromech droid who can be a bit reckless.

David Oyelowo as Agent Kallus, a member of the Imperial ground team tasked with overviewing Imperial activities.

Dee Bradley Baker as Captain Rex (seasons 2–4), a former high ranking Clone trooper, who served under Anakin Skywalker in the Clone Wars.

Sam Witwer as Maul (seasons 2–3), a former Sith Lord and apprentice to Palpatine who is attempting to hunt down Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Lars Mikkelsen as Grand Admiral Thrawn (seasons 3–4), a powerful high-ranking officer within the Galactic Empire.
===
Recurring ===
Jason Isaacs as Grand Inquisitor, a former Jedi Temple Guard who turned to the dark side and was tasked with hunting down surviving Jedi.

James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, an evil Sith Lord and apprentice to Palpatine who was once Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker.

Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, a former Jedi Knight who became Darth Vader.

Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, the former Padawan of Anakin Skywalker, who aids the rebellion with pivotal assets.

Stephen Stanton as Grand Moff Tarkin, an Imperial officer who oversees many of the Empire's activities.

Sam Witwer and Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the ruler of the galaxy and also known as Darth Sidious, Sith master of Darth Vader.

Mary Elizabeth McGlynn as Governor Arihnda Pryce, a high-ranking officer of the Galactic Empire and Governor of the Lothal sector.

Forest Whitaker as Saw Gerrera, a Rebel extremist and a former freedom fighter.

Genevieve O'Reilly as Mon Mothma, the leader of the Rebel Alliance.
===
Guest appearances ===
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a protocol droid who assists allies in the rebellion.

James Arnold Taylor and Stephen Stanton as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Knight in exile on Tatooine.

Frank Oz as Yoda, the wise and powerful Grand Master of the Jedi who is exiled on the planet Dagobah.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian, a smuggler in the underworld.

Nathan Kress as Wedge Antilles, a former Imperial TIE fighter pilot, who defects to the rebellion.

==
Episodes ==


==
Release ==


=== Broadcast ===
The first two episodes, titled Spark of Rebellion, premiered on October 3, 2014, on Disney Channels worldwide and on Family Channel in Canada.
In Australia, the series premiered on October 17 on Disney XD.
The Siege of Lothal premiered on June 28, 2015, and the second season debuted on October 18.
In Canada, the series premiered on October 19 on the DHX-owned Disney XD.
However, due to DHX Media losing the rights to Disney content, the show was later moved to Disney Channel.
The second season premiered on November 7, and it was moved to the Corus-owned Disney XD channel on December 1.In
the Middle East and Africa, Spark of Rebellion premiered on October 11 and the series debuted on October 18 on Disney XD.
Siege of Lothal premiered on October 10, followed the official season premiere on October 17.
In Southeast Asia, Spark of Rebellion premiered on Disney XD on October 4 and the series officially started on November 29.
Siege of Lothal premiered on October 3 on Disney XD and Disney Channel, and the second season was released on October 24.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the series debuted on October 16 on Disney XD.
Siege of Lothal premiered on July 18, 2015, followed by the second-season debut on October 17.
===
Home media ===
Star Wars Rebels:
Spark of Rebellion was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD in the US at all retailers on October 14, 2014.
DVD bonus features include character shorts, a 3D model kit of the Ghost ship, and a preview of season 1.The
Complete Season
One of Star Wars Rebels was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on September 1, 2015, in America, and in Germany on September 10, 2015.
The Season 1 collection contains the expanded version of Spark of Rebellion with the Darth Vader/Grand Inquisitor prologue shown on ABC-TV.
The Complete Season Two of Star Wars Rebels was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on August 30, 2016, in North America.
The Complete Season Three of Star Wars Rebels was released on DVD and Blu-Ray on August 29, 2017.
The Complete Season Four is announced to be released on DVD and Blu-ray on November 15, 2018, in Germany, and July 31, 2018, in the United States.
The series is also available on the Disney+ streaming service, which launched on November 12, 2019.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings ===
In the United States, the one-hour special garnered 2.74 million viewers on Disney Channel and 2.40 million viewers on ABC.
Worldwide, it delivered a total of 6.5 million viewers.
On Disney Channel, the first and second episodes delivered 2.33 million and 1.92 million viewers, respectively.
The third and fourth episodes garnered 2.32 million and 1.84 million, respectively.
The fifth, sixth, and seventh episodes were watched by 1.43 million, 1.30 million, and 1.60 million viewers, respectively.
The eighth and ninth episodes got 1.92 and 1.44 million viewers, respectively.
In Canada, the second episode was watched by 274,500 viewers, making it the most-watched broadcast ever on the network.
In the United Kingdom, the film was the highest-rated broadcast that week, with 81,000 viewers.

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has received a 92% positive score, based on 12 reviews, and seasons 2, 3 and 4 have received a 100% score based on 6 reviews for season 2, 6 reviews for season 3, and 10 reviews for season 4, with an average rating of 8.17/10 for season 1, 7.38/10 for season 2, 9/10 for season 3, and 9.22/10 for season 4.
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average score of 78 out of 100 based on 4 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
IGN and Variety in particular had strong praise for the pilot film, Spark of Rebellion, with their only criticism being the appearance of the Wookiees in the film, being cited as not all that impressive compared to the rest of the animation.

===
Accolades ===


==
Other media ==


===
Films ===
Chopper and the Ghost appear in the 2016 film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.
Hera's surname is called on a loudspeaker at the Rebel base on Yavin IV, where Chopper can briefly be seen.
In addition, the Ghost takes part in the climactic battle over Scarif.
The Ghost also appears in the 2019 film Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker during the final battle over Exegol.
The voice of Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus can also heard in the film as one of the voices of Jedi past who provide Rey with encouragement to defeat Emperor Palpatine.

===
Novels ===
On September 2, 2014, Del Rey Books published Star Wars: A New Dawn, a prequel novel by John Jackson Miller telling the story of how Kanan and Hera met (set about six years before the series).
One of the first canon Star Wars novels to be released by Disney, it also introduces Imperial captain Rae Sloane, who is later a grand admiral in the Aftermath trilogy (2015–2017).
It includes a foreword by Dave Filoni.

In 2017, a new novel, entitled Thrawn, was released.
The book marked the entrance of Grand Admiral Thrawn into the current canon.
It was written by the character's original creator, Timothy Zahn.

A sequel to Thrawn, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was released on July 24, 2018.

It explored Thrawn's partnerships with Darth Vader and Anakin Skywalker.
Another Thrawn novel, Thrawn: Treason was released on July 23, 2019.
It takes place during the events of Rebels' fourth season.
Hera Syndulla would go on to appear in Alexander Freed's Star Wars:
Alphabet Squadron  novel trilogy, as a general of the recently christened New Republic's eponymous starfighter squadron in the final days of the Galactic Civil War, hunting down the weakened Imperial forces after the battle of Endor and the death of Emperor Palpatine.
===
Comics ===
From April 1, 2015, through March 16, 2016, Marvel Comics published a 12-issue comic series, titled Kanan, and set during the events of the first season.
Written by former executive producer of the series Greg Weisman and illustrated by Pepe Larraz, Jacopo Camagni and Andrea Broccardo, the story is centered on Kanan having flashbacks to his days as a Padawan in the Jedi Temple and the Clone Wars.
The other members of the Ghost crew also appear.
In the summer of 2017, Marvel announced that a comic book miniseries adaptation of Zahn's Thrawn novel was being planned, scheduled to be released in early 2018.

The first issue was released on February 14, 2018, with new issues being released over the following five months.

A few days after the series finale was aired, IDW Publishing released the seventh issue of the long-running Star Wars Adventures multi-era comic book series, which contained the first of a two-part comic arc, set between the second and third season, in which the Spectres embark on a mission to save a rare endangered bird from Imperial custody.

The second part appeared in the next issue, which was released on March 28, 2018.

===
Video games ===
A side-scrolling run-and-gun game based on the show's first season, titled Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions, was released by Disney Mobile on iOS, Android, and Windows Store in early 2015, before being discontinued on July 28, 2016, due to the limitations of the support team.
Ezra Bridger is the only playable character, with other characters available via in-app purchases, which also grant early access to most of the game's levels in the mobile versions and are required to play the full campaign in the Windows Store version.

Additionally, several of the characters from the series are playable in other games such as Disney Infinity 3.0, Angry Birds Star Wars II, Roblox (as virtual accessories and gears), Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (as downloadable content only),
Star Wars:
Galactic Defense, Star Wars:
Force Arena and Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes.

Vanessa Marshall reprises her role as Hera Syndulla for the 2020 video game Star Wars:
Squadrons, providing voice work and motion capture for the character.

==
Themes ==


===
Historical influences ===
Characters in Star Wars Rebels have taken influence from Biblical, Hebrew, and Greco-Roman mythological names.
Star Wars writers have often used biblical names for Jedi while giving galactic Imperial characters Roman names.
In 2015 an interview was conducted with Dave Filoni and Simon Kinberg where Kinsberg stated that they wanted to connect to the original films by using the biblical naming scheme seen in the films.

Both Caleb and Ezra are historically Hebrew names with Ezra translating to "Helper".
Characters with Roman names include Clone Captain Rex which translates to "King" in Latin along with Sabine Wren, Admiral Brom Titus and Admiral Kassius Konstantine.

==
References ==


==
See also ==
2015 in science fiction


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Rebels at StarWars.com
Star Wars Rebels at IMDb
‹The
template TV.com show is being considered for deletion.› Star Wars Rebels at TV.com
DK Publishing for Star Wars Rebels
Star Wars Rebels on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens –
Original Motion Picture Soundtrack is the film score to the 2015 film of the same name composed by John Williams with Williams and William Ross conducting, and Gustavo Dudamel appearing as a "special guest conductor".
The album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 18, 2015, in both digipak CD and digital formats.
The score received critical acclaim, receiving praise for its new themes and use of old ones.
The main theme, "Rey's Theme", was the subject of mass acclaim, with the track reaching 10 million views on YouTube.
For the score, John Williams received his 50th Oscar nomination, being nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score, his first nomination for a Star Wars film since Return of the Jedi.
Williams won the Saturn Award for Best Music, his first win since Revenge of the Sith.
Williams also won the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media for the score, making it his 11th win in the category.

==
Overview ==
In July 2013, John Williams was confirmed to return to compose the sequel trilogy, beginning with The Force Awakens.

The music from the first two trailers for the film was reworked from earlier compositions.
Williams began working on the score in December 2014 and by June 2015, he had been through most of the film reels, working on a daily basis.
In May 2015, Williams said he would reuse themes from the previous films, such as those for Luke, Leia and Han, in ways that "will seem very natural and right in the moments for which we've chosen to do these kinds of quotes.
There aren't many of them, but there are a few that I think are important and will seem very much a part of the fabric of the piece in a positive and constructive way."
He said that working with J. J. Abrams was similar to the process he went through with George Lucas in the earlier films.
Recording sessions for The Force Awakens began on June 1, 2015, at the Sony Pictures Studios' Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage in Culver City, with William Ross conducting most of the music.
Williams attended the sessions and conducted the remainder of the recordings.
He called the recording process “very luxurious,” with 12 sessions scattered over a five-month period between June and November.
The score was recorded by a freelance orchestra—making it the first live-action Star Wars soundtrack not to feature the London Symphony Orchestra—with sessions continuing on and off over that five-month period.
The 85-piece orchestra recorded 175 minutes of music, although nearly an hour of that was discarded, modified, or rerecorded as Abrams re-edited the film.
The theme for Snoke was recorded by a 24-voice men’s chorus.
Gustavo Dudamel conducted the opening and end title music for the film at Williams' behest.
The last recording session took place on November 14, 2015.Leading up to the release of The Force
Awakens
multiple music streaming services began offering users Star Wars-themed playlists. "
Streaming platforms didn't exist for the [previous] movies, so that's something that we'll be rolling out, along with character-driven playlists with sounds and dialogue from the movie," said Ken Bunt, president of the Disney Music Group.
"
People love to hear dialogue and sound effects, so we're working on some ideas now that will incorporate some of that into playlisting.
"
Upon its release, the soundtrack for The Force Awakens became available to stream via Spotify.
== Reception ==
The musical score has received critical acclaim.
James Southall of Movie Wave said, "The new themes are great, hearing the old ones again is wonderful, the action music is remarkably energetic and the musical storytelling as vibrant as ever.

It’s just so good hearing
Williams return to this universe."

Jørn Tillnes of Soundtrack Geek said, "The fact is that this score is not even close to the classic trilogy and it struggles with the prequel trilogy as well.
I don’t know if it's the weakest in the saga.
Time will tell.
What I do know is that it's one of the best scores I've heard in a while.
"
uDiscover gave the score a positive review, saying, "The expansive, dramatic passages are as full-bodied as one would hope for a film as epic as The Force Awakens, but the attention to detail within the score – and the exquisitely recorded performance – make the results a subtle and engaging listen.
"Jonathan
Broxton of Movie Music UK praised the score, saying, "Even when you look at it objectively, what John Williams has achieved with this score is nothing short of remarkable.
He has written five new themes, two of which – 'Rey's Theme' and the 'March of the Resistance' – are wonderfully memorable, and can stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the already bulging cache of memorable themes within the Star Wars universe.
"It was nominated for Best Original Score category at 88th Academy Awards and lost to Ennio Morricone's score for The Hateful Eight.

==
Commercial performance ==
The soundtrack debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 chart for the week ending November 26, 2015, with 100,000 album-equivalent units, of which 94,000 were pure album sales.
It marked the highest debut for a score-only soundtrack since 1999, when The Phantom Menace placed at number 3.
Additionally, it is the sixth Star Wars soundtrack in the main Star Wars film series to reach the top ten;  only the Return of the Jedi soundtrack failed to reach top ten, peaking at number 20 in 1983.

The album has sold 206,000 copies in the US as of April 2016.

==
Track listing ==
All music is composed by John Williams.

==
Personnel ==
Credits adopted from Allmusic:


==
Additional music ==
Additional music featured in The Force Awakens:


==
Charts ==


==
References ==
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi is a 1984 arcade game by Atari, Inc. and the  follow-up to 1983's Star Wars arcade game.
The game uses raster graphics, rather than vector graphics which were used for the first and third Atari arcade games based on the Star Wars franchise.
Home ports were released by Domark for the Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum, Atari ST, Commodore 64, and Amiga in 1988.

The game is included as an unlockable extra on Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike for GameCube.

==
Gameplay ==
The player takes control of three different vehicles in stages based upon the Return of the Jedi film.
Gameplay is from a 3/4 isometrically projected perspective and is broken into several stages.
In the first stage, the player pilots a speeder bike to the Ewok village.
The next stage involves piloting the Millennium Falcon to destroy a reactor.
Another speeder bike stage follows.
The final stage involves piloting both an AT-ST and the Millennium Falcon in rapid succession in a fight against a Star Destroyer.

== Reception ==
In Japan, Game Machine listed Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi on their February 15, 1985 issue as being the sixth most-successful upright arcade unit of the year.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Return of the Jedi at the Killer List of Videogames
Return of the Jedi at the Arcade History database
Return of the Jedi at The GameRoom Blog
Star Wars: Droids – The Adventures of R2-D2 and C-3PO is a 1985 animated television series spin off from the original Star Wars trilogy.
It focuses on the exploits of droids R2-D2 and C-3PO between the events of Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope.
The series was produced by Nelvana on behalf of Lucasfilm and broadcast on ABC with its sister series Ewoks (as part of The Ewoks and Droids Adventure Hour).The series ran for one season of 13 half-hour episodes; an hour-long special broadcast in 1986 serves as the finale.
The opening theme, "Trouble Again", was performed by Stewart Copeland of the Police.
During their adventures, the droids find themselves in the service of successive new masters, and encounter minor characters from the original trilogy such as Boba Fett and IG-88.
==
Premise ==
Droids follows the adventures of R2-D2 and C-3PO as they face off against gangsters, criminals, pirates, bounty hunters, the Galactic Empire and other threats.
During their adventures, the droids find themselves in the service of successive new masters and in difficult situations as a result.

The series was retroactively placed four years after Revenge of the Sith and fifteen years before the events of A New Hope.
In the latter film, C-3PO tells Luke Skywalker that his and R2-D2's "last master was Captain Antilles.
"
The droids are placed in Antilles' care by Bail Organa at the end of Revenge of the Sith, creating an apparent continuity error.
This is explained by the droids being accidentally separated from Antilles during the events of the animated series.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
; Daniels also portrayed the character in the films.

R2-D2


===
Recurring/Guest ===
Don Francks as Jann Tosh, Boba Fett, Kybo Ren-Cha
Winston Rekert as Sise Fromm, Mungo Baobab
Graeme Campbell as Proto One, Admiral Terrinald Screed, and Lord Toda
Peter MacNeill as Jord Dusat
Taborah Johnson as Jessica Meade
John Stocker as Vlix Oncard, Greej, Zatec-Cha, and Sollag
Rob Cowan as Thall Joben
Dan Hennessey as Jord Dusat (episode 4), Uncle Gundy, Jyn Obah, Vinga, Yorpa, Governor Koong, and Captain Cag
Cree Summer as Princess Gerin
Jan Austin as Auren Yomm
Long John Baldry as the Great Heep
Lesleh Donaldson as Kea Moll
Chris Wiggins as Mon Julpa
Stephen Ouimette
as the narrator
Winston Rekert
as Tig FrommOther guest stars include George Buza, Andrew Sabiston, Eric Peterson, Jamie Dick, Donny Burns, Alan Fawcett, Don McManus, and Gordon Masten.

==
Production and broadcast ==
The series was produced by the Canadian company Nelvana for Lucasfilm.
Several episodes were written by Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt.
Hanho Heung-Up Co. was the Korean company hired to animate the series.
In the UK, BBC Television bought rights to screen the series in its entirety between 1986 and 1991 as part of the Children's BBC programming strand.
The entire series was shown twice within this time (in 1986 and 1988 to coincide with the full release of the Star Wars trilogy as well as Droids on VHS).
The Great Heep only made one showing in 1989 on BBC's Going Live!
,
which was a Saturday morning children's show—it was split into two parts over two weeks.
Different episodes from different cycles were also screened across the five-year licence, with the Trigon cycle being shown in full in early 1991 on another Saturday morning children's show called The 8:15 from Manchester.

The opening theme, "In Trouble Again", was performed by Stewart Copeland of the Police and written by him and Derek Holt.

The series was broadcast on ABC with its sister series Ewoks (as part of The Ewoks and Droids Adventure Hour).
It debuted in 1985 as part of a fitness special hosted by Tony Danza and live-action versions of the droids.
It ran for one season of 13 half-hour episodes; an hour-long special broadcast in 1986 serves as the finale.
Droids and Ewoks were later shown in reruns on Sci-Fi Channel's Cartoon Quest in 1996, although somewhat edited for time.

==
Episodes ==
Over the course of the series, the droids team up with three different sets of masters.
The series falls into three cycles or arcs; the droids usually run into their new masters at the beginning of each, and at the end are forced to leave.

The Great Heep, a 48-minute television special following the series, is set before the final arc.

==
Merchandising ==
In 1985, Kenner produced a toy line based on the series, including action figures, ship models, and other items.
Two action figures, Boba Fett and A-wing Pilot, were repackaged figures from the main Star Wars line.
The toy line was canceled after the first group of 12 figures due to decreasing popularity with Star Wars.
In 1987 and then 1988, Glasslite of Brazil issued remaining Kenner stock and produced a very limited run of remaining Return of the Jedi and Droids toys from a sell off.
Certain vehicles, mini-rigs and action figures were issued by the company in new packaging.
The character Vlix (Tig Fromm's henchman) was an action figure exclusive from unused molds by Kenner.
Like the remainder of the Glasslite line, very few were made, even less were sold and most were recycled due to the failing economy when money was tight across the country.
Vlix was the most valuable Star Wars action figure (at about $6,000 carded or $1,200 loose), until a Fett figure sold for £69,000 ($USD 92,000) at an auction.
A book was issued in the UK of the Episode "A Race to the Finish" as well as another book that had limited print runs.
Plans to release a storybook and cassette of the Trigon cycle for the publishing company Rainbow were abandoned after they lost the rights to re-issue their Star Wars run which included A New Hope
, The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, Planet of the Hoojibs, Droid World and Return of the Jedi:
The Battle of Endor due to poor reflective sales of Buena Vista's "Further Adventure" series overseas which included Mission to Ord Mantell, An Ewok Adventure and Ewoks: The Battle for Endor.

A computer game was released in 1988 for the ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC and Commodore 64 by Mastertronic.
The game went largely unnoticed and was pulled from production due to licensing rights of the end title theme tune being used.

===
Comic book series ===
In 1986, Marvel's Star Comics imprint published a Star Wars:
Droids comic series spun off from the cartoon.
The bi-monthly series ran for eight issues.
Four issues and issue 5's cover of the series were drawn by John Romita, Sr.
The "Lost in Time" crossover story from Droids #4 was continued in an issue of Ewoks.
The last three issues are part of an arc recounting the original Star Wars film from the droids' point of view.
Additionally, Spanish comics publisher Editorial Gepsa produced two-page Droids comics as part of an anthology series.

==
Home media ==
Almost all episodes of the series (except "Coby and the Starhunters") were released on VHS in the 1980s and 1990s, most notably the UK PAL releases over four cassettes (Droids 1–3 and The Great Heep), which had the opening sequences and credits edited out.
In 1996, Rick McCallum produced The Pirates and the Prince, a direct-to-video film compiled from four episodes.
In late 2004, McCallum and 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment produced a DVD titled Star Wars: Animated Adventures – Droids, which featured The Pirates and the Prince and Treasure of the Hidden Planet, a new compilation film including narration from Mungo Baobab (voiced by Alex Lindsay).
Both titles included some soundtrack changes.
On April 2, 2021, it was announced that the entire series would be released on Disney+
later in 2021.

== Reception ==
According to David Perlmutter, compared with Ewoks, Droids "was rudimentary, with short enough story lines for as many as four narratives in a single episode.
Obviously, neither Lucas nor the animation studio had enough faith in the characters to trust them as anything other than second bananas."
==
Legacy ==
Ben Burtt wrote liner notes for the Shadows of the Empire soundtrack, which referenced the Roonstones he had written about in Droids; Burtt made a cameo appearance in Episode I – The Phantom Menace, and named his character after the Baobabs.
Several references to the animated series are made in the prequels, such as the Boonta Eve Classic in The Phantom Menace, the planet Bogden and a four-armed cook in Attack of the Clones, and General Grievous' wheel bike design in Revenge of the Sith.
Genndy Tartakovsky gave C-3PO moving, expressive eyes in Clone Wars (2003) to pay homage to his previous animated appearances in Nelvana's Star Wars Holiday Special (1978) and Droids.
While Droids was excluded in the 2014 rebranding of Star Wars canon, recurring villain Admiral Screed—"the Emperor's right-hand man during the early days of the Empire"—makes appearances in canon novels such as Tarkin (2014) and Aftermath:
Life Debt (2016).
Additionally, possible sources of inspiration for sequel trilogy main characters Rey and Kylo Ren have been noticed.

==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Star Wars: Droids 1985, George Lucas, Ben Burtt
Star Wars Insider #27
A Guide to the Star Wars Universe
The Star Wars Encyclopedia by Stephen J. Sansweet, ISBN 0-345-40227-8 Del Rey; first edition (June 30, 1998)


==
External links ==
Star Wars: Droids at IMDb
The Great Heep at IMDb
The Pirates and the Prince at IMDb
Treasure of the Hidden Planet at IMDb
‹The
template TV.com show is being considered for deletion.›
Star Wars: Droids at TV.com
Star Wars:
Droids at the Big Cartoon DataBase
The Droids
Re-Animated, Part 1 - StarWars.com
The Droids
Re-Animated, Part
2 - StarWars.com
starwars.com
DVD
"Closer look"
A history of home video releases of Star Wars:
Droids
Episode review of The White Witch
A fan "Droids encyclopedia" blog at StarWars.com
This list provides an index of video game titles in Banpresto's Super Robot Wars franchise.
Most of the games in the series are tactical role-playing games but several games representing other genres were also released.
List is divided by video game genre and ordered by initial release date.
Only the original games, Neo Super Robot Wars and Super Robot Wars Compact, had final bosses that were not directly created by Banpresto.

==
Tactical role-playing games ==


==
Other genres ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Super Robot Wars Official Website
Super Robot Wars Official 20th Anniversary Website
The Mandalorian, an American space Western web television series set in the Star Wars universe created by Jon Favreau and released on Disney+, features an extensive cast of characters.
Since the show's debut on November 12, 2019, only one character has appeared in every episode: the protagonist and title character, a bounty hunter named, "Din Djarin".
Grogu (The Child) is a young alien of the same species as Star Wars character Yoda and the show's hugely popular breakout character, colloquially known among fans and writers as "Baby Yoda".
Several supporting characters appeared in at least three episodes of the first season of The Mandalorian.
These include allies of the Mandalorian such as Cara Dune, Greef Karga, IG-11, Kuiil, and The Armorer.
The primary villains of the series belong to a remnant of the Galactic Empire, which is led by Moff Gideon and includes such agents as The Client and Dr. Pershing.
A handful of guest characters made appearances in single episodes, including villagers from the planet Sorgan in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", a band of mercenaries in "Chapter 6: The Prisoner", and several minor antagonists.

== Cast ==
List indicator(s)
This section shows characters who will appear or have appeared in at least one season of the series.

===
Starring ===


===
Recurring co-stars ===
The following cast members have been credited as co-starring in at least two episodes within a season.

===
Featured co-stars ===
The following cast members have been credited as co-starring in a single episode within a season in which they play a significant role.

===
Guest starring ===


==
Main characters ==


===
The Mandalorian ===
The Mandalorian, sometimes abbreviated as Mando, is a sobriquet for Din Djarin, the protagonist of The Mandalorian television series.
Introduced as a bounty hunter, he is a member of the Mandalorian culture, as evidenced by his beskar armor and his distinctive helmet, which he never removes in front of anyone.
He was a "foundling" who was rescued at a young age by the Mandalorians and adopted into their culture prior to the events of the series, after his parents were murdered by Separatist battle droids during the Clone Wars, which resulted in his intense hatred of droids.
In the television series, the Mandalorian encounters a young alien known as "The Child", whom he attempts to protect from a remnant of the now-fallen Galactic Empire.
The Mandalorian is portrayed and voiced by Pedro Pascal, and stunt actors Brendan Wayne and Lateef Crowder perform as body doubles when Pascal is unavailable.
Pascal has cited Clint Eastwood as an influence on the character, and many comparisons have been drawn between the Mandalorian and Eastwood's Man with No Name.
The Mandalorian creator Jon Favreau suggested Pascal watch Akira Kurosawa's samurai films and Eastwood's Spaghetti Westerns as preparation for the role.
The Mandalorian character and Pascal's performance have been well received by audiences and critics.

===
Grogu ===
Grogu, also known as "The Child" and colloquially referred to by fans and the media as "Baby Yoda", is a young alien of the same species as popular Star Wars character Yoda.
Although 50 years old, he is still an infant by the standards of his species, and although he cannot yet speak, he demonstrates a strong natural ability with The Force.
A remnant of the Galactic Empire led by Moff Gideon is seeking the child to extract its blood for Dr. Pershing's secret experiments; the bounty hunter known as "The Mandalorian" is hired to track Grogu down.
Instead of turning him over, however, the Mandalorian attempts to protect the child from the Imperials.
By the end of the first season, the child is adopted into the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling", and the Mandalorian is tasked with reuniting the child with others of his kind.
The child has been hugely popular with fans and reviewers, becoming the show's breakout character, and the subject of many Internet memes.
The character was conceived by Jon Favreau out of a desire to explore the mystery around Yoda and his species, and was developed in early conversations about the series between Favreau and executive producer Dave Filoni.
The child is mostly a creation of animatronics and puppetry, although accentuated with computer-generated imagery.
He is voiced by sound editor David Acord with the aid of various sound effects.
The Guardian called Baby Yoda "2019's biggest new character", and many have described him as a key part in the success of the Disney+ streaming service.

==
Recurring characters ==
Several characters have been featured in more than one episode within a season of The Mandalorian.

===
Introduced in season one ===


====
Greef Karga ====
Greef Karga is a leader of the Bounty Hunters' Guild, who serves as both an ally and adversary to the Mandalorian at different points in the show's first season.
Operating out of the planet Nevarro, Greef gives assignments to bounty hunters and ensures everyone follows the guild's code.
Greef provides the assignment that leads the Mandalorian to meet the Child.
When the Mandalorian refuses to turn the Child over to the Imperials, Greef leads a group of bounty hunters in an unsuccessful attempt to take the Child from him.
Greef later devises a plan to kill the Mandalorian and return the Child to the Imperials, but when the Child saves his life, Greef has a change of heart and helps protect him from the Empire.
Greef Karga is portrayed by Carl Weathers, whom Jon Favreau knew through the Directors Guild of America.
Weathers accepted the part under the condition that he could direct future episodes of The Mandalorian in the second season.
Greef was originally to appear only in a handful of episodes, but Favreau and the writers liked the character so much that the part was expanded.
Weathers performs his own stunts in the role.
The character has received generally positive feedback from fans and reviewers.

====
The Client ====
The Client is a mysterious and unnamed agent of the Imperial remnant.
He hires the Mandalorian, as well as several other bounty hunters, to recover the Child on behalf of his superior, Moff Gideon.
The Client does not reveal why he wants the Child, but he orders his colleague, Dr. Pershing, to "extract the necessary material" from him.
The Mandalorian delivers the Child to the Client, but later rescues him back.
The Client conspires to recapture the Mandalorian and the Child, but after the Mandalorian returns to him, the Client is shot and killed by stormtroopers under Gideon's orders.
The Client is portrayed by German film director Werner Herzog, who was recruited for the part by Jon Favreau.
Herzog accepted the role in part to help finance his film Family Romance, LLC (2019).
Herzog was not familiar with Favreau's previous work, nor had he ever seen a Star Wars film, but he was impressed with the screenplays and filmmaking style of The Mandalorian.
Herzog strongly urged the show's filmmakers to use puppetry for the Child character and not computer-generated imagery, calling them "cowards" for considering using CGI in its place.
The Client character and Herzog's performance have received generally positive reviews from critics.

====
Dr. Pershing ====
Dr. Pershing is a doctor and scientist affiliated with the Imperial remnant who works with the Client in his attempts to capture the Child.
He has appeared in several episodes of The Mandalorian, starting with the series premiere "Chapter 1:
The Mandalorian", in which he is present on an Imperial compound on Nevarro when the Client hires the Mandalorian to track down and deliver the Child.
When the Client says he is willing to pay half-price for proof of termination, Pershing objects and says the child should be delivered alive.
Pershing appears again in "Chapter 3: The Sin", when the Mandalorian delivers the Child to the Client.
Later, when discussing the Child, the Client orders Pershing to "extract the necessary material and be done with it", but Pershing again protests, noting their employer has explicitly ordered them to bring the Child back alive.
The Mandalorian later returns to the Imperial compound to rescue the child, killing all the stormtroopers there and finding Pershing with the Child, who is sedated and strapped into laboratory equipment.
When the Mandalorian threatens Pershing, the scientist pleads for mercy and insists he protected the Child and prevented him from being killed.
The Mandalorian takes the Child and leaves Pershing unharmed.
Dr.
Pershing returns in season two.
The Mandalorian witnesses a hologram recording of Pershing, who is providing an update to Moff Gideon on his experiments involving Grogu's blood.
When the Dark Troopers apprehend Grogu, Gideon instructs his Comms officer to inform Dr. Pershing of Grogu's retrieval.
In the season finale, Pershing is captured by the Mandalorian and his companions; he helps his captors infiltrate Gideon's ship in order to rescue Grogu.
Pershing is portrayed by Omid Abtahi, who previously voiced a Mandalorian character named Amis in the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Pershing's costume includes a patch on his right arm with an insignia similar to one worn by clones in the cloning facility on the planet Kamino in the prequel film Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones.
This has led to speculation among some fans and writers that Pershing's plans for the Child involve cloning.
Pershing also wears glasses, making him the first human live-action character in Disney's Star Wars canon to do so.
This was contrary to a rule Star Wars creator George Lucas imposed, before selling the franchise to Disney, that no character wear glasses in the Star Wars universe.
Pershing's costume, which also included a grey shirt with white shoulders and a high collar, was ranked eighth on a Screen Rant list of the ten best costumes in the first season of The Mandalorian.
Inverse writer Allie Gemmill called Dr. Pershing an interesting character, particularly due to the mystery behind his possible association with Kamino.

====
Kuiil ====
Kuiil is an alien of the Ugnaught species, and a former indentured servant of the Galactic Empire.
He is living in solitude on the planet Arvala-7 when he encounters the Mandalorian, who comes to the planet to find and capture the Child.
Kuiil assists him, and then later helps him rebuild his ship when it is dismantled by Jawas.
Kuiil also rebuilds the bounty hunter droid IG-11 after the Mandalorian destroys him.
Kuiil and IG-11 later join the Mandalorian on a mission to protect the Child from the Imperial remnant on the planet Nevarro, where Kuiil is shot and killed by Imperial Scout Troopers while attempting to bring the Child to safety.
Kuiil is voiced by Nick Nolte, who completed his recordings for all the character's dialogue in a single afternoon.
Kuiil's on-set performance was done by Misty Rosas, who during filming wore a face mask brought to life through animatronics and puppetry, with its electronics and wires concealed in the backpack and pockets of Kuiil's costume.
Kuiil has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike.
Several critics have called him the best character on the show, and his signature line "I have spoken" became one of the better-known and best-liked lines of dialogue from the series.

==== IG-11 ====
IG-11 is a bounty hunter droid who initially attempts to capture and kill the Child, but is later reprogrammed to become its nurse and protector.
The Mandalorian first encounters IG-11 when both attempt to collect the bounty on the Child.
They work together to extract the Child from a gang of mercenaries, but when IG-11 tries to kill the Child, the Mandalorian instead shoots and kills the droid.
IG-11's remains are recovered by Kuiil, who repairs and reprograms him.
The droid later joins the Mandalorian on a mission to Nevarro to protect the Child from the Imperial remnant, and though the Mandalorian does not initially trust him, IG-11 ultimately sacrifices his own life to protect the Child and his allies.
IG-11 is voiced by Taika Waititi, who was offered the part by Jon Favreau based on their work together on Marvel films.
Waititi said he tried to create a voice that lacked human emotion while still maintaining some semblance of humanity, describing it as a cross between Siri and HAL 9000.
IG-11 was mistaken for the Star Wars bounty hunter IG-88 when first unveiled due to the resemblance between the two characters.
IG-11 has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike, with some calling him one of the best droids in the franchise.
====
The Armorer ====
The Armorer is the leader of a tribe of Mandalorian warriors on Nevarro, which includes the show's title character.
She provides spiritual guidance for the clan, and forges and repairs their armor, including a new set of armor she makes for the Mandalorian.
In the first season finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", the Armorer instructs the Mandalorian to watch over and protect the Child, and to reunite the Child with others of his own kind.
The character was partially inspired by the films of Akira Kurosawa, as well as the history and culture of the samurai, particularly in the character's deliberately-paced movement and aura of authority.
The Armorer is portrayed by Emily Swallow, who provides both the character's voice and live-action performance, while her stunts are performed by Lauren Mary Kim.
When Swallow auditioned for the role, she knew little about the character and did not know it was for a Star Wars series.
Aspects of The Mandalorian director Deborah Chow's personality influenced Swallow's portrayal of the character.
Kim's combat style in the Armorer's fight scenes was inspired by the Filipino martial art known as Kali.
The Armorer has been received positively by fans and reviewers alike, and has been described as a fan favorite.

====
Cara Dune ====
Cara Dune is a former Rebel shock trooper from Alderaan who became a mercenary after the fall of the Empire.
Originally from Alderaan,  Cara is a highly trained warrior and skilled battle tactician.
She harbors an intense hatred for the Galactic Empire, and is having trouble readjusting to post-war life.
Cara first encounters the Mandalorian on the planet Sorgan, where they work together to protect a local village from raiders.
He later recruits her to help protect the Child from the Imperial remnant.
Cara is portrayed by former mixed martial artist Gina Carano, for whom Favreau specifically created the character, without auditioning any other actresses.
Favreau sought to create a powerful and independent character, but one different from Princess Leia or other strong Star Wars female characters.
Carano performed many of her own stunts, and she credits Bryce Dallas Howard, who directed the character's first appearance in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", with helping translate the character from the script to the screen.
Cara has been received positively by reviewers and fans, and has been described as a feminist role model.
Some critics called her unique even among the Star Wars franchise's female characters due to her physicality and combat skills.

====
Peli Motto ====
Peli Motto is a mechanic who manages a spaceport on Tatooine, and is featured in "Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger", "Chapter 9:
The Marshal" and "Chapter 10:
The Passenger".
The Mandalorian hires her to repair his ship, and she also comes to take care of the Child.
The bounty hunter Toro Calican briefly takes Peli and the Child as hostages in an unsuccessful attempt to abduct the Mandalorian.
When the Mandalorian returns to Tatooine in search of another rumored to be there, Peli guides him to Mos Pelgo where he finds Cobb Vanth with Boba Fett's armor.
She later gives him the task of taking the Frog Lady to Trask where her husband has knowledge of other Mandalorians' whereabouts.

Peli is portrayed by actress and comedian Amy Sedaris, who had previously worked with The Mandalorian creator Jon Favreau on the film Elf (2003).
Sedaris said she enjoyed working with the animatronic Child puppet, which she said made everyone on the set happy: "The minute you looked into Baby Yoda's eyes you just got lost."
The character and Sedaris' performance drew acclaim from fans and reviewers, so much so that Sedaris became a trending topic on Twitter after the episode first became available.
====
Fennec Shand ====
Fennec Shand is an assassin and mercenary for the galaxy's top crime syndicates, who is sought by Toro Calican for his first bounty hunting assignment.
Calican catches Fennec with assistance from the Mandalorian.
When Fennec tries to convince Toro to free her so they could capture the Mandalorian and deliver him to the Bounty Hunters' Guild, Toro instead kills Fennec and seeks to capture the Mandalorian himself.
Her body is later approached by an unidentified character.
It is later revealed that this character was Boba Fett, who patched her up with some cybernetics.
In "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", Fennec accompanied Boba Fett to Tython in order to reclaim his armor from the Mandalorian's ship.
During a standoff with the Mandalorian, the three of them come under attack by the Stormtroopers dispatched by Moff Gideon.
Fennec managed to decimate some Stormtroopers which also involved sending a boulder into their machine gun.
When the Dark Troopers make off with Grogu and the Razor Crest is destroyed, Fennec and Boba Fett declare themselves in the Mandalorian's debt and agree to help him rescue Grogu.

Portrayed by actress Ming-Na Wen, Fennec Shand is the first major Star Wars villain character portrayed by an Asian actress.
Elements of the character's personality were inspired by characteristics of the fennec fox, including its trickiness, stealthiness, maneuverability, and ability to survive.
The fox also influenced the design of Fennec's costume and hairstyle.
Costume designer Joseph Porro incorporated orange accents into Fennec's black costume, and Wen recommended the character's hair include braids inspired by the fennec fox.
Fennec Shand has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike, and has been described as a fan favorite.
Several reviewers felt the character was eliminated too quickly and did not get the chance to live up to her potential, and some critics have speculated that the character could still be alive.
This is confirmed in the second-season episode "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy" that Fennec Shand is alive, discovered and saved by Boba Fett before her injuries proved fatal.
====
Moff Gideon ====
Moff Gideon is the leader of the Imperial remnant and the primary antagonist of The Mandalorian.
Few details of his backstory have yet been revealed.
He was previously an operative in the Imperial Security Bureau, a covert intelligence arm and secret police for the Empire, and played a role in past efforts to eliminate the Mandalorians.
In The Mandalorian, Moff Gideon is attempting to abduct the Child to extract its blood for experimentation.
In the first season, Gideon briefly traps the Mandalorian and his allies on Nevarro in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain the Child.
Gideon reveals he knows secret details about the Mandalorian and his allies, and is the first character in the series to reveal the Mandalorian's real name, Din Djarin.
In the final scene of the first season finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", it is revealed that Gideon possesses the Darksaber, a Mandalorian lightsaber.
Gideon returns in the second season as he continues to track down Grogu. "
Chapter 12:
The Siege" reveals that Gideon requires access to Grogu's blood, which contains a high 'M-count', for it to be transfused into a test subject.
However, the experiments have thus far resulted in "catastrophic failure".
Later in the season, Gideon apprehends Grogu and seeks to continue the experimentation, but the Mandalorian captures Dr. Pershing and infiltrates Gideon's ship.
Gideon battles the Mandalorian with the Darksaber, but is ultimately defeated.
As a platoon of Dark Troopers attempt to rescue him, Luke Skywalker arrives and destroys the droids.
Gideon attempts suicide, but is incapacitated by Cara Dune.
Grogu is taken by Skywalker to be trained as a Jedi.
Gideon is portrayed by Giancarlo Esposito.
He was recruited for the part by Jon Favreau, who had previously worked with Esposito on several projects.
Gideon has been received positively by reviewers and fans.

===
Introduced in season two ===


====
Boba Fett ====
Boba Fett is a Mandalorian bounty hunter who first appeared in The Empire Strikes Back.
Having survived the Sarlacc Pit he fell into in Return of the Jedi, he makes his return in a silent cameo in "Chapter 9:
The Marshal".
He reappears in "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", where he is revealed to have saved Fennec Shand on Tatooine after the events of "Chapter 5: The Gunslinger".
Initially demanding Din to return his armor which the latter had acquired from Cobb Vanth, he and Fennec later aid Din in battling Gideon's forces as he regains his armor in the process.
When the Dark Troopers make off with Grogu and the Razor Crest is destroyed, Fett and Fennec swear to help the Mandalorian rescue Grogu as repayment Din returning his armor.

Fett is played by Temuera Morrison, who previously portrayed Boba's father Jango Fett (whom Boba is a biological clone of) in Star Wars:
Episode II - Attack of the Clones and voiced Boba in the 2004 DVD releases of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.

====
Frog Lady ====
The "Frog Lady" is a female frog-like creature who appears in "Chapter 10:
The Passenger" and "Chapter 11:
The Heiress".
She enlists the Mandalorian to take her and her eggs to the moon Trask to be reunited with her husband, who can fertilize the eggs, in exchange for information on other Mandalorians' whereabouts.
She doesn't speak Galactic Basic, but briefly uses the damaged droid Q9-0's vocabulator to communicate with the Mandalorian.
Because of the eggs' fragility, they have to travel at "sub-light", and end up crashing on an icy planet to avoid a X-wing fighter patrol who have an arrest warrant for the Mandalorian since he has helped break out Qin from the New Republic transport.
They are nearly killed by a swarm of spider-like Krynka, but are rescued by the X-Wing pilots who let the Mandalorian go with a warning because he assisted in the capture of the others involved in the prison break.
After completing repairs, they manage to continue their journey to Trask.

The Frog Lady reunites with her mate the Frog Man upon their arrival on Trask.
The Mandalorian leaves the Child with the Frog Lady and the Frog Man to babysit.
Following the mission with Bo-Katan, the Mandalorian returns where he finds the Child interacting with the hatchlings.

The Frog Lady is performed by Misty Rosas and her vocal effects are provided by Dee Bradley Baker.
The Frog Lady was positively received by fans.

====
Koska Reeves ====
Koska Reeves is a Mandalorian warrior who appears in "Chapter 11:
The Heiress" and "Chapter 16:
The Rescue".
Reeves is part of the Night Owls, and fights alongside Bo-Katan Kryze.

Koska is portrayed by Mercedes Varnado, better known by her ring name Sasha Banks.

====
Bo-Katan Kryze ====

Bo-Katan Kryze is a Mandalorian warrior who appears in "Chapter 11:
The Heiress" and "Chapter 16:
The Rescue".

Originally appearing in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, then returning in Star Wars: Rebels
, Bo-Katan appears here for the first time in live action.
In "Chapter 11: The Heiress", she and the Nite Owls rescue The Mandalorian and The Child.
Bo-Katan introduces herself, revealing her heritage as a Mandalorian, and that he is actually part of group of zealots who wish to restore ancient Mandalorian traditions.
The Mandalorian leaves rejecting their help.
Later Bo-Katan and the Nite Owls again rescue The Mandalorian.
In return for information he reluctantly agrees to help them seize a shipment of weapons.
During the raid Bo-Katan changes plan, deciding to take the whole ship, not just the weapons.
When they capture the bridge, Bo-Katan interrogates the head officer, wanting to know about the Dark Saber.

Bo-Katan was impressed by the Mandalorian and invites him to join them, but he must continue his quest, so she tells him to go to the forest planet of Corvus, to find the Jedi Ahsoka Tano.

Bo-Katan returns in Chapter 16 and helps The Mandalorian to rescue The Child from Moff Gideon.

Bo-Katan is portrayed by Katee Sackhoff, who previously voiced the character in animated form in Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels.

==
Featured guest characters ==
Several characters have been featured in a single episode within a season of The Mandalorian in which they play a significant role.

===
Introduced in season one ===


====
Mythrol ====
An unnamed Mythrol appears in the opening scenes of the series premiere "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian", in which the Mandalorian captures him to collect a bounty.
He re-appears in "Chapter 12:
The Siege".
Blue-skinned and amphibious, with fins on his face, the Mythrol is ultimately delivered to the Bounty Hunters' Guild.
The Mythrol returned in the second season episode "Chapter 12:
The Siege" where he is was released from his Carbonite prison to work as a bookkeeper in exchange for a reduced sentence.
He also mentioned that he's still suffering from the side effect of the Carbonite where he hasn't regained vision in his left eye yet.
The Mythrol was brought along with the Mandalorian, Karga, and Cara Dune during their raid on an Imperial base where he does things when either threatened to be put back in Carbonite to having his sentence cut in half.
He was the one who found the message from Dr. Pershing to Moff Gideon about the experiments involving the Child's DNA.

The Mythrol is portrayed by comedian Horatio Sanz, a long-time fan of Star Wars.

====
Toro Calican ====
Toro Calican is a young bounty hunter who encountered the Mandalorian in episode "Chapter 5
: The Gunslinger".
He recruits the Mandalorian's help capturing the assassin Fennec Shand.
It is Toro's first bounty hunting assignment, and he hopes it will help him get into the Bounty Hunters' Guild.
Toro later double-crosses the Mandalorian and attempts to turn him over to the Guild, but is instead shot and killed by the Mandalorian.
Toro Calican is portrayed by Jake Cannavale.
The character received mixed reviews from critics.

====
Ranzar
Malk ====
Ranzar "Ran" Malk is the leader of a group of mercenaries that operate out of a space station in "Chapter 6: The Prisoner".
He develops a plan for his crew to infiltrate a New Republic prison ship and rescue Qin, an imprisoned Twi'lek.
After the mission, Ran tries to have the Mandalorian killed, but instead his space station is attacked by New Republic X-wing fighters, which were led there by the Mandalorian.
Ran is portrayed by Mark Boone Junior.
Fans reacted positively to Ran's character and Boone's performance, and the character was included on Vulture's list of the show's 15 best cameo appearances from season one.

==== Migs Mayfeld ====
Migs Mayfeld is a former Imperial Army sharpshooter who leads a crew of Ranzar "Ran" Malk's mercenaries in their attempt to rescue Qin from a New Republic prison transport ship.
He uses two blaster pistols, as well as a third blaster controlled by a droid arm attached to his backpack.
Mayfeld clashes repeatedly with the Mandalorian during the mission, and ultimately attempts to betray him, but instead the Mandalorian incapacitates Mayfeld and locks him in a cell on the transport.
After Moff Gideon's Dark Troopers make off with Grogu, the Mandalorian later asks Cara Dune about where Mayfeld is being held.
She finds information stating that Mayfeld was sentenced to 50 years on the Karthon Chop Fields.
Dune has him put on work release so that they can get to an Imperial console on Morak.
Mayfield and a disguised Mandalorian make it to the Imperial Rhydonium refinery after fighting off some pirates.
The terminal Mayfeld needs is in the officer's mess hall, but Mayfeld sees his former commanding officer Valin Hess and fears being recognized.
The Mandalorian goes instead but the terminal requires a facial scan, and he removes his helmet to acquire the codes.
He is confronted by Hess, but Mayfeld intervenes.
After a tense drink where Hess insults dead soldiers from Operation: Cinder on Burnin Konn, an angered Mayfeld shoots Hess dead.
The Mandalorian and Mayfeld fight their way past the Stormtroopers and Shoretroopers until Boba Fett extracts them.
Then Mayfeld blows up the refinery.
After getting what they need, Dune and the Mandalorian allow Mayfeld to leave while covering this up by stating that he was killed in action.

Mayfeld is portrayed by actor and comedian Bill Burr, who was not a fan of Star Wars and repeatedly mocked the franchise and its fans before he accepted the role.
Jon Favreau offered the part to Burr, believing his past criticism of the franchise would make his casting that much more amusing.
Burr was extremely impressed with the filming of The Mandalorian, complimenting the technical aspects of filming as well as the writing style of the series.
The character of Mayfeld received a generally positive response from reviewers, and several critics noted that Mayfeld's sardonic personality and hard-edged sense of humor are similar to Burr's real-life comedic style.
====
Xi'an ====
Xi'an is a female purple-skinned Twi'lek who appears in "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner".
A former love interest of the Mandalorian, she is part of the rescue team sent by Ranzar "Ran" Malk to rescue her brother Qin from a New Republic prison transport.
She attempts to betray the Mandalorian during the mission, but instead he incapacitates Xi'an and locks her in a cell on the prison transport.
Xi'an is portrayed by Natalia Tena, the only actress who has appeared in Star Wars, Game of Thrones, and the Harry Potter film series.
She is also the second Game of Thrones star to also appear in The Mandalorian, along with Pedro Pascal.
Xi'an has received mixed reviews from critics, and several reviewers compared her to the comic book character Harley Quinn.
====
Burg ====
Burg, a red-skinned Devaronian, is the "muscle" of
Ranzar "Ran" Malk's mercenary party sent to rescue Qin from a New Republic prison transport ship in "Chapter 6: The Prisoner".
Extremely strong, he repeatedly mocks the Mandalorian during their time together, at one point attempting to forcibly remove his helmet.
Burg attempts to betray the Mandalorian during the mission, but the Mandalorian defeats him in a fight, and locks him into a cell on the prison transport.
Burg is portrayed by Clancy Brown, who also voiced the Mandalorian bounty hunter Montross in Star Wars: Bounty Hunter (2002), Savage Opress in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, and Ryder Azadi in Star Wars Rebels.
Burg was well received by reviewers, with several comparing him to the fictional superhero Hellboy.

====
Q9-0 ====
Q9-0, also referred to simply as Zero, is a droid who acts as the pilot, navigator, and hacker for the mercenary crew sent by Ranzar "Ran" Malk to rescue Qin from a New Republic prison transport ship in "Chapter 6: The Prisoner".
During the mission, Q9-0 discovers there is a high bounty on the Child, whom he attempts to kill, but the Mandalorian shoots and destroys Q9-0 before he can do so.
In "Chapter 10: The Passenger", it is revealed that the Mandalorian has kept Q9-0's remains on the Razor Crest.
At one point, the Frog Lady uses the droid's vocabulator to better communicate with the Mandalorian so that he can understand what she is saying.

Q9-0 is voiced by Richard Ayoade.
The character received generally positive reviews from critics.
The Federalist writer Brad Jackson suggested the droid's nickname "Zero" could be a reference to a droid named "0-0-0", or "Triple Zero", a murderous droid in the Star Wars: Doctor Aphra comic book series that resembles C-3PO.
A Funko Pop figurine of Q9-0 has been released.

====
Qin ====
Qin is a male purple-skinned Twi'lek who was being held captive on a New Republic prison transport ship in "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner".
Qin blamed the Mandalorian for his imprisonment.
Ranzar "Ran" Malk arranges for a mercenary party to rescue Qin, which includes the Mandalorian.
After the team infiltrates the ship and recovers Qin, they lock the Mandalorian in Qin's cell and attempt to abandon him there, but he escapes.
The Mandalorian returns Qin to Ran's space station, but also leads the New Republic to their location, and the station is attacked by X-wing fighters while Qin is aboard.
Qin is portrayed by Ismael Cruz Córdova.
The character received mixed reviews from critics.

===
Introduced in season two ===


====
Gor Koresh ====
Gor Koresh is a Abyssin gangster whom the Mandalorian sought out for information on any Mandalorian sightings in "Chapter 9:
The Marshal".
When the Mandalorian approaches him while he is watching a ring fight, Koresh orders his henchmen to kill him and steal his beskar armor, but the Mandalorian defeats them and interrogates Koresh, who informs them of a Mandalorian warrior operating on Tatooine.
The Mandalorian then leaves Koresh hanging from the lamppost which he shoots the lights out as nocturnal creatures start to close in.

Gor Koresh is performed by John Rosengrant and voiced by John Leguizamo.

====
Cobb Vanth ====
Cobb Vanth is the marshal of the Tatooine town of Mos Pelgo.
On the day when the second Death Star was destroyed, Cobb was present when the Mining Collective attacked Mos Pelgo.
Although he was forced to work as a slave, he eventually escaped with a box that, unbeknownst to him, contained crystals, which he traded to his Jawa rescuers in exchange for the salvaged Mandalorian armor formerly owned by Boba Fett.
Using the armor, Cobb drove off the invaders, and continued to protect the townspeople of Mos Pelgo ever since.

In "Chapter 9:
The Marshal", the Mandalorian is told to seek out Cobb by people who had mistaken him for an actual Mandalorian because of his armor.
When the Mandalorian meets Cobb and finds out the truth, he demands that Cobb remove his armor.
Their stand-off is interrupted by the attack of a Krayt dragon that has been terrorizing Mos Pelgo, and Cobb persuades the Mandalorian to assist him in killing it in exchange for the armor.
Together, they form an unlikely alliance between the townspeople and the Tusken Raiders to eliminate their common enemy, before the Mandalorian comes up with a strategy to use a Bantha as a suicide bomber and have it detonate once the dragon eats it.
When the plan fails, the Mandalorian decides to allow himself to be eaten as well in order to manually detonate the explosives, and entrusts Cobb to look after the Child, should he perish.
The Mandalorian survives and, with the dragon slain, he parts ways amicably with Cobb, who hands him his armor.

Cobb Vanth is portrayed by Timothy Olyphant.
The character was introduced in the Star Wars:
Aftermath trilogy of novels written by Chuck Wendig.

====
Axe Woves ====
Axe Woves is a Mandalorian warrior who appears in "Chapter 11
: The Heiress".

Axe is portrayed by Simon Kassianides.
The character was named by George Lucas who visited the set during the shooting of Chapter 11.

====
Imperial Captain ====
The unnamed Imperial Captain appears in "Chapter 11:
The Heiress" as the captain of an Imperial cargo ship that contained stolen Mandalorian weapons.
The Mandalorian helped Bo-Katan Kryze's group in reclaiming it.
The captain informed Moff Gideon about the situation and called for backup only to be told by Gideon to sacrifice the ship as they are beyond rescue right now.
After Bo-Katan's group makes their way into the bridge and stops the ship from crashing, Bo-Katan demands the Captain to tell her the location of the Darksaber, but he fears Gideon more than her and commits suicide by biting on an electric capsule.

The unnamed Imperial Captain is portrayed by Titus Welliver.

====
Lang
====
Lang is an Imperial Lieutenant who works for Morgan Elsbeth on the planet Corvus.
He assisted her in oppressing the citizens of Calodan while leading the fight against Ahsoka Tano.
When the Mandalorian arrived in Calidan, Lang took him to Morgan.
Lang later led his troops into fighting Ahsoka and the Mandalorian when they attacked Calodan and took down the soldiers loyal to Morgan.
As Ahsoka dueled with Morgan, Lang was in a stand-off with the Mandalorian.
When Morgan was defeated, Lang put down his weapons and tried to fake surrender by pulling out a smaller blaster only to be shot by the Mandalorian.

Lang is portrayed by Michael Biehn.

====
Ahsoka Tano ====
Ahsoka Tano is a Togruta, former Jedi Padawan to Anakin Skywalker, and whom the Mandalorian seeks out in order to return the Child to his species.
When on Corvus, she attacked Calodan in order for Morgan Elsbeth to divulge to her the location of her master.
The Mandalorian met Ahsoka Tano, and she was able to interact with The Child without words as they can feel each other's thoughts.
Ahsoka then reveals that Grogu is the Child’s name.
She mentions that Grogu is only the second living being of his species that Ahsoka has encountered, the first being Master Yoda.
After testing one of Grogu's abilities, Ahsoka didn't want to train him due to the bad path he might take.
The Mandalorian and Ahsoka work together to liberate Calodan from Elsbeth who is defeated by Ahsoka.
She gives the unseen answer to Ahsoka on where her master Grand Admiral Thrawn is.
Before the Mandalorian and Grogu take their leave, Ahsoka directs them to Tython where there are the ruins of an old temple.
If his calls are answered by another Jedi, he will be trained by that Jedi.

Ahsoka is portrayed by Rosario Dawson in "Chapter 13:
The Jedi".
The character was previously voiced by Ashley Eckstein in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars Rebels, and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
====
Morgan Elsbeth ====
Morgan Elsbeth is the Imperial Magistrate of Calidan on the planet Corvus.

In her early life, her people were attacked during the Clone Wars.
During the rise of the Galactic Empire, Morgan helped to build the Imperial Fleet and has worked for Grand Admiral Thrawn, and she pillaged different worlds.
She ruled Calidan with an iron fist and strung up her prisoners in electrical cages.
Ahsoka Tano did different attacks on Calidan in order to get Morgan to divulge the location of Thrawn.
When the Mandalorian arrived on Corvus, Morgan contracted him to find Ahsoka, for which she will give him a pure beskar staff as reward.
The Mandalorian and Ahsoka worked together to liberate Calidan from Morgan's rule.
Following Morgan's overthrow, a man named Wing became the governor of Calidan.

Morgan Elsbeth is portrayed by Diana Lee Inosanto.

==== Luke Skywalker ====
Luke Skywalker is the Jedi Master who responds to Grogu's transmission through the Force, rescuing him from Gideon's Dark Troopers in "Chapter 16:
The Rescue".
Alongside R2-D2, he subsequently agrees to train Grogu as a Jedi Padawan.

Luke is portrayed by Mark Hamill, who portrays the character in majority of Star Wars media beginning with Star Wars.
Mark Hamill was digitally de-aged to portray a younger Luke Skywalker.
Max Lloyd-Jones served as an on-set body double for the character.

==
Minor guest characters ==
Several characters have appeared on The Mandalorian in minor roles or significant cameo appearances.

===
Introduced in season one ===


====
Paz Vizsla ====
Paz Vizsla is one of the warriors in the Mandalorian tribe on Nevarro.
Strong and physically imposing, he is a heavy infantry fighter.
He appears in the episode "Chapter 3: The Sin", where he initially quarrels with the Mandalorian for working with the Empire, but later comes to his assistance when the Mandalorian is being attacked.
Paz Vizsla is voiced by Jon Favreau, who previously voiced a similarly-named Mandalorian warlord named Pre Vizsla on the series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Stunt performer and former mixed martial artist Tait Fletcher was the live-action body double for Paz Vizsla.

====
Omera ====
Omera is a krill farmer and widow living on a village on Sorgan with her daughter, Winta, in the episode "Chapter 4: Sanctuary".
When the villagers hire the Mandalorian and Cara Dune to protect them from Klatooinian raiders, Omera befriends the Mandalorian, and the two appear attracted to each other.
She participates in the village's successful defense of the village and elimination of the raiders.
Omera is portrayed by Julia Jones.
"
Chapter 4" director Bryce Dallas Howard said it was challenging directing emotional scenes between Omera and the Mandalorian because he always wears a helmet, but that the scenes worked because "Julia is deeply connected to her emotions and you can just feel them on her face."
Brendan Wayne, a body double for the Mandalorian character, said his scenes with Jones were so emotional that they made him cry.
The character of Omera has received mixed reviews from critics.

====
Winta ====
Winta is the young daughter of Omera, living in a village on Sorgan in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary".
She develops a close friendship with the Child after the Mandalorian brings him to the village.
Winta is portrayed by Isla Farris.
====
Caben and Stoke ====
Caben and Stoke are krill farmers in a Sorgan village in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary".
The two hire the Mandalorian to provide protection from Klatooinian raiders attacking the village.
Caben is portrayed by actor and comedian Asif Ali, and Stoke is played by actor and comedian Eugene Cordero.
The two were included on Vulture's list of the show's 15 best cameo appearances from season one, in which writer Jackson McHenry described them as "a delightful pair of goofy villagers".

====
Riot
Mar ====
Riot Mar is a bounty hunter who attempts to recover the Child from the Mandalorian in "Chapter 5
: The Gunslinger".
Riot pilots a starfighter and attacks the Mandalorian's ship, but is killed by the Mandalorian after a brief dogfight.
Riot Mar is portrayed by Rio Hackford.

====
Davan ====
Davan is a soldier with the New Republic and the sole non-droid crew member of a New Republic prison transport ship in "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner".
Despite efforts by the Mandalorian to save him, Davan is murdered by a gang of mercenaries who board the ship to rescue the prisoner Qin.
Davan is portrayed by Matt Lanter, who also provides the voice of Star Wars protagonist Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars: The Clone Wars, as well as other minor characters.
Syfy Wire writer Bryan Young noted that Lanter's performance as Davan sounds nothing like his voice for Anakin, which Young said "speaks to his skill as an actor".
====
Trapper Wolf, Jib Dodger and Sash Ketter ====
Trapper Wolf, Jib Dodger and Sash Ketter are a trio of New Republic X-wing starfighter pilots, who investigate a homing beacon activated from a New Republic prison transport ship in "Chapter 6: The Prisoner".
The pilots follow the beacon to a space station operated by mercenary Ranzar "Ran" Malk, which they attack.
In "Chapter 10:
The Passenger," Trapper Wolf accompanied Carson Teva in investigating the Razor Crest.

Each of the three pilots are played by directors of first season episodes making cameo appearances:
Jib is portrayed by Rick Famuyiwa, Sash is played by Deborah Chow, and Trapper is portrayed by Dave Filoni.
Famuyiwa directed and co-wrote the episode in which he appeared.
Trapper Wolf's name was inspired by Filoni's love of wolves.

===
Introduced in season two ===


====
Carson Teva ====
Carson Teva is a captain in the New Republic's Starfighter Corps who originated from Alderaan.
He first appeared in "Chapter 10:
The Passenger" where he and Trapper Wolf follow the Razor Crest wanting a ping from it upon entering an area of space that is under the New Republic's jurisdiction and wanting to ask about the New Republic Correctional Transport incident which led to the Mandalorian flying to Maldo Kreis.
Teva and Wolf catch up to the Mandalorian where they slew some ice spiders.
After noting that he was sighted with some criminals during a breakout and that he left the same criminals in a cell, they were able to overlook it.
Before leaving, Carson advises that the Mandalorian gets his transponder fixed by the next time they run into each other.

In "Chapter 12: The Siege," Carson Teva and one of his fellow New Republic Starfighter Corps members visited Nevarro where he asked Greef Karga about the destruction of an Imperial base there.
After Karga confirmed some information, Teva later spoke to Cara Dune where he states that the New Republic is not sure what is happening in the Outer Rim and they won't be able to get to the bottom of it without local support.
It is also revealed that they suffered mutual losses of people they knew the day when Alderaan was destroyed.

Carson Teva is portrayed by Paul Sun-Hyung Lee.

====
Governor Wing ====
Governor Wing is a human who lives in Calidan on the planet Corvus at the time when its people were oppressed by Magistrate Morgan Elsbeth.
While the Mandalorian and Ahsoka Tano were fighting Morgan's forces, Wing helped to free the prisoners.
When Morgan is defeated by Ahsoka and overthrown, Wing becomes the governor of Calidan.

Governor Wing is portrayed by Wing Tao Chao, a Disney executive who retired in 2009.

====
Valin Hess ====
Valin Hess is an Imperial officer who used to have Migs Mayfeld as a soldier and participated in Operation:
Cinder.
A disguised Mandalorian and Mayfeld encounter him at a Rhydonium refinery on Morak.
The terminal Mayfeld needs is in the officer's mess hall, but Mayfeld sees his former commanding officer Valin Hess and fears being recognized.
The Mandalorian goes instead, but the terminal requires a facial scan and he removes his helmet to acquire the codes.
He is confronted by Hess, but Mayfeld intervenes.
After a tense drink where Hess insults dead soldiers from Operation: Cinder, an angered Mayfeld shoots Hess dead.

Valin Hess is portrayed by Richard Brake.
====
R2-D2 ====
R2-D2 is a droid that was befriended by Luke Skywalker.
He appeared with Luke in "Chapter 16:
The Rescue" where they obtain Grogu so that Luke can train him.

====
Bib Fortuna ====
Bib Fortuna is the former aide of Jabba the Hutt.
He appears in the post-credits scene of "Chapter 16:
The Rescue", where he is revealed to have taken over Jabba's palace, and is subsequently killed by his former associate Boba Fett.

Bib Fortuna is portrayed by Matthew Wood, he previously appeared as the character in The Phantom Menace.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars characters
Mandalorian
The Mandalorian


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Full cast and crew of The Mandalorian at IMDb
Star Wars is an American epic space opera media franchise created by George Lucas, which began with the eponymous 1977 film and quickly became a worldwide pop-culture phenomenon.
The franchise has been expanded into various films and other media, including television series, video games, novels, comic books, theme park attractions, and themed areas, comprising an all-encompassing fictional universe.
In 2020, its total value was estimated at US$70 billion, and it is currently the fifth-highest-grossing media franchise of all time.

The original film (Star Wars), retroactively subtitled Episode IV: A New Hope (1977), was followed by the sequels Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (1983), forming the original Star Wars trilogy.
Lucas later returned to filmmaking to direct a prequel trilogy, consisting of Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005).
In 2012, Lucas sold his production company to Disney, relinquishing his ownership of the franchise.
The subsequently produced sequel trilogy consists of Episode VII:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi (2017), and Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

All nine films of the 'Skywalker saga' were nominated for Academy Awards with wins going to the first two releases.
Together with the theatrical live action spin-off films Rogue One (2016) and Solo (2018), the combined box office revenue of the films equated to over US$10 billion and is currently the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time.

==
Premise ==
The Star Wars franchise depicts the adventures of characters "A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away", in which humans and many species of aliens (often humanoid) co-exist with robots, or 'droids', who may assist them in their daily routines; space travel between planets is common due to lightspeed hyperspace technology.
Spacecraft range from small starfighters, to huge capital ships such as the Star Destroyers, to space stations such as the moon-sized Death Stars.
Telecommunication includes two-way audio and audiovisual screens, and holographic projections.

A mystical power known as the Force is described in the original film as "an energy field created by all living things ...
[that] binds the galaxy together".
Through training and meditation, those whom "the Force is strong with" are able to perform various superpowers (such as telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and manipulation of physical energy).
The Force is wielded by two major knightly orders at conflict with each other: the Jedi, peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who act on the light side of the Force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the Sith, who use the dark side by manipulating fear and aggression.
While Jedi Knights can be numerous, the Dark Lords of the Sith (or 'Darths') are intended to be limited to two: a master and their apprentice.
Force-wielders are very limited in numbers in comparison to the population.
The Jedi and Sith prefer the use of a weapon called a lightsaber, a blade of energy that can cut through virtually any surface and deflect energy bolts.
The rest of the population, as well as renegades and soldiers, use laser-powered blaster firearms.
In the outer reaches of the galaxy, crime syndicates such as the Hutt cartel are dominant.
Bounty hunters are often employed by both gangsters and governments.
Illicit activities include smuggling and slavery.

==
Film ==
The Star Wars film series centers around three sets of trilogies, which are collectively referred to as the "Skywalker saga".
They were produced non-chronologically, with Episodes IV–VI (the original trilogy) being released between 1977 and 1983, Episodes I–III (the prequel trilogy) being released between 1999 and 2005, and Episodes VII–IX (the sequel trilogy), being released between 2015 and 2019.
Each trilogy focuses on a generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family.
The original trilogy depicts the heroic development of Luke Skywalker, the prequels tell the backstory of his father Anakin, while the sequels star Luke's nephew, Kylo Ren.

An anthology series set between the main episodes entered development in parallel to the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney chief financial officer Jay Rasulo as origin stories.
The first entry, Rogue One (2016), tells the story of the rebels who steal the Death Star plans just before Episode IV.
Solo (2018) focuses on Han Solo's backstory, also featuring original trilogy co-protagonists Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian and involving prequel trilogy villain Darth Maul.

Lucasfilm has a number of Star Wars films in development, two of which were confirmed during Disney Investor Day 2020.
The first will be a film titled Rogue Squadron, which is being directed by Patty Jenkins, and is scheduled for release on December 25, 2023.
The second is an unspecified film from Taika Waititi, who in May 2020 was announced to be directing a Star Wars film
he was co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.
Additionally, a trilogy independent from the Skywalker saga is being written by The Last Jedi writer/director Rian Johnson.
In September 2019, it was announced that Kathleen Kennedy and Kevin Feige would collaborate to develop a Star Wars film.
In February 2020, a film was announced to be in development from director J. D. Dillard and writer Matt Owens.

===
The Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
In 1971, George Lucas wanted to film an adaptation of the Flash Gordon serial, but could not obtain the rights, so he began developing his own space opera.
After directing American Graffiti (1973), he wrote a two-page synopsis, which 20th Century Fox decided to invest in.
By 1974, he had expanded the story into the first draft of a screenplay.
The 1977 movie's success led Lucas to make it the basis of an elaborate film serial.
With the backstory he created for the sequel, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies.
Most of the main cast would return for the two additional installments of the original trilogy, which were self-financed by Lucasfilm.

Star Wars was released on May 25, 1977, and first subtitled Episode IV:
A New Hope in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars.
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back was released on May 21, 1980, also achieving wide financial and critical success.
The final film in the trilogy, Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi was released on May 25, 1983.
The story of the original trilogy focuses on Luke Skywalker's quest to become a Jedi, his struggle with the evil Imperial agent Darth Vader, and the struggle of the Rebel Alliance to free the galaxy from the clutches of the Galactic Empire.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
According to producer Gary Kurtz, loose plans for a prequel trilogy were developed during the outlining of the original two films.
In 1980, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine-film series plotted, but due to the stress of producing the original trilogy, he had decided to cancel further sequels by 1981.
In 1983, Lucas explained that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now ...
As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ...
I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday.
"Technical
advances in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the ability to create computer-generated imagery (CGI), inspired Lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit his saga.
In 1989, Lucas stated that the prequels would be "unbelievably expensive."
In 1992, he acknowledged that he had plans to create the prequel trilogy.
A theatrical rerelease of the original trilogy in 1997 "updated" the 20-year-old films with the style of CGI envisioned for the new trilogy.

Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace was released on May 19, 1999, and Episode II:
Attack of the Clones on May 16, 2002.
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, the first PG-13 film in the franchise, was released on May 19, 2005.
The first two movies were met with mixed reviews, with the third being received somewhat more positively.
The trilogy begins 32 years before Episode IV and follows the Jedi training of Anakin Skywalker, Luke's father, and his eventual fall from grace and transformation into the Sith lord Darth Vader, as well as the corruption of the Galactic Republic and rise of the Empire led by Darth Sidious.
Together with the original trilogy, Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Prior to releasing the original film, and made possible by its success, Lucas planned "three trilogies of nine films."
He announced this to Time in 1978, and confirmed that he had outlined them in 1981.
At various stages of development, the sequel trilogy was to focus on the rebuilding of the Republic, the return of Luke in a role similar to that of Obi-Wan in the original trilogy, Luke's sister (not yet determined to be Leia), Han, Leia, R2-D2 and C-3PO.
However, after beginning work on the prequel trilogy, Lucas insisted that Star Wars was meant to be a six-part series and that there would be no sequel trilogy.
Lucas decided to leave the franchise in the hands of other filmmakers, announcing in January 2012 that he would make no more Star Wars films.
In October of that year, the Walt Disney Company agreed to buy Lucasfilm and announced that Episode VII would be released in 2015.
The co-chairman of Lucasfilm, Kathleen Kennedy, became president of the company and served as executive producer of new Star Wars feature films.
Lucas provided Kennedy his story treatments for the sequels during the 2012 sale, but in 2015 it was revealed Lucas's sequel outline had been discarded.
The sequel trilogy also meant the end of the existing Star Wars Expanded Universe, which was discarded from canon to give "maximum creative freedom to the filmmakers and also preserve an element of surprise and discovery for the audience.
"Episode
VII:
The Force Awakens was released on December 16, 2015, Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi on December 13, 2017, and Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker on December 18, 2019, in many countries.
The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi were both a critical and box office successes.
Episode IX received a mixed reception from critics and audiences.
The sequel trilogy starts 30 years after Episode VI and focuses on the journey of the Force-sensitive orphan Rey, guided by Luke Skywalker.
Along with ex-stormtrooper Finn and ace X-Wing pilot Poe Dameron, Rey helps the Resistance, led by Leia, fight the First Order, commanded by Han and Leia's son (and Luke's nephew), Kylo Ren.
===
Anthology films ===
Lucasfilm and Kennedy have stated that the standalone films would be referred to as the Star Wars anthology series (though the word anthology has not been used in any of the titles, instead carrying the promotional "A Star Wars Story" subtitle).
Focused on how the Rebels obtained the Death Star plans introduced in the 1977 film, the first anthology film, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, was released on December 16, 2016, to favorable reviews and box office success.
The second, Solo:
A Star Wars Story, centered on a young Han Solo with Chewbacca and Lando as supporting characters, was released on May 25, 2018, to generally favorable reviews and underperformance at the box office.
Despite this, more anthology films are expected to be released, following a hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker.

==
Television ==
The Star Wars franchise has been spun off to various television productions, including two animated series released in the mid-1980s.
Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the Clone Wars.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only the later one remained canon.
Eight live-action Star Wars series will be released on Disney+.
The first, The Mandalorian, premiered on November 12, 2019.
Star Wars won the 2020 Webby Award for Television & Film in the category Social.
Disney+
later released the Ewoks movies and animated series, along the animated first appearance of Boba Fett, and the Clone Wars animated micro-series in a section called Star Wars Vintage, that section will also include the Droids animated series in the future.
Certain aspects of the original Clone Wars micro-series are considered to not contradict the canon, while others do.

=== Series ===


===
Films ===


===
Television special ===


==
Fictional timeline ==
The Star Wars canon fictional universe spans multiple eras, of which three are focused around each of the film trilogies.
The following eras were defined in January 2021:
The High Republic:
The era of the "High Republic", set 200 years before the prequel trilogy.
It includes the media released in The High Republic and the upcoming The Acolyte.

Fall of the Jedi: The era of the prequel trilogy, in which the democratic Galactic Republic is corrupted by its ruler, Palpatine—secretly the Sith lord Darth Sidious.
After orchestrating the Clone Wars between the Republic and a Separatist confederation, Palpatine exterminates the Jedi Order, overthrows the Republic, and establishes the totalitarian Galactic Empire.
It includes the prequel trilogy films and the animated The Clone Wars.
This era was previously defined as The Age of Republic in August 2019.

Reign of the Empire:
The era after the prequel trilogy, exploring the reign of the Empire.
It includes the animated The Bad Batch and Solo: A Star Wars Story.

The Age of Rebellion:
The era of the original trilogy, in which the Empire is fought by the Rebel Alliance in a Galactic Civil War that spans several years, climaxing with the death of the Emperor and eventually resulting in the fall of the Empire.
It includes the animated Star Wars Rebels, Rogue One, and the original trilogy films.

The New Republic:
The era after the original trilogy, set during the formative years of the New Republic following the fall of the Empire.
It includes The Mandalorian and its spin-off series, The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic, and Ahsoka.

Rise of the First Order:
The era of the sequel trilogy, in which the remnants of the Empire reform as the First Order.
Heroes of the former Rebellion, aided by the New Republic, lead the Resistance against the oppressive regime and its rulers, the mysterious being known as Snoke and his puppet master, the revived Palpatine.
It includes the animated Star Wars Resistance and the sequel trilogy films.
This era was previously defined as The Age of Resistance in August 2019.The
Expanded Universe of spin-off media depicts different levels of continuity, which were deemed non-canonical and rebranded as Legends on April 25, 2014, to make most subsequent works align to the episodic films, The Clone Wars film, and television series.

==
In other media ==
From 1976 to 2014, the term Expanded Universe (EU) was an umbrella term for all officially licensed Star Wars storytelling material set outside the events depicted within the theatrical films, including novels, comics, and video games.
Lucasfilm maintained internal continuity between the films and television content and the EU material until April 25, 2014, when the company announced all of the EU works would cease production.
Existing works would no longer be considered canon to the franchise and subsequent reprints would be rebranded under the Star Wars Legends label, with downloadable content for the massively multiplayer online game
The Old Republic the only Legends material to still be produced.
The Star Wars canon was subsequently restructured to only include the existing six feature films, the animated film The Clone Wars (2008), and its companion animated series.
All future projects and creative developments across all types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the story group, announced as a division of Lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a cohesive vision on the storytelling of the franchise.
Multiple comics series from Marvel and novels published by Del Rey were produced after the announcement.

===
Print media ===
Star Wars in print predates the release of the first film, with the December 1976 novelization of Star Wars, initially subtitled "From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker".
Credited to Lucas, it was ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster.
The first "Expanded Universe" story appeared in Marvel Comics' Star Wars #7 in January 1978 (the first six issues being an adaptation of the film), followed by Foster's sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye the following month.

====
Novels ====
After penning the novelization of the original film, Foster followed it with the sequel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978).
The novelizations of The Empire Strikes Back (1980) by Donald F. Glut and Return of the Jedi (1983) by James Kahn followed, as well as The Han Solo Adventures trilogy (1979–1980) by Brian Daley, and The Adventures of Lando Calrissian trilogy (1983) by L. Neil Smith.
Timothy Zahn's bestselling Thrawn trilogy (1991–1993) reignited interest in the franchise and introduced the popular characters Grand Admiral Thrawn, Mara Jade, Talon Karrde, and Gilad Pellaeon.
The first novel, Heir to the Empire, reached #1 on the New York Times Best Seller list, and the series finds Luke, Leia, and Han facing off against tactical genius Thrawn, who is plotting to retake the galaxy for the Empire.
In The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994) by Dave Wolverton, set immediately before the Thrawn trilogy, Leia considers an advantageous political marriage to Prince Isolder of the planet Hapes,  but she and Han ultimately marry.
Steve Perry's Shadows of the Empire (1996), set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, was part of a multimedia campaign that included a comic book series and video game.
The novel introduced the crime lord Prince Xizor, another popular character who would appear in multiple other works.
Other notable series from Bantam include the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, the 14-book Young Jedi Knights series (1995–1998) by Anderson and Rebecca Moesta, and the X-wing series (1996–2012) by Michael A. Stackpole and Aaron Allston.
Del Rey took over Star Wars book publishing in 1999, releasing what would become a 19-installment novel series called The New Jedi Order (1999–2003).
Written by multiple authors, the series was set 25 to 30 years after the original films and introduced the Yuuzhan Vong, a powerful alien race attempting to invade and conquer the entire galaxy.
The bestselling multi-author series Legacy of the Force (2006–2008) chronicles the crossover of Han and Leia's son Jacen Solo to the dark side of the Force; among his evil deeds, he kills Luke's wife Mara Jade as a sacrifice to join the Sith.
Although no longer canon, the story is paralleled in The Force Awakens with Han and Leia's son Ben Solo, who has become the dark Kylo Ren.
Three series set in the prequel era were introduced for younger audiences: the 18-book Jedi Apprentice (1999–2002) chronicles the adventures of Obi-Wan Kenobi and his master Qui-Gon Jinn in the years before The Phantom Menace; the 11-book Jedi Quest (2001–2004) follows Obi-Wan and his own apprentice, Anakin Skywalker in between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones; and the 10-book
The Last of the Jedi (2005–2008), set almost immediately after Revenge of the Sith, features Obi-Wan and the last few surviving Jedi.

Although Thrawn had been designated a Legends character in 2014, he was reintroduced into the canon in the 2016 third season of Rebels, with Zahn returning to write more novels based in the character, and set in the new canon.

====
Comics ====
Marvel Comics published a Star Wars comic book series from 1977 to 1986.
Original Star Wars comics were serialized in the Marvel magazine Pizzazz between 1977 and 1979.
The 1977 installments were the first original Star Wars stories not directly adapted from the films to appear in print form, as they preceded those of the Star Wars comic series.
From 1985 to 1987, the animated children's series Ewoks and Droids inspired comic series from Marvel's Star Comics line.
According to Marvel comics former Editor-In-Chief Jim Shooter, the strong sales of Star Wars comics saved Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
Marvel's Star Wars series was one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.
The only downside for Marvel was that the 100,000 copy sales quota was surpassed quickly, allowing Lippincott to renegotiate the royalty arrangements from a position of strength.
In the late 1980s, Marvel dropped a new Star Wars comic it had in development, which was picked up by Dark Horse Comics and published as the popular Dark Empire series (1991–1995).
Dark Horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after the original film trilogy, including Tales of the Jedi (1993–1998), X-wing Rogue Squadron (1995–1998), Star Wars: Republic (1998–2006),
Star Wars Tales (1999–2005),
Star Wars: Empire (2002–2006), and Knights of the Old Republic (2006–2010).After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, it was announced in January 2014 that in 2015 the Star Wars comics license would return to Marvel Comics, whose parent company, Marvel Entertainment, Disney had purchased in 2009.
Launched in 2015, the first three publications were titled Star Wars, Darth Vader, and the limited series Princess Leia.
First announced as Project Luminous at Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, full details of a publishing initiative called Star Wars: The High Republic were revealed in a press conference in February 2020.
Involving the majority of the current officially licensed publishers, a new era set 200 years before the Skywalker Saga will be explored in various books and comics.
These include ongoing titles by Marvel and IDW Publishing, written by Cavan Scott and Daniel José Older respectively, that will both premiere in August 2020.

===
Audio ===
====
Soundtracks and singles ====
John Williams composed the soundtracks for the nine episodic films; he has stated that he will retire from the franchise with The Rise of Skywalker.
He also composed Han Solo's theme for Solo: A Star Wars Story; John Powell adapted and composed the rest of the score.
Michael Giacchino composed the score of Rogue One.
Ludwig Göransson scored and composed the music of The Mandalorian.
Williams also created the main theme for Galaxy's Edge.
====
Audio novels ====
The first Star Wars audio work is The Story of Star Wars, an LP using audio samples from the original film and a new narration to retell the story, released in 1977.
Most later printed novels were adapted into audio novels, usually released on cassette tape and re-released on CD.
As of 2019, audio-only novels have been released not directly based on printed media.

====
Radio ====
Radio adaptations of the films were also produced.
Lucas, a fan of the NPR-affiliated campus radio station of his alma mater the University of Southern California, licensed the Star Wars radio rights to KUSC-FM for US$1.
The production used John Williams's original film score, along with Ben Burtt's sound effects.
The first was written by science-fiction author Brian Daley and directed by John Madden.
It was broadcast on National Public Radio in 1981, adapting the original 1977 film into 13 episodes.
Mark Hamill and Anthony Daniels reprised their film roles.
The overwhelming success, led to a 10-episode adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back debuted in 1983.
Billy Dee Williams joined the other two stars, reprising his role as Lando Calrissian.
In 1983, Buena Vista Records released an original, 30-minute Star Wars audio drama titled Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell, written by Daley.
In the 1990s, Time Warner Audio Publishing adapted several Star Wars series from Dark Horse Comics into audio dramas: the three-part Dark Empire saga, Tales of the Jedi, Dark Lords of the Sith, the Dark Forces trilogy, and Crimson Empire (1998).
Return of the Jedi was adapted into 6-episodes in 1996, featuring Daniels.

===
Video games ===
The Star Wars franchise has spawned over one hundred computer, video, and board games, dating back to some of the earliest home consoles.
Some are based directly on the movie material, while others rely heavily on the non-canonical Expanded Universe (rebranded as Star Wars Legends and removed from the canon in 2014).
Star Wars games have gone through three significant development eras, marked by a change in leadership among the developers: the early licensed games, those developed after the creation of LucasArts, and those created after the closure of the Lucasfilm division by Disney and the transfer of the license to Electronic Arts.

====
Early licensed games (1979–1993) ====
The first officially licensed electronic Star Wars game was Kenner's 1979 table-top Star Wars Electronic Battle Command.
In 1982, Parker Brothers published the first Star Wars video game for the Atari 2600, Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back, followed soon the year later by Star Wars: Jedi Arena, the first video game to depict lightsaber combat.
They were followed in 1983 by Atari's rail shooter arcade game Star Wars, with vector graphics to replicate the Death Star trench run scene from the 1977 film.
The next game, Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984), has more traditional raster graphics, while the following Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back (1985) has vector graphics.
Platform games were made for the Nintendo Entertainment System, including the Japan-exclusive Star Wars (1987), an international Star Wars (1991), and Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992).
Super Star Wars (1992) was released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, with two sequels over the next two years.

====
LucasArts and modern self-published games (1993–2014) ====
Lucasfilm founded its own video game company in 1982, becoming best known for adventure games and World War II flight combat games, but as George Lucas took more interest in the increasing success of the video game market, he wanted to have more creative control over the games and founded his own development company, LucasArts.
Improved graphics allowed games to tell complex narratives, which allowed for the retelling of the films, and eventually original narratives set in the same continuity, with voice-overs and CGI cutscenes.
In 1993, LucasArts released Star Wars: X-Wing, the first self-published Star Wars video game and the first space flight simulator based on the franchise.
It was one of the best-selling video games of 1993 and established its own series of games.
The Rogue Squadron series was released between 1998 and 2003, also focusing on space battles set during the films.

Dark Forces (1995), a hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy, was the first Star Wars first-person shooter.
It featured gameplay and graphical features not then common in other games, made possible by LucasArts' custom-designed game engine, the Jedi.
The game was well received, and it was followed by four sequels.
The series introduced Kyle Katarn, who would appear in multiple games, novels, and comics.
Katarn is a former stormtrooper who joins the Rebellion and becomes a Jedi, a plot arc similar to that of Finn in the sequel trilogy films.
A massively multiplayer online role-playing game, Star Wars Galaxies, was in operation from 2003 until 2011.
After Disney bought Lucasfilm, LucasArts ceased its role as a developer in 2013, although it still operates as a licensor.

====
EA Star Wars (2014–present) ====
Following its acquisition of the franchise, Disney reassigned video game rights to Electronic Arts.
Games made during this era are considered canonical, and feature more influence from the Star Wars filmmakers.
Disney partnered with Lenovo to create the augmented reality video game Jedi Challenges, released in November 2017.
In August 2018, it was announced that Zynga would publish free-to-play Star Wars mobile games.
The Battlefront games received a canonical reboot in 2017.
Jedi:
Fallen Order was released in November 2019 and Star Wars:
Squadrons was released in October 2020.

===
Theme park attractions ===
In addition to the Disneyland ride Star Tours (1987) and its successor, Star Tours: The Adventures Continue (2011), many live attractions have been held at Disney parks, including the travelling exhibition Where Science Meets Imagination, the Space Mountain spin-off Hyperspace Mountain, a walkthrough Launch Bay, and the night-time A Galactic Spectacular.
An immersive themed area called Galaxy's Edge (2019) opened at Disneyland and opened at Walt Disney World in mid-2019.

A themed hotel, Star Wars:
Galactic Starcruiser, is currently under construction at Walt Disney World.

===
Multimedia projects ===
A multimedia project involves works released across multiple types of media.
Shadows of the Empire (1996) was a multimedia project set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi that included a novel by Steve Perry, a comic book series, a video game, and action figures.
The Force Unleashed (2008–2010) was a similar project set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope that included a novel, a 2008 video game and its 2010 sequel, a graphic novel, a role-playing game supplement, and toys.

===
Merchandising ===
The success of the Star Wars films led the franchise to become one of the most merchandised franchises in the world.
While filming the original 1977 film, George Lucas decided to take a $500,000 pay cut to his salary as director in exchange for full ownership of the franchise's merchandising rights.
By 1987, the first three films have made US$2.6 billion in merchandising revenue.
By 2012, the first six films produced approximately US$20 billion in merchandising revenue.
Kenner made the first Star Wars action figures to coincide with the release of the original film, and today the original figures are highly valuable.
Since the 1990s, Hasbro holds the rights to create action figures based on the saga.
Pez dispensers began to be produced in 1997.
Star Wars was the first intellectual property to be licensed in Lego history.
Lego has produced animated parody short films and mini-series to promote their Star Wars sets.
The Lego Star Wars video games are critically acclaimed bestsellers.
In 1977, the board game Star Wars: Escape from the Death Star was released.
A Star Wars Monopoly and themed versions of Trivial Pursuit and Battleship were released in 1997, with updated versions released in subsequent years.
The board game Risk has been adapted in two editions by Hasbro:
The Clone Wars Edition (2005) and the Original Trilogy Edition (2006).
Three Star Wars tabletop role-playing games have been developed: a version by West End Games in the 1980s and 1990s, one by Wizards of the Coast in the 2000s, and one by Fantasy Flight Games in the 2010s.

Star Wars Trading Cards have been published since the first "blue" series, by Topps, in 1977.
Dozens of series have been produced, with Topps being the licensed creator in the United States.
Each card series are of film stills or original art.
Many of the cards have become highly collectible with some very rare "promos", such as the 1993 Galaxy Series II "floating Yoda" P3 card often commanding US$1,000 or more.
While most "base" or "common card" sets are plentiful, many "insert" or "chase cards" are very rare.
From 1995 until 2001, Decipher, Inc. had the license for, created, and produced the Star Wars Customizable Card Game.

==
Themes ==
Star Wars features elements such as knighthood, chivalry, and Jungian archetypes such as "the shadow".

There are also many references to Christianity, such as in the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil.
Anakin was conceived of a virgin birth, and is assumed to be the "Chosen One", a messianic individual.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin falls from grace, remaining evil as Darth Vader until Return of the Jedi.
According to Adam Driver, sequel
trilogy villain Kylo Ren, who idolizes Vader, believes he is "doing what he thinks is right".
George Lucas has said that the theme of the saga is redemption.
The saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
Each character—primarily Anakin, Luke, and Rey—follows the steps of the cycle or undergoes its reversal, becoming the villain.
A defining step of the journey is "Atonement with the Father".
Obi-Wan's loss of a father figure could have impacted his relationship with Anakin, whom both Obi-Wan and Palpatine are fatherlike mentors to.
Luke's discovery that Vader is his father has strong repurcussions on the saga and is regarded as one of the most influential plot twists in cinema.
Supreme Leader Snoke encourages Kylo Ren to kill his father, Han Solo.
Kylo uses the fact that Rey is an orphan to tempt her into joining the dark side.
According to Inverse, the final scene in The Last Jedi, which depicts servant children playing with a toy of Luke and one boy using the Force, symbolizes that "the Force can be found in people with humble beginnings."
===
Historical influences ===
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
Battles featuring the Ewoks and Gungans against the Empire and Trade Federation, respectively, represent the clash between a primitive society and a more advanced one, similar to the Vietnam-American War.
Darth Vader's design was initially inspired by Samurai armor, and also incorporated a German military helmet.
Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler; this was condensed into one character in the form of Vader.
Stormtroopers borrow the name of World War I German "shock" troopers.
Imperial officers wear uniforms resembling those of German forces during World War II, and political and security officers resemble the black-clad SS down to the stylized silver death's head on their caps.
World War II terms were used for names in the films; e.g. the planets Kessel (a term that refers to a group of encircled forces) and Hoth (after a German general who served on the snow-laden Eastern Front).
Shots of the commanders looking through AT-AT walker viewscreens in The Empire Strikes Back resemble tank interiors, and space battles in the original film were based on World War I and World War II dogfights.
Palpatine being a chancellor before becoming the Emperor in the prequel
trilogy alludes to Hitler's role before appointing himself Führer.
Lucas has also drawn parallels to historical dictators such as Julius Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and politicians like Richard Nixon.
The Great Jedi Purge mirrors the events of the Night of the Long Knives.
The corruption of the Galactic Republic is modeled after the fall of the democratic Roman Republic and the formation of an empire.
On the inspiration for the First Order formed "from the ashes of the Empire", The Force Awakens
director J. J. Abrams spoke of conversations the writers had about how the Nazis could have escaped to Argentina after WWII and "started working together again."

==
Cultural impact ==
The Star Wars saga has had a significant impact on popular culture, with references to its fictional universe deeply embedded in everyday life.
Phrases like "evil empire" and
"May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon.
The first Star Wars film in 1977 was a cultural unifier, enjoyed by a wide spectrum of people.
The film can be said to have helped launch the science-fiction boom of the late 1970s and early 1980s, making science-fiction films a mainstream genre.
The widespread impact made it a prime target for parody works and homages, with popular examples including Hardware Wars, Spaceballs, The Family Guy Trilogy and Robot Chicken: Star Wars.

In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back, was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possesses a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.

===
Industry ===
The original Star Wars film was a huge success for 20th Century Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company.
Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price doubled to a record high.
Prior to 1977, 20th Century Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.
The franchise helped Fox to change from an almost bankrupt production company to a thriving media conglomerate.
Star Wars fundamentally changed the aesthetics and narratives of Hollywood films, switching the focus of Hollywood-made films from deep, meaningful stories based on dramatic conflict, themes and irony to sprawling special-effects-laden blockbusters, as well as changing the Hollywood film industry in fundamental ways.
Before Star Wars, special effects in films had not appreciably advanced since the 1950s.
The commercial success of Star Wars created a boom in state-of-the-art special effects in the late 1970s.
Along with Jaws, Star Wars started the tradition of the summer blockbuster film in the entertainment industry, where films open on many screens at the same time and profitable franchises are important.
It created the model for the major film trilogy and showed that merchandising rights on a film could generate more money than the film itself did.
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.
"
It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures.
The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.
Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.
Some critics have blamed Star Wars and Jaws for "ruining" Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy, and for the industry shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster franchises with multiple sequels and prequels.
One such critic, Peter Biskind, complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies...
They marched backward through the looking-glass.
"
In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth".
The original Star Wars trilogy is widely considered one of the best film trilogies in history.
Numerous filmmakers have been influenced by Star Wars, including Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Joss Whedon, John Singleton, Kevin Smith, and later Star Wars directors J. J. Abrams and Gareth Edwards.
Lucas's concept of a "used universe" particularly influenced Ridley Scott's Blade Runner (1982) and Alien (1979), James Cameron's Aliens (1986) as well as The Terminator (1984), George Miller's Mad Max 2 (1981), and Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings trilogy (2001–2003).
Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film Inception.

====
Fan works ====
The Star Wars saga has inspired many fans to create their own non-canon material set in the Star Wars galaxy.
In recent years, this has ranged from writing fan fiction to creating fan films.
In 2002, Lucasfilm sponsored the first annual Official Star Wars Fan Film Awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the genre.
Because of concerns over potential copyright and trademark issues, however, the contest was initially open only to parodies, mockumentaries, and documentaries.
Fan fiction films set in the Star Wars universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007, Lucasfilm changed the submission standards to allow in-universe fiction entries.
Lucasfilm has allowed but not endorsed the creation of fan fiction, as long as it does not attempt to make a profit.

===
Academia ===
As the characters and the storyline of the original trilogy are so well known, educators have used the films in the classroom as a learning resource.

For example, a project in Western Australia honed elementary school students storytelling skills by role-playing action scenes from the movies and later creating props and audio/visual scenery to enhance their performance.

Others have used the films to encourage second-level students to integrate technology in the science classroom by making prototype lightsabers.
Similarly, psychiatrists in New Zealand and the US have advocated their use in the university classroom to explain different types of psychopathology.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==


==
Further reading ==
Decker, Kevin S. (2005).
Star Wars and Philosophy.
Open Court.
ISBN 978-0-8126-9583-0.

Campbell, Joseph (1991).
The Power of Myth.
Anchor.
ISBN 978-0-385-41886-7.

Henderson, Mary (1997).
Star Wars: The Magic of Myth.
Bantam.
ISBN 978-0-553-10206-2.

Cavlelos, Jeanne (1999).
The Science of Star Wars.
St. Martin's Press.
ISBN 978-0-312-20958-2.

Nancy R. Reagin, Janice Liedl, ed.
(
2012).
Star Wars and History.
John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 978-0-470-60200-3.

Star Wars:
Where Science Meets Imagination.
National Geographic & Boston Museum of Science.
October 2005.
ISBN 978-0-7922-6200-8.
==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Map - 2020 official; HiRez; WebSite
A dwarf planet is a planetary-mass object that does not dominate its region of space (as a planet does) and is not a satellite.
That is, it is in direct orbit of the Sun and is massive enough to be plastic – for its gravity to maintain it in a hydrostatically equilibrious shape (usually a spheroid) – but has not cleared the neighborhood of its orbit of similar objects.
The prototype dwarf planet is Pluto.
The interest of dwarf planets to planetary geologists is that, being possibly differentiated and geologically active bodies, they may display planetary geology, an expectation borne out by the 2015 New Horizons mission to Pluto.

The number of dwarf planets in the Solar System is unknown.
This is because determining whether a body is in hydrostatic equilibrium requires close observation by spacecraft.
The half-dozen largest candidates have either been visited by spacecraft (Pluto and Ceres) or have at least one known moon (Pluto, Eris, Haumea, Makemake, Gonggong, Quaoar), which allows their masses and thus an estimate of their densities to be determined.
Mass and density in turn can be fit into models of hydrostatic equilibrium.

The term dwarf planet was coined by planetary scientist Alan Stern as part of a three-way categorization of planetary-mass objects in the Solar System: classical planets (the big eight), dwarf planets and satellite planets.
Dwarf planets were thus conceived of as a category of planet, as the name suggests.
However, in 2006 the term was adopted by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) as a category of sub-planetary objects, part of a three-way recategorization of bodies orbiting the Sun.
The decision had been precipitated by the discovery of Eris, an object farther away from the Sun than Neptune that was more massive than Pluto but still much smaller than the classical planets, after discoveries of a number of other objects that rivaled Pluto in size had forced a reconsideration of what Pluto was.
Thus Stern and many other planetary geologists distinguish dwarf planets from classical planets, but since 2006 the IAU and the majority of astronomers have excluded bodies such as Eris and Pluto from the roster of planets altogether.
==
History of the concept ==
Starting in 1801, astronomers discovered Ceres and other bodies between Mars and Jupiter that for decades were considered to be planets.
Between then and around 1851, when the number of planets had reached 23, astronomers started using the word asteroid for the smaller bodies and then stopped naming or classifying them as planets.
With the discovery of Pluto in 1930, most astronomers considered the Solar System to have nine planets, along with thousands of significantly smaller bodies (asteroids and comets).
For almost 50 years Pluto was thought to be larger than Mercury, but with the discovery in 1978 of Pluto's moon Charon, it became possible to measure Pluto's mass accurately and to determine that it was much smaller than initial estimates.
It was roughly one-twentieth the mass of Mercury, which made Pluto by far the smallest planet.
Although it was still more than ten times as massive as the largest object in the asteroid belt, Ceres, it had only one-fifth the mass of Earth's Moon.
Furthermore, having some unusual characteristics, such as large orbital eccentricity and a high orbital inclination, it became evident that it was a different kind of body from any of the other planets.
In the 1990s, astronomers began to find objects in the same region of space as Pluto (now known as the Kuiper belt), and some even farther away.

Many of these shared several of Pluto's key orbital characteristics, and Pluto started being seen as the largest member of a new class of objects, the plutinos.
It became clear that either the larger of these bodies would also have to be classified as planets, or Pluto would have to be reclassified, much as Ceres had been reclassified after the discovery of additional asteroids.

This led some astronomers to stop referring to Pluto as a planet.
Several terms, including subplanet and planetoid, started to be used for the bodies now known as dwarf planets.

Astronomers were also confident that more objects as large as Pluto would be discovered, and the number of planets would start growing quickly if Pluto were to remain classified as a planet.
Eris (then known as 2003 UB313) was discovered in January 2005; it was thought to be slightly larger than Pluto, and some reports informally referred to it as the tenth planet.
As a consequence, the issue became a matter of intense debate during the IAU General Assembly in August 2006.
The IAU's initial draft proposal included Charon, Eris, and Ceres in the list of planets.
After many astronomers objected to this proposal, an alternative was drawn up by the Uruguayan astronomers Julio Ángel Fernández and Gonzalo Tancredi: they proposed an intermediate category for objects large enough to be round but which had not cleared their orbits of planetesimals.
Dropping Charon from the list, the new proposal also removed Pluto, Ceres, and Eris, because they have not cleared their orbits.
The IAU's final Resolution 5A preserved this three-category system for the celestial bodies orbiting the Sun.
It reads:
The IAU ... resolves that planets and other bodies, except satellites, in our Solar System be defined into three distinct categories in the following way: (1)
A planet1 is a celestial body that (a) is in orbit around the Sun,
(b) has sufficient mass for its self-gravity to overcome rigid body forces so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium (nearly round) shape, and
(c) has cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit.

(2)
A "dwarf planet" is a celestial body that (a) is in orbit around the Sun, (b) has sufficient mass for its self-gravity to overcome rigid body forces so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium (nearly round)
shape,2 (c) has not cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit, and (d) is not a satellite.

(3)
All other objects,3 except satellites, orbiting the Sun shall be referred to collectively as "Small Solar System Bodies."

Footnotes:
1
The eight planets are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.

2
An IAU process will be established to assign borderline objects either dwarf planet or other status.

3
These currently include most of the Solar System asteroids, most Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs), comets, and other small bodies.

The IAU never did establish a process to assign borderline objects, leaving such judgements to astronomers.
However, it did subsequently establish guidelines under which an IAU committee would oversee the naming of possible dwarf planets:
unnamed trans-Neptunian objects with an absolute magnitude brighter than +1 (and hence a minimum diameter of 838 km corresponding to a geometric albedo of 1) were to be named by the dwarf-planet naming committee.
At the time (and still as of 2019), the only bodies to meet the naming criterion were Haumea and Makemake.

These five bodies – the three under consideration in 2006 (Pluto, Ceres and Eris) plus the two named in 2008 (Haumea and Makemake) – are commonly presented as the dwarf planets of the Solar System by naming authorities.

However, only one of them – Pluto – has been observed in enough detail to verify that its current shape fits what would be expected from hydrostatic equilibrium.
Ceres is close to equilibrium, but some gravitational anomalies remain unexplained.
On the other hand, the astronomical community typically refers to the larger TNOs as dwarf planets.
For instance, JPL/NASA characterized Gonggong as a dwarf planet after observations in 2016, and Simon Porter of the Southwest Research Institute spoke of "the big eight [TNO] dwarf planets" in 2018, referring to Pluto, Eris, Haumea, Makemake, Gonggong, Quaoar, Sedna and Orcus.
Although concerns were raised about the classification of planets orbiting other stars, the issue was not resolved; it was proposed instead to decide this only when dwarf-planet-size objects start to be observed.

==
Name ==
Names for large subplanetary bodies include dwarf planet, planetoid, meso-planet, quasi-planet and (in the transneptunian region) plutoid.
Dwarf planet, however, was originally coined as a term for the smallest planets, not the largest sub-planets, and is still used that way by many planetary astronomers.

Alan Stern coined the term dwarf planet, analogous to the term dwarf star, as part of a three-fold classification of planets, and he and many of his colleagues continue to classify dwarf planets as a class of planets.
The IAU decided that dwarf planets are not to be considered planets, but kept Stern's term for them.
Other terms for the IAU definition of the largest subplanetary bodies that do not have such conflicting connotations or usage include quasi-planet
and the older term planetoid ("having the form of a planet").
Michael E. Brown stated that planetoid is "a perfectly good word" that has been used for these bodies for years, and that the use of the term dwarf planet for a non-planet is "dumb", but that it was motivated by an attempt by the IAU division III plenary session to reinstate Pluto as a planet in a second resolution.
Indeed, the draft of Resolution 5A had called these median bodies planetoids, but the plenary session voted unanimously to change the name to dwarf planet.
The second resolution, 5B, defined dwarf planets as a subtype of planet, as Stern had originally intended, distinguished from the other eight that were to be called "classical planets".
Under this arrangement, the twelve planets of the rejected proposal were to be preserved in a distinction between eight classical planets and four dwarf planets.
Resolution 5B was defeated in the same session that 5A was passed.
Because of the semantic inconsistency of a dwarf planet not being a planet due to the failure of Resolution 5B, alternative terms such as nanoplanet and subplanet were discussed, but there was no consensus among the CSBN to change it.
In most languages equivalent terms have been created by translating dwarf planet more-or-less literally: French planète naine, Spanish planeta enano, German Zwergplanet, Russian karlikovaya planeta (карликовая планета), Arabic kaukab qazm (كوكب قزم), Chinese ǎixíngxīng (矮行星), Korean waesohangseong or waehangseong (왜소행성; 矮小行星, 왜행성; 矮行星), but in Japanese they are called junwakusei (準惑星), meaning "quasi-planets" or "peneplanets".

IAU Resolution
6a of 2006 recognizes Pluto as "the prototype of a new category of trans-Neptunian objects".
The name and precise nature of this category were not specified but left for the IAU to establish at a later date; in the debate leading up to the resolution, the members of the category were variously referred to as plutons and plutonian objects but neither name was carried forward, perhaps due to objections from geologists that this would create confusion with their pluton.

On June 11, 2008, the IAU Executive Committee announced a name, plutoid, and a definition: all trans-Neptunian dwarf planets are plutoids.
The authority of that initial announcement has not been universally recognized: ...in part because of an email miscommunication, the WG-PSN [Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature] was not involved in choosing the word plutoid. ...
In fact, a vote taken by the WG-PSN subsequent to the Executive Committee meeting has rejected the use of that specific term..."
The category of 'plutoid' captured an earlier distinction between the 'terrestrial dwarf' Ceres and the 'ice dwarfs' of the outer Solar system, part of a conception of a threefold division of the Solar System into inner terrestrial planets, central gas giants and outer ice dwarfs, of which Pluto was the principal member. '
Ice dwarf' however also saw some use as an umbrella term for all trans-Neptunian minor planets, or for the ice asteroids of the outer Solar System; one attempted definition was that an ice dwarf "is larger than the nucleus of a normal comet and icier than a typical asteroid.
"Before
the Dawn mission, Ceres was sometimes called a 'terrestrial dwarf' to distinguish it from the 'ice dwarfs' Pluto and Eris.
However, since Dawn it has been recognized that Ceres is an icy body more similar to the icy moons of the outer planets and to TNOs such as Pluto than it is to the terrestrial planets, blurring the distinction,
and Ceres has since been called an ice dwarf as well.

==
Characteristics ==


===
Orbital dominance ===
Alan Stern and Harold F. Levison introduced a parameter Λ (lambda), expressing the likelihood of an encounter resulting in a given deflection of orbit.
The value of this parameter in Stern's model is proportional to the square of the mass and inversely proportional to the period.
This value can be used to estimate the capacity of a body to clear the neighbourhood of its orbit, where Λ > 1 will eventually clear it.
A gap of five orders of magnitude in Λ was found between the smallest terrestrial planets and the largest asteroids and Kuiper belt objects.
Using this parameter, Steven Soter and other astronomers argued for a distinction between planets and dwarf planets based on the inability of the latter to "clear the neighbourhood around their orbits": planets are able to remove smaller bodies near their orbits by collision, capture, or gravitational disturbance (or establish orbital resonances that prevent collisions), whereas dwarf planets lack the mass to do so.
Soter went on to propose a parameter he called the planetary discriminant, designated with the symbol µ (mu), that represents an experimental measure of the actual degree of cleanliness of the orbital zone (where µ is calculated by dividing the mass of the candidate body by the total mass of the other objects that share its orbital zone), where µ > 100 is deemed to be cleared.
Jean-Luc Margot refined Stern and Levison's concept to produce a similar parameter Π (Pi).
It is based on theory, avoiding the empirical data used by Λ. Π
> 1 indicates a planet, and there is again a gap of several orders of magnitude between planets and dwarf planets.

There are several other schemes that try to differentiate between planets and dwarf planets, but the 2006 definition uses this concept.

===
Hydrostatic equilibrium ===
Sufficient internal pressure, caused by the body's gravitation, will turn a body plastic, and sufficient plasticity will allow high elevations to sink and hollows to fill in, a process known as gravitational relaxation.
Bodies smaller than a few kilometers are dominated by non-gravitational forces and tend to have an irregular shape and may be rubble piles.
Larger objects, where gravitation is significant but not dominant, are "potato" shaped; the more massive the body is, the higher its internal pressure, the more solid it is and the more rounded its shape, until the pressure is sufficient to overcome its internal compressive strength and it achieves hydrostatic equilibrium.
At this point, a body is as round as it is possible to be, given its rotation and tidal effects, and is an ellipsoid in shape.
This is the defining limit of a dwarf planet.

When an object is in hydrostatic equilibrium, a global layer of liquid covering its surface would form a liquid surface of the same shape as the body, apart from small-scale surface features such as craters and fissures.
If the body does not rotate, it will be a sphere, but the faster it rotates, the more oblate or even scalene it becomes.
If such a rotating body were to be heated until it melted, its overall shape would not change when liquid.
The extreme example of a body that may be scalene due to rapid rotation is Haumea, which is twice as long along its major axis as it is at the poles.
If the body has a massive nearby companion, then tidal forces cause its rotation to gradually slow until it is tidally locked,
such that it always presents the same face to its companion.
An extreme example of this is the Pluto–Charon system, where both bodies are tidally locked to each other.
Tidally locked bodies are also scalene, though sometimes only slightly so.
Earth's Moon is also tidally locked, as are all rounded satellites of the gas giants.

The upper and lower size and mass limits of dwarf planets have not been specified by the IAU.
There is no defined upper limit, and an object larger or more massive than Mercury that has not "cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit" would be classified as a dwarf planet.
The lower limit is determined by the requirements of achieving a hydrostatic equilibrium shape, but the size or mass at which an object attains this shape depends on its composition and thermal history.
The original draft of the 2006 IAU resolution redefined hydrostatic equilibrium shape as applying "to objects with mass above 5×1020 kg and diameter greater than 800 km", but this was not retained in the final draft.

==
Population of possible dwarf planets ==
The number of dwarf planets in the Solar system is not known.
The three objects under consideration during the debates leading up to the 2006 IAU acceptance of the category of dwarf planet – Ceres, Pluto and Eris – are generally accepted as dwarf planets, including by those astronomers who continue to classify dwarf planets as planets.
In 2015, Ceres and Pluto were determined to have shapes consistent with hydrostatic equilibrium (and thus with being dwarf planets) by the Dawn and New Horizons missions, respectively, though there is still some question about Ceres.
Eris is assumed to be a dwarf planet because it is more massive than Pluto.

In order of discovery, these three bodies are:

Ceres  – discovered January 1, 1801 and announced January 24, 45 years before Neptune.
Considered a planet for half a century before reclassification as an asteroid.
Considered a dwarf planet by the IAU since the adoption of Resolution 5A on August 24, 2006.
Confirmation is pending.

Pluto
♇ –
discovered February 18, 1930 and announced March 13.
Considered a planet for 76 years.
Explicitly reclassified as a dwarf planet by the IAU with Resolution 6A on August 24, 2006.
Five known moons.

Eris (2003 UB313) – discovered January 5, 2005 and announced July 29.
Called the "tenth planet" in media reports.
Considered a dwarf planet by the IAU since the adoption of Resolution 5A on August 24, 2006, and named by the IAU dwarf-planet naming committee on September 13 of that year.
One known moon.
Due to the 2008 decision to assign the naming of Haumea and Makemake to the dwarf-planet naming committee and their announcement as dwarf planets in IAU press releases, these two bodies are also generally assumed to be dwarf planets, though this has not been demonstrated:

Four additional bodies meet the criteria of Brown, Tancredi et al.
and Grundy et al.
for candidate objects:

Additional bodies have been proposed, such as Salacia and 2002 MS4 by Brown, or Varuna and Ixion by Tancredi et al.
Most of the larger bodies have moons, which enables a determination of their masses and thus their densities, which inform estimates as to whether they could be dwarf planets.
The largest TNOs that are not known to have moons are Sedna, 2002 MS4 and 2002
AW197.

At the time Makemake and Haumea were named, it was thought that trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) with icy cores would require a diameter of only perhaps 400 km (250 mi)—about 3% of that of Earth—to relax into gravitational equilibrium.
Researchers thought that the number of such bodies could prove to be around 200 in the Kuiper belt, with thousands more beyond.

This was one of the reasons (keeping the roster of 'planets' to a reasonable number) that Pluto was reclassified in the first place.

However, research since then has cast doubt on the idea that bodies that small could have achieved or maintained equilibrium under common conditions.

Individual astronomers have recognized a number of such objects as dwarf planets or as highly likely to prove to be dwarf planets.
In 2008, Tancredi et al.
advised the IAU to officially accept Orcus, Sedna and Quaoar as dwarf planets, though the IAU did not address the issue then and has not since.
In addition, Tancredi considered the five TNOs Varuna, Ixion, 2003
AZ84, 2004
GV9, and 2002
AW197 to be mostly likely dwarf planets as well.

Since 2011, Brown has maintained a list of hundreds of candidate objects, ranging from "nearly certain" to "possible" dwarf planets, based solely on estimated size.

As of 13 September 2019, Brown's list identifies ten trans-Neptunian objects with diameters greater than 900 km (the four named by the IAU plus Gonggong, Quaoar, Sedna, Orcus, 2002 MS4 and Salacia) as "near certain" to be dwarf planets, and another 16, with diameters greater than 600 km, as "highly likely".
Notably, Gonggong may have a larger diameter (1230±50 km) than Pluto's round moon Charon (1212 km).

However, in 2019 Grundy et al.
proposed that dark, low-density bodies smaller than about 900–1000 km in diameter, such as Salacia and Varda, never fully collapsed into solid planetary bodies and retain internal porosity from their formation (in which case they could not be dwarf-planets),
while accepting that brighter (albedo > ≈0.2) or denser (> ≈1.4 g/cc) Orcus and Quaoar probably were fully solid.
===
Most likely dwarf planets ===
The following Trans-Neptunian objects are agreed by Brown, Tancredi et al.
and Grundy et al.
to be probably dwarf planets.
Charon, a moon of Pluto that was proposed as a dwarf planet by the IAU in 2006, is included for comparison.
Those objects that have absolute magnitudes greater than +1, and so meet the criteria for the dwarf-planet naming committee of the IAU, are highlighted, as is Ceres, which has been accepted as a dwarf planet by the IAU since they first debated the concept, though it has not yet been demonstrated to meet the definition.
==
Exploration ==
On March 6, 2015, the Dawn spacecraft began to orbit Ceres, becoming the first spacecraft to orbit a dwarf planet.
On July 14, 2015, the New Horizons space probe flew by Pluto and its five moons.

Ceres displays such planetary-geologic features as surface salt deposits and cryovolcanos, while Pluto has water-ice mountains drifting in nitrogen-ice glaciers, as well as an atmosphere.

For both bodies, there is at least the possibility of a subsurface ocean or brine layer.

Dawn has also orbited the former dwarf planet Vesta.
Phoebe has been explored by Cassini (most recently) and Voyager 2, which also explored Neptune's moon Triton.
These three bodies are thought to be former dwarf planets and therefore their exploration helps in the study of the evolution of dwarf planets.

==
Contention regarding the reclassification of Pluto ==
In the immediate aftermath of the IAU definition of dwarf planet, some scientists expressed their disagreement with the IAU resolution.
Campaigns included car bumper stickers and T-shirts.
Mike Brown (the discoverer of Eris) agrees with the reduction of the number of planets to eight.
NASA announced in 2006 that it would use the new guidelines established by the IAU.
Alan Stern, the director of NASA's mission to Pluto, rejects the current IAU definition of planet, both in terms of defining dwarf planets as something other than a type of planet, and in using orbital characteristics (rather than intrinsic characteristics) of objects to define them as dwarf planets.
Thus, in 2011, he still referred to Pluto as a planet, and accepted other likely dwarf planets such as Ceres and Eris, as well as the larger moons, as additional planets.
Several years before the IAU definition, he used orbital characteristics to separate "überplanets" (the dominant eight) from "unterplanets" (the dwarf planets), considering both types "planets".

==
Bodies resembling dwarf planets ==
A number of bodies physically resemble dwarf planets.
These include former dwarf planets, which may still have an equilibrium shape; planetary-mass moons, which meet the physical but not the orbital definition for dwarf planets; and Charon in the Pluto–Charon system, which is arguably a binary dwarf planet.
The categories may overlap: Triton, for example, is both a former dwarf planet and a planetary-mass moon.

===
Former dwarf planets ===
Vesta, the next-most-massive body in the asteroid belt after Ceres, was once in hydrostatic equilibrium and is roughly spherical, deviating mainly because of massive impacts that formed the Rheasilvia and Veneneia craters after it solidified.

Its dimensions are not consistent with it currently being in hydrostatic equilibrium.
Triton is more massive than Eris or Pluto, has an equilibrium shape, and is thought to be a captured dwarf planet (likely a member of a binary system), but no longer directly orbits the sun.
Phoebe is a captured centaur that, like Vesta, is no longer in hydrostatic equilibrium, but is thought to have been so early in its history due to radiogenic heating.
Evidence from 2019 suggests that Theia, the former planet that collided with Earth in the giant-impact hypothesis, may have originated in the outer Solar System rather than in the inner Solar System and that Earth's water originated on Theia, thus implying that Theia may have been a former dwarf planet from the Kuiper Belt.

=== Planetary-mass moons ===
Nineteen moons have an equilibrium shape from having relaxed under their own gravity at some point in their history, though some have since frozen solid and are no longer in equilibrium.
Seven are more massive than either Eris or Pluto.
These moons are not physically distinct from the dwarf planets, but do not fit the IAU definition because they do not directly orbit the Sun.
(
Indeed, Neptune's moon Triton is a captured dwarf planet, and Ceres formed in the same region of the Solar System as the moons of Jupiter and Saturn.)
Alan Stern calls planetary-mass moons "satellite planets", one of three categories of planet, together with dwarf planets and classical planets.
The term planemo ("planetary-mass object") also covers all three populations.

===
Charon ===
There has been some debate as to whether the Pluto–Charon system should be considered a double dwarf planet.

In a draft resolution for the IAU definition of planet, both Pluto and Charon were considered planets in a binary system.
The IAU currently states that Charon is not considered to be a dwarf planet
but rather is a satellite of Pluto, although the idea that Charon might qualify as a dwarf planet in its own right may be considered at a later date.
However, it is no longer clear that Charon is in hydrostatic equilibrium.
Further, the location of the barycenter depends not only on the relative masses of the bodies, but also on the distance between them; the barycenter of the Sun–Jupiter orbit, for example, lies outside the Sun, but they are not considered a binary object.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
NPR:
Dwarf Planets
May Finally Get Respect (David Kestenbaum)
BBC News:
Q&A New planets proposal, August 16, 2006
Ottawa Citizen:
The case against Pluto (P. Surdas Mohit)
August 24, 2006
James L. Hilton,
When Did the asteroids Become Minor Planets?

NASA:
IYA 2009 Dwarf Planets
Ngô Thanh Vân (born 26 February 1979) is a Vietnamese actress, singer and model.
She is also known as Veronica Ngô or her initials NTV.

==
Early life and education ==
Ngô Thanh Vân was born on February 26, 1979, in Trà Vinh, Vietnam.
She is the youngest child with 3 older brothers.
When she was 10, her family put her in a boat to cross the border.
In 1990 Vân became a boat person who arrived in Norway without a family member.

In 1999, at the age of 20, Vân returned to Vietnam where she participated in a beauty pageant organized by the magazine Women's World, and finished as second runner-up.
Following this initial success, she launched her modelling career in Vietnam as a model for magazines, calendars, and fashion collections.
Soon after, she had her first acting role on the small screen in Hương Dẻ, a short TV series on HTV Channel.

==
Career ==


===
Music career ===
In 2002, Vân transitioned into the music scene as a pop-dance singer with the help of producer Quốc Bảo.
She recorded a duet album called Vườn tình nhân (Lovers' Garden) with established singer Tuấn Hưng.

The next year, again with the help of producer Quốc Bảo, Vân released her debut solo album, Thế giới trò chơi (Playworld), on February 26.
This album was a power pop-dance LP with the theme "NTV Virus".
Two music videos were filmed for the album: "
Thế giới trò chơi" and "Ngày tươi sáng", a cover version of jtL's "A Better Day", which was directed by Jackie Chen.
These two videos were the first Vietnamese music videos to feature professional special effects and are listed among the most expensive Vietnamese music videos to date.

In 2004, Vân followed up with her second album, Bí ẩn vầng trăng (Mystery of the Moon), which featured a moon theme, on March 15.
Three videos were released from this album: "
Bí ẩn vầng trăng", the cheerleader-themed "Vươn đến tầm cao" ("Reach for the Sky"), and the ballad "Khi nào
em buồn"
("Whenever I'm Sad"), which was later covered by many artists including Mắt Ngọc, Minh Thuận, and Thanh Thảo.

On September 5, 2005, Vân released her third album, Con đường em đi
(My Way).
This album was produced by Vân herself and featured a collaboration with a group of producers called The Dreams.
My Way featured multiple genres, from alternative rock to pop, R&B, and hip hop.
She remixed the famous Trịnh Công Sơn song "Quỳnh Hương".

In autumn 2006, after a two month break in America, Vân returned to Vietnam, and started recording her fourth album which she promised would be a dance anthem record.
On October 2006, Vân premiered one of her new songs "
I Won't Stop Loving You," a new collaboration with Quốc Bảo, on the final episode of 21st Century Woman on VTV.
Due to heavy promotion for her film The Rebel, the album release was pushed back to the summer of 2007.
In May 2007, Vân announced that the fourth album title would be Studio 68 and claimed that 68 was her lucky number.
She released Studio 68 on January 10, 2008.In 2006, Vân signed a contract to appear in the long-running music and comedy show Van Son, produced by Van Son Entertainment, an overseas Vietnamese music production company.
She has since appeared in every Van Son DVD release to date.
During the first months of 2008, Vân began working on her next album
Nước mắt thiên thần (Tears of Angel), while Studio 68 was awarded Most Creative Album in a monthly Album Vang prize.
===
Acting career ===
In 2004, Vân made her first international appearance in Rouge, a 13-part late night television series that aired on AZN Television.
Rouge was produced by MTV Asia & MediaCorp Singapore and was broadcast widely in Asia and Australia.
For the remainder of the year, Ngo was busy with the promotional campaign for Rouge throughout Asia and the recording of her third album.
She was chosen as the favorite actress in Rouge on the MTV Asia website.
After the release of her album My Way, Vân continued acting, with many starring roles in films such as Saigon Love Story directed by Ringo Le, 2 in 1 directed by Dao Duy Phuc, and The Rebel directed by Charlie Nguyễn with Johnny Trí Nguyễn, the latter becoming (at that point)
Vietnam's highest-grossing film of all time.
Vân's performance was highly praised by both critics and the public, and earned her the Best Actress Award at the 15th Vietnam Film Festival.
She was also nominated for Best Actress at the Golden Kite Awards for the second time.
In the spring of 2007, Vân also starred in a new thriller called Ngôi nhà
bí ân, which premiered in Vietnamese cinemas in November 2007.

2009 saw Vân once again starring beside Johnny Trí Nguyễn in a Chanh Phuong action movie Clash.
She also opened her own talent agency called VAA.In 2010, Vân competed as a contestant in the Vietnamese version of Dancing With The Stars.
She finished as the winner of season one.
After winning, Vân revealed that she would return to music in 2011.
That autumn, she embarked on a national promotional tour.

In 2016, she appeared in Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon: Sword of Destiny and starred in Tấm Cám:
The Untold Story.
In 2017, she played Paige Tico, the older sister to Rose Tico, in The Last Jedi.
Although her screen time was brief, her character's death was an important act of self-sacrifice that affected the major characters in the film, especially Rose.
Later in 2017, she played Tien, an Inferni elf enforcer working for Leilah, the main antagonist in the Netflix film
Bright.
In 2019, she starred in Vietnamese action film Furie (Hai Phượng), which later became the highest grossing domestic film of all time in Vietnam.
In 2020, she appeared in The Old Guard beside Charlize Theron and in Spike Lee‘s film Da 5 Bloods with Chadwick Boseman.

The same year, Vân was selected to jury the New York Asian Film Festival.

==
Personal life ==
After the success of The Rebel, Vân publicly revealed her relationship with co-star Johnny Trí Nguyễn, which was rumored to have ended his marriage with Cathy Viet Thi, a singer on Van Son.
The couple separated in 2011.

==
Discography ==
2002:
Vườn tình nhân (Lovers' Garden), featuring Tuấn Hưng
2003:
Thế giới trò chơi (Playworld)
2004:
Bí ẩn vầng trăng (Mystery of the Moon)
2005:
Con đường em đi
(My Way)
2008:
Studio 68
(Heaven: The Virus Remix)
2008:
Nước mắt thiên thần (Tears of Angel)


==
Filmography ==


===
Television ===


===
Film ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Ngô Thanh Vân at IMDb
Ngô Thanh Vân on Facebook
Ngô Thanh Vân's channel on YouTube
The eleventh series of Geordie Shore, a British television programme based in Newcastle upon Tyne was confirmed on 23 May 2015 when it was confirmed that MTV had renewed the series for a further three series.
The show began on 20 October 2015.
This is the first series not to include original cast member James Tindale after he departed at the beginning of the previous series.
Ahead of the series it was confirmed that the series would be filmed in Greece.
In September 2015 when the series premiere was announced, it was confirmed that the cast members would air for 10 episodes, making it the longest series to date.
It was also confirmed that the cast had travelled to Zante, Malia, Mykonos, Ios as well as Athens for the series.

== Cast ==
Aaron Chalmers
Charlotte-Letitia Crosby
Chloe Ferry
Gary Beadle
Holly Hagan
Kyle Christie
Marnie Simpson
Nathan Henry
Scott Timlin


===
Duration of cast ===
=
Cast member is featured in this episode.

=
Cast member leaves the series.

=
Cast member does not feature in this episode.

==
Episodes ==


==
Ratings ==


==
References ==
The Chevrolet Cruze is a compact car that has been made by the Chevrolet division of General Motors since 2008.
The nameplate has been used previously in Japan, for a version of a subcompact hatchback car produced under a joint venture with Suzuki from 2001 to 2007, and was based on the Suzuki Ignis.

Since 2009, the Cruze nameplate has designated a globally developed, designed, and manufactured four-door compact sedan—complemented by a five-door hatchback body variant (in 2010 it also replaced the Chevrolet Cobalt) from 2011, and a station wagon in 2012.
The Cruze was actually released earlier in 2008 to the South Korean market under the name Daewoo Lacetti Premiere until the phasing out of the Daewoo brand in favor of Chevrolet in 2011.
In Australia, the model has been on sale since 2009 as the Holden Cruze.
This new generation Cruze does not serve as a replacement for the Suzuki-derived Japanese market predecessor.
Instead, it replaces three other compact models: the Chevrolet Optra sold internationally under various names (such as the Suzuki Forenza in the United States, Chevrolet Optra in Latin America and Canada, Chevrolet/Daewoo Lacetti in Europe and Asia), the Chevrolet Cobalt, sold exclusively in North America, and the Opel-sourced, Australia-market Holden Astra (later returning in 2012 briefly as an Opel until the next year, and again in 2015 as a Holden).

While production of the Cruze in the United States and Mexico ended in 2019, the car is still produced and sold in other markets worldwide.

==
Nameplate disambiguation ==
Before the release of the global Chevrolet Cruze compact sedan in 2008, General Motors made use of the name "Cruze" between 2001 and 2008 in Japan.
Announced as the Chevrolet YGM1 concept car at the Tokyo Motor Show in 1999, the original Cruze was derived from the subcompact Suzuki Ignis five-door hatchback (known as the Suzuki Swift in Japan).
Despite the Chevrolet branding, the YGM1, like the production car, was the work of GM's Australian arm, Holden.
Along with the styling, Holden executed most of the engineering work and were responsible for devising the "Cruze" nameplate.
The Cruze came either with a 1.3- or 1.5-liter engine coupled to either five-speed manual or four-speed automatic transmissions.

Manufactured by Suzuki in Japan, GM revealed the production Chevrolet Cruze in October 2001, with Japanese sales commencing the following month.
From 2002 through to 2006 this generation of Cruze was sold in Australia and New Zealand.
In New Zealand, this generation Cruze was sold as the Chevrolet Cruze.
The production Cruze had standard front-wheel drive, with all-wheel drive optional.
Chevrolet pursued a marketing strategy that positioned the high-riding Cruze as a light-duty sport utility vehicle (SUV).
This contrasted with Suzuki's approach with the Ignis marketed as a conventional passenger model.
From 2003, Suzuki of Europe began manufacturing the Cruze as the Suzuki Ignis—representing a facelift of the original Ignis, but only for European markets.

==
First generation (J300; 2008) ==
In 2008, GM introduced the Cruze compact car, carrying the "J300" internal designation.
This J300 iteration serves as a replacement for the Chevrolet Cobalt, Daewoo Lacetti and Holden Astra—all unrelated cars.
GM phased out production of the Cobalt and its badge engineered counterpart, the Pontiac G5 in 2010, just prior to the manufacturing of the Chevrolet Cruze was to commence.
The first renderings of the Cruze were revealed by GM at a press conference on July 15, 2008, with the first official images released on August 21, 2008.Cruze production sites include Gunsan, Jeonbuk, South Korea; Saint Petersburg, Russia; Shenyang, China; and Halol, India; Hanoi, Vietnam since April 2010 in complete knock-down (CKD) form, Ust-Kamenogorsk, Kazakhstan from May 2010; Rayong, Thailand after December 2010, and São Caetano do Sul, Brazil from 2011.
Holden's localized hatchback version of the Cruze built at the Elizabeth, South Australia factory from late 2011 joined the Cruze sedan manufactured there since March 2011.
GM in the United States has upgraded the existing plant in Lordstown, Ohio to manufacture the Cruze, investing more than US$350 million.
At the ceremony of the start of production of Cruze at Ohio, Mark Reuss, the president of GM's North American operations said, "This is everything for us".
It is described as GM's most significant new vehicle introduction into North America since the Chapter 11 reorganization in 2009, and is GM's latest attempt to build a small size car that North American consumers would "buy because they like it – not simply because it is cheap".
Underpinned by the front-wheel drive GM Delta II platform, GM has confirmed the Cruze development program occurred under a global design and engineering team.
GM Daewoo in South Korea played a leading role in the design and engineering of the Cruze, along with GM's German-based Opel division.
This development program spanned over 27 months at a cost of US$4 billion.
A total of 221 prototypes were tested in Australia, Canada, China, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States.
According to GM, the Cruze's body structure is 65 percent high-strength steel.
MacPherson struts are utilized in the front suspension with a solid torsion beam axle for the rear, avoiding the cost and complexity needed for a modern multi-link independent rear suspension used by some more expensive rivals.
According to GM's global product development chief Mark Reuss, the North America version Cruze is modified from the global platform as it requires reinforcements to the engine compartment because it offers a bigger engine than in other markets and uses torsion beam suspension.
Hydraulically-assisted (electric for North American market) rack and pinion steering gives for a 10.9-meter (36 ft) turning circle.
Braking-wise, ventilated front, and solid rear disc brakes are employed, both using piston steel calipers.
To counteract noise, vibration, and harshness, engineers have designed the Cruze with an isolated four-point engine mount and implemented sound damping material in areas including the front-of-dashboard panel, luggage compartment, decklid internals, doors, carpet and headlining.
Further noise suppression through the use of a triple-layer sealing system in the doors has also been employed.
A five-door Cruze hatchback was unveiled as a concept car at the 2010 Paris Motor Show on October 1, 2010.
Cruze hatchback sales began in Europe in mid-2011.
Holden in Australia were responsible for the design and development of the hatchback body variant.
GM unveiled the Chevrolet Cruze station wagon in February 2012 at the Geneva Motor Show.
Load space ranges from about 500 litres (20 cu ft) up to the window line in the rear, to nearly 1,500 litres
(50 cu ft) up to the roof top with the rear seats folded down.

=== Safety ===
The Australasian New Car Assessment Program (ANCAP) in May 2009 awarded the Cruze five out of five stars in their crash safety test, with 35.04 out of a possible 37 points.
The following July, the China New Car Assessment Program (C-NCAP) awarded the Cruze five out of five stars in their test.
The Cruze SE 1.6-liter tested scored 16 points in side-impact collision, 14.44 in front-end collision, and 15.73 in the 40 percent frontal offset collision.
Euro NCAP graded the Cruze at five out of five stars as well—96 percent for adult protection, and 84 percent for child occupant protection, though the rating for pedestrian protection was a much lower 34 percent.
The South Korean-specification Cruze—the Daewoo Lacetti Premiere—received the top rating of five stars in the Korean New Car Assessment Program's (KNCAP) frontal, offset frontal, side, and whiplash tests.
In the United States, the Cruze received the highest possible ratings of "good" in front, side, rear and rollover crash protection tests by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS), who listed the Cruze as a 2011 Top Safety Pick.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) gave the Cruze the agency's highest five-star safety rating, based on its score for frontal impact (driver and passenger), side impact (driver and passenger), and for the side pole test (driver).
NHTSA graded the Cruze at four out of five stars for rollover safety performance.

=== Reliability and recalls ===
According to Consumer Reports, during its first year, the Cruze scored the lowest in reliability among compact sedans.
GM announced in April 2011 that 2,100 Cruzes in North America would be recalled following a report of the steering wheel breaking away from the steering column during motion.
On June 22, 2012, GM issued a recall for 413,418 Cruzes manufactured at the Lordstown, Ohio plant, to address a risk of engine compartment fires.
The recall covered 2011 and 2012 models built from September 2010 through May 2012 and affected vehicles sold in the United States, Canada, and Israel.
The fire hazard arose from the possibility of fluids becoming trapped near the engine and catching fire.
9,547 Australian-built Cruzes were also recalled for this reason, though no engine fires were reported in Australia.
GM issued another recall on August 16, 2013 for 2011 and 2012-model Cruzes—292,879 cars built at the Lordstown plant—to address a potential loss of power brake assist, due to a faulty microswitch in the power brake vacuum pipe assembly of Cruzes with the 1.4-liter engine and the 6T40 automatic transaxle.
GM stated awareness of 27 low-speed crashes due to brake issues that might have involved this fault.
On March 28, 2014, GM halted sales of 2013- and 2014-model Cruzes with 1.4-liter engines (about 60% of Cruzes), initially without stating a reason for the stop-sale order; subsequently GM disclosed that the issue was a faulty right-side axle shaft.

===
2012 update ===
The Cruze was given a mild facelift for 2013, unveiled at the 2012 Geneva Motor Show.
There was a new front fascia with redesigned air vents around the fog lamps, and the grille and headlamps also received minor updates.
New alloy wheels were offered, and GM's optional MyLink entertainment system became available.
This model was first sold in South Korea, then Malaysia, then in other markets.

===
2014 update ===
On April 12, 2014 at the New York International Auto Show, Chevrolet announced a refreshed 2015-model Cruze with an updated grille and a more angular shape similar to that of the Malibu.
For Asian markets, the car's rear end was restyled with new lamps, trunk lid, and bumper; the Chinese version also got a market-specific redesigned front end.

===
Powertrain ===
Engines fitted to the Cruze are the 1.6-liter Family 1 inline-four, a 1.8-liter version of the same, and a 2.0-liter VM Motori RA 420 SOHC turbocharged common rail diesel, marketed as VCDi.
All three engines are coupled to a five-speed manual or optional six-speed automatic transmission featuring Active Select.
When the Cruze launched in the United States in 2010, a new 1.4-liter Family 0 turbocharged gasoline engine was introduced.
North American models fitted with the 1.8-liter gasoline engine have also been upgraded to a standard six-speed manual.
In 2011, a new 2.0-liter Family Z diesel engine marketed as VCDi replaced the previous VM Motori VCDi unit of equal displacement.
Since late 2011, Chinese market models have been available with a turbocharged 1.6-liter engine with a six-speed manual transmission.

===
Marketing ===
AfricaThe Chevrolet Cruze was launched in the Egyptian market during mid-2009.
South African sales of the Cruze commenced in September 2009.

Asia
South Korean-market versions of the Cruze entered production there in 2008 as the "Daewoo Lacetti Premiere".
The Lacetti debuted on October 30, 2008, featuring the 1.6-liter naturally aspirated engine.
On January 30, 2009, GM Daewoo introduced the turbodiesel engine variant.
Inline with the February 2011 renaming of "GM Daewoo" to "GM Korea", the Lacetti Premiere adopted the international "Chevrolet Cruze" name from March 2, 2011.
For the owners of the previous model, Lacetti, GM Korea decided to replace the old emblem to that of Chevrolet for free.
The Chevrolet Cruze was launched in the Chinese market on April 18, 2009 as a sedan manufactured at GM India's Halol factory.
Transmission choices were a five-speed manual or a six-speed automatic along with 1.6- or 1.8-liter engines.
The sedan range consisted of the 1.6 SL, 1.6 SE, 1.8 SE (automatic only) and 1.8 SX (automatic only).
Hatchback models were introduced in 2013 available with the 1.6-liter or 1.6-liter turbo engines.

The Chevrolet Cruze was released in India on October 12, 2009.
It was offered in only two versions: LT and LTZ in diesel form only (VCDi).During 2009, there were reports that the Cruze was to become available in Malaysia with the 1.6 and a 1.8-liter engines.
The Naza automotive group in Malaysia has announced that it's expecting to launch the Cruze in the Malaysian market for the first time in the second quarter of 2010 and they are expecting to sell 1,200 to 1,500 units in 2010.In Thailand, the car launch in December 2010, built at GM's Rayong facility.
Specification levels comprised: Base (1.6-liter), LS (1.6- and 1.8-liter), LT and LTZ (1.8-liter),
6-speed automatic are standard in all models except 1.6 Base used 5-speed manual, with an optional 2.0-liter VCDi available on LTZ variant with 6-speed automatic.

Australia
The Australian arm of GM, Holden, announced at the Melbourne International Motor Show on February 27, 2009 that sales of the South Korean-produced Cruze would begin under the Holden brand.
Replacing the Holden Viva, the Cruze reached dealerships on June 1.
The Cruze also became the replacement for the Holden Astra, dropped from the Holden lineup the following August.
Given the model designation JG, the Holden Cruze was launched with the 1.8-liter petrol engine and optional 2.0-liter turbodiesel.
Both engines are mated to the five-speed manual transmission or optional six-speed automatic.
Electronic stability control (ESC), seat belt pretensioners and six airbags were standard fitment across the range.
Specification-wise, the "CD" opened up the range, finished off with a more upmarket "CDX".
The "CD" equipment list comprised 16-inch steel wheels, air conditioning, cruise control, a trip computer, power windows and automatic headlamps. "
CDX" versions add 17-inch alloy wheels, front fog lamps, a leather-wrapped steering wheel and upholstery, heated front seats and rear parking sensors.
Initially a petrol-only model, diesel availability was expanded to the "CDX" trim in early 2010.On March 18, 2010, Holden issued a recall for 9,098 petrol-engined 2010 model year Cruzes in Australia and a further 485 in New Zealand over a faulty fuel hose.
According to Holden, some hoses on 1.8-liter cars had developed a leakage, although no accidents or injuries had been reported prior to the recall.
The recall followed a stop-delivery notice issued by Holden to its dealers on March 3 while the automaker conducted an investigation into the matter.
Holden announced on December 22, 2008 that its Elizabeth, South Australia production line would be split to commence local production of the Cruze sedan and the Australian-developed hatchback.
Production was originally scheduled to start by September 2010.
However, it was confirmed in January 2010 that production would in fact begin in March 2011.
The announcement to assemble the car came as a response to the slowing sales of the larger, locally produced Holden Commodore range.
The Australian Government committed A$149 million to the program from its $6.2 billion Green Car Innovation Fund, with a further $30 million given by the State Government of South Australia.
GM Holden matched both amounts, but the then chairman and managing director Mark Reuss would not reveal Holden's total investment.
Reuss announced his firm would be considering the utilization of liquid petroleum gas (LPG), compressed natural gas (CNG), ethanol (E85)
flexible-fuel and petrol/electric hybrid start-stop system powertrain technologies.
These technologies, if materialized, would supplement the four-cylinder petrol and diesel powertrain offerings already confirmed by Holden at the time of the announcement.
At a media event on February 28, 2011, Holden unveiled the Australian assembled Cruze sedan in facelifted "Series II" guise, otherwise known as the JH series.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard attended the February launch to drive the first example off Holden's production line before full-scale production commenced in March.
Holden has confirmed an initial local content level of between 40 and 50 percent if assessed by retail value, with an aim of increasing Cruze localization over time.
Series II styling revisions to the grille, lower air intake, and bumper have softened the front-end to bear a closer resemblance to Holden's larger VE II Commodore.
Further differentiation from the original has been achieved via the fitment of amber front indicator lights, jewelled bezel headlamps, remodelled wheel trims, and through adjustments to the lower portion of the rear bumper.
Carrying over largely unchanged is the 1.8-liter petrol inline-four, tweaked to yield slight enhancements in drivability.
When automatic transmission is specified, the 1.8-liter is now teamed with GM's six-speed 6T30 unit, lighter and more compact than the previous 6T40.
Diesel remains optional for "CD" and "CDX" specifications over the standard 1.8-liter petrol.
Alterations to the 2.0-liter turbodiesel have resulted in an additional 10 kilowatts (13 hp) and 40 newton metres (30 lb⋅ft) and a slight reduction in fuel consumption for the manual variant, now a six-speed unit.
However, the headline change is the release of the turbocharged 1.4-liter engine, dubbed iTi by Holden for intelligent turbo induction.
The inclusion of the 1.4 also brings an upgrade to electric (as opposed to hydraulic) power steering and affixes a Watt's linkage to the torsion beam rear suspension.
Linked with six-speed manual or automatic transmissions, the 1.4 is fitted as standard to the new "SRi" and "SRi-V" sports-oriented trims, but is available at extra cost on the base "CD".
The new "SRi" and "SRi-V" models have their respective badges embossed onto the grille insert, are fitted with their own front bumper design, and feature side skirts, chrome exterior door handles, a rear lip spoiler, and five-spoke 17-inch alloy wheels.
Over the "CD", "SRi" gains a leather-covered steering wheel rim and shift lever, with the "SRi-V" extending this upholstering to the seating.
A heat function for the front seats, keyless entry with push-button engine start, reversing sensors, and seven-inch LCD multimedia unit are also part of the "SRi-V" equipment list.
This multimedia system integrates satellite navigation, the CD and DVD players, and a 10 GB internal hard disk drive.
In mid-November 2011, Holden released the MY12 update to the Series II Cruze.
This update coincided with the release of the hatchback body variant and saw Bluetooth telephone connectivity standard across the range.
In April 2013, the Series II Cruze received an update and price drops.
The update included rear-parking sensors, a 7-inch touch-screen, suspension adjustments and improved automatic gearboxes across the range along with many other new extras such as a larger 1.6-liter turbocharged engine as standard on the SRi and SRi-V, replacing the 1.4-liter turbo.

Holden ended manufacturing of the Cruze at its Elizabeth plant on October 7, 2016, replaced by the Astra hatchback and new generation Cruze sedan—both imported.

EuropeEuropean specification variants of the Cruze are offered with 1.6- and 1.8-litre petrol engines, and 2.0-litre and (from 2012) 1.7-litre diesel engines.
In mid-2011, with the arrival of the five-door hatchback variant, the 1.6-litre petrol engine received an upgrade from 113 bhp to 122 bhp.
Exports from the South Korean factory began on February 24, 2009.

North AmericaMexico became the first North American country to receive the car, going on sale for the 2010 model year in late 2009.
Imported from South Korea, the Chevrolet Cruze in Mexico replaces both the Chevrolet Astra (last sold in 2008) and Optra as the compact offering there.
The US and Canadian version of the Chevrolet Cruze entered limited production at Lordstown, Ohio, in July 2010 as a 2011 model, replacing the Chevrolet Cobalt.
Full production began September 8, 2010.
For these markets, the Cruze utilizes a more advanced Watts Z-link rear suspension from the Opel Astra (J).
Offered in LS, LT, LTZ and Eco trim levels, both the 1.8-liter and the turbocharged 1.4-liter engines are offered, coupled with either a six-speed manual or automatic transmission.
With a starting price slightly higher than most compact competitors, the base model Cruze LS is equipped with the 1.8-liter gasoline engine and comes with air-conditioning and power locks, the higher-level LT and LTZ models is fitted with the 1.4-liter turbocharged gasoline engine.
For the Eco model, aerodynamic improvements have been made such as an electronically controlled air shutter that adjusts air flow to the engine depending on the temperature, wind speed and tow weight.
To save weight, Chevrolet replaces the space saving spare tire and jack on the Eco model with a tire inflator kit, reducing weight by 12 kilograms (26 lb).Standard safety equipment includes electronic stability control and ten airbags, including side rear-seat and front knee airbags not fitted on models produced in the original South Korea facility.
The Cobalt's badge engineered twin, the Pontiac G5, has not been replaced by a Cruze-based equivalent, due to the Pontiac brand being phased out during 2010.
The Cruze is built on the production lines that were used to build the Cobalt and Pontiac G5 in Lordstown, Ohio.
Cobalt production ended in June 2010 and the Cruze started production in July 2010.
GM has allocated three shifts to produce the Cruze and it arrived to dealers in September 2010, giving all dealers time to deplete their inventories of Cobalts.
Changes to the North American-built Cruze for model year 2012 include the availability of the six-speed manual transmission for the 1.4-litre turbocharged engine, plus models not equipped with power front seats
no longer have the front seat cushion tilt option.
Starting with the 2014 model year, Chevrolet offered the Cruze with the clean diesel engine option for North America.
With a starting price of $25,695, the Cruze diesel 2.0-liter Multijet engine got 44 mpg on the highway and 27 mpg in the city, while producing 148 hp (110 kW) and 258 lb⋅ft (350 N⋅m), mated to a six-speed automatic transmission.
The 2014 Chevy Cruze Clean Turbo Diesel, direct from the factory, will be rated for up to B20 (blend of 20% biodiesel / 80% regular diesel) biodiesel compatibility.
The Cruze diesel was the first GM passenger car in the US equipped with a diesel engine in 28 years, however sales were weaker than expected with 2% of US models.
For 2016, the first generation Cruze continued as a fleet and rental exclusive model in the United States, billed as Cruze Limited.
The diesel model was discontinued, but a new chrome appearance package was offered.

===
Trim levels (North America) ===
Between 2011 and 2016, the first-generation Chevrolet Cruze was available in several different trim levels:
L :
The L, introduced in 2015, was positioned below the previously-base LS.
Offering identical standard equipment as the LS described below, the base L omitted the standard front and rear carpeted floor mats that were standard equipment on the LS, and was only offered with a six-speed manual transmission.

LS:
Between 2011 and 2014, the LS was the base Cruze trim level, until the base L was added in 2015.
Standard features of the LS included fifteen-inch black-painted steel wheels with full wheel covers, air conditioning, power windows and door locks, keyless entry, premium cloth seating surfaces, dual manually-adjustable front bucket seats, an A/M-F/M stereo with single-disc CD/MP3 player and auxiliary audio input jack with a six-speaker audio system, front and rear carpeted floor mats, tilt-and-telescopic vinyl-wrapped steering wheel with integrated audio system controls, a 1.8L
EcoTec
Inline Four-Cylinder (I4) gasoline engine, a six-speed manual transmission, and a split-folding rear bench seat.
Options included Bluetooth for hands-free telephone calls (no streaming audio capabilities), a six-speed automatic transmission, and SiriusXM Satellite Radio.

1LT:
Between 2011 and 2016, the 1LT was the value-oriented Cruze model.
It added the following equipment to the base LS: sixteen-inch aluminum-alloy wheels, SiriusXM Satellite Radio, cruise control, and the OnStar in-vehicle telematics system.
Options included the 1.4L
Turbocharged
EcoTec
Inline Four-Cylinder (I4) gasoline engine, a six-speed automatic transmission, Chevrolet MyLink seven-inch touch-screen infotainment system (2013+ models only), Bluetooth for hands-free telephone calls (no streaming audio capabilities) (later standard equipment in 2013+ models), a 290-watt premium amplified Pioneer audio system, a power-adjustable front driver's bucket seat, a power sunroof, a leather-wrapped steering wheel, and the RS Package.

Eco:
The Eco trim level, offered between 2011 and 2016 and based on the 1LT, was geared towards consumers who wanted a Cruze with higher fuel economy ratings.
It added the following equipment to the 1LT: active front grille shutters, Bluetooth for hands-free telephone calls (no streaming audio capabilities- for 2011–2013 models only), Chevrolet MyLink touch-screen infotainment system (2013+ models only), a 1.4L
Turbocharged
EcoTec
Inline Four-Cylinder (I4) gasoline engine, a power-adjustable front driver's bucket seat, a leather-wrapped steering wheel, and a rear-mounted spoiler.
Additional options were identical to that of the 1LT, though the Eco also offered luxury leather-trimmed seating surfaces with dual heated front bucket seats as part of an optional package.

2LT:
The 2LT trim level, offered between 2011 and 2016, added additional luxury and convenience features to the 1LT: a 1.4L
Turbocharged
EcoTec
Inline Four-Cylinder (I4) gasoline engine, seventeen-inch aluminum-alloy wheels, Chevrolet MyLink seven-inch color touch-screen infotainment system (2013+ models only), luxury leather-trimmed seating surfaces with dual heated front bucket seats, a leather-wrapped steering wheel, power sunroof, and a security system.
Options included a six-speed automatic transmission, a 290-watt premium amplified Pioneer audio system, side blind zone alert with rear cross-traffic alert (2014+ models only), the RS Package, and GPS navigation.

LTZ: The LTZ trim level, offered between 2011 and 2016, was the top-of-the-line Cruze trim level.
It added additional luxury features to the 2LT, such as: premium aluminum-alloy wheels, remote start, a six-speed automatic transmission, and a 290-watt premium amplified Pioneer audio system.
Options included GPS navigation and the RS Package.

Diesel: The Diesel was a diesel-powered version of the 2LT trim level of the Cruze, available for 2014 and 2015 only.
It added unique seventeen-inch aluminum-alloy wheels, a six-speed automatic transmission, remote start, and a 2.0L Turbocharged Inline Four-Cylinder (I4) diesel engine to the 2LT trim level.
Options were identical to that of the 2LT trim level, though the RS Package was not available on the Diesel.

South AmericaThe car was launched and began production for South America in 2011.

==
Second generation ==


===
Chinese version (2014–2016, D2SC) ===
The new model was first announced for the Chinese market on the 2014 Beijing Auto Show and went on sale in August 2014.
Based on the D2XX platform and designed by SAIC-GM, the Cruze J400 CN only sold for 2 years before the release of the international Cruze J400.
The four-door sedan has a fastback-like sloping roofline and a low drag coefficient of 0.28 comes with a choice of a 1.4 L (1,399 cc) turbocharged direct injection engine with a power of 110 kW (150 hp) at 5,600 rpm and torque of 235 N⋅m (173 lb⋅ft) at 1,600–4,000 rpm, which can be mated with a six-speed manual transmission or seven-speed Start/Stop enabled dual-clutch gearbox, or a 1.5 L (1,490 cc) direct injection engine with a power of 84 kW (113 hp) at 5,600 rpm and torque of 146 N⋅m (108 lb⋅ft) at 6,000 rpm mated to a six-speed Start/Stop-capable automatic transmission.
Both engines come from the new GM Small Gasoline Engine family.
Weight reduction of 10% is achieved by using very high-strength steels and aluminum alloys.
Watt's link torsion beam rear suspension, first used on the Opel Astra (J), comes as standard.
The car comes equipped with a 4.2" color screen radio or MyLink 2.0 infotainment system with an 8" screen, and can be configured with OnStar Gen10 offering 4G LTE Internet connection with a built-in Wi-Fi hotspot.

===
International version (2016–present, D2LC/D2LC-K) ===
The second-generation Cruze began sales in North America in early 2016, delayed a year by engineering changes.
The Cruze has a new external design with a new split grille front and a fastback-like sloping roofline from the Chinese version of the fastback.
This second generation Cruze has a slightly longer length and wheelbase than the one designed for the Chinese market, with different styling cues.
It is also powered by the 1.4-liter turbocharged four-cylinder engine producing 153 hp (114 kW) and
177 lb⋅ft (240 N⋅m) torque.

The 2016 Cruze comes equipped with both Apple CarPlay and Android Auto Capability features.
However, only one of their phone brands at any one time can be used.
In January 2016, Chevrolet unveiled the five-door hatchback version of the North American Cruze at the North American International Auto Show.
It went on sale in late 2016 as a 2017 model.
Trim levels continue to be L, LS, LT (now combined into one trim level, as opposed to the previous 1LT and 2LT designations), and Premier (replacing the previous LTZ trim level as the top-of-the-line Cruze trim level).
Discontinued are the Eco and Diesel trim levels (at least for the time being).

All trim levels include a seven-inch MyLink touch-screen infotainment system with AM/FM radio, USB integration, a 3.5-millimeter auxiliary audio input jack, optional SiriusXM satellite radio, voice control, and CarPlay and Android Auto capabilities, keyless entry, power windows, power door locks, OnStar with 4G/LTE/Wi-Fi Hotspot connectivity for multiple devices and RemoteLink via an app on the consumer's smartphone, air conditioning, and a 1.4-liter EcoTec inline-four engine.

Higher trim levels (LT and Premier) also offer features such as the "RS Sport Package", alloy wheels, remote start, keyless access with push-button ignition, a premium sound system by Bose with external amplifier and subwoofer, an eight-inch MyLink infotainment system with GPS navigation, a power tilt-and-sliding sunroof, and power seats.
However, only the top-of-the-line Premier trim level offers heated leather seating surfaces, premium alloy wheels, and other luxury features.

The base L only offers a six-speed manual transmission, while the Premier, on the other end of the spectrum, offers only a six-speed automatic transmission.
The LS and LT trim levels offer either a six-speed manual transmission, or a six-speed automatic transmission.

A new diesel-powered Cruze became available in 2017.
It had the 1.6L turbodiesel also found in the 2018 Equinox, paired to either a nine-speed automatic or six-speed manual transmission.
===
Australia ===
Before launching the Chevrolet Cruze as the Holden Astra in Australia, Holden engineers performed 100,000 kilometres of suspension and steering testing at the Lang Lang
Proving Ground south east of Melbourne, Australia, tuning for Australian roads.
A firmer more compliant ride and more responsive steering tune is the result.
Other major changes over the international model included revised front and rear bumpers, which aim to give it a similar look to the Holden Astra Hatch.
Unlike the Hatch, the sedan is offered in LS, LS+, LT and LTZ trim levels.
All models are powered by a 1.4 L (1,399 cc) turbocharged direct injection engine with a power of 110 kW (150 hp) at 5,600 rpm and torque of 235 N⋅m (173 lb⋅ft) at 1,600–4,000 rpm mated to a 6 speed manual or 6-speed automatic.
===
2019 facelift ===
For 2019, the Cruze received a mid-cycle facelift, which made its debut in April 2018, along with restyled versions of the 2019 Camaro, Spark and Malibu.
Changes for the Cruze for 2019 include the addition of a lower-priced LS model for the Cruze Hatchback, the deletion of the six-speed manual transmission option (all Cruze models, including the previous manual-only L, will come equipped with an automatic transmission), all-new third-generation MyLink Systems, and a revised RS Package for LT and Premier models.
The 2019 Cruze went on sale in November 2018.

=== Discontinuation ===
Production of the D2LC-K Cruze ended in South Korea in July 2018, and in the US and Mexico in March 2019.
The Lordstown assembly plant was closed and sold to Lordstown Motors, while Ramos Arizpe Assembly will build the Chevrolet Blazer instead.
Production of the Cruze will continue in Argentina and China.

Assembly of the Chevrolet Cruze Sedan at Lordstown Assembly in Lordstown, Ohio concluded on Wednesday, March 6, 2019, when the last car rolled off of the assembly line.
Assembly plant workers at the plant wrote inspiring messages on the unfinished body underneath the paint, as well as signed one of the foam front seat cushions underneath the upholstery.
GM turned down an offer from Cleveland automotive dealer owner Bernie Moreno to keep the plant open and continue building the Cruze under a five-year deal, which he hoped would be used to launch a ridesharing service featuring a fleet of Cruzes with two shifts under Moreno's direction.
Production in China ended in February 2020, following stronger sales of the Chevrolet Monza in that market.
This leaves Argentina as the sole remaining producer of the Cruze, for the Latin American market.

Unlike its Chevrolet predecessors for the U.S. market—Cavalier, Prizm, and Cobalt—or its Daewoo predecessors for the South Korean market—Espero, Nexia, Nubira, and Lacetti—the Cruze has been discontinued without any announcement or plans for a replacement.
The second-generation Cruze "was not [considered] a particularly standout product in an extremely competitive segment" against similar offerings from well-established and highly-attractive rivals from Japan, and South Korea such as the Honda Civic, the Toyota Corolla, and the Hyundai Elantra.

==
Motorsport ==
The Chevrolet Cruze first entered the World Touring Car Championship in 2009 with a 2.0-litre naturally aspirated engine, taking six wins in its debut season.
The car has proved successful since its entry, with Yvan Muller winning the championship in 2010 and again in 2011 using the new 1.6-litre turbocharged engine.
Chevrolet placed first, second and third in 2011, with Muller finishing ahead of teammates Rob Huff and Alain Menu.
Chevrolet finished 1–2–3 again in 2012, this time, Huff becoming champion ahead of Menu and Muller.

The Cruze also entered the British Touring Car Championship for 2010 and 2011.
Jason Plato won the championship for Chevrolet in 2010 and finished 3rd in 2011.
The BTCC Cruze used the 2.0-liter naturally aspirated engine found in the original variant of the WTCC Cruze.
The Cruze won the Scandinavian Touring Car Championship in 2011, being run by NIKA Racing under the banner of 'Chevrolet Motorsport Sweden' with Rickard Rydell driving.
Rydell and teammate Michel Nykjær finished second and third in 2012.

Chevrolet pulled their sponsorship at the end of 2011 from the BTCC to support the Chevrolet team in the World Touring Car Championship for 2012.
Chevrolet then announced they would not enter a works team for the 2013 WTCC season.
For 2013 RML, the original builders of the Cruzes, continued to compete without the support of Chevrolet.
Cars were also entered by Bamboo Engineering, NIKA Racing and Tuenti Racing Team.
Despite no funding from the manufacturer, the Cruze remained the car to beat, even against works teams from Honda and Lada.
Muller won his fourth WTCC title, his third in a Cruze and James Nash won the Yokohama Drivers' Trophy for independent entries, ahead of fellow Cruze drivers Alex MacDowall and Michel Nykjær.

RML have confirmed they will build Cruzes to the new set of WTCC regulations for 2014, which sees the cars increase in power and feature greater aerodynamics.
RML aim to build up to six cars.
Confirmed recipients include Tom Chilton who has yet to announce a team to run his car, Bamboo Engineering who will run two cars and Campos Racing who will enter a car for Hugo Valente.

The Cruze returned to the BTCC in 2013 in the hands of Joe Girling and Tech-Speed Motorsport, who loaned the car from Finesse Motorsport.
The increase in performance of the Next Generation Touring Car entries meant the older Super 2000 specification cars like the Cruze were now too uncompetitive to compete for wins but were provided with their own category.
Now running a 2.0-litre turbocharged NGTC-specification engine, Girling took one class win at Donington Park but missed the second half of the season.
The car returned to Finesse Motorsport who entered the Knockhill round of the championship with Aiden Moffat driving.
At sixteen years old, Moffat became the BTCC's youngest driver at 16 years, 10 months and 28 days.
This was to be the S2000 Cruze's final appearance in the BTCC, as S2000 cars are to be abolished from 2014.
Andy Neate entered the 2013 season with a new NGTC-specification Cruze, built by his own team, IP Tech Race Engineering and used an engine built by RML.
The car made its debut at Snetterton and competed at several rounds towards the end of the season.
The car has since been sold to Aiden Moffat, who will run the car with his own team for 2014.
BTC Racing will enter a hatchback variant of the Cruze for 2014, driven by Chris Stockton.
The car was originally intended to be used by Jason Plato in 2012 but RML and Chevrolet withdrew from the BTCC and mothballed the shell.
BTC Racing acquired it and were initially included on the entry list for 2013 but the car was not finished in time and never appeared all season.

The first-generation Chevrolet Cruze debuted in the Argentine TC 2000 in 2011, and the second-generation in 2016.
Agustín Canapino won the 2016 championship.

==
Sales ==
By countryThe Cruze diesel was the first GM passenger car equipped with a diesel engine in the American market in 28 years; however, sales were weaker than expected being 2% of Cruze models sold July through June of 2014.

Top marketsIn August 2014
, Cruze sales reached the milestone of 3 million units sold worldwide, 16 months after passing the 2 million mark.
The following table shows the top selling markets as of August 2014.

By April 2016, cumulative sales of cars of the Cruze name exceeded 4 million worldwide.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official websites for Australia, Canada, the UK, and the US
Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun and the second-smallest planet in the Solar System, being larger than only Mercury.
In English, Mars carries the name of the Roman god of war and is often referred to as the "Red Planet".
The latter refers to the effect of the iron oxide prevalent on Mars's surface, which gives it a reddish appearance distinctive among the astronomical bodies visible to the naked eye.
Mars is a terrestrial planet with a thin atmosphere, with surface features reminiscent of the impact craters of the Moon and the valleys, deserts and polar ice caps of Earth.

The days and seasons are comparable to those of Earth, because the rotational period as well as the tilt of the rotational axis relative to the ecliptic plane are similar.
Mars is the site of Olympus Mons, the largest volcano and highest known mountain on any planet in the Solar System, and of Valles Marineris, one of the largest canyons in the Solar System.
The smooth Borealis basin in the Northern Hemisphere covers 40% of the planet and may be a giant impact feature.
Mars has two moons, Phobos and Deimos, which are small and irregularly shaped.
These may be captured asteroids, similar to 5261 Eureka, a Mars trojan.
Mars has been explored by several uncrewed spacecraft.
Mariner 4 was the first spacecraft to visit Mars; launched by NASA on 28 November 1964, it made its closest approach to the planet on 15 July 1965.
Mariner 4 detected the weak Martian radiation belt, measured at about 0.1% that of Earth, and captured the first images of another planet from deep space.
The Soviet Mars 3 mission included a lander, which achieved a soft landing in December 1971; however, contact was lost seconds after touchdown.
On 20 July 1976, Viking 1 performed the first successful landing on the Martian surface.
On 4 July 1997, the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft landed on Mars and on 5 July released its rover, Sojourner, the first robotic rover to operate on Mars.
The Mars Express orbiter, the first European Space Agency (ESA) spacecraft to visit Mars, arrived in orbit on 25 December 2003.
In January 2004, NASA's Mars Exploration Rovers, named Spirit and Opportunity, both landed on Mars; Spirit operated until 22 March 2010
and Opportunity lasted until 10 June 2018.
NASA landed its Curiosity rover on August 6, 2012, as a part of its Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission to investigate Martian climate and geology.
On 24 September 2014, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) became the fourth space agency to visit Mars when its maiden interplanetary mission, the Mars Orbiter Mission spacecraft, arrived in orbit.
The United Arab Emirates became the fifth to successfully undertake a mission to Mars, having inserted an orbiter in to the Martian atmosphere on 9 February 2021.
NASA's Perseverance rover and Ingenuity helicopter successfully landed on Mars on 18 February 2021.
Ingenuity successfully completed the first powered controlled flight by an aircraft on any planet besides Earth on 19 April 2021, taking off vertically, hovering and landing on Mars.
There are investigations assessing the past habitability of Mars, as well as the possibility of extant life.
Astrobiology missions are planned, such as  the European Space Agency's Rosalind Franklin rover.
Liquid water on the surface of Mars cannot exist due to low atmospheric pressure, which is less than 1% of the atmospheric pressure on Earth, except at the lowest elevations for short periods.
The two polar ice caps appear to be made largely of water.
The volume of water ice in the south polar ice cap, if melted, would be sufficient to cover the planetary surface to a depth of 11 metres (36 ft).
In November 2016, NASA reported finding a large amount of underground ice in the Utopia Planitia region.
The volume of water detected has been estimated to be equivalent to the volume of water in Lake Superior.
Mars can easily be seen from Earth with the naked eye, as can its reddish coloring.
Its apparent magnitude reaches −2.94, which is surpassed only by Venus, the Moon and the Sun.
Optical ground-based telescopes are typically limited to resolving features about 300 kilometres (190 mi) across when Earth and Mars are closest because of Earth's atmosphere.

==
Nomenclature ==
In English, the planet is named for the Roman god of war, an association made because of its red color, which suggests blood.
The adjectival form of Latin Mars is Martius, which provides the English words Martian, used as an adjective or for a putative inhabitant of Mars, and Martial, used as an adjective corresponding to Terrestrial for Earth.
In Greek, the planet is known as Ἄρης Arēs, with the inflectional stem
Ἄρε- Are-.
From this come technical terms such as areology, as well as the adjective Arean and the star name Antares.

'
Mars' is also the basis of the name of the month of March (from Latin Martius mēnsis 'month of Mars'), as well as of Tuesday (Latin dies Martis 'day of Mars'), where the old Anglo-Saxon god Tíw was identified with Roman god Mars by Interpretatio germanica.
Due to the global influence of European languages in astronomy, a word like Mars or Marte for the planet is common around the world, though it may be used alongside older, native words.
A number of other languages have provided words with international usage.
For example:

Arabic مريخ mirrīkh – which connotes fire – is used as the (or a) name for the planet in Persian, Urdu, Malay and Swahili, among others
Chinese 火星
[Mandarin Huǒxīng] '
fire star' (in Chinese the five classical planets are identified with the five elements) is used in Korean, Japanese and Vietnamese.

India uses the Sanskrit term Mangal derived from the Hindu goddess Mangala.

A long-standing nickname for Mars is the "Red Planet".
That is also the planet's name in Hebrew, מאדים ma'adim, which is derived from אדום adom, meaning 'red'.

The archaic Latin form Māvors () is seen, but only very rarely, in English,
though the adjectives Mavortial and Mavortian mean 'martial' in the military rather than planetary sense.

==
Physical characteristics ==
Mars is approximately half the diameter of Earth, with a surface area only slightly less than the total area of Earth's dry land.
Mars is less dense than Earth, having about 15% of Earth's volume and 11% of Earth's mass, resulting in about 38% of Earth's surface gravity.
The red-orange appearance of the Martian surface is caused by iron(III) oxide, or rust.
It can look like butterscotch; other common surface colors include golden, brown, tan, and greenish, depending on the minerals present.

===
Internal structure ===
Like Earth, Mars has differentiated into a dense metallic core overlaid by less dense materials.
Scientists initially determined that the core is at least partially liquid.
Current models of its interior imply a core with a radius of about 1,794 ± 65 kilometres (1,115 ± 40 mi), consisting primarily of iron and nickel with about 16–17% sulfur.
This iron(II) sulfide core is thought to be twice as rich in lighter elements as Earth's.
The core is surrounded by a silicate mantle that formed many of the tectonic and volcanic features on the planet, but it appears to be dormant.
Besides silicon and oxygen, the most abundant elements in the Martian crust are iron, magnesium, aluminium, calcium, and potassium.
The average thickness of the planet's crust is about 50 kilometres (31 mi), with a maximum thickness of 125 kilometres (78 mi).
Earth's crust averages 40 kilometres (25 mi).

Mars is seismically active, with InSight recording over 450 marsquakes and related events in 2019.
In March 2021, NASA reported, based on measurements of over 500 Marsquakes by the InSight lander on the planet Mars, that the core of Mars is between 1,810 and 1,860 km (1,120 and 1,160 mi), about half the size of the core of Earth, and significantly smaller — suggesting a core of lighter elements — than thought earlier.

===
Surface geology ===
Mars is a terrestrial planet whose surface consists of minerals containing silicon and oxygen, metals, and other elements that typically make up rock.
The Martian surface is primarily composed of tholeiitic basalt, although parts are more silica-rich than typical basalt and may be similar to andesitic rocks on Earth, or silica glass.
Regions of low albedo suggest concentrations of plagioclase feldspar, with northern low albedo regions displaying higher than normal concentrations of sheet silicates and high-silicon glass.
Parts of the southern highlands include detectable amounts of high-calcium pyroxenes.
Localized concentrations of hematite and olivine have been found.
Much of the surface is deeply covered by finely grained iron(III) oxide dust.

Although Mars has no evidence of a structured global magnetic field, observations show that parts of the planet's crust have been magnetized, suggesting that alternating polarity reversals of its dipole field have occurred in the past.
This paleomagnetism of magnetically susceptible minerals is similar to the alternating bands found on Earth's ocean floors.
One theory, published in 1999 and re-examined in October 2005 (with the help of the Mars Global Surveyor), is that these bands suggest plate tectonic activity on Mars four billion years ago, before the planetary dynamo ceased to function and the planet's magnetic field faded.
It is thought that, during the Solar System's formation, Mars was created as the result of a stochastic process of run-away accretion of material from the protoplanetary disk that orbited the Sun.
Mars has many distinctive chemical features caused by its position in the Solar System.
Elements with comparatively low boiling points, such as chlorine, phosphorus, and sulphur, are much more common on Mars than Earth; these elements were probably pushed outward by the young Sun's energetic solar wind.
After the formation of the planets, all were subjected to the so-called "Late Heavy Bombardment".
About 60% of the surface of Mars shows a record of impacts from that era, whereas much of the remaining surface is probably underlain by immense impact basins caused by those events.
There is evidence of an enormous impact basin in the Northern Hemisphere of Mars, spanning 10,600 by 8,500 kilometres (6,600 by 5,300 mi), or roughly four times the size of the Moon's South Pole – Aitken basin, the largest impact basin yet discovered.
This theory suggests that Mars was struck by a Pluto-sized body about four billion years ago.
The event, thought to be the cause of the Martian hemispheric dichotomy, created the smooth Borealis basin that covers 40% of the planet.

The geological history of Mars can be split into many periods, but the following are the three primary periods:
Noachian period (named after Noachis Terra):
Formation of the oldest extant surfaces of Mars, 4.5 to 3.5 billion years ago.
Noachian age surfaces are scarred by many large impact craters.
The Tharsis bulge, a volcanic upland, is thought to have formed during this period, with extensive flooding by liquid water late in the period.

Hesperian period (named after Hesperia Planum):
3.5 to between 3.3 and 2.9 billion years ago.
The Hesperian period is marked by the formation of extensive lava plains.

Amazonian period (named after Amazonis Planitia): between 3.3 and 2.9 billion years ago to the present.
Amazonian regions have few meteorite impact craters but are otherwise quite varied.
Olympus Mons formed during this period, with lava flows elsewhere on Mars.
Geological activity is still taking place on Mars.
The Athabasca Valles is home to sheet-like lava flows created about 200 Mya.
Water flows in the grabens called the Cerberus Fossae occurred less than 20 Mya, indicating equally recent volcanic intrusions.
On 19 February 2008, images from the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter showed evidence of an avalanche from a 700-metre-high (2,300 ft) cliff.

===
Soil ===
The Phoenix lander returned data showing Martian soil to be slightly alkaline and containing elements such as magnesium, sodium, potassium and chlorine.
These nutrients are found in soils on Earth, and they are necessary for growth of plants.
Experiments performed by the lander showed that the Martian soil has a basic pH of 7.7, and contains 0.6% of the salt perchlorate.
This is a very high concentration and makes the Martian soil toxic (see also Martian soil toxicity).Streaks are common across Mars and new ones appear frequently on steep slopes of craters, troughs, and valleys.
The streaks are dark at first and get lighter with age.
The streaks can start in a tiny area, then spread out for hundreds of metres.
They have been seen to follow the edges of boulders and other obstacles in their path.
The commonly accepted theories include that they are dark underlying layers of soil revealed after avalanches of bright dust or dust devils.
Several other explanations have been put forward, including those that involve water or even the growth of organisms.

===
Hydrology ===
Liquid water cannot exist on the surface of Mars due to low atmospheric pressure, which is less than 1% that of Earth's, except at the lowest elevations for short periods.
The two polar ice caps appear to be made largely of water.
The volume of water ice in the south polar ice cap, if melted, would be sufficient to cover the entire planetary surface to a depth of 11 metres (36 ft).
A permafrost mantle stretches from the pole to latitudes of about 60°.
Large quantities of ice are thought to be trapped within the thick cryosphere of Mars.
Radar data from Mars Express and the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) show large quantities of ice at both poles (July 2005) and at middle latitudes (November 2008).
The Phoenix lander directly sampled water ice in shallow Martian soil on 31 July 2008.

Landforms visible on Mars strongly suggest that liquid water has existed on the planet's surface.
Huge linear swathes of scoured ground, known as outflow channels, cut across the surface in about 25 places.
These are thought to be a record of erosion caused by the catastrophic release of water from subsurface aquifers, though some of these structures have been hypothesized to result from the action of glaciers or lava.
One of the larger examples, Ma'adim Vallis is 700 kilometres (430 mi)
long, much greater than the Grand Canyon, with a width of 20 kilometres (12 mi) and a depth of 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) in places.
It is thought to have been carved by flowing water early in Mars's history.
The youngest of these channels are thought to have formed as recently as only a few million years ago.
Elsewhere, particularly on the oldest areas of the Martian surface, finer-scale, dendritic networks of valleys are spread across significant proportions of the landscape.
Features of these valleys and their distribution strongly imply that they were carved by runoff resulting from precipitation in early Mars history.
Subsurface water flow and groundwater sapping may play important subsidiary roles in some networks, but precipitation was probably the root cause of the incision in almost all cases.
Along crater and canyon walls, there are thousands of features that appear similar to terrestrial gullies.
The gullies tend to be in the highlands of the Southern Hemisphere and to face the Equator; all are poleward of 30° latitude.
A number of authors have suggested that their formation process involves liquid water, probably from melting ice, although others have argued for formation mechanisms involving carbon dioxide frost or the movement of dry dust.
No partially degraded gullies have formed by weathering and no superimposed impact craters have been observed, indicating that these are young features, possibly still active.
Other geological features, such as deltas and alluvial fans preserved in craters, are further evidence for warmer, wetter conditions at an interval or intervals in earlier Mars history.
Such conditions necessarily require the widespread presence of crater lakes across a large proportion of the surface, for which there is independent mineralogical, sedimentological and geomorphological evidence.

Further evidence that liquid water once existed on the surface of Mars comes from the detection of specific minerals such as hematite and goethite, both of which sometimes form in the presence of water.
In 2004, Opportunity detected the mineral jarosite.
This forms only in the presence of acidic water, which demonstrates that water once existed on Mars.
More recent evidence for liquid water comes from the finding of the mineral gypsum on the surface by NASA's Mars rover Opportunity in December 2011.
It is estimated that the amount of water in the upper mantle of Mars, represented by hydroxyl ions contained within the minerals of Mars's geology, is equal to or greater than that of Earth at 50–300 parts per million of water, which is enough to cover the entire planet to a depth of 200–1,000 metres (660–3,280 ft).In 2005, radar data revealed the presence of large quantities of water ice at the poles and at mid-latitudes.
The Mars rover Spirit sampled chemical compounds containing water molecules in March 2007.

On 18 March 2013, NASA reported evidence from instruments on the Curiosity rover of mineral hydration, likely hydrated calcium sulfate, in several rock samples including the broken fragments of "Tintina" rock and "Sutton Inlier" rock as well as in veins and nodules in other rocks like "Knorr" rock and "Wernicke" rock.
Analysis using the rover's DAN instrument provided evidence of subsurface water, amounting to as much as 4% water content, down to a depth of 60 centimetres (24 in), during the rover's traverse from the Bradbury Landing site to the Yellowknife Bay area in the Glenelg terrain.
In September 2015, NASA announced that they had found conclusive evidence of hydrated brine flows on recurring slope lineae, based on spectrometer readings of the darkened areas of slopes.
These observations provided confirmation of earlier hypotheses based on timing of formation and their rate of growth, that these dark streaks resulted from water flowing in the very shallow subsurface.
The streaks contain hydrated salts, perchlorates, which have water molecules in their crystal structure.
The streaks flow downhill in Martian summer, when the temperature is above −23° Celsius, and freeze at lower temperatures.

Researchers suspect that much of the low northern plains of the planet were covered with an ocean hundreds of meters deep, though this remains controversial.
In March 2015, scientists stated that such an ocean might have been the size of Earth's Arctic Ocean.
This finding was derived from the ratio of water to deuterium in the modern Martian atmosphere compared to that ratio on Earth.
The amount of Martian deuterium is eight times the amount that exists on Earth, suggesting that ancient Mars had significantly higher levels of water.
Results from the Curiosity rover had previously found a high ratio of deuterium in Gale Crater, though not significantly high enough to suggest the former presence of an ocean.
Other scientists caution that these results have not been confirmed, and point out that Martian climate models have not yet shown that the planet was warm enough in the past to support bodies of liquid water.
Near the northern polar cap is the 81.4 kilometres (50.6 mi) wide Korolev Crater, where the Mars Express orbiter found it to be filled with approximately 2,200 cubic kilometres (530 cu mi) of water ice.
The crater floor lies about 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) below the rim, and is covered by a 1.8 kilometres (1.1 mi) deep central mound of permanent water ice, up to 60 kilometres (37 mi) in diameter.
In February 2020, it was found that dark streaks called recurring slope lineae (RSL), which appear seasonably, are caused by briny water flowing for a few days annually.

====
Polar caps ====
Mars has two permanent polar ice caps.
During a pole's winter, it lies in continuous darkness, chilling the surface and causing the deposition of 25–30% of the atmosphere into slabs of CO2 ice (dry ice).
When the poles are again exposed to sunlight, the frozen CO2 sublimes.
These seasonal actions transport large amounts of dust and water vapor, giving rise to Earth-like frost and large cirrus clouds.
Clouds of water-ice were photographed by the Opportunity rover in 2004.The caps at both poles consist primarily (70%) of water ice.
Frozen carbon dioxide accumulates as a comparatively thin layer about one metre thick on the north cap in the northern winter only, whereas the south cap has a permanent dry ice cover about eight metres thick.
This permanent dry ice cover at the south pole is peppered by flat floored, shallow, roughly circular pits, which repeat imaging shows are expanding by meters per year; this suggests that the permanent CO2 cover over the south pole water ice is degrading over time.
The northern polar cap has a diameter of about 1,000 kilometres (620 mi) during the northern Mars summer, and contains about 1.6 million cubic kilometres (5.7×1016 cu ft) of ice, which, if spread evenly on the cap, would be 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) thick.
(
This compares to a volume of 2.85 million cubic kilometres (1.01×1017 cu ft) for the Greenland ice sheet.)
The southern polar cap has a diameter of 350 kilometres (220 mi) and a thickness of 3 kilometres (1.9 mi).
The total volume of ice in the south polar cap plus the adjacent layered deposits has been estimated at 1.6 million cubic km.
Both polar caps show spiral troughs, which recent analysis of SHARAD ice penetrating radar has shown are a result of katabatic winds that spiral due to the Coriolis Effect.
The seasonal frosting of areas near the southern ice cap results in the formation of transparent 1-metre-thick slabs of dry ice above the ground.
With the arrival of spring, sunlight warms the subsurface and pressure from subliming CO2 builds up under a slab, elevating and ultimately rupturing it.
This leads to geyser-like eruptions of CO2 gas mixed with dark basaltic sand or dust.
This process is rapid, observed happening in the space of a few days, weeks or months, a rate of change rather unusual in geology – especially for Mars.
The gas rushing underneath a slab to the site of a geyser carves a spiderweb-like pattern of radial channels under the ice, the process being the inverted equivalent of an erosion network formed by water draining through a single plughole.

===
Geography and naming of surface features ===
Although better remembered for mapping the Moon, Johann Heinrich Mädler and Wilhelm Beer were the first areographers.
They began by establishing that most of Mars's surface features were permanent and by more precisely determining the planet's rotation period.
In 1840, Mädler combined ten years of observations and drew the first map of Mars.
Rather than giving names to the various markings, Beer and Mädler simply designated them with letters; Meridian Bay (Sinus Meridiani) was thus feature "a".
Today, features on Mars are named from a variety of sources.
Albedo features are named for classical mythology.
Craters larger than 60 km are named for deceased scientists and writers and others who have contributed to the study of Mars.
Craters smaller than 60 km are named for towns and villages of the world with populations of less than 100,000.
Large valleys are named for the word "Mars" or "star" in various languages; small valleys are named for rivers.
Large albedo features retain many of the older names but are often updated to reflect new knowledge of the nature of the features.
For example, Nix Olympica (the snows of Olympus) has become Olympus Mons (Mount Olympus).
The surface of Mars as seen from Earth is divided into two kinds of areas, with differing albedo.
The paler plains covered with dust and sand rich in reddish iron oxides were once thought of as Martian "continents" and given names like Arabia Terra (land of Arabia) or Amazonis Planitia (Amazonian plain).
The dark features were thought to be seas, hence their names Mare Erythraeum, Mare Sirenum and Aurorae Sinus.
The largest dark feature seen from Earth is Syrtis Major Planum.
The permanent northern polar ice cap is named Planum Boreum, whereas the southern cap is called Planum Australe.

Mars's equator is defined by its rotation, but the location of its Prime Meridian was specified, as was Earth's (at Greenwich), by choice of an arbitrary point; Mädler and Beer selected a line for their first maps of Mars in 1830.
After the spacecraft Mariner 9 provided extensive imagery of Mars in 1972, a small crater (later called Airy-0), located in the Sinus Meridiani ("Middle Bay" or "Meridian Bay"), was chosen by Merton Davies of the Rand Corporation for the definition of 0.0° longitude to coincide with the original selection.
Because Mars has no oceans and hence no "sea level", a zero-elevation surface had to be selected as a reference level; this is called the areoid of Mars, analogous to the terrestrial geoid.
Zero altitude was defined by the height at which there is 610.5 Pa (6.105 mbar) of atmospheric pressure.
This pressure corresponds to the triple point of water, and it is about 0.6% of the sea level surface pressure on Earth (0.006 atm).

====
Map of quadrangles ====
For mapping purposes, the United States Geological Survey divides the surface of Mars into thirty cartographic quadrangles, each named for a classical albedo feature it contains.
The quadrangles can be seen and explored via the interactive image map below.
====
Impact topography ====
The dichotomy of Martian topography is striking: northern plains flattened by lava flows contrast with the southern highlands, pitted and cratered by ancient impacts.
Research in 2008 has presented evidence regarding a theory proposed in 1980 postulating that, four billion years ago, the Northern Hemisphere of Mars was struck by an object one-tenth to two-thirds the size of Earth's Moon.
If validated, this would make the Northern Hemisphere of Mars the site of an impact crater 10,600 by 8,500 kilometres (6,600 by 5,300 mi) in size, or roughly the area of Europe, Asia, and Australia combined, surpassing the South Pole–Aitken basin as the largest impact crater in the Solar System.

Mars is scarred by a number of impact craters: a total of 43,000 craters with a diameter of 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) or greater have been found.
The largest confirmed of these is the Hellas impact basin, a light albedo feature clearly visible from Earth.
Due to the smaller mass and size of Mars, the probability of an object colliding with the planet is about half that of Earth.
Mars is located closer to the asteroid belt, so it has an increased chance of being struck by materials from that source.
Mars is more likely to be struck by short-period comets, i.e., those that lie within the orbit of Jupiter.
In spite of this, there are far fewer craters on Mars compared with the Moon, because the atmosphere of Mars provides protection against small meteors and surface modifying processes have erased some craters.

Martian craters can have a morphology that suggests the ground became wet after the meteor impacted.

====
Volcanoes ====
The shield volcano Olympus Mons (Mount Olympus) is an extinct volcano in the vast upland region Tharsis, which contains several other large volcanoes.
Olympus Mons is roughly three times the height of Mount Everest, which in comparison stands at just over 8.8 kilometres (5.5 mi).
It is either the tallest or second-tallest mountain in the Solar System, depending on how it is measured, with various sources giving figures ranging from about 21 to 27 kilometres (13 to 17 mi) high.

====
Tectonic sites ====
The large canyon, Valles Marineris (Latin for "Mariner Valleys", also known as Agathadaemon in the old canal maps), has a length of 4,000 kilometres (2,500 mi) and a depth of up to 7 kilometres (4.3 mi).
The length of Valles Marineris is equivalent to the length of Europe and extends across one-fifth the circumference of Mars.
By comparison, the Grand Canyon on Earth is only 446 kilometres (277 mi)
long and nearly 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) deep.
Valles Marineris was formed due to the swelling of the Tharsis area, which caused the crust in the area of Valles Marineris to collapse.
In 2012, it was proposed that Valles Marineris is not just a graben, but a plate boundary where 150 kilometres (93 mi) of transverse motion has occurred, making Mars a planet with possibly a two-tectonic plate arrangement.

====
Holes ====
Images from the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS) aboard NASA's Mars Odyssey orbiter have revealed seven possible cave entrances on the flanks of the volcano Arsia Mons.
The caves, named after loved ones of their discoverers, are collectively known as the "seven sisters".
Cave entrances measure from 100 to 252 metres (
328 to 827 ft) wide
and they are estimated to be at least 73 to 96 metres (240 to 315 ft) deep.
Because light does not reach the floor of most of the caves, it is possible that they extend much deeper than these lower estimates and widen below the surface.
"
Dena" is the only exception; its floor is visible and was measured to be 130 metres (430 ft) deep.
The interiors of these caverns may be protected from micrometeoroids, UV radiation, solar flares and high energy particles that bombard the planet's surface.

===
Atmosphere ===
Mars lost its magnetosphere 4 billion years ago, possibly because of numerous asteroid strikes, so the solar wind interacts directly with the Martian ionosphere, lowering the atmospheric density by stripping away atoms from the outer layer.
Both Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Express have detected ionised atmospheric particles trailing off into space behind Mars, and this atmospheric loss is being studied by the MAVEN orbiter.
Compared to Earth, the atmosphere of Mars is quite rarefied.
Atmospheric pressure on the surface today ranges from a low of 30 Pa (0.0044 psi) on Olympus Mons to over 1,155 Pa (0.1675 psi) in Hellas Planitia, with a mean pressure at the surface level of 600 Pa (0.087 psi).
The highest atmospheric density on Mars is equal to that found 35 kilometres (22 mi) above Earth's surface.
The resulting mean surface pressure is only 0.6% of that of Earth  101.3 kPa (14.69 psi).
The scale height of the atmosphere is about 10.8 kilometres (6.7 mi), which is higher than Earth's, 6 kilometres (3.7 mi), because the surface gravity of Mars is only about 38% of Earth's, an effect offset by both the lower temperature and 50% higher average molecular weight of the atmosphere of Mars.

The atmosphere of Mars consists of about 96% carbon dioxide, 1.93% argon and 1.89% nitrogen along with traces of oxygen and water.
The atmosphere is quite dusty, containing particulates about 1.5 µm in diameter which give the Martian sky a tawny color when seen from the surface.
It may take on a pink hue due to iron oxide particles suspended in it.

====
Methane ====
Methane has been detected in the Martian atmosphere; it occurs in extended plumes, and the profiles imply that the methane is released from discrete regions.
The concentration of methane fluctuates from about 0.24 ppb during the northern winter to about 0.65 ppb during the summer.
Estimates of its lifetime range from 0.6 to 4 years, so its presence indicates that an active source of the gas must be present.
Methane could be produced by non-biological process such as serpentinization involving water, carbon dioxide, and the mineral olivine, which is known to be common on Mars.
Methanogenic microbial life forms in the subsurface are among possible sources.
But even if rover missions determine that microscopic Martian life is the source of the methane, the life forms likely reside far below the surface, outside of the rover's reach.

====
Aurora ====
In 1994, the European Space Agency's Mars Express found an ultraviolet glow coming from "magnetic umbrellas" in the Southern Hemisphere.
Mars does not have a global magnetic field which guides charged particles entering the atmosphere.
Mars has multiple umbrella-shaped magnetic fields mainly in the Southern Hemisphere, which are remnants of a global field that decayed billions of years ago.

In late December 2014, NASA's MAVEN spacecraft detected evidence of widespread auroras in Mars's Northern Hemisphere and descended to approximately 20–30°
North latitude of Mars's equator.
The particles causing the aurora penetrated into the Martian atmosphere, creating auroras below 100 km above the surface, Earth's auroras range from 100 km to 500 km above the surface.
Magnetic fields in the solar wind drape over Mars, into the atmosphere, and the charged particles follow the solar wind magnetic field lines into the atmosphere, causing auroras to occur outside the magnetic umbrellas.
On 18 March 2015, NASA reported the detection of an aurora that is not fully understood and an unexplained dust cloud in the atmosphere of Mars.
In September 2017, NASA reported radiation levels on the surface of the planet Mars were temporarily doubled, and were associated with an aurora 25 times brighter than any observed earlier, due to a massive, and unexpected, solar storm in the middle of the month.
===
Climate ===
Of all the planets in the Solar System, the seasons of Mars are the most Earth-like, due to the similar tilts of the two planets' rotational axes.
The lengths of the Martian seasons are about twice those of Earth's because Mars's greater distance from the Sun leads to the Martian year being about two Earth years long.
Martian surface temperatures vary from lows of about −143 °C (−225 °F) at the winter polar caps to highs of up to 35 °C (95 °F) in equatorial summer.
The wide range in temperatures is due to the thin atmosphere which cannot store much solar heat, the low atmospheric pressure, and the low thermal inertia of Martian soil.
The planet is 1.52 times as far from the Sun as Earth, resulting in just 43% of the amount of sunlight.
If Mars had an Earth-like orbit, its seasons would be similar to Earth's because its axial tilt is similar to Earth's.
The comparatively large eccentricity of the Martian orbit has a significant effect.
Mars is near perihelion when it is summer in the Southern Hemisphere and winter in the north, and near aphelion when it is winter in the Southern Hemisphere and summer in the north.
As a result, the seasons in the Southern Hemisphere are more extreme and the seasons in the northern are milder than would otherwise be the case.
The summer temperatures in the south can be warmer than the equivalent summer temperatures in the north by up to 30 °C (54 °F).Mars has the largest dust storms in the Solar System, reaching speeds of over 160 km/h (100 mph).
These can vary from a storm over a small area, to gigantic storms that cover the entire planet.
They tend to occur when Mars is closest to the Sun, and have been shown to increase the global temperature.

== Orbit and rotation ==
Mars's average distance from the Sun is roughly 230 million km (143 million mi), and its orbital period is 687 (Earth) days.
The solar day (or sol) on Mars is only slightly longer than an Earth day: 24 hours, 39 minutes, and 35.244 seconds.
A Martian year is equal to 1.8809 Earth years, or 1 year, 320 days, and 18.2 hours.
The axial tilt of Mars is 25.19° relative to its orbital plane, which is similar to the axial tilt of Earth.
As a result, Mars has seasons like Earth, though on Mars they are nearly twice as long because its orbital period is that much longer.
In the present day epoch, the orientation of the north pole of Mars is close to the star Deneb.
Mars has a relatively pronounced orbital eccentricity of about 0.09; of the seven other planets in the Solar System, only Mercury has a larger orbital eccentricity.
It is known that in the past, Mars has had a much more circular orbit.
At one point, 1.35 million Earth years ago, Mars had an eccentricity of roughly 0.002, much less than that of Earth today.
Mars's cycle of eccentricity is 96,000 Earth years compared to Earth's cycle of 100,000 years.
Mars has a much longer cycle of eccentricity, with a period of 2.2 million Earth years, and this overshadows the 96,000-year cycle in the eccentricity graphs.
For the last 35,000 years, the orbit of Mars has been getting slightly more eccentric because of the gravitational effects of the other planets.
The closest distance between Earth and Mars will continue to mildly decrease for the next 25,000 years.

==
Habitability and search for life ==
The current understanding of planetary habitability – the ability of a world to develop environmental conditions favorable to the emergence of life – favors planets that have liquid water on their surface.
Most often this requires the orbit of a planet to lie within the habitable zone, which for the Sun extends from just beyond Venus to about the semi-major axis of Mars.
During perihelion, Mars dips inside this region, but Mars's thin (low-pressure) atmosphere prevents liquid water from existing over large regions for extended periods.
The past flow of liquid water demonstrates the planet's potential for habitability.
Recent evidence has suggested that any water on the Martian surface may have been too salty and acidic to support regular terrestrial life.

The lack of a magnetosphere and the extremely thin atmosphere of Mars are a challenge: the planet has little heat transfer across its surface, poor insulation against bombardment of the solar wind and insufficient atmospheric pressure to retain water in a liquid form (water instead sublimes to a gaseous state).
Mars is nearly, or perhaps totally, geologically dead; the end of volcanic activity has apparently stopped the recycling of chemicals and minerals between the surface and interior of the planet.
In situ investigations have been performed on Mars by the Viking landers, Spirit and Opportunity rovers, Phoenix lander, and Curiosity rover.
Evidence suggests that the planet was once significantly more habitable than it is today, but whether living organisms ever existed there remains unknown.
The Viking probes of the mid-1970s carried experiments designed to detect microorganisms in Martian soil at their respective landing sites and had positive results, including a temporary increase of CO2 production on exposure to water and nutrients.
This sign of life was later disputed by scientists, resulting in a continuing debate, with NASA scientist Gilbert Levin asserting that Viking may have found life.
A re-analysis of the Viking data, in light of modern knowledge of extremophile forms of life, has suggested that the Viking tests were not sophisticated enough to detect these forms of life.
The tests could even have killed a (hypothetical) life form.
Tests conducted by the Phoenix Mars lander have shown that the soil has an alkaline pH
and it contains magnesium, sodium, potassium and chloride.
The soil nutrients may be able to support life, but life would still have to be shielded from the intense ultraviolet light.
A recent analysis of martian meteorite EETA79001 found 0.6 ppm ClO−4, 1.4 ppm ClO−3, and 16 ppm
NO−3, most likely of Martian origin.
The ClO−3 suggests the presence of other highly oxidizing oxychlorines, such as ClO−2 or ClO, produced both by UV oxidation of Cl and X-ray radiolysis of ClO−4.
Thus, only highly refractory and/or well-protected (sub-surface) organics or life forms are likely to survive.

A 2014 analysis of the Phoenix WCL showed that the Ca(ClO4)2 in the Phoenix soil has not interacted with liquid water of any form, perhaps for as long as 600 million years.
If it had, the highly soluble Ca(ClO4)2
in contact with liquid water would have formed only CaSO4.
This suggests a severely arid environment, with minimal or no liquid water interaction.
Scientists have proposed that carbonate globules found in meteorite
ALH84001, which is thought to have originated from Mars, could be fossilized microbes extant on Mars when the meteorite was blasted from the Martian surface by a meteor strike some 15 million years ago.
This proposal has been met with skepticism, and an exclusively inorganic origin for the shapes has been proposed.
Small quantities of methane and formaldehyde detected by Mars orbiters are both claimed to be possible evidence for life, as these chemical compounds would quickly break down in the Martian atmosphere.
Alternatively, these compounds may instead be replenished by volcanic or other geological means, such as serpentinite.

Impact glass, formed by the impact of meteors, which on Earth can preserve signs of life, has been found on the surface of the impact craters on Mars.
Likewise, the glass in impact craters on Mars could have preserved signs of life if life existed at the site.
In May 2017, evidence of the earliest known life on land on Earth may have been found in 3.48-billion-year-old geyserite and other related mineral deposits (often found around hot springs and geysers) uncovered in the Pilbara Craton of Western Australia.
These findings may be helpful in deciding where best to search for early signs of life on the planet Mars.
In early 2018, media reports speculated that certain rock features at a site called Jura looked like a type of fossil, but project scientists say the formations likely resulted from a geological process at the bottom of an ancient drying lakebed, and are related to mineral veins in the area similar to gypsum crystals.
On 7 June 2018, NASA announced that the Curiosity rover had discovered organic compounds in sedimentary rocks dating to three billion years old, indicating that some of the building blocks for life were present.
In July 2018, scientists reported the discovery of a subglacial lake on Mars, the first known stable body of water on the planet.
It sits 1.5 km (0.9 mi) below the surface at the base of the southern polar ice cap and is about 20 kilometres (12 mi) wide.
The lake was discovered using the MARSIS radar on board the Mars Express orbiter, and the profiles were collected between May 2012 and December 2015.
The lake is centered at 193° East, 81° South, a flat area that does not exhibit any peculiar topographic characteristics.
It is mostly surrounded by higher ground except on its eastern side, where there is a depression.

== Moons ==
Mars has two relatively small (compared to Earth's) natural moons, Phobos (about 22 kilometres (14 mi) in diameter) and Deimos (about 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) in diameter), which orbit close to the planet.
Asteroid capture is a long-favored theory, but their origin remains uncertain.
Both satellites were discovered in 1877 by Asaph Hall; they are named after the characters Phobos (panic/fear) and Deimos (terror/dread), who, in Greek mythology, accompanied their father Ares, god of war, into battle.
Mars was the Roman counterpart of Ares.
In modern Greek, the planet retains its ancient name Ares (Aris:
Άρης).From the surface of Mars, the motions of Phobos and Deimos appear different from that of the Moon.
Phobos rises in the west, sets in the east, and rises again in just 11 hours.
Deimos, being only just outside synchronous orbit – where the orbital period would match the planet's period of rotation – rises as expected in the east but slowly.
Despite the 30-hour orbit of Deimos, 2.7 days elapse between its rise and set for an equatorial observer, as it slowly falls behind the rotation of Mars.

Because the orbit of Phobos is below synchronous altitude, the tidal forces from the planet Mars are gradually lowering its orbit.
In about 50 million years, it could either crash into Mars's surface or break up into a ring structure around the planet.
The origin of the two moons is not well understood.
Their low albedo and carbonaceous chondrite composition have been regarded as similar to asteroids, supporting the capture theory.
The unstable orbit of Phobos would seem to point towards a relatively recent capture.
But both have circular orbits, near the equator, which is unusual for captured objects and the required capture dynamics are complex.
Accretion early in the history of Mars is plausible, but would not account for a composition resembling asteroids rather than Mars itself, if that is confirmed.

A third possibility is the involvement of a third body or a type of impact disruption.
More-recent lines of evidence for Phobos having a highly porous interior, and suggesting a composition containing mainly phyllosilicates and other minerals known from Mars, point toward an origin of Phobos from material ejected by an impact on Mars that reaccreted in Martian orbit, similar to the prevailing theory for the origin of Earth's moon.
Although the VNIR spectra of the moons of Mars resemble those of outer-belt asteroids, the thermal infrared spectra of Phobos are reported to be inconsistent with chondrites of any class.
Mars may have moons smaller than 50 to 100 metres (160 to 330 ft) in diameter, and a dust ring is predicted to exist between Phobos and Deimos.

==
Exploration ==
Dozens of crewless spacecraft, including orbiters, landers, and rovers, have been sent to Mars by the Soviet Union, the United States, Europe, and India to study the planet's surface, climate, and geology.

As of 2021, Mars is host to eleven functioning spacecraft: eight in orbit – 2001 Mars Odyssey, Mars Express, Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, MAVEN, Mars Orbiter Mission, ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter, Emirates Mars Mission and Tianwen-1 – and three on the surface –  the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover, the InSight lander and the Perseverance rover.
The public can request images of Mars via the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter's HiWish program.

The Mars Science Laboratory, named Curiosity, launched on 26 November 2011, and reached Mars on 6 August 2012 UTC.
It is larger and more advanced than the Mars Exploration Rovers, with a movement rate up to 90 metres (300 ft) per hour.
Experiments include a laser chemical sampler that can deduce the make-up of rocks at a distance of 7 metres (23 ft).
On 10 February 2013, the Curiosity rover obtained the first deep rock samples ever taken from another planetary body, using its on-board drill.
The same year, it discovered that Mars's soil contains between 1.5% and 3% water by mass (albeit attached to other compounds and thus not freely accessible).
Observations by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter had previously revealed the possibility of flowing water during the warmest months on Mars.
On 24 September 2014, Mars Orbiter Mission (MOM), launched by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), reached Mars orbit.
ISRO launched MOM on 5 November 2013, with the aim of analyzing the Martian atmosphere and topography.
The Mars Orbiter Mission used a Hohmann transfer orbit to escape Earth's gravitational influence and catapult into a nine-month-long voyage to Mars.
The mission is the first successful Asian interplanetary mission.
The European Space Agency, in collaboration with Roscosmos, launched the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter and Schiaparelli lander on 14 March 2016.
While the Trace Gas Orbiter successfully entered Mars orbit on 19 October 2016, Schiaparelli crashed during its landing attempt.
In May 2018, NASA's InSight lander was launched, along with the twin MarCO CubeSats that flew by Mars and acted as telemetry relays during the landing.
The mission arrived at Mars in November 2018.
InSight detected potential seismic activity (a "marsquake") in April 2019.

In 2019, MAVEN spacecraft mapped high-altitude global wind patterns at Mars for the first time.
It was discovered that the winds which are miles above the surface retained information about the land forms below.
===
Future ===
NASA launched the Mars 2020 mission on 30 July 2020.
The rover Perseverance and Ingenuity successfully landed on the surface of Mars on 18 February 2021.
The mission will cache samples for future retrieval and return of them to Earth.
The current concept for the Mars sample-return mission would launch in 2026 and feature hardware built by NASA and ESA.

The European Space Agency will launch the ExoMars rover and surface platform sometime between August and October 2022.The
United Arab Emirates' Mars Hope orbiter was launched on 19 July 2020, and successfully entered orbit around Mars on 9 February 2021.
The probe will conduct a global study of the Martian atmosphere.
With this accomplishment, UAE became the second country, after India, to reach Mars on its first attempt.

Several plans for a human mission to Mars have been proposed throughout the 20th and 21st centuries, but no human mission has yet launched.
SpaceX founder Elon Musk presented a plan in September 2016 to, optimistically, launch a crewed mission to Mars in 2024 at an estimated development cost of US$10 billion, but this mission is not expected to take place before 2027.
In October 2016, President Barack Obama renewed United States policy to pursue the goal of sending humans to Mars in the 2030s, and to continue using the International Space Station as a technology incubator in that pursuit.
The NASA Authorization Act of 2017 directed NASA to get humans near or on the surface of Mars by the early 2030s.

==
Astronomy on Mars ==
With the presence of various orbiters, landers, and rovers, it is possible to practice astronomy from Mars.
Although Mars's moon Phobos appears about one-third the angular diameter of the full moon on Earth, Deimos appears more or less star-like, looking only slightly brighter than Venus does from Earth.
Various phenomena seen from Earth have also been observed from Mars, such as meteors and auroras.
The apparent sizes of the moons Phobos and Deimos are sufficiently smaller than that of the Sun; thus, their partial "eclipses" of the Sun are best considered transits (see transit of Deimos and Phobos from Mars).
Transits of Mercury and Venus have been observed from Mars.
A transit of Earth will be seen from Mars on 10 November 2084.On 19 October 2014, comet Siding Spring passed extremely close to Mars, so close that the coma may have enveloped Mars.

==
Viewing ==
The mean apparent magnitude of Mars is +0.71 with a standard deviation of 1.05.
Because the orbit of Mars is eccentric, the magnitude at opposition from the Sun can range from about −3.0 to −1.4.
The minimum brightness is magnitude +1.86 when the planet is in conjunction with the Sun.
At its brightest, Mars (along with Jupiter) is second only to Venus in luminosity.
Mars usually appears distinctly yellow, orange, or red.
NASA's Spirit rover has taken pictures of a greenish-brown, mud-colored landscape with blue-grey rocks and patches of light red sand.
When farthest away from Earth, it is more than seven times farther away than when it is closest.
When least favorably positioned, it can be lost in the Sun's glare for months at a time.
At its most favorable times — at 15-year or 17-year intervals, and always between late July and late September — a lot of surface detail can be seen with a telescope.
Especially noticeable, even at low magnification, are the polar ice caps.
As Mars approaches opposition, it begins a period of retrograde motion, which means it will appear to move backwards in a looping motion with respect to the background stars.
The duration of this retrograde motion lasts for about 72 days, and Mars reaches its peak luminosity in the middle of this motion.

===
Closest approaches ===


====
Relative ====
The point at which Mars's geocentric longitude is 180° different from the Sun's is known as opposition, which is near the time of closest approach to Earth.
The time of opposition can occur as much as 8.5 days away from the closest approach.
The distance at close approach varies between about 54 and 103 million km (34 and 64 million mi) due to the planets' elliptical orbits, which causes comparable variation in angular size.
The second-to-last Mars opposition occurred on 27 July 2018, at a distance of about 58 million km (36 million mi).
The last Mars opposition occurred on 13 October 2020, at a distance of about 63 million km (39 million mi).
The average time between the successive oppositions of Mars, its synodic period, is 780 days; but the number of days between the dates of successive oppositions can range from 764 to
812.As Mars approaches opposition it begins a period of retrograde motion, which makes it appear to move backwards in a looping motion relative to the background stars.
The duration of this retrograde motion is about 72 days.

====
Absolute, around the present time ====
Mars made its closest approach to Earth and maximum apparent brightness in nearly 60,000 years, 55,758,006 km (0.37271925 AU; 34,646,419 mi), magnitude −2.88, on 27 August 2003, at 09:51:13 UTC.
This occurred when Mars was one day from opposition and about three days from its perihelion, making it particularly easy to see from Earth.
The last time it came so close is estimated to have been on 12 September 57,617 BC, the next time being in 2287.
This record approach was only slightly closer than other recent close approaches.
For instance, the minimum distance on 22 August 1924, was 0.37285 AU, and the minimum distance on 24 August 2208, will be 0.37279 AU.Every 15 to 17 years, Mars comes into opposition near its perihelion.
These perihelic oppositions make a closer approach to earth than other oppositions which occur every 2.1 years.
Mars comes into perihelic opposition in 2003, 2018 and 2035, with 2020 and 2033 being close to perihelic opposition.

==
Historical observations ==
The history of observations of Mars is marked by the oppositions of Mars when the planet is closest to Earth and hence is most easily visible, which occur every couple of years.
Even more notable are the perihelic oppositions of Mars, which occur every 15 or 17 years and are distinguished because Mars is close to perihelion, making it even closer to Earth.

===
Ancient and medieval observations ===
The ancient Sumerians believed that Mars was Nergal, the god of war and plague.
During Sumerian times, Nergal was a minor deity of little significance, but, during later times, his main cult center was the city of Nineveh.
In Mesopotamian texts, Mars is referred to as the "star of judgement of the fate of the dead."
The existence of Mars as a wandering object in the night sky was recorded by the ancient Egyptian astronomers and, by 1534 BCE, they were familiar with the retrograde motion of the planet.
By the period of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, the Babylonian astronomers were making regular records of the positions of the planets and systematic observations of their behavior.
For Mars, they knew that the planet made 37 synodic periods, or 42 circuits of the zodiac, every 79 years.
They invented arithmetic methods for making minor corrections to the predicted positions of the planets.
In Ancient Greece, the planet was known as Πυρόεις.
In the fourth century BCE, Aristotle noted that Mars disappeared behind the Moon during an occultation, indicating that the planet was farther away.
Ptolemy, a Greek living in Alexandria, attempted to address the problem of the orbital motion of Mars.
Ptolemy's model and his collective work on astronomy was presented in the multi-volume collection Almagest, which became the authoritative treatise on Western astronomy for the next fourteen centuries.
Literature from ancient China confirms that Mars was known by Chinese astronomers by no later than the fourth century BCE.
In the East Asian cultures, Mars is traditionally referred to as the "fire star" (Chinese: 火星), based on the Five elements.
During the seventeenth century, Tycho Brahe measured the diurnal parallax of Mars that Johannes Kepler used to make a preliminary calculation of the relative distance to the planet.
When the telescope became available, the diurnal parallax of Mars was again measured in an effort to determine the Sun-Earth distance.
This was first performed by Giovanni Domenico Cassini in 1672.
The early parallax measurements were hampered by the quality of the instruments.
The only occultation of Mars by Venus observed was that of 13 October 1590, seen by Michael Maestlin at Heidelberg.
In 1610, Mars was viewed by Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei, who was first to see it via telescope.
The first person to draw a map of Mars that displayed any terrain features was the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens.

===
Martian "canals" ===
By the 19th century, the resolution of telescopes reached a level sufficient for surface features to be identified.
A perihelic opposition of Mars occurred on 5 September 1877.
In that year, the Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli used a 22 centimetres (8.7 in) telescope in Milan to help produce the first detailed map of Mars.
These maps notably contained features he called canali, which were later shown to be an optical illusion.
These canali were supposedly long, straight lines on the surface of Mars, to which he gave names of famous rivers on Earth.
His term, which means "channels" or "grooves", was popularly mistranslated in English as "canals".
Influenced by the observations, the orientalist Percival Lowell founded an observatory which had 30 and 45 centimetres (12 and 18 in) telescopes.
The observatory was used for the exploration of Mars during the last good opportunity in 1894 and the following less favorable oppositions.
He published several books on Mars and life on the planet, which had a great influence on the public.
The canali were independently found by other astronomers, like Henri Joseph Perrotin and Louis Thollon in Nice, using one of the largest telescopes of that time.
The seasonal changes (consisting of the diminishing of the polar caps and the dark areas formed during Martian summer) in combination with the canals led to speculation about life on Mars, and it was a long-held belief that Mars contained vast seas and vegetation.
The telescope never reached the resolution required to give proof to any speculations.
As bigger telescopes were used, fewer long, straight canali were observed.
During an observation in 1909 by Camille Flammarion with an 84 centimetres (33 in) telescope, irregular patterns were observed, but no canali were seen.
Even in the 1960s, articles were published on Martian biology, putting aside explanations other than life for the seasonal changes on Mars.
Detailed scenarios for the metabolism and chemical cycles for a functional ecosystem have been published.

===
Spacecraft visitation ===
Once spacecraft visited the planet during NASA's Mariner missions in the 1960s and 1970s, these concepts were radically broken.
The results of the Viking life-detection experiments aided an intermission in which the hypothesis of a hostile, dead planet was generally accepted.
Mariner 9 and Viking allowed better maps of Mars to be made using the data from these missions, and another major leap forward was the Mars Global Surveyor mission, launched in 1996 and operated until late 2006, that allowed complete, extremely detailed maps of the Martian topography, magnetic field and surface minerals to be obtained.
These maps are available online; for example, at Google Mars.
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter and Mars Express continued exploring with new instruments and supporting lander missions.
NASA provides two online tools: Mars Trek, which provides visualizations of the planet using data from 50 years of exploration, and Experience Curiosity, which simulates traveling on Mars in 3-D with Curiosity.

==
In culture ==
Mars is named after the Roman god of war.
In different cultures, Mars represents masculinity and youth.
Its symbol, a circle with an arrow pointing out to the upper right, is used as a symbol for the male gender.

The many failures in Mars exploration probes resulted in a satirical counter-culture blaming the failures on an Earth-Mars "Bermuda Triangle", a "Mars Curse", or a "Great Galactic Ghoul" that feeds on Martian spacecraft.

===
Intelligent "Martians" ===
The fashionable idea that Mars was populated by intelligent Martians exploded in the late 19th century.
Schiaparelli's "canali" observations combined with Percival Lowell's books on the subject put forward the standard notion of a planet that was a drying, cooling, dying world with ancient civilizations constructing irrigation works.

Many other observations and proclamations by notable personalities added to what has been termed "Mars Fever".
In 1899, while investigating atmospheric radio noise using his receivers in his Colorado Springs lab, inventor Nikola Tesla observed repetitive signals that he later surmised might have been radio communications coming from another planet, possibly Mars.
In a 1901 interview, Tesla said:

It was some time afterward when the thought flashed upon my mind that the disturbances I had observed might be due to an intelligent control.
Although I could not decipher their meaning, it was impossible for me to think of them as having been entirely accidental.
The feeling is constantly growing on me that I had been the first to hear the greeting of one planet to another.

Tesla's theories gained support from Lord Kelvin who, while visiting the United States in 1902, was reported to have said that he thought Tesla had picked up Martian signals being sent to the United States.
Kelvin "emphatically" denied this report shortly before leaving: "What I really said was that the inhabitants of Mars, if there are any, were doubtless able to see New York, particularly the glare of the electricity.
"In
a New York Times article in 1901
, Edward Charles Pickering, director of the Harvard College Observatory, said that they had received a telegram from Lowell Observatory in Arizona that seemed to confirm that Mars was trying to communicate with Earth.

Early in December 1900, we received from Lowell Observatory in Arizona a telegram that a shaft of light had been seen to project from Mars (the Lowell observatory makes a specialty of Mars) lasting seventy minutes.
I wired these facts to Europe and sent out neostyle copies through this country.
The observer there is a careful, reliable man and there is no reason to doubt that the light existed.
It was given as from a well-known geographical point on Mars.
That was all.
Now the story has gone the world over.
In Europe, it is stated that I have been in communication with Mars, and all sorts of exaggerations have spring up.
Whatever the light was, we have no means of knowing.
Whether it had intelligence or not, no one can say.
It is absolutely inexplicable.

Pickering later proposed creating a set of mirrors in Texas, intended to signal Martians.

In recent decades, the high-resolution mapping of the surface of Mars, culminating in Mars Global Surveyor, revealed no artifacts of habitation by "intelligent" life, but pseudoscientific speculation about intelligent life on Mars continues from commentators such as Richard C. Hoagland.
Reminiscent of the canali controversy, these speculations are based on small scale features perceived in the spacecraft images, such as "pyramids" and the "Face on Mars".
Planetary astronomer Carl Sagan wrote:

Mars has become a kind of mythic arena onto which we have projected our Earthly hopes and fears.

The depiction of Mars in fiction has been stimulated by its dramatic red color and by nineteenth-century scientific speculations that its surface conditions might support not just life but intelligent life.
Thus originated a large number of science fiction scenarios, among which is H. G. Wells' The War of the Worlds, published in 1898, in which Martians seek to escape their dying planet by invading Earth.

Influential works included Ray Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles, in which human explorers accidentally destroy a Martian civilization, Edgar Rice Burroughs' Barsoom series, C. S. Lewis' novel Out of the Silent Planet (1938), and a number of Robert A. Heinlein stories before the mid-sixties.
Jonathan Swift made reference to the moons of Mars, about 150 years before their actual discovery by Asaph Hall, detailing reasonably accurate descriptions of their orbits, in the 19th chapter of his novel Gulliver's Travels.
A comic figure of an intelligent Martian, Marvin the Martian, appeared in Haredevil Hare (1948) as a character in the Looney Tunes animated cartoons of Warner Brothers, and has continued as part of popular culture to the present.
After the Mariner and Viking spacecraft had returned pictures of Mars as it really is, an apparently lifeless and canal-less world, these ideas about Mars had to be abandoned, and a vogue for accurate, realist depictions of human colonies on Mars developed,
the best known of which may be Kim Stanley Robinson's Mars trilogy.
Pseudo-scientific speculations about the Face on Mars and other enigmatic landmarks spotted by space probes have meant that ancient civilizations continue to be a popular theme in science fiction, especially in film.

== Interactive Mars map ==


==
See also ==
List of missions to Mars
Mars monolith
Outline of Mars
Timekeeping on Mars
Wikipedia table comparing stats of planets in the Solar System
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Mars at Curlie
Mars Exploration Program at NASA.gov
Mars Trek –
An integrated map browser of maps and datasets for Mars
Google Mars and Google Mars 3D, interactive maps of the planet
Geody Mars, mapping site that supports NASA World Wind, Celestia, and other applications
Interactive 3D Gravity simulation of the Martian system and all the operational spacecraft in orbit around it as of the 12'th of June 2020


===
Images ===
Mars images by NASA's Planetary Photojournal
Mars images by NASA's Mars Exploration Program
Mars images by Malin Space Science Systems
HiRISE image catalog by the University of Arizona


===
Videos ===
Rotating color globe of Mars by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Rotating geological globe of Mars by the United States Geological Survey
NASA's Curiosity Finds Ancient Streambed – First Evidence of Water on Mars on YouTube by The Science Channel (2012, 4:31)
Flight Into Mariner Valley by Arizona State University
High resolution video simulation of rotating Mars by Seán Doran, showing Arabia Terra, Valles Marineris and Tharsis (see album for more)
Mars rover captures high-resolution panorama of its home (NASA)


===
Cartographic resources ===
Mars nomenclature and quadrangle maps with feature names by the United States Geological Survey
Geological map of Mars by the United States Geological Survey
Viking orbiter photomap by Eötvös Loránd University
Mars Global Surveyor topographical map by Eötvös Loránd University
Star Wars:
Jedi Arena is lightsaber battle video game written by Rex Bradford for the Atari 2600 and published by Parker Brothers in 1983.
It is the first Star Wars video game to feature lightsabers.
The goal of the game, based on one scene in the original Star Wars film, is to take out the opponent with the Seeker ball while defending oneself from incoming laser blasts using one's lightsaber.

Following the adequate sales of their first Star Wars game, Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back
, Parker Brothers went on to continue developing Star Wars titles, one of which is Star Wars: Jedi Arena, programmed by Rex Bradford.
Although the game's reception was mixed at the time of release, with sound effects being praised and primarily the abstract combat being criticized, its legacy is largely negative, with several modern critics referring to the game as one of the worst Star Wars games of all time.

==
Gameplay ==
In Star Wars: Jedi Arena, two Jedi Knights, one blue and one red, who are depicted from a top-down perspective, face each other during lightsaber training.
Player one is blue; the red Jedi is either a human- or computer-controlled opponent.
Players control their lightsabers with the paddle controller to defend themselves from the laser blasts coming from the Seeker ball, fired by the opponent.
The Seeker will regularly turn wild and fire laser blasts randomly.
The objective of the game is to fire laser blasts from the Seeker at the opponent's shield and finally directly at the opponent by aiming in the direction that the lightsaber is pointing.
The game has four difficulty levels, changing the Seeker's speed; on the highest level, the Seeker is invisible.
The game ends when one player has received three direct hits, and the winner becomes a Jedi Master.

==
Development and release ==
Although Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back was not a huge success, it sold well enough to encourage Parker Brothers to develop more Star Wars titles.
In the December 11, 1982, issue of Billboard, it was reported that Parker Brothers was developing its second game cartridge.
Titled Star Wars: Jedi Arena, the game was set for release the following month.
During Jedi Arena's production, Parker Brothers relied upon an abstract approach to combat that took advantage of "the unique technologies and situations of the Star Wars universe".
The game was programmed by Rex Bradford and inspired by one scene in Star Wars in which Luke Skywalker defends himself from the Seeker ball's incoming laser bolts with his lightsaber on board the Millennium Falcon.
The game was released for the Atari 2600 as scheduled, in January 1983.

== Reception ==
Star Wars:
Jedi Arena received mixed reviews from critics in the 1980s.
Adam Thompson of Creative Computing Video & Arcade Games likened the mechanism of damaging the opponent's shield to smashing bricks in Breakout and praised the game's glowing multi-colored laser blasts and the sound effects, the latter of which he felt added realism to the game.
According to Peter Brown of GameSpot, however, the main criticisms of the game were the stationary Jedi and abstract combat, for the opposite of which action fans were expecting.
However, the game also has a cult following.
Benj Edwards, writing for PCMag.com, claimed that Jedi Arena "may secretly be the best Star Wars video game ever made."
==
Legacy ==
The legacy of Jedi Arena among modern critics is extremely negative.
Ian Dransfield of Digital Spy ranked it as one of the 5 worst Star Wars games ever, noting that the game has not aged well.
Lewis Packwood of Kotaku ranked the game second-to-worst, believing that the game should not have been based on one particular scene in Star Wars involving Luke Skywalker defending himself from a "floaty beach ball".
In the book Classic Home Video Games, 1972–1984: A Complete Reference Guide, Brett Weiss criticized the game's controls, its overall "misguided" concept (given that the Jedi never actually engage in a duel), and the gameplay for "[relying] too much on luck".
Several other sources described Jedi Arena to be either lamentable or one of the worst Star Wars games.
Matt Dorville of Blastr ranked the game No.
31 on the website's list of 50 Star Wars games ranked from worst to best, admitting that Jedi Arena was not bad at the time of release and that the game did offer an entertaining gameplay.
In the book Guinness World Records 2017 Gamer’s Edition, Jedi Arena is credited for being the first Star Wars video game to feature lightsaber action.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
Jedi Arena on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: Jedi Arena at Atari Mania
Star Wars: Jedi Arena at AtariAge
The Atari 2600 version of Star Wars: Jedi Arena can be played for free in the browser at the Internet Archive
The fourteenth series of Geordie Shore, a British television programme based in Newcastle upon Tyne, was confirmed on 31 October 2016 when cast member Scotty T announced that he would be taking a break from the series to focus on other commitments.
The series was filmed in November 2016, and began airing on 28 March 2017.
Ahead of the series, it was also confirmed that original cast member Holly Hagan had quit the show, following her exit in the previous series.
On 28 February 2017, it was announced that eight new cast members had joined for this series.
Zahida Allen, Chelsea Barber, Sam Bentham, Sarah Goodhart, Abbie Holborn, Elettra Lamborghini, Billy Phillips and Eve Shannon all appeared throughout the series hoping to become permanent members of the cast, and in the series finale, Holborn was chosen.
Goodhart and Allen both previously appeared on Ex on the Beach, with the former appearing on the third series of the show as the ex-girlfriend of current Geordie Shore cast member Marty McKenna (before he joined the cast).
Lamborghini has also appeared on Super Shore and participated in the fifth season of Gran Hermano VIP, the Spanish version of Celebrity Big Brother.
It was also confirmed that Scotty T would return later in the series.

== Cast ==
Zahida Allen
Chelsea Barber
Gaz Beadle
Sam Bentham
Aaron Chalmers
Chloe Ferry
Sarah Goodhart
Nathan Henry
Abbie Holborn
Sophie Kasaei
Elettra Lamborghini
Marty McKenna
Billy Phillips
Eve Shannon
Marnie Simpson
Scotty T
=== Duration of cast ===
=
Cast member is featured in this episode.

=
Cast member arrives in the house.

=
Cast member voluntarily leaves the house.

= Cast member is removed from the house.

= Cast member returns to the house.

= Cast member leaves the series.

= Cast member returns to the series.

=
Cast member does not feature in this episode.

=
Cast member is not officially a cast member in this episode.

==
Episodes ==


==
Ratings ==


==
References ==
Endor (designated: IX3244-A) is a fictional moon in the Star Wars universe, known for its endless forests, savannahs, grasslands, mountain ranges, and a few oceans.
The moon was the site of a pivotal battle depicted in Return of the Jedi.
Homeworld of the sentient Dulok, Ewok, and Yuzzum species, as well as the semi-sentient Gorax and Wistie species.
The Endor solar cycle was 402 GSC days orbital, with a breathable earth-like atmosphere conducive for humans and 8% surface water.
It is where Darth Vader's funeral was held.

The moon orbits Tana—
the Ewokese word for Endor's host planet—a gas giant located in the Endor system, a binary star system positioned in the Moddell sector of the galaxy's Outer Rim Territories.
Located in grid square H-16 on the Standard Galactic Grid, it was connected to Cerea and Bakura by a hyperspace route.
The planet was orbited by nine moons, the largest of which was known as the Forest Moon of Endor or "Sanctuary Moon".
The ocean moon of Kef Bir was also one of these moons, and is the location where the second Death Star crashed after it exploded over Endor in Return of the Jedi.
It also had two suns:
Endor Prime I and Endor Prime II.
==
Description ==
The Forest Moon of Endor first appears in Return of the Jedi, in which it is the body in whose orbit the second Death Star is constructed, and is the home of a race of furry aliens called Ewoks.
The moon later appears in the original Star Tours Disney theme park attraction, Ewok TV movies
The Ewok Adventure and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor, as well as the animated Ewoks and its Marvel Comics tie-in series.

Various descriptions of the Endor system exist in various media.
Special effects storyboards for Return of the Jedi
refer to a distant orb in the system as "Planet Endor".
According to the Return of the Jedi novelization, the planet disappeared in an ancient cataclysm.
The Ewok television films depict a gas giant in the sky, and novels such as The Truce at Bakura and Dark Apprentice also mention a planet visible from the moon.
The planet is called "Tana" in the Ewoks animated series, which also depicts a binary star system (while other sources depict only one sun).In
a Star Wars Tales comic entitled Apocalypse Endor, an Imperial veteran of Endor refers to the moon being devastated by the impact of falling debris from the Death Star, which was blown up while in orbit around the moon.
However, another character dismisses this as a myth, saying that most of the Death Star's mass was obliterated in the explosion, and that the Rebels "took care of the rest".
The Rise of Skywalker depicts the wreckage of the second Death Star in a watery location, named Kef Bir, an ocean moon featured in the film that orbits the same gas giant as the forest moon.
Wicket W. Warrick and his son Pommet appear briefly at the end of The Rise of Skywalker, at the sky after the destruction of a Resurgent-class Star Destroyer.

==
Filming ==
Scenes set on Endor were filmed on private logging company land that was shortly thereafter clearcut near the town of Smith River, California; the speeder chase scene was filmed at the Chetham Grove section of Grizzly Creek Redwoods State Park.
near the "Avenue of the Giants" in Humboldt Redwoods State Park.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars planets and moons


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Cavelos, Jeanne (2007).
The Science of Star Wars:
An Astrophysicist's Independent Examination of Space Travel, Aliens, Planets, and Robots as Portrayed in the Star Wars Films and Books.
Macmillan.
pp.
29–32.
ISBN 978-1-4299-7176-8.
==
External links ==
Endor at the Star Wars Databank
Endor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Endor 'Holocaust' at Star Wars Technical Commentaries
Warsaw ( WOR-saw; Polish: Warszawa [varˈʂava] (listen); see also other names) is the capital and largest city of Poland.
The metropolis stands on the Vistula River in east-central Poland and its population is officially estimated at 1.8 million residents within a greater metropolitan area of 3.1 million residents, which makes Warsaw the 7th most-populous capital city in the European Union.
The city area measures 517.24 square kilometres (199.71 sq mi), while the metropolitan area covers 6,100.43 square kilometres (2,355.39 sq mi).
Warsaw is an alpha-global city, a major international tourist destination, and a significant cultural, political, and economic hub.
Its historical Old Town was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

The city rose to prominence in the late 16th century, when Sigismund III decided to move the Polish capital and his royal court from Kraków.
The elegant architecture,  grandeur and extensive boulevards earned Warsaw the nickname 'Paris of the North' prior to the Second World War.
Bombed at the start of the German invasion in 1939, the city withstood a siege, but was largely destroyed by the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising in 1943, the general Warsaw Uprising in 1944 and the systematic razing by the Germans in advance of the Vistula–Oder Offensive.
Warsaw gained the new title of Phoenix City because of its complete reconstruction after the war, which had left over 85% of its buildings in ruins.
In 2012, the Economist Intelligence Unit ranked Warsaw as the 32nd most liveable city in the world.
In 2017, the city came 4th in the "Business-friendly", 8th in "Human capital and life style" and topped the quality of life rankings in the region.
The city is a significant centre of research and development, business process outsourcing, and information technology outsourcing.
The Warsaw Stock Exchange is the largest and most important in Central and Eastern Europe.
Frontex, the European Union agency for external border security as well as ODIHR, one of the principal institutions of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe have their headquarters in Warsaw.
Jointly with Frankfurt and Paris, Warsaw features one of the highest number of skyscrapers in the European Union.
The city is the seat of the Polish Academy of Sciences, National Philharmonic Orchestra, University of Warsaw, the Warsaw University of Technology, the National Museum, Zachęta Art Gallery and the Warsaw Grand Theatre, the largest of its kind in the world.
The Old Town, which represents examples of nearly every European architectural style and historical period, was listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1980.
Other main architectural attractions include the Royal Castle and the iconic King Sigismund's Column, the Wilanów Palace, the Palace on the Isle, St. John's Cathedral, Main Market Square, as well as numerous churches and mansions along the Royal Route.
Warsaw is positioning itself as Central and Eastern Europe's chic cultural capital with thriving art or club scenes and restaurants, with around a quarter of the city's area occupied by parks.

==
Toponymy and names ==
Warsaw's name in the Polish language is Warszawa.
Other previous spellings of the name may have included Warszewa, Warszowa, Worszewa or Werszewa.
The exact origin of the name is uncertain and has not been fully determined.
Originally, Warszawa was the name of a small fishing settlement on the banks of the Vistula river.
One theory states that Warszawa means "belonging to Warsz", Warsz being a shortened form of the masculine Old Polish name Warcisław, which etymologically is linked with Wrocław.
However the ending -awa is unusual for a large city; the names of Polish cities derived from personal names usually end in -ów/owo/ew/ewo (e.g. Piotrków, Adamów).

Folk etymology attributes the city name to a fisherman, Wars, and his wife, Sawa.
According to legend, Sawa was a mermaid living in the Vistula with whom Wars fell in love.
In actuality, Warsz was a 12th/13th-century nobleman who owned a village located at the modern-day site of the Mariensztat neighbourhood.
The official city name in full is miasto stołeczne Warszawa ("The Capital City of Warsaw").Other names for Warsaw include Varsovia (Latin, Spanish) and Varsóvia (Portuguese), Varsovie (French), Varsavia (Italian), Warschau (German, Dutch), װאַרשע / Varshe (Yiddish), Варшава / Varshava (Russian), Varšuva (Lithuanian), Varsó (Hungarian), Varšava (Serbo-Croatian, Slovene and Czech).

A native or resident of Warsaw is known as a Varsovian – in Polish warszawiak, warszawianin (male), warszawianka (female), warszawiacy, and warszawianie (plural).

==
History ==


=== 1300–1800 ===
The first fortified settlements on the site of today's Warsaw were located in Bródno (9th/10th century) and Jazdów (12th/13th century).
After Jazdów was raided by nearby clans and dukes, a new fortified settlement was established on the site of a small fishing village called "Warszowa".
The Prince of Płock, Bolesław II of Masovia, established the modern-day city in about 1300 and the first historical document attesting to the existence of a castellany dates to 1313.
With the completion of St John's Cathedral in 1390, Warsaw became one of the seats of the Dukes of Masovia and was officially made capital of the Masovian Duchy in 1413.
The economy then predominantly rested on craftsmanship or trade, and the town housed approximately 4,500 people at the time.

During the 15th century, the population migrated and spread beyond the northern city wall into a newly formed self-governing precinct called New Town.
The existing older settlement became eventually known as the Old Town.
Both possessed their own town charter and independent councils.
The aim of establishing a separate district was to accommodate new incomers or undesirables who were not permitted to settle in Old Town, particularly the Jews.
Social and financial disparities between the classes in the two precincts led to a minor revolt in 1525.
Following the sudden death of Janusz III and the extinction of the local ducal line, Masovia was incorporated into the Kingdom of Poland in 1526.
Bona Sforza, wife of Sigismund I of Poland, was widely accused of poisoning the duke to uphold Polish rule over Warsaw.

In 1529, Warsaw for the first time became the seat of a General Sejm, and held that privilege permanently from 1569.
The city's rising importance encouraged the construction of a new set of defenses, including the landmark Barbican.
Renowned Italian architects were brought to Warsaw to reshape the Royal Castle, the streets and the marketplace, resulting in the Old Town's early Italianate appearance.
In 1573, the city gave its name to the Warsaw Confederation which formally established religious freedom in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
Due to its central location between the Commonwealth's two major cities of Kraków and Vilnius, Warsaw became the capital of the Commonwealth and the Polish Crown when Sigismund III Vasa transferred his royal court in 1596.
In the subsequent years the town significantly expanded to the south and westwards.
Several private independent districts (jurydyka) were the property of aristocrats and the gentry, which they ruled by their own laws.
Between 1655 and 1658 the city was besieged and pillaged by the Swedish, Brandenburgian and Transylvanian forces.
The conduct of the Great Northern War (1700–1721) also forced Warsaw to pay heavy tributes to the invading armies.
The reign of Augustus II and Augustus III was a time of great development for Warsaw, which turned into an early-capitalist city.
The Saxon monarchs employed many German architects, sculptors and engineers, who rebuilt the city in a style similar to Dresden.
The year 1727 marked the opening of the Saxon Garden in Warsaw, the first publicly accessible park.
The Załuski Library, the first Polish public library and the largest at the time, was founded in 1747.
Stanisław II Augustus, who remodelled the interior of the Royal Castle, also made Warsaw a centre of culture and the arts.
He extended the Royal Baths Park and ordered the construction or refurbishment of numerous palaces, mansions and richly-decorated tenements.
This earned Warsaw the nickname Paris of the North.
Warsaw remained the capital of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth until 1795, when it was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in the third and final partition of Poland; it subsequently became the capital of the province of South Prussia.

=== 1800–1939 ===
Warsaw was made the capital of a newly created French client state, known as the Duchy of Warsaw, after a portion of Poland's territory was liberated from Prussia, Russia and Austria by Napoleon in 1806.
Following Napoleon's defeat and exile, the 1815 Congress of Vienna assigned Warsaw to Congress Poland, a constitutional monarchy within the easternmost sector (or partition) under a personal union with Imperial Russia.
The Royal University of Warsaw was established in 1816.

With the violation of the Polish constitution, the 1830 November Uprising broke out against foreign influence.
The Polish-Russian war of 1831 ended in the uprising's defeat and in the curtailment of Congress Poland's autonomy.
On 27 February 1861, a Warsaw crowd protesting against Russian control over Congress Poland was fired upon by Russian troops.
Five people were killed.
The Underground Polish National Government resided in Warsaw during the January Uprising in 1863–64.

Warsaw flourished in throughout the 19th century under Mayor Sokrates Starynkiewicz (1875–92), who was appointed by Alexander III.
Under Starynkiewicz Warsaw saw its first water and sewer systems designed and built by the English engineer William Lindley and his son, William Heerlein Lindley, as well as the expansion and modernisation of trams, street lighting, and gas infrastructure.
Between 1850 and 1882, the population grew by 134% to 383,000 as a result of rapid urbanisation and industrialisation.
Many migrated from surrounding rural Masovian towns and villages to the city for employment opportunities.
The western borough of Wola was transformed from an agricultural periphery occupied mostly by small farms and windmills (mills being the namesake of Wola's central neighborhood Młynów) to an industrial and manufacturing centre.
Metallurgical, textile and glassware factories were commonplace, with chimneys dominating the westernmost skyline.
Similarly to London, Warsaw's population was subjected to income segmentation.
Gentrification of inner suburbs forced poorer residents to move across the river into Praga or Powiśle and Solec districts, alike the East End of London and London Docklands.
Poorer religious and ethnic minorities such as the Jews settled in the crowded parts of northern Warsaw, in Muranów.
The Imperial Census of 1897 recorded 626,000 people living in Warsaw, making it the third-largest city of the Empire after St. Petersburg and Moscow as well as the largest city in the region.
Grand architectural complexes and structures were also erected in the city centre, including the Warsaw Philharmonic, the Church of the Holiest Saviour and tenements along Marszałkowska Street.

During World War I, Warsaw was occupied by Germany from 4 August 1915 until November 1918.
The Armistice of 11 November 1918 concluded that defeated Germany is to withdraw from all foreign areas, which included Warsaw.
Germany did so, and underground leader Józef Piłsudski returned to Warsaw on the same day which marked the beginning of the Second Polish Republic, the first truly sovereign Polish state after 1795.
In the course of the Polish–Soviet War (1919–1921), the 1920 Battle of Warsaw was fought on the eastern outskirts of the city.
Poland successfully defended the capital, stopped the brunt of the Bolshevik Red Army and temporarily halted the "export of the communist revolution" to other parts of Europe.
The interwar period (1918–1939) was a time of major development in the city's infrastructure.
New modernist housing estates were built in Mokotów to de-clutter the densely populated inner suburbs.
In 1921, Warsaw's total area was estimated at only 124.7 square kilometres with 1 million inhabitants–over 8,000 people per square kilometre made Warsaw more densely populated than contemporary London.
The Średnicowy Bridge was constructed for railway (1921–1931), connecting both parts of the city across the Vistula.
Warszawa Główna railway station (1932–1939) was not completed due to the outbreak of the Second World War.

Stefan Starzyński was the Mayor of Warsaw between 1934 and 1939.

===
Second World War ===
After the German Invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 started the Second World War, Warsaw was defended until 27 September.
Central Poland, including Warsaw, came under the rule of the General Government, a German Nazi colonial administration.
All higher education institutions were immediately closed and Warsaw's entire Jewish population – several hundred thousand, some 30% of the city – were herded into the Warsaw Ghetto.
In July on 1942, the Jews of the Warsaw Ghetto began to be deported en masse to the Aktion Reinhard extermination camps, particularly Treblinka.
The city would become the centre of urban resistance to Nazi rule in occupied Europe.
When the order came to annihilate the ghetto as part of Hitler's "Final Solution" on 19 April 1943, Jewish fighters launched the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising.
Despite being heavily outgunned and outnumbered, the Ghetto held out for almost a month.
When the fighting ended, almost all survivors were massacred, with only a few managing to escape or hide.

By July 1944, the Red Army was deep into Polish territory and pursuing the Nazis toward Warsaw.
The Polish government-in-exile in London gave orders to the underground Home Army (AK) to try to seize control of Warsaw before the Red Army arrived.
Thus, on 1 August 1944, as the Red Army was nearing the city, the Warsaw uprising began.
The armed struggle, planned to last 48 hours, was partially successful, however it went on for 63 days.
Eventually the Home Army fighters and civilians assisting them were forced to capitulate.
They were transported to PoW camps in Germany, while the entire civilian population was expelled.
Polish civilian deaths are estimated at between 150,000 and 200,000.Hitler, ignoring the agreed terms of the capitulation, ordered the entire city to be razed to the ground and the library and museum collections taken to Germany or burned.
Monuments and government buildings were blown up by special German troops known as Verbrennungs-
und Vernichtungskommando ("Burning and Destruction Detachments").
About 85% of the city was destroyed, including the historic Old Town and the Royal Castle.
On 17 January 1945 – after the beginning of the Vistula–Oder Offensive of the Red Army – Soviet troops and Polish troops of the First Polish Army entered the ruins of Warsaw, and liberated Warsaw's suburbs from German occupation.
The city was swiftly taken by the Soviet Army, which rapidly advanced towards Łódź, as German forces regrouped at a more westward position.
=== 1945–1989 ===
In 1945, after the bombings, revolts, fighting, and demolition had ended, most of Warsaw lay in ruins.
The area of the former Ghetto was razed to the ground, with only a sea of rubble remaining.
The immense destruction prompted a temporary transfer of the new government and its officials to Lodz, which became the transitional seat of power.
Nevertheless, Warsaw officially resumed its role as the capital of Poland and the country's centre of political and economic life.

After World War II, the "Bricks for Warsaw" campaign was initiated and large prefabricated housing projects were erected in Warsaw to address the major housing shortage.
Plattenbau apartment blocks were a solution to avoid Warsaw's former density problem and to create more green spaces.
Some of the buildings from the 19th century that have survived in a reasonably reconstructible form were nonetheless demolished in the 1950s and 1960s, like the Kronenberg Palace.
The Śródmieście (central) region's urban system was completely reshaped; former cobblestone streets were asphalted and significantly widened for traffic use.
Many notable streets such as Gęsia, Nalewki and Wielka disappeared as a result of these changes and some were split in half due to the construction of Plac Defilad (Parade Square), one of the largest of its kind in Europe.
Much of the central district was also designated for future skyscrapers.
The 237-metre Palace of Culture and Science resembling New York's Empire State Building was built as a gift from the Soviet Union.
Warsaw's urban landscape is one of modern and contemporary architecture.
Despite wartime destruction and post-war remodelling, many of the historic streets, buildings, and churches were restored to their original form.
In 1980, Warsaw's historic Old Town was inscribed onto UNESCO's World Heritage list.
John Paul II's visits to his native country in 1979 and 1983 brought support to the budding "Solidarity" movement and encouraged the growing anti-communist fervor there.
In 1979, less than a year after becoming pope, John Paul celebrated Mass in Victory Square in Warsaw and ended his sermon with a call to "renew the face" of Poland.
These words were meaningful for Varsovians and Poles who understood them as the incentive for liberal-democratic reforms.

=== 1989–present ===
In 1995, the Warsaw Metro opened with a single line.
A second line was opened in March 2015.
With the entry of Poland into the European Union in 2004, Warsaw is experiencing the largest economic boom of its history.
The opening fixture of UEFA Euro 2012 took place in Warsaw and the city also hosted the 2013 United Nations Climate Change Conference and the 2016 NATO Summit.

==
Geography ==


===
Location and topography ===
Warsaw lies in east-central Poland about 300 km (190 mi) from the Carpathian Mountains and about 260 km (160 mi) from the Baltic Sea, 523 km (325 mi) east of Berlin, Germany.
The city straddles the Vistula River.
It is located in the heartland of the Masovian Plain, and its average elevation is 100 metres (330 ft) above sea level.
The highest point on the left side of the city lies at a height of 115.7 metres (379.6 ft) ("Redutowa" bus depot, district of Wola), on the right side – 122.1 metres (400.6 ft) ("Groszówka" estate, district of Wesoła, by the eastern border).
The lowest point lies at a height 75.6 metres (248.0 ft) (at the right bank of the Vistula, by the eastern border of Warsaw).
There are some hills (mostly artificial) located within the confines of the city – e.g. Warsaw Uprising Hill (121 metres (397.0 ft)) and Szczęśliwice hill (138 metres (452.8 ft) – the highest point of Warsaw in general).

Warsaw is located on two main geomorphologic formations: the plain moraine plateau and the Vistula Valley with its asymmetrical pattern of different terraces.
The Vistula River is the specific axis of Warsaw, which divides the city into two parts, left and right.
The left one is situated both on the moraine plateau (10 to 25 m (32.8 to 82.0 ft) above Vistula level) and on the Vistula terraces (max.
6.5 m (21.3 ft) above Vistula level).
The significant element of the relief, in this part of Warsaw, is the edge of moraine plateau called Warsaw Escarpment.
It is 20 to 25 m (65.6 to 82.0 ft)
high in the Old Town and Central district and about 10 m (32.8 ft) in the north and south of Warsaw.
It goes through the city and plays an important role as a landmark.

The plain moraine plateau has only a few natural and artificial ponds and also groups of clay pits.
The pattern of the Vistula terraces is asymmetrical.
The left side consists mainly of two levels: the highest one contains former flooded terraces and the lowest one the flood plain terrace.
The contemporary flooded terrace still has visible valleys and ground depressions with water systems coming from the old Vistula – riverbed.
They consist of still quite natural streams and lakes as well as the pattern of drainage ditches.
The right side of Warsaw has a different pattern of geomorphological forms.
There are several levels of the Vistula plain terraces (flooded as well as formerly flooded), and only a small part is a not so visible moraine escarpment.
Aeolian sand with a number of dunes parted by peat swamps or small ponds cover the highest terrace.
These are mainly forested areas (pine forest).
===
Climate ===
Officially, Warsaw experiences an oceanic climate, denoted by Cfb by Köppen's original classification.
But the city being in the midst of Siberian air mass and far from the coast has clear continental influences (Dfb), defined as such with old data.
By the Köppen-Geiger climate classification measure, Warsaw is defined as having a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb), with long cold winters and short warm summers, though the urban heat island effect does make Warsaw's winters slightly less severe than in the surrounding rural areas.
However, by classification of the Wincenty Okołowicz, it has a warm-temperate climate in the center of continental Europe with the "fusion" of different features.
The city has cold, sometimes snowy, cloudy winters and warm, sunny, stormy summers.
Spring and autumn can be unpredictable, highly prone to sudden weather changes; however, temperatures are usually mild and with low humidity, especially around May and September.
The average temperature ranges between −1.8 °C (29 °F) in January and 19.2 °C (66.6 °F) in July.
The mean year temperature is 8.5 °C (47.3 °F).
Temperatures may often reach 30 °C (86 °F) in the summer, although the effects of hot weather are usually offset by relatively low dew points and large diurnal temperature differences.
Warsaw is Europe's sixth driest major city (third in Eastern Europe), with yearly rainfall averaging 529 millimetres (20.8 in), the wettest month being July.

==
Cityscape ==


===
Urbanism and architecture ===
Warsaw's long and eclectic history left a noticeable mark on its architecture and urban form.
Unlike most Polish cities, Warsaw's cityscape is mostly contemporary – modern glass buildings are towering above older historical edifices which is a common feature of North American metropolises.
A concentric zone pattern emerged within the last decades; the majority of Warsaw's residents live outside the commercial city centre and commute by metro, bus or tram.
Tenements and apartments in the central neighbourhoods are often reserved for commercial activity or temporary (tourist, student) accommodation.
The nearest residential zones are predominantly located on the outskirts of the inner borough, in Ochota, Mokotów and Żoliborz or along the Vistula in Powiśle.

A seat of Polish monarchs since the end of the 16th century
, Warsaw remained a small city with only privately owned palaces, mansions, villas and several streets of townhouses.
These displayed a richness of colour and architectonic details.
The finest German, Italian and Dutch architects were employed, among them Tylman van Gameren, Andreas Schlüter, Jakub Fontana and Enrico Marconi.
The buildings situated in the vicinity of the Warsaw Old Town represent nearly every European architectural style and historical period.
Warsaw has excellent examples of architecture from the Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque and Neoclassical periods, all of which are located within walking distance of the centre.

Gothic architecture is represented in the majestic churches but also at the burgher houses and fortifications.
The most significant buildings are St John's Cathedral (1390), a typical example of the so-called Masovian Brick Gothic style; St Mary's Church (1411); the Burbach townhouse (14th century); Gunpowder Tower (after 1379); and Royal Castle's Curia Maior (1407–1410).
The most notable examples of Renaissance architecture in the city are the house of the Baryczko merchant family (1562), a building called "The Negro" (early 17th century), and Salwator tenement (1632), all situated on the Old Market Place.
The most interesting examples of Mannerist architecture are the Royal Castle (1596–1619) and the Jesuit Church (1609–1626).
Among the first structures of the early Baroque, the most important are St. Hyacinth's Church (1603–1639) and Sigismund's Column (1644), the first secular monument in the form of a column in modern history.

Some of the best examples of palatial Baroque architecture are Krasiński Palace (1677–1683), Wilanów Palace (1677–1696) and St Kazimierz Church (1688–1692).
The most impressive examples of rococo architecture are Czapski Palace (1712–1721), Palace of the Four Winds (1730s) and Visitationist Church (façade 1728–1761).
The neoclassical architecture in Warsaw can be described by the simplicity of the geometrical forms teamed with a great inspiration from the Roman period.
Some of the best examples of the neoclassical style are the Palace on the Isle (1775–1795), Królikarnia (1782–1786), Carmelite Church (façade 1761–1783) and the Holy Trinity Church (1777–1782).
The neoclassical revival affected all aspects of architecture; the most notable examples are the Great Theater (1825–1833) and buildings located at Bank Square (1825–1828).

Exceptional examples of the bourgeois architecture of the later periods were not restored by the communist authorities after the war or were remodelled into a socialist realist style (like Warsaw Philharmonic edifice originally inspired by Palais Garnier in Paris).
Despite that, the Warsaw University of Technology (Polytechnic) building (1899–1902) is the most interesting of the late 19th-century architecture.
Some 19th-century industrial and brick workhouse buildings in the Praga district were restored, though many have been poorly maintained or demolished.
Some of the important landmarks lost are the Saxon Palace and the Brühl Palace, the most distinctive buildings in prewar Warsaw.
Notable examples of post-war architecture include the Palace of Culture and Science (1952–1955), a soc-realist and art deco skyscraper based on the Empire State Building in New York.
The Constitution Square with its monumental socialist realism architecture (MDM estate) was modelled on the grand squares of Paris, London, Moscow and Rome.
Italianate tuscan-styled colonnades based on those at Piazza della Repubblica in Rome were also erected on Saviour Square.
Contemporary architecture in Warsaw is represented by the Metropolitan Office Building at Pilsudski Square by Norman Foster, Warsaw University Library (BUW) by Marek Budzyński and Zbigniew Badowski, featuring a garden on its roof and view of the Vistula River, Rondo 1 office building by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, Złota 44 residential skyscraper by Daniel Libeskind, Museum of the History of Polish Jews by Rainer Mahlamäki and Golden Terraces, consisting of seven overlapping domes retail and business centre.
Jointly with Frankfurt, London, Paris and Rotterdam, Warsaw is one of the cities with the highest number of skyscrapers in Europe.

===
Landmarks ===
Although contemporary Warsaw is a fairly young city compared to other European capitals, it has numerous tourist attractions and architectural monuments dating back centuries.
Apart from the Warsaw Old Town quarter, reconstructed after World War II, each borough has something to offer.
Among the most notable landmarks of the Old Town are the Royal Castle, Sigismund's Column, Market Square, and the Barbican.

Further south is the so-called Royal Route, with many historical churches, Baroque and Classicist palaces, most notably the Presidential Palace, and the University of Warsaw campus.
The former royal residence of King John III Sobieski at Wilanów is notable for its Baroque architecture and eloquent palatial garden.
Powązki Cemetery is one of the oldest cemeteries in Europe, featuring of sculptures, some of them by the most renowned Polish artists of the 19th and 20th centuries.
Since it serves the religious communities of Warsaw such as Catholics, Jews, Orthodox Christians, Muslims or Protestants, it is often called a necropolis.
Nearby is the Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery, one of the largest Jewish cemeteries in Europe.

In many places in the city the Jewish culture and history resonates down through time.
Among them the most notable are the Jewish theater, the Nożyk Synagogue, Janusz Korczak's Orphanage and the picturesque Próżna Street.
The tragic pages of Warsaw's history are commemorated in places such as the Monument to the Ghetto Heroes, the Umschlagplatz, fragments of the Ghetto wall on Sienna Street and a mound in memory of the Jewish Combat Organization.
Many places commemorate the heroic history of Warsaw such as Pawiak, a German Gestapo prison now occupied by a Mausoleum of Memory of Martyrdom and a museum.
The Warsaw Citadel, a 19th-century fortification built after the defeat of the November Uprising, was a place of martyrdom for the Poles.
Another important monument, the statue of Little Insurrectionist located at the ramparts of the Old Town, commemorates the children who served as messengers and frontline troops in the Warsaw Uprising, while the Warsaw Uprising Monument by Wincenty Kućma was erected in memory of the largest insurrection of World War
II.In Warsaw
there are many places connected with the life and work of Frédéric Chopin who was born near the city in Żelazowa Wola.
The heart of the Polish composer is sealed inside Warsaw's Holy Cross Church.
During the summer time the Chopin Statue in Łazienki Park is a place where pianists give concerts to the park audience.
Also many references to Marie Curie, her work and her family can be found in Warsaw; Curie's birthplace at the Warsaw New Town, the working places where she did her first scientific works and the Radium Institute at Wawelska Street for the research and the treatment of which she founded in 1925.

===
Flora and fauna ===
Green space covers almost a quarter of Warsaw's total area.
These range from small neighborhood parks and green spaces along streets or in courtyards, to tree-lined avenues, large historic parks, nature conservation areas and urban forests at the fringe of the city.
There are as many as 82 parks in the city; the oldest ones were once part of representative palaces and include the Saxon and Krasiński Gardens, Łazienki Park (Royal Baths Park) and Wilanów Palace Parkland.

The Saxon Garden, covering an area of 15.5 ha, formally served as a royal garden to the now nonexistent Saxon Palace.
In 1727, it was made into one of the world's first public parks and later remodelled in the forest-like English style.
The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier is situated at the east end of the park near the central fountain, on Piłsudski Square.
With its benches, flower carpets and a central pond, the Krasiński Palace Garden was once a notable strolling destination for most Varsovians.
The Łazienki Park covers an area of 76 ha and its unique character and history is reflected in the landscape architecture (pavilions, sculptures, bridges, water cascades) and vegetation (domestic and foreign species of trees and shrubs).
The presence of peacocks, pheasants and squirrels at Łazienki attracts tourists and locals.
The Wilanów Palace Parkland on the outskirts of Warsaw traces it history to the second half of the 17th century and covers an area of 43 ha.
Its French-styled alleys corresponds to the ancient, Baroque forms of the palace.

The Botanical Garden and the University Library rooftop garden host an extensive collection of rare domestic and foreign plants, while a palm house in the New Orangery displays plants of subtropics from all over the world.
Mokotów Field (once a racetrack), Ujazdów Park and Skaryszewski Park are also located within the city borders.
The oldest park in the Praga borough was established between 1865 and 1871.The flora of Warsaw may be considered very rich in species on city standards.
This is mainly due to the location of Warsaw within the border region of several big floral regions comprising substantial proportions of close-to-wilderness areas (natural forests, wetlands along the Vistula) as well as arable land, meadows and forests.
The nearby Kampinos Nature Reserve is the last remaining part of the Masovian Primeval Forest and is protected by law.
The Kabaty Woods are by the southern city border and are visited by the residents of southern boroughs such as Ursynów.
There are 13 natural reserves in the vicinity and just 15 kilometres (9 miles) from Warsaw, the environment features a perfectly preserved ecosystem with a habitat of animals like the otter, beavers and hundreds of bird species.
There are also several lakes in Warsaw – mainly the oxbow lakes at Czerniaków and Kamionek.

The Warsaw Zoo covers an area of 40 hectares (99 acres).
There are about 5,000 animals representing nearly 500 species.
Although officially created in 1928, it traces back its roots to 17th century private menageries, often open to the public.

==
Demographics ==
Demographically, Warsaw was the most diverse city in Poland, with significant numbers of foreign-born residents.
In addition to the Polish majority, there was a large and thriving Jewish minority.
According to the Imperial Census of 1897, out of the total population of 638,000, Jews constituted 219,000 (equivalent to 34%).
Prior to the Second World War, Warsaw hosted the world's second largest Jewish population after New York – approximately 30 percent of the city's total population in the late 1930s.
In 1933, 833,500 out of 1,178,914 people declared Polish as their mother tongue.
There was also a notable German community.
The ethnic composition of contemporary Warsaw is incomparable to the diversity that existed for nearly 300 years.
Most of the modern-day population growth is based on internal migration and urbanisation.

In 1939, approximately 1,300,000 people resided in Warsaw; by 1945 the population had dropped to 420,000.
During the first years after the war, the population growth rate was high and the city soon began to suffer from the lack of flats and dwellings to house new incomers.
The first remedial measure was the enlargement of Warsaw's total area (1951) – however the city authorities were still forced to introduce limitations; only the spouses and children of permanent residents as well as some persons of public importance (renowned specialists, artists, engineers) were permitted to stay.
This negatively affected the image of an average Warsaw citizen, who was perceived as more privileged than those migrating from rural areas, towns or other cities.
While all restrictions on residency registration were scrapped in 1990, the negative opinion of Varsovians in some form continues to this day.

===
Immigrant population ===
Much like most capital cities in Europe, Warsaw boasts a foreign-born population that is significantly larger than in other cities, although not coming close to the figures representing the likes of Madrid or Rome.
In 2019, it was estimated that 40,000 people living in Warsaw were born overseas.
Of those, Ukrainians, Vietnamese, Belarusians, Russians and Indians were the most prominent groups.

===
Religion ===
Throughout its existence, Warsaw had been a multi-cultural and multi-religious city.
According to the 1901 census, out of 711,988 inhabitants 56.2% were Catholics, 35.7% Jews, 5% Greek Orthodox Christians and 2.8% Protestants.
Eight years later, in 1909, there were 281,754 Jews (36.9%), 18,189 Protestants (2.4%) and 2,818 Mariavites (0.4%).
This led to construction of hundreds of places of religious worship in all parts of the town.
Most of them were destroyed in the aftermath of the Warsaw Uprising in 1944.
After the war, the new communist authorities of Poland discouraged church construction and only a small number were rebuilt.

The Archdiocese of Warsaw and the Diocese of Warsaw-Praga are the two ecclesiastical districts active in the city which serve the large Roman Catholic population of 1.4 million.
The Lutheran Diocese of Warsaw is one of six in Poland; its main temple is the Holy Trinity Church from 1782, one of Warsaw's most important and historic landmarks.
The Evangelical Reformed Parish (Calvinist) is leading the Polish Reformed Church.
The main tserkva of the Orthodox Christians is Praga's Cathedral of St. Mary Magdalene from 1869.
The Jewish Commune of Warsaw (Gmina Wyznaniowa Żydowska) is one of eight in the country; Chief Rabbi of Poland Michael Schudrich resides in the city.
There are also 3 active synagogues, one of which is the pre-war Nożyk Synagogue designated for Orthodox Jews.
An Islamic Cultural Centre in Ochota and a small mosque in Wilanów serve the Muslims.

==
Government and politics ==
As the capital of Poland, Warsaw is the political centre of the country.
All state agencies are located there, including the Polish Parliament, the Presidential Office and the Supreme Court.
In the Polish parliament the city and the area are represented by 31 MPs (out of 460).
Additionally, Warsaw elects two MEPs (Members of the European Parliament).

The Sejm, the lower house of the Polish parliament, is situated in Warsaw on Wiejska Street.
The Sejm is composed of 460 members (in Polish deputowany or poseł).
It is elected by universal ballot and is presided over by a speaker called the Marshal of the Sejm (Marszałek Sejmu).
===
Municipal government ===
The municipal government existed in Warsaw until World War II and was restored in 1990 (during the communist times, the National City Council – Miejska Rada Narodowa – governed in Warsaw).
Since 1990, the system of city administration has been changed several times – also as the result of the reform which restored powiats, cancelled in 1975.
Finally, according to the Warsaw Act, the city is divided into 18 districts and forms one city powiat with a unified municipal government.

The basic unit of territorial division in Poland is a commune (gmina).
A city is also a commune – but with a city charter.
Both cities and communes are governed by a mayor – but in the communes the mayor is vogt (wójt in Polish), however in the cities – burmistrz.
Some bigger cities obtain the entitlements, i.e. tasks and privileges, which are possessed by the units of the second level of the territorial division – counties (powiaty in Polish).
An example of such entitlement is a car registration: a gmina cannot register cars, this is a powiat's task (
i.e. a registration number depends on what powiat a car had been registered in, not the gmina).
In this case we say "city county" or powiat grodzki.
Such cities are for example Lublin, Kraków, Gdańsk, and Poznań.
In Warsaw, its districts additionally have some of a powiat's entitlements – like the already mentioned car registration.
For example, the Wola district has its own evidence and the Ursynów district – its own (and the cars from Wola
have another type of registration number than those from Ursynów).
But for instance the districts in Kraków do not have the entitlements of a powiat, so the registration numbers in Kraków are of the same type for all districts.

Legislative power in Warsaw is vested in a unicameral Warsaw City Council (Rada Miasta), which comprises 60 members.
Council members are elected directly every five years (since 2018 election).
Like most legislative bodies, the city council divides itself into committees which have the oversight of various functions of the city government.
Bills passed by a simple majority are sent to the mayor (the President of Warsaw), who may sign them into law.
If the mayor vetoes a bill, the council has 30 days to override the veto by a two-thirds majority vote.

Each of the 18 separate city districts has its own council (Rada dzielnicy).
Their duties are focused on aiding the President and the City Council, as well as supervising various municipal companies, city-owned property and schools.
The head of each of the District Councils is named the Mayor (Burmistrz) and is elected by the local council from the candidates proposed by the President of Warsaw.

The mayor of Warsaw is called President.
Generally, in Poland, the mayors of bigger cities are called presidents – i.e. cities with over 100,000 people or that had a president before 1990.
The first Warsaw President was Jan Andrzej Menich (1695–1696).
Between 1975 and 1990 the Warsaw presidents simultaneously led the Warsaw Voivode.
Since 1990 the President of Warsaw had been elected by the city council.
In the years of 1994–1999 the mayor of the district Centrum automatically was designated as the President of Warsaw: the mayor of Centrum was elected by the district council of Centrum and the council was elected only by the Centrum residents.
Since 2002 the President of Warsaw is elected by all of the citizens of Warsaw.
The President of Warsaw is Rafał Trzaskowski.
The first president elected according these rules was Lech Kaczyński.
When he was elected as the President of Polish Republic (December 2005)
he resigned as mayor on the day before taking office.

Headquarters of Polish government agencies in Warsaw
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


===
Districts ===
Until 1994, there were 7 districts in Warsaw:
Śródmieście, Praga Północ, Praga Południe, Żoliborz, Wola, Ochota, and Mokotów.
Between 1994 and 2002, there were 11 districts: Centrum, Białołęka, Targówek, Rembertów, Wawer, Wilanów, Ursynów, Włochy, Ursus, Bemowo, and Bielany.
In 2002, the town Wesoła was incorporated and the territorial division of Warsaw was established as follows:
Warsaw is a county (powiat), and is further divided into 18 districts (dzielnica), each one with its own administrative body.
Each of the districts is customarily subdivided into several neighbourhoods which have no legal or administrative status.
Warsaw has two historic neighbourhoods, called Old Town (Stare Miasto) and New Town (Nowe Miasto), in the borough of Śródmieście.

==
Economy ==
Warsaw is the leading economic and financial hub of Central Europe, the Visegrád Group and the Three Seas Initiative.
In 2019, the city's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was estimated at €94 billion ($105 billion), which places Warsaw among the wealthiest regions in the European Union; it generates approximately 1/6 of the total GDP of Poland and the country's national income.
In 2020, Warsaw was classified as an alpha world city (also known as a "major global city that links economic regions into the world economy") by the Globalization and World Cities (GaWC) Study Group and Network from Loughborough University, placing it on a par with cities such as Sydney, Istanbul, Amsterdam or Seoul.
Warsaw's city centre (Śródmieście) and commercial Wola district are home not only to many national institutions and government agencies, but also to many domestic and international companies.
In 2017, 423,000 enterprises were registered in the city.
Warsaw's ever-growing business community has been noticed globally, regionally, and nationally; in 2019 Warsaw was one of the top destinations for foreign investors in Europe.
In October 2019, Warsaw's unemployment rate was 1.3%, the lowest in the country.
Shopping and consumerism is an important component of Warsaw's economy –
the high street of retail is New World (Nowy Świat) and the Royal Route.
However, most retailers choose to operate in central shopping centres and malls such as Złote Tarasy-Golden Terraces, Galeria Mokotów and Westfield Arkadia – one of the biggest shopping complexes in Europe.
Luxury or upmarket goods as well as
designer labels can be found in the Vitkac Department Store and around Frascati.
===
Warsaw Stock Exchange ===
Warsaw's first stock exchange was established in 1817 and continued trading until World War II.
It was re-established in April 1991, following the end of a communist planned economy and the reintroduction of a free-market economy.
Today, the Warsaw Stock Exchange (WSE) is, according to many indicators, the largest market in the region, with 433 companies listed and total capitalisation of 1 trillion PLN as of 26 November 2020.
From 1991 until 2000, the stock exchange was, ironically, located in the building previously used as the headquarters of the Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR).

===
Industry ===
The most prominent industries and industrial sectors include high-tech, electrotechnical, chemical, cosmetic, construction, food processing, printing, metallurgy, machinery and clothing.
The majority of production plants and facilities are concentrated within the WOP Warsaw Industrial Precinct (Warszawski Okręg Przemysłowy) which is situated around the city's peripheral localities such as Praga, Pruszków, Sochaczew, Piaseczno, Marki and Żyrardów.

Warsaw has developed a particularly strong retail market/sector, representing around 13% of the total retail stock in the country.
Following World War II, the authorities decided that the city will be transformed into a major industrial (heavy industry) and manufacturing centre.
As a result, numerous large factories and production facilities were built in and around the city.
Among the largest were Huta Warszawa steel works (now Arcelor), the FSO Car Factory and Ursus SA.
The FSO, established in 1951, was once Warsaw's most successful corporation.
Notable vehicles assembled there over the decades include the Warszawa, Syrena, Fiat 125p and the Polonez.
In 1995, the factory was purchased by the South Korean car manufacturer Daewoo, which assembled the Tico, Espero, Nubia, Tacuma, Leganza, Lanos and Matiz there for the European market.
The company is now defunct.
The Ursus factory opened in 1893 and is still in operation.
Throughout its history various machinery was assembled there – motorcycles, military vehicles, trucks and buses.
Since World War II it has produced only tractors.

===
Media and film ===
Warsaw is the media centre of Poland, and the location of the main headquarters of TVP and other numerous local and national TV and radio stations, such as Polskie Radio (Polish Radio), TVN, Polsat, TV4, TV Puls,
Canal+ Poland, Cyfra+ and MTV Poland.
Since May 1661 the first Polish newspaper, the Polish Ordinary Mercury, was printed in Warsaw.
The city is also the printing capital of Poland with a wide variety of domestic and foreign periodicals expressing diverse views, and domestic newspapers are extremely competitive.
Rzeczpospolita, Gazeta Wyborcza and Dziennik Polska-Europa-Świat, Poland's large nationwide daily newspapers, have their headquarters in Warsaw.

Warsaw also has a sizable movie and television industry.
The city houses several movie companies and studios.
Among the movie companies are TOR, Czołówka, Zebra and Kadr which is behind several international movie productions.
Since World War II, Warsaw has been the most important centre of film production in Poland.
It has also been featured in numerous movies, both Polish and foreign, for example: Kanał and Korczak by Andrzej Wajda and The Decalogue by Krzysztof Kieślowski, also including Oscar winner
The Pianist by Roman Polański.
It is also home to the National Film Archive, which, since 1955, has been collecting and preserving Polish film culture.

==
Education ==
Warsaw holds some of the finest institutions of higher education in Poland.
It is home to four major universities and over 62 smaller schools of higher education.
The overall number of students of all grades of education in Warsaw is almost 500,000 (29.2% of the city population; 2002).
The number of university students is over 280,000.
Most of the reputable universities are public, but in recent years there has also been an upsurge in the number of private universities.

The University of Warsaw was established in 1816, when the partitions of Poland separated Warsaw from the oldest and most influential Polish academic center, in Kraków.
Warsaw University of Technology is the second academic school of technology in the country, and one of the largest in East-Central Europe, employing 2,000 professors.
Other institutions for higher education include the Medical University of Warsaw, the largest medical school in Poland and one of the most prestigious; the National Defence University, highest military academic institution in Poland; the Fryderyk Chopin University of Music, the oldest and largest music school in Poland and one of the largest in Europe; the Warsaw School of Economics, the oldest and most renowned economic university in the country; the Warsaw University of Life Sciences, the largest agricultural university, founded in 1818; and the University of Social Sciences and Humanities, the first private secular university in the country.

Warsaw has numerous libraries, many of which contain vast collections of historic documents.
The most important library in terms of historic document collections is the National Library of Poland.
The library holds 8.2 million volumes in its collection.
Formed in 1928, it sees itself as a successor to the Załuski Library, the biggest in Poland and one of the first and biggest libraries in the world.
Another important library – the University Library, founded in 1816, is home to over two million items.
The building was designed by architects Marek Budzyński and Zbigniew Badowski and opened on 15 December 1999.
It is surrounded by green.
The University Library garden, designed by Irena Bajerska, was opened on 12 June 2002.
It is one of the largest roof gardens in Europe with an area of more than 10,000 m2 (110,000 sq ft), and plants covering 5,111 m2 (55,010 sq ft).
As the university garden it is open to the public every day.

==
Transport ==
Warsaw is a considerable transport hub linking Western, Central and Eastern Europe.
The city has a good network of buses and a continuously expanding perpendicular metro running north to south and east to west.
The tram system is one of the biggest in Europe, with a total length of 132 km (82 mi).
As a result of increased foreign investment, economic growth and EU funding, the city has undertaken the construction of new roads, flyovers and bridges.
The supervising body is the City Roads Authority (ZDM – Zarząd Dróg Miejskich).

Warsaw lacks a complete ring road system and most traffic goes directly through the city centre, leading to the eleventh highest level of congestion in Europe.
The Warsaw ring road has been planned to consist of three express roads: S2 (south), S8 (north-west) and S17 (east).
S8 and a part of S2 are open, with S2 to be finished by 2020.The A2 motorway opened in June 2012, stretches west from Warsaw and is a direct motorway connection with Łódź, Poznań and ultimately with Berlin.

The city has two international airports:
Warsaw Chopin Airport, located just 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) from the city centre, and Warsaw-Modlin Airport, located 35 kilometres (22 mi) to the north, opened in July 2012.
With around 100 international and domestic flights a day and with 15 500 000 passengers served in 2017, Warsaw Frédéric Chopin Airport is by far the biggest airport in Poland and in Central-Eastern Europe.
and it has also been called "the most important and largest airport in Central Europe".
Public transport also extends to light rail Warszawska Kolej Dojazdowa line, urban railway Szybka Kolej Miejska, regional rail Koleje Mazowieckie (Mazovian Railways), and bicycle sharing systems (Veturilo).
The buses, trams, urban railway and Metro are managed by Warszawski transport Publiczny (WTP, Warsaw Public Transpoert).

The regional rail and light rail is operated by Polish State Railways (PKP).
There are also some suburban bus lines run by private operators.
Bus service covers the entire city, with approximately 170 routes totalling about 2,603 kilometres (1,617 mi), and with some 1,600 vehicles.

The first section of the Warsaw Metro was opened in 1995 initially with a total of 11 stations.
As of 2020, it has 34 stations running a distance of approximately 32 km (20 mi).The main railway station is Warszawa Centralna serving both domestic traffic to almost every major city in Poland, and international connections.
There are also five other major railway stations and a number of smaller suburban stations.

Public transport in Warsaw
		
		
		
		
		


==
Culture ==


===
Music and theatre ===
Thanks to numerous musical venues, including the Teatr Wielki, the Polish National Opera, the Chamber Opera, the National Philharmonic Hall and the National Theatre, as well as the Roma and Buffo music theatres and the Congress Hall in the Palace of Culture and Science
, Warsaw hosts many events and festivals.
Among the events worth particular attention are: the International Frédéric Chopin Piano Competition, the International Contemporary Music Festival Warsaw Autumn, the Jazz Jamboree, Warsaw Summer Jazz Days, the International Stanisław Moniuszko Vocal Competition, the Mozart Festival, and the Festival of Old Music.
Warsaw is also considered as one of the European hubs of underground electronic music with a very attractive house and techno music scene.
Warsaw is home to over 30 major theatres spread throughout the city, including the National Theatre (founded in 1765) and the Grand Theatre (established 1778).

Warsaw also attracts many young and off-stream directors and performers who add to the city's theatrical culture.
Their productions may be viewed mostly in smaller theatres and Houses of Culture (Domy Kultury), mostly outside Śródmieście (Central Warsaw).
Warsaw hosts the International Theatrical Meetings.

From 1833 to the outbreak of World War II, Plac Teatralny (Theatre Square) was the country's cultural hub and home to the various theatres.
Plac Teatralny and its environs was the venue for numerous parades, celebrations of state holidays, carnival balls and concerts.

The main building housed the Great Theatre from 1833 to 1834, the Rozmaitości Theatre from 1836 to 1924 and then the National Theatre, the Reduta Theatre from 1919 to 1924, and from 1928 to 1939 – the Nowy Theatre, which staged productions of contemporary poetical drama, including those directed by Leon Schiller.
Nearby, in Ogród Saski (the Saxon Garden), the Summer Theatre was in operation from 1870 to 1939, and in the inter-war period, the theatre complex also included Momus, Warsaw's first literary cabaret, and Leon Schiller's musical theatre Melodram.
The Wojciech Bogusławski Theatre (1922–26) was the best example of "Polish monumental theatre".
From the mid-1930s, the Great Theatre building housed the Upati Institute of Dramatic Arts – the first state-run academy of dramatic art, with an acting department and a stage directing department.

===
Museums and art galleries ===
There are over 60 museums and galleries in Warsaw which are accessible to the public.
As interesting examples of expositions the most notable are: the world's first Museum of Posters boasting one of the largest collections of art posters in the world, and the Museum of the History of Polish Jews.
Among the most prestigious ones are the National Museum with a collection of works whose origin ranges in time from antiquity till the present epoch as well as one of the best collections of paintings in the country including some paintings from Adolf Hitler's private collection, and the Museum of the Polish Army whose set portrays the history of arms.

The collections of Łazienki and Wilanów palaces focus on the paintings of the "old masters", as do those of the Royal Castle which displays the Lanckoroński Collection including two paintings by Rembrandt.
The Palace in Natolin, a former rural residence of Duke Czartoryski, is another venue with its interiors and park accessible to tourists.

Holding Poland's largest private collection of art, the Carroll Porczyński Collection Museum displays works from such varied artists as Paris Bordone, Cornelis van Haarlem, José de Ribera, William-Adolphe Bouguereau, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Vincent van Gogh along with some copies of masterpieces of European painting.

A fine tribute to the fall of Warsaw and history of Poland can be found in the Warsaw Uprising Museum and in the Katyń Museum which preserves the memory of that crime.
The Warsaw Uprising Museum also operates a rare preserved and operating historic stereoscopic theatre, the Warsaw Fotoplastikon.
The Museum of Independence preserves patriotic and political objects connected with Poland's struggles for independence.
Dating back to 1936 the Warsaw Historical Museum contains 60 rooms which host a permanent exhibition of the history of Warsaw from its origins until today.

The 17th century Royal Ujazdów Castle houses the Centre for Contemporary Art, with some permanent and temporary exhibitions, concerts, shows and creative workshops.
The Centre  realizes about 500 projects a year.
The Zachęta National Gallery of Art, the oldest exhibition site in Warsaw, with a tradition stretching back to the mid-19th century organises exhibitions of modern art by Polish and International Artists and promotes art in many other ways.
Since 2011, Warsaw Gallery Weekend is held on the last weekend of September.

The city also possesses some oddities such as the Neon Museum, the Museum of Caricature, the Museum of John Paul II and Primate Wyszyński, the Legia Warsaw Museum, and a Motorisation Museum in Otrębusy.

=== Cuisine and food ===
Warsaw's culinary tradition was shaped by its once multicultural population; its cuisine is distinct from that of other cities and towns in Poland.
Strong Jewish and French influences were cultivated over the years, in particular herring, consommé, bagels, aspic and French meringue-based pastries or cakes.
Traditional Varsovian food is hearty and includes a tripe soup for entrée, a pyza dumpling for main and the iconic wuzetka (voo-zetka) chocolate cream pie for dessert.
Crayfish and fish in gelatin were the classical dishes in Warsaw's restaurants throughout the 1920s and the 1930s.

Much like Paris or Vienna, Warsaw once possessed a prominent café culture which dated back to the early 18th century, and the city's cafeterias were a place for socializing.
The historic Wedel Chocolate Lounge on Szpitalna Street remains one of the most renowned spots for social gatherings.
Cafeterias, confectioneries and patisseries such as Caffè Nero, Costa Coffee and Starbucks are predominantly found along the Royal Route on New World Street.
Thousands of Warsaw's residents also flock annually to the pastry workshops (pączkarnia) to buy pączki doughnuts on Fat Thursday.
Restaurants offering authentic Polish cuisine like Polka, Zapiecek and U Fukiera are concentrated around the Old Town district.
Various spit cakes of Czech or Hungarian origin (kürtőskalács and trdelník) are also sold primarily in the Old Town.
In the 20th century, Warsaw was famed for its state-owned milk bars (bar mleczny) which offered cheap fast food in the form of home dinners.
Examples of dishes popularized by these canteens include tomato soup, schnitzels, frikadeller, mizeria salad and many others.
Contemporary fast food giants like McDonald's, KFC, Subway and Burger King are the successors to milk bars, though some reemerged in recent years due to widespread nostalgia.
Gourmet and haute cuisine establishments are situated in the vicinity of the downtown area or in the Frascati neighbourhood.
Thirteen Varsovian restaurants were appreciated by the Michelin Guide, with two receiving a michelin star in 2019.

===
Events ===
Several commemorative events take place every year, notably the Orange Warsaw Festival featuring music concerts.
One of the more popular events is the procession of the Three Wise Men (in Polish known as the Three Kings) on Epiphany, shortly after the New Year.
Paper crowns are usually worn by spectators throughout the day.
The event, which runs along the Royal Route, is attended by Warsaw's highest officials and by the Polish president who resides nearby.
Gatherings of thousands of people on the banks of the Vistula on Midsummer's Night for a festival called Wianki (Polish for Wreaths) have also become a tradition and a yearly event in the programme of cultural events in Warsaw.
The festival traces its roots to a peaceful pagan ritual where maidens would float their wreaths of herbs on the water to predict when they would be married, and to whom.
By the 19th century this tradition had become a festive event, and it continues today.
The city council organize concerts and other events.
Each Midsummer's Eve, apart from the official floating of wreaths, jumping over fires, and looking for the fern flower, there are musical performances, dignitaries' speeches, fairs and fireworks by the river bank.
Warsaw Multimedia Fountain Park is located in an enchanting place, near the Old Town and the Vistula.
The ‘Water – Light – Sound’ multimedia shows take place each Friday and Saturday from May till September at 9.30 pm (May and – 9 October pm).
On other weekdays, the shows do not include lasers and sound.

The Warsaw Film festival, an annual festival that takes place every October.
Films are usually screened in their original language with Polish subtitles and participating cinemas include Kinoteka (Palace of Science and Culture), Multikino at Golden Terraces and Kultura.
Over 100 films are shown throughout the festival, and awards are given to the best and most popular films.
===
Warsaw Mermaid ===
The mermaid (syrenka) is Warsaw's symbol and can be found on statues throughout the city and on the city's coat of arms.
This imagery has been in use since at least the mid-14th century.
The oldest existing armed seal of Warsaw is from the year 1390, consisting of a round seal bordered with the Latin inscription Sigilium Civitatis Varsoviensis (Seal of the city of Warsaw).
City records as far back as 1609 document the use of a crude form of a sea monster with a female upper body and holding a sword in its claws.
In 1653 the poet Zygmunt Laukowski asks the question:

Warsaw of strong walls; why was the emblem Mermaid with sharp sword, given you by the kings?

The Mermaid Statue stands in the very centre of Old Town Square, surrounded by a fountain.
Due to vandalism, the original statue had been moved to the grounds of the Museum of Warsaw – the statue in the square is a copy.

This is not the only mermaid in Warsaw.
Another is located on the bank of the Vistula River near Świętokrzyski Bridge and another on Karowa Street.

The origin of the legendary figure is not fully known.
The best-known legend, by Artur Oppman, is that long ago two of Triton's daughters set out on a journey through the depths of the oceans and seas.
One of them decided to stay on the coast of Denmark and can be seen sitting at the entrance to the port of Copenhagen.
The second mermaid reached the mouth of the Vistula River and plunged into its waters.
She stopped to rest on a sandy beach by the village of Warszowa, where fishermen came to admire her beauty and listen to her beautiful voice.
A greedy merchant also heard her songs; he followed the fishermen and captured the mermaid.
Another legend says that a mermaid once swam to Warsaw from the Baltic Sea for the love of the Griffin, the ancient defender of the city, who was killed in a struggle against the Swedish invasions of the 17th century.
The mermaid, wishing to avenge his death, took the position of defender of Warsaw, becoming the symbol of the city.
Every member of the Queen's Royal Hussars of the UK's light cavalry wears the Maid of Warsaw, the crest of the City of Warsaw, on the left sleeve of his No.
2 (Service) Dress.
Members of 651 Squadron Army Air Corps of the United Kingdom also wear the Maid of Warsaw on the left sleeve of their No.
2 (Service) Dress.

==
Sports ==
On 9 April 2008 the President of Warsaw, Hanna Gronkiewicz-Waltz, obtained from the mayor of Stuttgart Wolfgang Schuster a challenge award – a commemorative plaque awarded to Warsaw as the European capital of Sport in 2008.

The National Stadium, a 58,580-seat-capacity football (soccer) stadium, replaced Warsaw's recently demolished 10th-Anniversary Stadium.
The national stadium hosted the opening match, 2 group matches, a quarterfinal, and a semi-final of the UEFA Euro 2012.There are many sports centres in the city as well.
Most of these facilities are swimming pools and sports halls, many of them built by the municipality in the past several years.
The main indoor venue is Hala Torwar, used for a variety of indoor sports (it was a venue for the 2009 EuroBasket
but it is also used as an indoor skating rink).
There is also an open-air skating rink (Stegny) and a horse racetrack (Służewiec).

The best of the city's swimming centres is at Wodny Park Warszawianka, 4 km (2 mi)
south of the centre at Merliniego Street, where there's an Olympic-sized pool as well as water slides and children's areas.
From the Warsovian football teams, the most famous is Legia Warsaw – the army club with a nationwide following play at Stadion Wojska Polskiego, just southeast of the centre at Łazienkowska Street.
Established in 1916, they have won the country's championship 14 times (most recently in 2020) and won the Polish Cup 19 times.
In the Champions League season 1995/96 they reached the quarter-finals, where they lost to Panathinaikos Athens.

Their local rivals, Polonia Warsaw, have significantly fewer supporters, yet they managed to win the country's championship two times (in 1946 and 2000) and won the cup twice as well.
Polonia's home venue is located at Konwiktorska Street, a ten-minute walk north from the Old Town.
Polonia was relegated from the country's top flight in 2013 because of their disastrous financial situation.
They are now playing in the second league (3rd tier in Poland).

Legia Warsaw's basketball team was one of the country's best teams in 50s and 60s.
They are now participating in PLK, the highest-tier level of the Polish basketball.

==
Famous people ==
One of the most famous people born in Warsaw was Maria Skłodowska-Curie, who achieved international recognition for her research on radioactivity and was the first female recipient of the Nobel Prize.
Famous musicians include Władysław Szpilman and Frédéric Chopin.
Though Chopin was born in the village of Żelazowa Wola, about 60 km (37 mi) from Warsaw, he moved to the city with his family when he was seven months old.
Casimir Pulaski, a Polish general and hero of the American Revolutionary War, was born here in 1745.Tamara de Lempicka
was a famous artist born in Warsaw.
She was born Maria Górska in Warsaw to wealthy parents and in 1916 married a Polish lawyer Tadeusz Łempicki.
Better than anyone else she represented the art deco style in painting and art.
Nathan Alterman, the Israeli poet, was born in Warsaw, as was Moshe Vilenski, the Israeli composer, lyricist, and pianist, who studied music at the Warsaw Conservatory.
Russian Jewish poet and essayist Osip Mandelstam, one of the foremost members of the Acmeist school of poetry was born in Warsaw while it was part of the Russian Empire.
Other notables include Samuel Goldwyn, the founder of Goldwyn Pictures, mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot, physicist Joseph Rotblat, biochemist Casimir Funk, and Moshe Prywes, an Israeli physician who was the first President of Ben-Gurion University of the Negev.
Warsaw was the beloved city of Isaac Bashevis Singer, which he described in many of his novels: "Warsaw has just now been destroyed.
No one will ever see the Warsaw I knew.
Let me just write about it.
Let this Warsaw not disappear forever", he wrote.
Notable sportspeople born in Warsaw include footballer Robert Lewandowski and tennis player Iga Świątek.

== Rankings ==
Largest capital cities of the European Union:
ranked 7th (2020).

Most expensive cities: ranked 113th of 144.

Livability index:
ranked 32nd
(2012)


==
International relations ==


===
Twin towns – sister cities ===
Warsaw is twinned with:


===
Partnership and friendship ===
Warsaw also cooperates with:


==
See also ==
Battle of Warsaw
Destruction of Warsaw
List of tallest buildings in Warsaw
List of honorary citizens of Warsaw
Street names of Warsaw
Tourism in Poland
Treaty of Warsaw
(disambiguation)
Warsaw concentration camp
Warsaw dialect
Warsaw Fire Guard
Legia Warszawa


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Official website (in English)
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (also known as Star Wars:
Episode VII – The Force Awakens) is a 2015 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the first installment in the Star Wars
sequel trilogy, following Return of the Jedi (1983), and the seventh episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Lupita Nyong'o, Andy Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, and Max von Sydow.
Set thirty years after Return of the Jedi, The Force Awakens follows Rey, Finn, Poe Dameron, and Han Solo's search for Luke Skywalker and their fight in the Resistance, led by General Leia Organa and veterans of the Rebel Alliance, against Kylo Ren and the First Order, a successor to the Galactic Empire.

The film was announced after The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012.
The film is the first Star Wars film to not extensively involve franchise creator George Lucas, who only served as a creative consultant in the early stages of production.
The film was produced by Abrams, his longtime collaborator Bryan Burk, and Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy.
Abrams and Lawrence Kasdan, co-writer of the original trilogy films
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi, rewrote an initial script by Michael Arndt.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score.
Filming began in April 2014 in Abu Dhabi and Iceland, with principal photography also taking place in Ireland and at Pinewood Studios in England, and wrapped in November.

The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles on December 14, 2015, and was released in the United States on December 18.
The film received positive reviews for its screenplay, direction, acting performances (particularly those of Ford, Driver, Ridley, Isaac, and Boyega), musical score, visual effects, editing, and action sequences, although some critics found it too similar to A New Hope (1977).
The film marked an improvement in a reception over the previous four Star Wars films.
The film broke various box office records and became the highest-grossing installment in the franchise, the highest-grossing film in the United States and Canada, the highest-grossing film of 2015, and the third-highest-grossing film at the time of its release, with a worldwide gross of over $2 billion and a net profit of over $780 million.
Among films' box office adjusted for inflation, the film is the top-grossing sequel of all time in North America.
The film received numerous accolades, including five nominations at the 88th Academy Awards and four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards, where it won the award for Best Special Visual Effects.
Two sequels within the sequel trilogy have been released: The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

==
Plot ==
Thirty years after the Galactic Civil War, the First Order has risen from the fallen Galactic Empire and seeks to end the New Republic.
The Resistance, backed by the Republic and led by General Leia Organa, opposes the First Order.
Leia searches for her brother, Luke Skywalker, who has gone missing.

On the desert planet Jakku, Resistance pilot Poe Dameron receives a map to Luke's place from Lor San Tekka.
Stormtroopers commanded by Kylo Ren raid the village and capture Poe, while Kylo kills San Tekka.
Poe's droid, BB-8, escapes with the map and encounters a scavenger named Rey.
Kylo tortures Poe using the Force and learns of BB-8.
Stormtrooper FN-2187, disillusioned by the First Order, frees Poe, and they escape in a stolen TIE fighter.
Upon learning that FN-2187 has no other name, Poe gives him the name "Finn".
As they head to Jakku to retrieve BB-8, a First Order Star Destroyer shoots them, and they crash-land.
Finn survives and assumes that Poe died in the crash.
He encounters Rey and BB-8, but the First Order tracks them and launches an airstrike.
Rey, Finn, and BB-8 steal the Millennium Falcon and escape the planet.

The Falcon gets discovered and boarded by Han Solo and Chewbacca.
Gangs seeking to settle debts with Han attack, but the group escape in the Falcon.
At the First Order's Starkiller Base, a planet converted into a superweapon, Supreme Leader Snoke allows General Hux to use the weapon for the first time.
Snoke questions
Kylo's ability to deal with emotions on his father, Han Solo, who Kylo states means nothing to him.

Aboard the Falcon, Han determines that BB-8's map is incomplete.
He then explains that Luke attempted to rebuild the Jedi Order but exiled himself when an apprentice turned to the dark side, destroyed the temple, and slaughtered the other apprentices.
The crew travels to the planet Takodana and meets with cantina owner Maz Kanata, who offers help getting BB-8 to the Resistance.
The Force draws Rey to a secluded vault, where she finds the lightsaber once belonging to Luke and his father, Anakin Skywalker.
She experiences disturbing visions and flees into the woods, confused and terrified.
Maz gives Finn the lightsaber for safekeeping.

Starkiller Base destroys the New Republic and its fleet.
The First Order attacks Takodana in search of BB-8.
Han, Chewbacca, and Finn are saved by Resistance X-wing fighters led by Poe, who survived the crash.
Leia arrives at Takodana with C-3PO and reunites with Han.
Meanwhile, Kylo captures Rey and takes her to Starkiller Base, but she resists his mind-reading attempts.
Snoke orders Kylo to bring Rey to him.
Discovering she can use the Force, Rey escapes using a Jedi mind trick on a guard.

At the Resistance base on D'Qar, BB-8 finds R2-D2, who had been inactive since Luke's disappearance.
As Starkiller Base prepares to fire once more, the Resistance devises a plan to destroy it by attacking its thermal oscillator.
Using the Falcon, Han, Chewbacca, and Finn infiltrate the facility, find Rey, and plant explosives.
Han confronts Kylo, calling him by his birth name Ben, and implores him to abandon the dark side.
Kylo seems to consider this, but ultimately refuses and kills his father.
Devastated, Chewbacca shoots Kylo and sets off the explosives, allowing Poe to attack and destroy the base's thermal oscillator.

The injured Kylo pursues Finn and Rey into the woods.
Finn fights Kylo with the lightsaber to protect Rey before Kylo knocks him unconscious.
Rey takes the lightsaber and channels the Force to defeat Kylo in a duel; they are then separated by a fissure as the planet's surface begins to splinter.
Snoke orders Hux to evacuate and bring Kylo to him to complete his training.
Chewbacca rescues Rey and the unconscious Finn, and they escape aboard the Falcon.
As the Resistance forces flee, Starkiller Base implodes.
R2-D2 awakens and reveals the rest of the map, which Rey uses to find the oceanic planet
Ahch-To in the Falcon.

On Ahch-To, Rey finds Luke atop a cliff on a remote island.
Without a word, she presents him with his father's lightsaber.

== Cast ==
Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A rogue and a smuggler, formerly a key player in the Rebel Alliance.
Ford said, "[Han] does not aspire to the position of Obi-Wan, nor do I aspire to be some New Age Alec Guinness.
His development is consistent with the character, and there are emotional elements which have occasioned his growth.
[...]
There's a lot of the rogue still left in Solo.
Some things don't change."

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker:
The last Jedi, who has gone into hiding.
Regarding Luke, Han, and Leia, Abrams stated: "They'd be as old and as mythic as the tale of King Arthur.
They would be characters who [the new characters] may have heard of, but maybe not.
They'd be characters who they might believe existed, or just sounded like a fairy tale.
"
Hamill was initially skeptical of Luke only appearing at the end of the film and called his limited screentime "a great surprise".
Abrams added that the film's ending was intended to be "this great long drumroll up to seeing this guy".

Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa: The former princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan, now General of the Resistance, and Luke's twin sister.
After the events of Return of the Jedi, she is described as "a little more battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
Fisher described Leia as "Solitary.
Under a lot of pressure.
Committed as ever to her cause, but I would imagine feeling somewhat defeated, tired, and pissed."
Abrams said: "The stakes are pretty high in the story for her, so there's not much goofing around where Leia's concerned."

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren: A dark warrior who is strong with the Force, the leader of the Knights of Ren, and a high-ranking member of the First Order.
He is the son of Han and Leia, nephew of Luke, and the grandson of the deceased Darth Vader.
Driver said the team tried "not to think of him as being bad, or evil, or a villain.
Something that was more three-dimensional.
He's more dangerous and unpredictable, and morally justified in doing what he thinks is right."

Daisy Ridley as Rey: A highly Force-sensitive scavenger who was abandoned as a child on the desert planet Jakku and awaits her absent family's return.
Ridley said: "She's completely self-sufficient and does everything for herself, until she meets [Finn] and an adventure begins.
"Cailey
Fleming as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn: A reformed First Order stormtrooper.
Boyega said that he learned he obtained the part "over a nice breakfast in Mayfair" during which Abrams told him, "John, you're the new star of Star Wars."
Boyega said: "When we find Finn, he's in incredible danger.
And the way he reacts to this danger changes his life, and launches him into the Star Wars universe in a very unique way."
He said in another interview: "He's been taught about Luke Skywalker, he knows about his history.
For him it's like joining the army and then learning about one of the great enemies of your country."

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron: A Resistance X-wing fighter pilot.
Isaac said: "He's the best freaking pilot in the galaxy, [...]
He's been sent on a mission by a certain princess, and he ends up coming up across [Finn], and their fates are forever intertwined."

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata: A wise and perceptive figure operating a somewhat shady cantina on the peaceful forest planet Takodana who is acquainted with Han.
Abrams said Kanata has "lived over a thousand years.
She's had this watering hole for about a century, and it's like another bar that you'd find in a corner of the Star Wars universe."
According to Abrams, the character was based on his former high school English teacher, Rose Gilbert, who lectured at the Palisades Charter High School from 1961 to 2013.
Abrams said the team "really wanted the story to feel authentic, despite being a wild fantasy.
I mentioned Rose in an early story meeting as a sort of timeless, wise figure that I'd actually known in my life."

Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke:
The political leader of the First Order.
He is Kylo Ren's master, who seduced him to the dark side and is very powerful in the dark side of the Force.
Serkis described Snoke as "quite an enigmatic character, and strangely vulnerable at the same time as being quite powerful, [...]
He is large.
He appears tall.
And also just the facial design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics.
[...]
Without giving too much away at this point, he has a very distinctive, idiosyncratic bone and facial structure."

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux:
The commander of the First Order's Starkiller Base.
Gleeson described him as "pretty ruthless.
A strong disciplinarian would be a mild way of putting it.
[...]
He's kind of opposite Kylo Ren.
They have their own relationship, which is individual and unusual.
One of them is strong in different ways than the other.
They're both vying for power."

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A humanoid protocol droid in Organa's service.
Daniels said the actors were allowed to experiment with their performances, and that Abrams "made a field, a playpen where you were allowed to take your time and suggest things".

Max von Sydow as Lor San Tekka: A retired adventurer on Jakku, aiding the Resistance in finding Skywalker.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca:
A Wookiee and Solo's longtime companion.
Mayhew's double Joonas Suotamo portrays the character in several action scenes, and Ian Whyte performed stunts, as the 71-year-old Mayhew suffered from knee problems.
Tim Rose and Mike Quinn reprise their respective roles as Admiral Ackbar and Nien Nunb from Return of the Jedi, with Erik Bauersfeld and Kipsang Rotich returning their respective voices.
Kenny Baker, originally announced as part of the cast, was credited as "consultant" for R2-D2, with Jimmy Vee performing some of the work for R2-D2.
Ewan McGregor has an uncredited vocal cameo as Obi-Wan Kenobi in Rey's vision sequence, while archival audio of Frank Oz and Alec Guinness as Yoda and Kenobi, respectively, are also used in the same scene; Oz recorded new dialogue for the film, but it was replaced with preexisting audio from The Empire Strikes Back.
Gwendoline Christie portrays Captain Phasma, the commander of the First Order's legions of stormtroopers.
Dave Chapman and Brian Herring served as puppeteers for BB-8, with Bill Hader and Ben Schwartz credited as "Vocal Consultants".
Ken Leung appears as Statura, an admiral in the Resistance.
Simon Pegg appears as Unkar Plutt, the Junk parts dealer on Jakku.
Greg Grunberg plays Temmin "Snap" Wexley, an X-wing pilot.
Kiran Shah plays Teedo, a scavenger on Jakku who rides a semi-mechanical Luggabeast.
Jessica Henwick appears as Jess "Testor" Pava or Jess Testor, an X-wing pilot.
Brian Vernel appears as Bala-Tik, the leader of the Guavian Death Gang.
Yayan Ruhian and Iko Uwais appear as Tasu Leech and Razoo Qin-Fee, members of the Kanjiklub Gang, a criminal organization.
Warwick Davis appears as Wollivan, a tavern-dweller in Maz Kanata's castle.
Anna Brewster appears as Bazine Netal, a First Order spy, also at Maz Kanata's castle.
Hannah John-Kamen appears as a First Order officer.
Thomas Brodie-Sangster and Kate Fleetwood play First Order Petty Officers, Thanisson and Unamo, respectively.
Billie Lourd, daughter of Carrie Fisher, appears as Connix, a lieutenant in the Resistance.
Members of the Resistance include Emun Elliott as Brance and Maisie Richardson-Sellers as Korr Sella while Harriet Walter appears as Kalonia, the doctor who tends to Chewbacca.
Mark Stanley appears as a Knight of Ren.
Sebastian Armesto portrays Lieutenant Mitaka and Pip Torrens portrays Colonel Kaplan, both serving the First Order.
Daniel Craig, Michael Giacchino, and Nigel Godrich cameo as stormtroopers.
Abrams' assistant, Morgan Dameron, appears as a Resistance officer, while his father, Gerald W. Abrams, appears as Captain Cypress.
The film's dialect coach, Andrew Jack, appears as Major Ematt of the Resistance.
Additionally, Crystal Clarke, Pip Andersen, Christina Chong, Miltos Yerolemou, Amybeth Hargreaves, Leanne Best, Judah Friedlander, and Kevin Smith appear in minor roles.
Riot control stormtrooper FN-2199, who calls Finn a traitor during the battle on Takodana, was portrayed by stunt performer Liang Yang and voiced by sound editor David Acord.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Star Wars creator George Lucas discussed ideas for a sequel trilogy several times after the conclusion of the original trilogy, but denied any intent to make it.
In October 2012, he sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Speaking alongside Lucasfilm's new president, Kathleen Kennedy, Lucas said: "I always said I wasn't going to do any more
and that's true, because I'm not going to do any more, but that doesn't mean I'm unwilling to turn it over to Kathy to do more.
"As
creative consultant on the film, Lucas attended early story meetings and advised on the details of the Star Wars universe.
Among the materials he turned over to the production team were his rough story treatments for Episodes VII–IX, which Lucas requested be read only by Kennedy, Bob Iger, Alan F. Horn, and Kevin A. Mayer.
Lucas later said Disney had discarded his story ideas and that he had no further involvement with the film.
Lucas' son Jett told The Guardian that his father was "very torn" about having sold the rights to the franchise and that his father was "there to guide" but that "he wants to let it go and become its new generation".

The Force Awakens' first screenplay was written by Michael Arndt.
Early drafts had Luke Skywalker appear midway through the film, but Arndt found that "every time Luke came in and entered the movie, he just took it over.
Suddenly you didn't care about your main character anymore.
"
The writers decided to use Luke as the film's MacGuffin and, as something that the protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the final scene.
Arndt also developed some backstory elements for the returning characters from the original trilogy, such as how Leia was instrumental in rebuilding the Republic after the fall of the Empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that her biological father was Darth Vader (this would go on to become a central plot point in the canonical novel Star Wars:
Bloodline).Several directors were considered, including David Fincher, Brad Bird, Jon Favreau, and Guillermo del Toro; after a suggestion by Steven Spielberg to Kennedy, J. J. Abrams was named director in January 2013, with Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg as project consultants.
Arndt worked on the script for eight months, but said he needed 18 more, which was more time than Disney or Abrams could give him.
The production announced Arndt's exit from the project on October 24, 2013, and Kasdan and Abrams took over script duties.
Abrams expressed relief that the release date was announced for December 2015 instead of a previously discussed summer release.
He and Kasdan planned the story while walking in Santa Monica, New York City, Paris, and London.
The first draft was completed in six weeks.
Abrams said the key to the film was [returned] to the roots of the first Star Wars films and be based more on emotion than explanation.
In January 2014, Abrams confirmed that the script was complete.
In April 2014, Lucasfilm clarified that Episodes VII–IX would not feature storylines from the Star Wars expanded universe, though other elements could be included, as with the TV series Star Wars Rebels.
Abrams stated that he purposely withheld some plot elements from The Force Awakens, such as Rey and Finn's last names and backgrounds.
Kennedy admitted that "we haven't mapped out every single detail [of the sequel trilogy] yet", but said that Abrams was collaborating with The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson, and that Johnson would work with The Rise of Skywalker's then-director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition and that "everybody's got a say in how we move forward with this".
Daisy Ridley later recounted that J. J. Abrams had written drafts for episodes 8 and 9.A fictional language was developed for use in the film by YouTube star Sara Forsberg, who created the viral video series "What Languages Sound Like To Foreigners"; Forsberg developed the language by studying various languages, such as Hindi and Gujarati.
In November 2015, Lucas recorded an hour-long interview with CBS News reporter Charlie Rose in which he said Disney had not been "keen" to involve him and conceded: "If I get in there, I'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what I want them to do, and I don't have the control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up.
"
He also said, "They wanted to do a retro movie.
I don't like that.
Every movie, I worked very hard to make them different
[...] I made them completely different—different planets, different spaceships to make it new.
"
In early December 2015, Kathleen Kennedy told The Hollywood Reporter that Lucas had seen the movie and "liked it".
In the same month, at the Kennedy Center Honors, Lucas stated, "I think the fans are going to love it
, It's very much the kind of movie they've been looking for."
Abrams felt that, as the first in a new trilogy, the film "needed to take a couple of steps backwards into very familiar terrain" and use plot elements from previous Star Wars films.

=== Pre-production ===
In May 2013, it was confirmed that The Force Awakens would be filmed in the United Kingdom.
Representatives from Lucasfilm met with Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne to agree to produce The Force Awakens in the UK.
Osborne committed £25 million of public money towards the film, claiming it was a boost for British culture and its film industry.
According to production company account filings in the United Kingdom, The Force Awakens ultimately received a total of £31.6 million ($47.4 million) from the government.
Beginning in September 2013, production spaces at the Bad Robot facility were converted for shooting of The Force Awakens for the benefit of shooting a minor portion of the film in the United States.
The film's costume designer was Michael Kaplan, who had previously worked with Abrams on the films Star Trek (2009) and Star Trek Into Darkness (2013).
Film editors Mary Jo Markey and Maryann Brandon, long-term collaborators with Abrams, were also signed.
In August 2013, it was announced that cinematographer Daniel Mindel would be shooting the film on 35 mm film (specifically Kodak 5219).
In October 2013, other crew members were confirmed, including sound designer Ben Burtt, director of photography Mindel, production designers Rick Carter and Darren Gilford, costume designer Michael Kaplan, special effects supervisor Chris Corbould, re-recording mixer Gary Rydstrom, supervising sound editor Matthew Wood, visual effects supervisors Roger Guyett, and executive producer Jason McGatlin.
===
Casting ===
Open auditions were held in the United Kingdom and the United States in November 2013 for the roles of Rachel and Thomas.
Casting began in earnest in January 2014, because of changes to the script by Kasdan and Abrams.
Screen tests with actors continued until at least three weeks before the official announcement in April 2014, with final casting decisions made only a few weeks earlier.
Actors testing had strict nondisclosure agreements, preventing them, their agents or their publicists from commenting on their involvement.
Though Lucas intimated that previous cast members Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, and Mark Hamill would return for the new film as early as March 2013, their casting was not confirmed until over a year later.
Saoirse Ronan, Michael B. Jordan, Lupita Nyong'o and Frida Gustavsson, auditioned for new characters; industry publications reported Jesse Plemons was considered, possibly for Luke Skywalker's son;
Adam Driver for an unnamed villain; and Maisie Richardson-Sellers for an unknown character.
Daisy Ridley was cast by February 2014, and by the end of that month a deal had been worked out with Driver, who was able to work around his Girls schedule.
Talks with Andy Serkis and Oscar Isaac began by March and continued into April.
That same month, John Boyega began talks after dropping out of a Jesse Owens biopic.
Denis Lawson, who played Wedge Antilles in the original trilogy, declined to reprise his role, saying it would have "bored" him.
In April, the cast was announced with a photo of the first table read of the script at Pinewood Studios near London, picturing director Abrams with Ford, Ridley, Fisher, Peter Mayhew, producer Bryan Burk, Lucasfilm president and producer Kathleen Kennedy, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Hamill, Serkis, Isaac, Boyega, Driver, and writer Lawrence Kasdan.
In June, cast additions Lupita Nyong'o and Gwendoline Christie were announced.
To prepare for his role, Hamill was assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist at the request of the producers, who wanted him to resemble an older Luke.
Fisher was also assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist.
Abrams initially considered using Daniels only in a voice role for C-3PO, but Daniels opted to reprise the role physically as well; the production team built a new C-3PO costume to accommodate him.
A flashback scene was cut from Rey's vision (following her discovery of Luke's lightsaber), which would have featured Robert Boulter standing in for Luke as he appeared in his duel with Vader in The Empire Strikes Back.
In May, Abrams announced a donation contest for UNICEF from the Star Wars set in Abu Dhabi; the winner was allowed to visit the set, meet members of the cast and appear in the film.
In October, Warwick Davis, who played Wicket in Return of the Jedi, as well as Wald and Weazle in The Phantom Menace (1999), announced that he would appear in The Force Awakens, but did not reveal his role.
In November, Debbie Reynolds confirmed that her granddaughter (Fisher's daughter), Billie Lourd, was in the film.

===
Filming ===
In February 2014, Abrams said filming would begin in May and last about three months.
The official announcement came in March, when Disney and Lucasfilm announced that principal photography would commence in May and be based at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.
That month, it was revealed that pre-production filming would take place in Iceland prior to the start of official filming in May, consisting of landscape shots that would be used for scenery in the film.
In April, Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn confirmed that filming had begun, filming in secret in the United Arab Emirates around Liwa Oasis, part of the emirate of Abu Dhabi, by a second unit.
Later that month, it was revealed that in addition to 35 mm film, segments of the film were being shot in the 65 mm IMAX format.
In July, Bad Robot reported via Twitter that the film would be at least partially shot on IMAX cameras.
Principal photography began in Abu Dhabi on May 16, 2014.
Abrams and the cast members went to Abu Dhabi in early-May, where large sets were built on location—including a shuttle-like spacecraft, a large tower, and a big market—and where explosives were used to create a "blast crater".
Cast members were spotted practicing driving vehicles that would be used during filming.
Production moved to Pinewood Studios in June.

That same month, Harrison Ford fractured his leg while filming at Pinewood after a hydraulic door on the Millennium Falcon set fell on him, and was taken to a hospital.
According to Abrams, Ford's ankle "went to a 90-degree angle".
Production was suspended for two weeks because of Ford's injury.
Ford's son Ben said the ankle would likely need a plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the crew needing to shoot Ford from the waist up for a short time until he recovered.
A month later, Jake Steinfeld, Ford's personal trainer, said Ford was recovering rapidly.
Abrams also suffered a fractured vertebra in his back when he was trying to help lift the door after Ford's accident, but he kept this to himself for over a month.
In February 2016, it was reported that the Health and Safety Executive brought four criminal charges against Disney subsidiary Foodles Production (UK), Ltd. for alleged health and safety breaches relating to Ford's accident.
Foodles Production (UK) Ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in October 2016 for two health and safety breaches, after admitting the counts at an earlier hearing.
In July 2014, filming took place over three days at Skellig Michael, an island off the coast of County Kerry, Ireland, with a cast including Mark Hamill and Daisy Ridley.
Landscape shots for the planet
Takodana were shot in July in the Lake District in the northwest of England.
Production was halted for two weeks in early August 2014
so Abrams could rework shooting in Ford's absence and resumed with a fully healed Ford in mid-August.
In September, the former RAF Greenham Common military base in Berkshire was used and featured set constructions of several spaceships.
Puzzlewood in the Forest of Dean Gloucestershire England was used for some scenes.
Principal photography ended on November 3, 2014.

===
Post-production ===
Kathleen Kennedy said The Force Awakens would use real locations and models over computer-generated imagery.
Rian Johnson, director of The Last Jedi, reiterated that Abrams would use little CGI and more practical, traditional special effects, saying: "I think people are coming back around to [practical effects].
It feels like there is sort of that gravity pulling us back toward it.
I think that more and more people are hitting kind of a critical mass in terms of the CG-driven action scene lending itself to a very specific type of action scene, where physics go out the window and it becomes so big so quick."
Abrams' intention in prioritizing practical special effects was to recreate the visual realism and authenticity of the original Star Wars.
To that end, the droid BB-8 was a physical prop developed by Disney Research, created by special effects artist Neal Scanlan and operated live on set with the actors.
In February 2014, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) announced plans to open a facility in London, citing Disney's Star Wars films as a catalyst for the expansion.
ILM's Vancouver branch also worked on the special effects for the film.
Abrams supervised post-production and editing of the film at Bad Robot Productions' headquarters in Santa Monica.
In August 2015, he gave the film's estimated running time as 124 minutes.
Abrams made changes to the film's plot in the editing process to simplify the film, by removing some sequences shown in trailers: "At one point, Maz used to continue along with the characters back to the Resistance base, but we realised that she really had nothing to do there of value [...]
So we ended up leaving those things out.
"On
November 6, 2014, the film's title was announced as Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In December 2015, Pablo Hidalgo, the creative executive at the Lucasfilm Story Group which handles all the canonical continuity for the Star Wars universe, revealed that the working title for the film was Shadow of the Empire "for the longest time".

===
Music ===
In July 2013, John Williams was confirmed to return to compose the sequel trilogy, beginning with The Force Awakens.
He began working on the film in December 2014, and by June 2015 had been through most of the film reels, working on a daily basis.
In May 2015, Williams said he would return to themes from the previous films, such as those for Luke, Leia, and Han, in ways that "there are a few that I think are important and will seem very much a part of the fabric of the piece in a positive and constructive way."
He said that working with Abrams was similar to the process he went through with Lucas in the earlier films.
Recording sessions for The Force Awakens began in June 2015 at the Sony Pictures Studios' Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage in Culver City, with William Ross conducting most of the music.
The first day of recording was June 1, 2015.
Williams attended the sessions and conducted the remainder of the recordings in Los Angeles.
The score was recorded in 12 sessions within a five-month period between June and mid-November.
The 90-piece orchestra recorded 175 minutes of music; however, Abrams reedited the film, which discarded, modified, or rerecorded the score's part for nearly an hour.
Williams' theme for Snoke was recorded by a 24-voice men's chorus.
Gustavo Dudamel conducted the opening and end title music for the film at Williams' behest.
Recording of the score was completed on November 14, 2015.
The film's soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on December 18, 2015.
Williams' score is more than two hours long.
Lin-Manuel Miranda and Abrams contributed music to the film's cantina scene.
Abrams met Miranda at a performance of his Broadway musical Hamilton, where Miranda jokingly offered to compose cantina music, should it be needed.
Unknown to Miranda, Williams had previously told Abrams that he did not want to compose the music for that scene, wanting to focus on the orchestral score.
Abrams then contacted Miranda, and the two collaborated on the music for the scene over a period of two months.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Disney backed The Force Awakens with extensive marketing campaigns.
On November 28, 2014, Lucasfilm released an 88-second teaser trailer.
It was screened in selected cinemas across the United States and Canada and in theaters worldwide in December 2014.
It was also released on YouTube and the iTunes Store, generating 58.2 million views on YouTube in its first week.
Critics compared the brief footage favorably to the production values of the original trilogy.
The Hollywood Reporter called the trailer "perfectly potent nostalgia", praising its mix of old and new.
Empire was impressed by the continuity with the first films—"the feel of classic Star Wars"—but noted the absence of Hamill, Ford, and Fisher and speculated about the significance of the new characters.
The Guardian wrote that the use of the Star Wars fanfare by John Williams reinforced brand loyalty among fans.

On December 11, 2014, Abrams and Kennedy released a series of eight mock Topps trading cards revealing the names of several characters.
On April 16, 2015, a second teaser trailer, this one lasting two minutes, was shown at the opening panel at the Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim, California.
Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said the reaction to the trailer was "staggering [...]
the entire room of almost eight thousand people just leapt to their feet and roared,
I mean I can't think of anything I've ever been to—other than a rock concert—
that felt quite like that".
The trailer was viewed over 88 million times within the first 24 hours of release.
The trailer shows many of the new characters and the first footage of Chewbacca and Han Solo.
The Huffington Post's Graham Milne wrote that the trailer "was an affirmation of something that we'd long been told was never going to happen.
This was a gift.
This was faith rewarded.
About damn time.
"Vanity
Fair was the first magazine to release an exclusive cover issue devoted to The Force Awakens.
The magazine, released on May 7, 2015, featured exclusive interviews and photos of the cast photographed by Annie Leibovitz.
At the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International, in addition to a panel with many of the actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the film demonstrated the film's use of practical sets and effects.
It was positively received, with Nigel M. Smith of The Guardian writing: "
The featurette's angle is a strong one and connects with fans of the original trilogy in an incredibly poignant way.
It also does a sly job of teasing Fisher's new look as Leia and Simon Pegg's mysterious involvement as a rumored alien in the movie, without actually showing the actors in action.
"
Smith compared the marketing strategy for the film to that of a previous Abrams film, Super 8, saying "the promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away.
"Walt
Disney Studios and Lucasfilm presented a look at The Force Awakens at Disney's D23 Expo in August 2015.
Drew Struzan—who designed the poster artwork for the previous Star Wars films—produced a commemorative poster given to the event's attendees.
In October 2015, Lucasfilm unveiled the theatrical release poster and a third trailer.
The poster omitted Luke Skywalker and revealed a Death Star-like "orb".
The trailer debuted during the halftime break of Monday Night Football, before being released online.
The reaction to the trailer by fans on social media was "frenzied", with Lizo Mzimba of the BBC writing that "perhaps the most significant thing about the final trailer before the film's release is how little of the story it reveals."
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph felt the trailer was "a perfect blend of old and new, in keeping with the old-fashioned Star Wars aesthetic".
The trailer received 128 million views in 24 hours.
16 million of the views came from its airing on Monday Night Football.
At the end of October, Air France announced a "Flight and Cinema" package, providing customers who book select flights to Paris transportation to a theater to see the film, since France was one of the first countries to release the film.
On November 23, a partnership with Google was announced, in which Google users could choose to affiliate themselves with either the Dark or Light Side, which would change the appearance of their Google websites.
Additionally, Disney teamed up with Verizon to create a virtual-reality experience for Google Cardboard.
On December 17, 2015, select theaters across the United States and Canada aired a Star Wars marathon, airing the six previous Star Wars episode films in 2D, followed by The Force Awakens in 3D.
Attendees received a special lanyard featuring exclusive marathon art.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
Disney Publishing Worldwide and Lucasfilm announced a series of at least 20 books and comics, "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens", which were released by multiple publishers starting in late 2015, prior to the film's premiere.
The series includes books by Del Rey and Disney-Lucasfilm publishers and comic books from Marvel Comics.
All titles under the program are canonical to the Star Wars universe.
Alan Dean Foster wrote a novelization of The Force Awakens which was released in e-book form on December 18.
In an effort to avoid revealing plot details before the film's release, the print release of the novelization was delayed until January 2016.
Marvel Comics published a six-issue comic book adaptation of The Force Awakens between June and November 2016.Disney Consumer Products and Lucasfilm announced that September 4, 2015 would be deemed "Force Friday" and would be the official launch of all the merchandise for The Force Awakens.
Beginning at 12:01 am, fans could buy toys, books, clothing and various other products at Disney Stores and other retailers throughout the world.
Disney and Maker Studios hosted an 18-hour live-streaming presentation on YouTube, showcasing multiple merchandise products beginning on September 3, 2015.
Among these products were a remote-controlled BB-8 developed by Sphero.
Sphero had participated in a Disney-run startup accelerator in July 2014, where they were invited into a private meeting with Disney CEO Bob Iger, in which they were shown on-set photos and imagery of BB-8 before its public unveiling.
Many retailers, such as Toys "R" Us, were unable to meet demand for Star Wars products due to the event.

===
Video games ===
The Force Awakens is the first Star Wars film to not have a direct tie-in game to accompany it.
Instead, select characters, scenes and/or locations from the film became part of other Star Wars video games:
Characters from the film were added to an update to the mobile game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, available for iOS and Android and released by Electronic Arts;
free downloadable content for Electronic Arts' Star Wars Battlefront reboot allowed players to battle on the planet Jakku; an update to the mobile game Star Wars Commander, released by Disney Mobile for iOS, Android and the Windows Store, allowed players to battle on the planet
Takodana during the Galactic Civil War era; and a condensed version of the film's plot becomes an add-on "playset" in the toys-to-life game Disney Infinity 3.0, with Finn, Rey, Poe Dameron, and Kylo Ren as playable characters.
Eventually, the film got a full Lego video game adaptation, titled Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, which was released by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Wii U, Xbox 360, and Xbox One on June 28, 2016.
==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles at the TCL Chinese Theatre, El Capitan Theatre, and Dolby Theatre on December 14, 2015.
A white tent stretched along Hollywood Boulevard from Orange Drive to Highland Avenue, covering the "massive" premiere event that hosted more than five thousand guests.
The film was released in 12 countries, including European nations (such as Italy and France), the Philippines, and Thailand on December 16; 32 countries including the United Kingdom, Mexico, and additional European, Asian, African, South American, and Oceania countries on December 17; and in the United States and Canada, Japan, Spain, and Venezuela on December 18, in 3D and IMAX 3D.
It was released in India on December 25 and in China on January 9
, 2016.In the United States and Canada, it had the widest release of December across 4,134 theaters, of which 3,300 were 3D locations, a record 392 IMAX screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451 premium large format screens, 146 D-Box locations, as well as releasing in the Dolby Vision format (high-dynamic range, Rec.
2020 color) in Dolby Cinema.
Worldwide, it was released across 940 IMAX theaters, a new record.
On December 18, 2015, the film began playing on every IMAX screen in the United States and Canada for four straight weeks up to January 14, 2016.
This made it the first film since Warner Bros.' The Hobbit trilogy to receive such a release.
The film finally shed some of its IMAX screens with the release of The Revenant (2015) and The Finest Hours (2016) in mid-January 2016.Advance ticket sales for the film began on October 19, 2015, and were in strong demand, resulting in online movie ticket sites crashing.
Vue Cinemas, the United Kingdom's third-largest theater chain, sold 45,000 tickets in 24 hours, 10,000 of which were sold in 90 minutes, a record for the theater.
In the United States, the film pre-sold a record-breaking $6.5 million worth of IMAX ticket sales on a single day.
IMAX has never previously registered more than $1 million in pre-sales on a single day.
In total, it sold over $50 million in pre-sales, breaking the record.
This number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance ticket sales by December 14.
However, not all tickets that were pre-sold were for the film's opening weekend, with
Fandango President Paul Yanover saying "people have set aside tickets for screenings in January, weeks after the big opening [...]
We have people buying Star Wars [The Force Awakens] into 2016.
It's not just an opening-weekend phenomenon.
"
Similarly, the film broke pre-sales records in the UK, Canada, and Germany.
The Force Awakens is the first live-action Star Wars film not to be released theatrically by 20th Century Fox; accordingly the film is not introduced with either that company's logo, or its signature fanfare composed by Alfred Newman.
Instead, the film is the first in the series to be distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, and the film is presented with only Lucasfilm's production logo shown silently before the main titles.
Disney chairman Bob Iger explained that the decision not to place Disney branding on the film was "for the fans".
===
Home media ===
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars:
The Force Awakens via download and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 1, 2016, with a Blu-ray and DVD release on April 5.
The home media release contains additional footage, with eight bonus features.
A Blu-ray 3D "collector's edition" of the film was released on November 15, including all the features of the original home releases, as well as several new bonus features, including new deleted scenes and audio commentary by director J. J. Abrams.
The package includes a Blu-ray 3D, regular Blu-ray, DVD, and digital copy of the film, as well as an additional Blu-ray disc for the bonus features.
The 4K version of the film was later re-released in "The Skywalker Saga" 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens grossed $936.7 million in the United States and Canada, and $1.132 billion in other countries for a worldwide total of $2.068 billion.
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold close to 110 million tickets in the United States and Canada.
The Force Awakens earned 8.6% of the total 2015 releases in the United States and Canada, second only to the 8.8% of the box office earned by Titanic in 1997.
It was the 24th film in cinematic history to gross $1 billion worldwide, standing as the fastest film to surpass the mark at the time, doing so in 12 days.
It was also the third film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its 53rd day of release.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $780.1 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film, making it the most profitable film of 2015.

====
Commercial analysis ====
With a production budget of $259–306 million, plus $175 million for marketing, printing and advertising costs, The Force Awakens was predicted to be a major box office success.
The cost of the film was subsidized by £31.6 million (US$47 million) from the UK film incentive program.
Total costs, after accounting for profit participations, production and distribution of home videos, as well as other ancillary mediums, is expected to run $423 million.
Reports in April 2015 from The Hollywood Reporter and Amboee Brand Intelligence predicted the film would earn up to $540 million worldwide for its opening, breaking the record for the biggest worldwide opening, as well as breaking the record for the biggest U.S. opening.
They believed that The Force Awakens would have the widest release ever, across 4,500 theaters in the United States and Canada.
Instead, it received a total of 4,134 theaters, and had the widest December opening.
Box office analyst Phil Contrino likened the film to Avatar (2009), which opened to $77 million in the United States and Canada and went on to earn $2.8 billion worldwide, saying The Force Awakens would earn $1 billion "without blinking" and could gross $2 billion.
In August 2015, Deadline Hollywood predicted an opening weekend of $615 million worldwide could be possible, including a $300 million opening in the United States and Canada.
Months prior to the film's release, box office analysts reported opening weekend projections were at $175–250 million.
Analysts said that the box office receipts of the film, when compared to predecessors, must be adjusted for inflation, and that the first Star Wars film made more when this adjustment is made.
It has further been observed that each of the first three films in the series was more profitable in calculating revenue against production costs.
Box office analyst Paul Dergarabedian said that while Avatar and The Force Awakens were both released on the same date of December 18, higher ticket prices in 2015 and IMAX screenings could push Star Wars "into the box office stratosphere".
By January 13, analysts concluded that it was unlikely that The Force Awakens would surpass Avatar's global gross.
While The Force Awakens was very successful in the United States and Canada, the same success was not witnessed in many overseas individual markets such as Germany, India, Latin America, and parts of Asia.
One cited reason for this is that overseas audiences do not have the same nostalgia or affinity for the film as those in the U.S.
The Star Wars franchise has traditionally lacked resonance with filmgoers in China, and marketing for The Force Awakens heavily focused on appealing to that market.
Nancy Tartaglione of Deadline Hollywood argued that, if accounting for its 40/60 domestic to international split, The Force Awakens did well overseas.
Avatar did well internationally because of its novelty, the marketing campaign advertising it as showcasing the newest 3D technology that can only be fully appreciated in the theaters, and because of its extended time in overseas theaters.
While The Force Awakens had appeal with its special effects, analysts felt that it lacked the novelty factor; they also cited that its gross was stilted due to markets making way for new films sooner than was previously done, and for films not playing in overseas theaters as long as they did back when Avatar was released.
Dergarabedian stated, "No matter what, [The Force Awakens] is an absolute, all-out blockbuster without peer in terms of the sheer speed at which it has crossed all of these major box-office milestones."
Moreover, Mike Fleming of Deadline Hollywood argued that the movie was the "most valuable movie" of the year, with "the net profit to Disney was an astounding $780.11M, and the Cash on Cash Return was twice that of any other film [released in 2016], at 2.00".
====
United States and Canada ====
In the United States and Canada, The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015.
It made a record-breaking $57 million from Thursday night previews, of which IMAX screenings generated a record-breaking $5.7 million from 391 screens.
On its opening day, the film grossed $119.1 million, marking the biggest single- and opening-day record and the first time a film has earned more than $100 million in a single day.
Without Thursday-night grosses, the film earned the second-largest opening-day gross and a record of $247.9 million for its opening weekend.
The debut was 19% bigger than the previous record holders
The Avengers (2012) ($207 million) and Jurassic World (2015) ($208 million).
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391 IMAX theaters, which nearly amounts to the $252.5 million total earned by Return of the Jedi—the second-lowest-grossing film in the series—in its original run.
2D screenings accounted for 53% of the total opening gross while 3D accounted for 47%.
RealD 3D comprised $78 million of the opening gross, setting a new record.
Revenues in the film's second weekend decreased by only 39.8% in the United States and Canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first place at the box office and recording the biggest second weekend of all time.
On January 2, after just 16 days of release, it became the second film (following Avatar) to gross over $700 million in the United States and Canada, and on January 6 became the highest-grossing film of all time domestically, doing so in 20 days.
On January 9, it became the first film in cinematic history to cross $800 million domestically unadjusted for inflation.
On February 5, The Force Awakens became the first film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the United States and Canada.
The film fell outside of the top ten for the first time in its eleventh weekend during the weekend February 26–28, 2016, and did not achieve $1 million in ticket sales for the first time in its fourteenth weekend.

====
Other territories ====
Internationally, the film was released in over 30,000 screens.
It opened on December 16, 2015, in 12 international markets and earned $14.1 million on its opening day, debuting at first place in all of them.
It expanded in an additional 42 countries on December 17, generating $58.6 million for a two-day international total of $72.7 million, reaching first place in all 44 markets.
It grossed a total of $129.5 million in three days after adding $56.8 million on its third day, and set a new midnight record in the United Kingdom with $3.6 million.
It broke opening-day records in the United Kingdom ($14.4 million), Germany ($7.1 million), Australia ($6.8 million), Sweden ($1.7 million), Norway ($1.1 million), and in 12 other countries.
Other markets which generated large opening days were Spain ($3.5 million) and Japan ($3 million).
After the five days, The Force Awakens had a total international opening gross of $281 million from 30,000 screens, a new record for December opening and the third-biggest international opening of all time.
International markets generating opening-weekend tallies of at least $10 million were the United Kingdom ($50.6 million), Germany ($27.5 million), France ($22.5 million), Australia ($19.6 million), Japan ($13.4 million), and Russia ($12.3 million).
The film had the biggest opening of all time in 18 countries including the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia, Russia, and Sweden.
After five days, the film had a total worldwide opening record of $529 million from 74 territories, which was the biggest worldwide opening at that time, making it only the second time in cinematic history—after Jurassic World—that a film had opened to more than $500 million globally.
This included an IMAX opening record of $48 million.
Revenues from IMAX dipped slightly, generating $19 million in its second weekend, for a record total of over $70 million in 11 days.
IMAX generated $17.9 million from 276 IMAX theaters.
The film had a steeper decline in its second weekend, falling 51% to $136.9 million.
Of the notable major markets, the film had an unsuccessful opening in India where it opened third against two local blockbusters with a mere $1.51 million.
As of February 21, the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($180.7 million), China ($124.5 million), Germany ($109.7 million), Japan ($92.6 million), and France ($88.2 million).
On January 17, 2016, it passed the $1 billion mark overseas becoming the first film of Disney, the third film of 2015 and the fifth film overall to achieve this feat.
It topped the international box office chart for five consecutive weekends, becoming the first film since Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015) to have five straight wins, before being dethroned by The Revenant in its sixth weekend.
In Japan, it topped the box office for six straight weekends.

===
Critical response ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics.
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 440 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.20/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Packed with action and populated by both familiar faces and fresh blood
, The Force Awakens successfully recalls the series' former glory while injecting it with renewed energy."
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 55 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 80 out of 100, The Force Awakens received "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale; women, and people under the ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "A+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "A" or a "B".
Audiences polled by PostTrak gave the film an 88% "definite recommend" while 96% said it met or exceeded their expectations.
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph said the film "sets out to shake Star Wars from its slumber, and reconnect the series with its much-pined-for past", and "it achieves this both immediately and joyously
is perhaps the single greatest relief of the movie-going year."
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian said that it was "both a narrative progression from the earlier three films and a shrewdly affectionate next-gen reboot", and it was "ridiculous and melodramatic and sentimental, but exciting and brimming with energy and its own kind of generosity.
"
Variety's Justin Chang wrote that the film has "sufficient style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times described it as "a beautiful, thrilling, joyous, surprising, and heart-thumping adventure".
Ann Hornaday, writing for The Washington Post, thought the film had "enough novelty to create yet another cohort of die-hard fans", and the film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."
The Charlotte Observer's Lawrence Toppman said Abrams had "pulled off a delicate balancing act, paying clever homage to the past."
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film his highest rating and called it "the best Star Wars sequel yet and one of the best films of 2015".
Frank Pallotta, reviewing the film for CNN Business, found it was the best Star Wars film since the original trilogy and that it "is bound to be a film experience long remembered by fans and non-fans
alike".
Certain critics found The Force Awakens derivative of the original Star Wars trilogy, some expressing their opinion that the film was essentially a remake of A New Hope.
Tom Long of The Detroit News wrote that though some may find the film too similar to the original Star Wars, it leaves "the ungainly and unneeded clumsiness of the subsequent prequels far behind", with "the energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".
The Tribune-Star called it "basically the same" as the original film but "isn't that what we all wanted anyway?"
Stephanie Zacharek of Time wrote that Abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those nebulous wonders we didn't know we wanted".
Reviewing for Forbes, Scott Mendelson cited the film's "top-tier production values and a strong sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an exercise in fan service [that] it is only due to the charisma and talent of our newbies and J. J. Abrams' undeniable skill as a visual storyteller that the Mad Libs narrative doesn't outright destroy the picture".
Brian Merchant of Motherboard said that the film "is supposed to be all about exploring the unexplored, not rehashing the well-trod", and is "one of the most unabashedly creative enterprises of the 20th century has been rendered another largely enjoyable."
RogerEbert.com's Gerardo Valero went as far as to accuse the film of plagiarizing A New Hope and resorting to nostalgia.
He felt that it "didn't [justify] a return to the universe" from not having an original story of its own to tell in the plot, characters, and musical score, negatively comparing it to George Lucas' prequel trilogy, and that some of its climactic moments felt unearned.
In an interview with journalist Charlie Rose that aired on December 24, 2015, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a "divorce" and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens.
Lucas described the previous Star Wars films as his "children" and criticized the "retro feel" of The Force Awakens, saying: "I worked very hard to make [my films] completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships—you know, to make it new."
Lucas also likened Disney to "white slavers", which drew some criticism; he subsequently apologized.
In a 2019 memoir, Disney chairman Bob Iger said that George Lucas "couldn't even hide his disappointment" towards J. J. Abrams' interpretation.
According to Iger, Lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the film, and that "there weren't enough visual or technical leaps forward".
Lucas preferred Rian Johnson's sequel The Last Jedi and the anthology film Rogue One (2016).
===
Accolades ===
Several awards held their nominations before the December release of The Force Awakens, making the film ineligible for the 73rd Golden Globe Awards and some other awards ceremonies.
However, the film was added to the 21st Critics' Choice Awards' slate of best picture nominees after a special vote by the board of directors, and the announcement of the 2015 American Film Institute Awards was delayed until after the release of The Force Awakens, where it was named one of Top Ten Films of the year.
The film received five Academy Award nominations at the 88th Academy Awards, including Best Original Score, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, Best Film Editing, and Best Visual Effects.
The film garnered four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards for Best Original Music, Best Sound, and Best Production Design, including two wins, one for Best Special Visual Effects and a BAFTA Rising Star Award for John Boyega.
It was nominated for Best Picture at the 2016 Critics' Choice Awards.
The film received seven Visual Effects Society Awards nominations, winning four, including Outstanding Visual Effects in an Effects Driven Feature Motion Picture.
It received the most nominations at the 21st Empire Awards, including Best Film, Best Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film, Best Director for J. J. Abrams, Best Male Newcomer for John Boyega, and Best Female Newcomer for Daisy Ridley.
The Force Awakens received 13 nominations at the 42nd Saturn Awards, where it won in eight categories, including Best Science Fiction Film, Best Writing, Best Actor for Harrison Ford, Best Supporting Actor for Adam Driver, Best Music, Best Special Effects, Best Editing, and Best Make-Up.
Daisy Ridley and John Boyega each received several nominations and accolades for their performances.
They were nominated as Best Newcomers at various critics circle and associations, including the Alliance of Women Film Journalists, and the Florida Film Critics Circle, The Force Awakens received 11 nominations at the MTV Movie Awards, including Movie of the Year, Best Female Performance for Ridley, Best Breakthrough Performance for Boyega, and Best Virtual Performance for Lupita Nyong'o and Andy Serkis.
==
Sequels ==


===
The Last Jedi ===
Rian Johnson confirmed in August 2014 that he would write and direct The Last Jedi, which was released on December 15, 2017.
Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Gwendoline Christie, Jimmy Vee, and Joonas Suotamo reprised their roles in the film, and are joined by Kelly Marie Tran, Laura Dern, and Benicio del Toro.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
The Rise of Skywalker was released on December 20, 2019.
J. J. Abrams directed the film and co-wrote it with Chris Terrio.
Hamill, Fisher, Driver, Ridley, Boyega, Isaac, Daniels, Nyong'o, Suotamo, and Tran reprised their roles in the film, and are joined by Naomi Ackie, Keri Russell, and Richard E. Grant.
Billy Dee Williams returns from the original trilogy as Lando Calrissian and Ian McDiarmid returns from original and prequel trilogies as Palpatine.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==
Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

==
Further reading ==
Hidalgo, Pablo (2015).
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary.
New York: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-3816-4.
==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at Disney A to Z
Star Trek:
Enterprise is an American science fiction television series that debuted on UPN on September 26, 2001, and ran for four seasons until May 13, 2005.
The show was the fifth live-action series in the Star Trek franchise, and was intended to serve as a prequel to Star Trek: The Original Series.
It was originally entitled Enterprise, but was renamed to add the Star Trek prefix towards the start of the third season.
The series was created by Rick Berman and Brannon Braga, both of whom served as executive producers throughout the four seasons.
They stood down as show runners during the fourth season, with Manny Coto taking on the role instead.
The casting team pursued Scott Bakula for the role of Jonathan Archer, with no other actors in mind.
There were extended contract negotiations, and Bakula signed up for another pilot during the talks which didn't go to series, and he instead signed for Enterprise.
Both Anthony Montgomery and Dominic Keating had previously auditioned for roles on Star Trek: Voyager and were hired when they returned for Enterprise.
Braga later explained that the most difficult casting process was for the role of T'Pol, who had been originally envisioned as the character T'Pau from The Original Series episode "Amok Time".
Jolene Blalock was cast after attending the final casting session, after her agents had previously rejected invitations to attend auditions.
Some recurring characters were played by actors who had previously appeared in the franchise, with Jeffrey Combs portraying the Andorian Shran, making his first appearance in the season one episode "The Andorian Incident".
He had previously portrayed the characters Weyoun and Brunt on Deep Space Nine.
Vaughn Armstrong, who played Admiral Maxwell Forrest in Enterprise, had previously appeared in a number of roles throughout the franchise since portraying a Klingon in The Next Generation episode "Heart of Glory" and by the end of the Enterprise run, he had appeared as 13 different characters in total.
Randy Oglesby, Rick Worthy and Scott MacDonald had also appeared in a variety of parts within the franchise before taking on the recurring parts of Xindi council members throughout the third season.

== Cast ==


===
Main cast ===
Scott Bakula as Jonathan Archer, commanding officer of the USS Enterprise NX-01
Jolene Blalock as T'Pol, first officer and science officer.

John Billingsley as Phlox, chief medical officer.

Dominic Keating as Malcolm Reed, chief security/tactical officer.

Anthony Montgomery as Travis Mayweather, conn officer.

Linda Park as Hoshi Sato, communications officer.

Connor Trinneer as Charles "Trip" Tucker III, chief engineer.
===
Recurring cast ===
Nathan Anderson as N. Kemper, United Earth Military Assault Command Operations (MACO) officer.

Vaughn Armstrong as Maxwell Forrest, flag officer in charge of the NX project at Starfleet Command.

Molly Brink as Talas, officer in the Andorian imperial guard.

Joanna Cassidy as T'Les, instructor at the Vulcan science academy and mother of T'Pol.

Jeffrey Combs as Thy'lek Shran, commander in the Andorian imperial guard.

Steven Culp as J. Hayes, MACO commanding officer.

Daniel Dae Kim as D. Chang, MACO officer.

Jim Fitzpatrick as Marcus Williams, officer in the NX project at Starfleet Command.

John Fleck as Silik, officer of the Suliban Cabal.

Gary Graham as Soval, Vulcan ambassador to Earth.

James Horan as the Humanoid figure,
a messenger from the future.

Ken Lally as Taylor, Archer's steward.

Scott MacDonald as Dolim, officer serving on the Xindi Council.

Ada Maris as Erika Hernandez, commanding officer of the USS Columbia NX-02.

Sean McGowan as F. Hawkins, MACO officer.

Randy Oglesby as Degra, scientist on the Xindi Council.

Eric Pierpoint as Harris, Section 31 operative.

Michael Reilly Burke as Koss, a Vulcan architect arranged to marry T'Pol.

Daniel Riordan as Duras, Klingon commander.

Tucker Smallwood as a Xindi Primate Councillor, member of the Xindi Council.

Kellie Waymire as Elizabeth Cutler, science officer.

Joseph Will as Michael Rostov, engineering officer.

Matt Winston as Daniels, a temporal agent from the 31st century.

Rick Worthy as Jannar, member of the Xindi Council.

==
Appearances ==
=
Main cast (credited) 
  =
Recurring cast (4+)
  =
Guest cast (1-3)


==
See also ==
List of Star Trek:
The Original Series cast members
List of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine cast members
List of Star Trek:
The Next Generation cast members
List of Star Trek: Voyager cast members
List of Star Trek:
Discovery cast members
== Notes ==


==
Citations ==


==
References ==
Captain Planet and the Planeteers is an American animated environmentalist superhero television series created by Ted Turner, Barbara Pyle and Robert Larkin III, and developed by Pyle, Nicholas Boxer, Thom Beers, Andy Heyward, Robby London, Bob Forward and Cassandra Schafausen.
The series was produced by Turner Program Services and DIC Enterprises and broadcast on TBS from September 15, 1990, to December 5, 1992.
A sequel series, The New Adventures of Captain Planet, was produced by Hanna-Barbera Cartoons, Inc., distributed by Turner Program Services and broadcast from September 11, 1993, to May 11, 1996.
Both series continue today in syndication.
The program is a form of edutainment and advocates environmentalism and is known for having a number of famous actors providing voices for the villains.
The show spawned a franchise consisting of a charity, video games, and a TV crossover with OK K.O.!
Let's Be Heroes.

==
Plot ==
Our world is in peril.
Gaia, the spirit of the Earth, can no longer stand the terrible destruction plaguing our planet.
She sends five magic rings to five special young people: Kwame, from Africa, with the power of Earth...
From North America, Wheeler, with the power of Fire...
From Eastern Europe, Linka, with the power of Wind.
From Asia, Gi, with the power of Water... and from South America, Ma-Ti, with the power of Heart.
When the five powers combine, they summon Earth's greatest champion, Captain Planet.

Every episode is followed up with at least one "Planeteer Alert" clip, often connected to the plot, where environmental-political and other social-political issues are discussed and how the viewer can contribute and be part of "the solution" rather than "the pollution".

==
Characters ==


===
Gaia ===
Gaia (voiced by Whoopi Goldberg in 1990–1992, Margot Kidder in 1993–1996), is the spirit of the planet who sends five magic rings – four with the power to control an element of nature and one controlling the element of Heart – to five chosen youths across the globe.
She claims to have been asleep for the entire 20th Century and awoken to see a more polluted world than when she was last awake, however this is contradicted by a flashback episode set in the 1920s in which people get guidance from Gaia.

Her appearance seems to be a mixture of attractive women of all races, and is often seen as an intangible spirit.
However, in cases of serious problems, Gaia gains corporeal form, which puts her in danger of death.
In the two-part episode "Summit to Save Earth" where her rival Zarm had defeated her, Gaia was shown as an old, frail woman, with Zarm explaining that given the Earth's several billion years of existence, it would make sense for Gaia to be superannuated in appearance.

===
Captain Planet ===
In situations that the Planeteers cannot resolve alone, they can combine their planetary powers to summon the titular Captain Planet (voiced by David Coburn),
who is Ma-Ti's magnified heart power in the form of a holographic superhero android that possesses all of the other Planeteers' magnified powers.
Once his work is done, Captain Planet returns to the planet, and leaves viewers with the message: "
The power is yours!"
Typically Planet only manifests to deal with the bigger crisis and then departs, but a few storylines have explored him existing beyond these moments, such as when he was summoned while Kwame and Ma-Ti were in space, with the result that the energy from their rings that created Planet could not return to its source, resulting in Planet being forced to operate on a human level, such as requiring a crowbar and handcuff keys to rescue the rest of the team.

===
Planeteers ===
The Planeteers are tasked with helping defend the planet from environmental disasters and making efforts to educate humankind to keep others from happening.
In the beginning of the episodes, Gaia uses her "Planet Vision" in the Crystal Chamber to discover where the most devastating destruction is occurring (in most episodes one or more of the Eco-Villains is behind it) and sends the Planeteers to help solve the problem.
The Planeteers use transportation (usually a flying machine called a Geo-Cruiser) based on solar power to avoid causing pollution themselves.

Kwame (voiced by LeVar Burton) - Hailing from Africa, Kwame possesses the power of earth.

Wheeler (voiced by Joey Dedio) - From New York City, Wheeler controls the power of fire.

Linka (voiced by Kath Soucie) -
From the Soviet Union (in later episodes stated as being from Russia after the communist regime's collapse), Linka has the power of wind.

Gi (voiced by Janice Kawaye)
- Hailing from Asia, Gi controls the power of water.

Ma-Ti (voiced by Scott Menville) - From Brazil, Ma-Ti wields the power of heart.

Suchi (vocal effects provided by Frank Welker) - Ma-Ti's pet monkey.
===
Villains ===


====
Eco-Villains ====
The Eco-Villains are a small group of antagonists who cause danger to the planet through pollution, deforestation, poaching, and other environmentally unsafe activities.
They enjoy the destruction they cause to the planet and the harm they bring to obtain wealth, land, or power.
The Eco-Villains tend to work alone most of the time, although they're willing to work with one another when it suits their plans.
Only in the two-part episode "Summit to Save Earth" did the entire ensemble of Eco-Villains work as a team with Zarm as the leader.
Each of these villains represents a specific way of thought that can cause ecological problems.

Hoggish Greedly (voiced by Ed Asner) – A pig-like human who represents the dangers of overconsumption and greed, Hoggish is the first villain Captain Planet and the Planeteers encounter.
In the episode "Smog Hog", it's revealed Hoggish has a son named Hoggish Greedly Jr.
(voiced by Charlie Schlatter) who appears only once and had gotten affected by his polluting Road Hog plot.
Because of this, Greedly had to work with Captain Planet to save his son's life.
In the episode "Hog Tide," it is revealed that he has a grandfather named Don Porkaloin (portrayed as a parody of Vito Corleone from The Godfather and also voiced by Ed Asner) who in the past was defeated by another group of Planeteers.
Unlike Hoggish Greedly, Porkaloin became environmentally friendly as shown in the episode "The Ghost of Porkaloin Past".

Rigger (voiced by John Ratzenberger) - Greedly's main henchman.
He once claimed that the main reason he works for Greedly is because no one else would hire him.
He does sometime question Greedly's orders and shows concern when Greedly's actions hurt the environment though it never has any effect on his boss, and Rigger, for the most part, remains loyal to Greedly.
Rigger does all the leg-work while Greedly usually sits around and eats.

Verminous Skumm (voiced by Jeff Goldblum in Season 1, Maurice LaMarche in season 2-5) – The second villain to appear on the series
, he is a part-human, part-rat creature who represents urban blight, disease, and drug abuse.
Skumm can control rats and has his own personal helicopter called The Scum O'Copter.
Skumm is responsible for the death of Linka's cousin Boris via drugs in the episode "Mind Pollution."
In some of the later episodes
Verminous Skumm partook in war profiteering when selling weapons to different gangs.

Rat Pack - A group of humanoid rats that work for Verminous Skumm.

Duke Nukem (voiced by Dean Stockwell in 1990–1992, Maurice LaMarche in 1993–1995) –
A doctor who changed himself into a radioactive mutant who represents the misuse of nuclear power, and the third villain to appear.
He is one of the few Eco-Villains, along with Zarm and Captain Pollution, able to battle Captain Planet one-on-one.
Nukem generates radiation to fire off radioactive blasts from his hands and possesses X-Ray vision.
Apogee temporarily renamed the eponymous character of the Duke Nukem computer game franchise to 'Duke Nukum' so as to avoid any possible trademark claims they could face from the producers of Captain Planet.
The character was later found to be under no trademark and the games were restored to their original titles.
Leadsuit (voiced by Frank Welker) - Duke Nukem's henchman, Leadsuit's name defines his appearance as he wears a full-bodied lead suit in order to withstand the radiation released by Duke Nukem's body.
He revealed that he works for Duke Nukem because when Nukem takes over the world, he'll get to be second in command.
Leadsuit is timid, rarely arguing with Nukem (and always losing if he objects to anything).
Leadsuit is afraid of the dark, and usually gives in at the slightest trouble.

Dr. Barbara "Babs" Blight (voiced by Meg Ryan in 1990-1991, Mary Kay Bergman in 1992–1996, Tessa Auberjonois in OK K.O.!
Let's Be Heroes) –
The fourth villain revealed, Dr. Blight is a mad scientist who represents the dangers of uncontrolled technology and unethical scientific experimentation.
As a result of self-experimentation, the left half of her face is horribly scarred; this is usually hidden by her hair.
In the episode "Hog Tide," it is revealed that Dr. Blight had a grandmother named Betty Blight who assisted Don Porkaloin in his plot.
In the episode "Hollywaste", it is revealed that Dr. Blight has a sister named Bambi (voiced by Kath Soucie).
Bambi calls Blight by her nickname "Babs".

Ozone Slayer MAL (voiced by David Rappaport in 1990, Tim Curry in 1991-1996) - Dr. Blight's artificial intelligence computerized aerosol spraycan husband and henchman.
He has the ability to hack into other computer systems, take over them and reprogram them mainly to Dr. Blight's specifications.
MAL is often the control and main power source of everything in Dr. Blight's labs as well as the vehicles she travels in.

Looten Plunder (voiced by James Coburn in 1990–1992, Ed Gilbert in 1993–1996) – A wealthy poacher and crooked businessman who represents the evils of unethical business actions.
Looten is the sixth villain to appear on Captain Planet in the seventh episode, "The Last of Her Kind".
He is also shown to have a nephew named Robin Plunder.
His name was a play on the term "Loot and Plunder", and he was always in the ending credits of every episode when the singer mentioned "Bad guys who like to...loot and plunder!",
taken from footage of one episode where a disshelved Plunder sees his scheme in ruins and screams "You will pay for this, Captain Planet!".
Plunder is the only eco villain to come out on top as the Planeteers lose after failing to provide proof that Plunder was illegally cutting down trees.

Argos Bleak (voiced by S. Scott Bullock) -
Looten Plunder's main henchman and bodyguard
, he also functions as a mercenary and carries out most of Plunder's dirty work.
He seems to have a military background as he is seen in many episodes flying helicopters or other aircraft, and is proficient in handling firearms.
Argos even got his own episode "The Preditor", where he appeared without his boss to hunt down sharks.
Another time where Plunder conspired with Hoggish Greedily, Argos Bleak was seen arguing with Rigger as to who was the better Eco-Villain.

Pinehead Brothers (voiced by Dick Gautier and Frank Welker) –
Oakey and Dokey are two oversized lumberjacks that are Looten Plunder's henchmen in the final season of "The New Adventures of Captain Planet."

Sly Sludge (voiced by Martin Sheen in 1990–1992, Jim Cummings in 1993–1995) –
An unscrupulous waste collector who represents laziness, ignorance, and the dangers of apathy and short-term thinking.
However, as many of his schemes involve waste management, which is a legitimate environmental issue, he often uses that to gain apparent respectability.
Sludge is the last villain to be revealed.
He is also the only main villain to defect to the Planeteers where a recycling program of his makes a lot of money by the end of "No Small Problem" enabling Sludge to propose plans to mass-produce an affordable, eco-friendly way to safely dispose of waste.

Ooze (voiced by Cam Clarke) - Sly Sludge's henchman.

Tank Flusher III (voiced by Frank Welker) – Sly Sludge's strongman servant who makes his debut in "The New Adventures of Captain Planet" episode "
A Mine is a Terrible Thing to Waste" Pt.
1.

Zarm (voiced by Sting in 1990–1992, David Warner in 1993, Malcolm McDowell in 1994–1995) – A former spirit of the planet who left Gaia in search of other worlds and ended up laying other populous planets to ruin lacking Gaia to balance out his methods.
He represents war and destruction.
Even though Zarm does not have any henchmen of his own, he would often manipulate other people to do his bidding.
He once united Hoggish Greedly, Looten Plunder, Sly Sludge, Duke Nukem, Verminous Skumm, and Dr. Blight under his leadership in the two-part episode "Summit to Save Earth."
Other times he recruits and manipulates others, even the Planeteers, to work for him.
Zarm is the fifth Eco-Villain to appear in the series, having his first appearance in the sixth episode.
Outside of war and destruction, Zarm promoted hatred and totalitarianism, which he believed were the most dangerous pollutants to mankind, as evidenced by his acting as kingmaker to a dictator named Morgar.
Zarm admits he has been a guiding force for every despot of the 20th Century, but admits one of them actually declined his help and challenges the Planeteers to guess who saying "I think you'll be pleasantly surprised."
====
Captain Pollution ====
A polluting counterpart to Captain Planet named Captain Pollution (voiced by David Coburn, like his good counterpart) appears in the two-part episode "Mission to Save Earth" when  Dr. Blight steals the Planeteers' rings, creates polluting duplicates of them, and distributes the duplicates to most of the other Eco-villains.
Each Eco-villain received a specific ring which had the opposite power of the Planeteers:
Duke Nukem has a Super Radiation Ring (counterpart of Fire).

Looten Plunder has a Deforestation Ring (counterpart of Earth).

Sly Sludge has a Smog Ring (counterpart of Wind).

Verminous Skumm has a Toxics Ring (counterpart of Water).

Dr. Blight has a Hate Ring (counterpart of Heart).Each of the evil rings has malevolent faces on them, in contrast to the more element-themed Planeteer rings.
Captain Pollution is weakened when he is in contact with pure elements such as clean water or sunlight, while he gains power from contact with pollutants, being able to absorb pollutant and emit radioactive rays (and is later shown to gain limitless power when in contact with pollutants after his resurrection).
When he is summoned he says "By your polluting powers combined, I am Captain Pollution!
Ha!
Ha!
Ha!
Ha!
Ha!
Ha!",
and when he disappears, he declares "The polluting power is yours!"

In his first appearance, he is sent by the Eco-villains to destroy the Planeteers but gets chased off by Commander Clash, and after a fight with Captain Planet, he returns to the evil rings causing them to explode.
In the two-part episode "A Mine is a Terrible Thing to Waste", Captain Pollution is brought back to life by toxins of the five evil rings that seep into the planet.

Captain Pollution is Captain Planet's polar opposite in personality as well as power.
In contrast to Planet's generous and altruistic nature, Pollution is lazy, and arrogant, seeing himself as a god and his creators as servants rather than partners.
Captain Planet sums up the difference in their outlook during their first battle by taunting that the Planeteers have no boss - they are a team - and this is why Pollution will always lose.

Captain Pollution resembles Captain Planet, but his skin is pale yellow and covered in brown lesions.
His hair is red and styled in a Widow's peak and he has red eyes.
His costume is the same color and style as Planet's, but the globe on his chest is torn in the middle.
His voice is similar to Captain Planets, but it has a California Valley twang to it.
Captain Pollution is defeated twice by Captain Planet; first in "Mission to Save Earth" by being rammed through earth, lava, air and water, and then again in "
A Mine is a Terrible Thing to Waste" by being tricked into going into an underground magma chamber.

Captain Pollution is destroyed by Captain Planet who throws Pollution in the water destroying him.

===
Other villains ===
The Slaughters - A family of poachers who made their debut in "The New Adventures of Captain Planet.
"
The Slaughters represent the endangerment of animals and the evils of poaching and are often in direct monetary competition with Looten Plunder.
Mame and her family once collaborated with Looten Plunder and Argos Bleak in the episode "Horns A'Plenty" when the Planeteers ruined each one's rhinoceros poaching.

Mame Slaughter (voiced by Theresa Saldana in the first appearance, Mitzi McCall in the second appearance) - The leader of the Slaughters
Stalker Slaughter
(voiced by Charlie Adler) –
One of Mame's sons and her second-in-command.
==
Episodes ==


==
Development ==


===
Conception ===
According to Barbara Pyle, the inspiration for the five Planeteers came from real people that she met during the show's pre-production in 1989.
In a September 2012 interview with Barbara Pyle and co-developer Nicholas Boxer, it was stated that the Hope Island was located near the Bahamas.

===
DIC history (1990–1992) ===
The original series was the second longest running US-cartoon of the 1990s, producing 113 episodes.
It lasted for three seasons under the name Captain Planet and the Planeteers (produced by TBS Productions and DiC).

The show's intro theme was composed by Tom Worrall.
The ending theme (maintained by both DIC and Hanna-Barbera's versions) is considered one of the most memorable parts of the series due to its catchy main chorus and rock track ("Captain Planet, he's our hero, gonna take pollution down to zero").
Its lyrics were written by show producer Nick Boxer and is performed by Murray McFadden and Timothy Mulhollan.
During the end credits, James Coburn, in character as Looten Plunder, utters the line "You'll pay for this, Captain Planet.".
This is then followed by a rap from the voice actors of the Planeteers.
It is akin to New Kids
On The Block's "Step By Step".
==
=
Hanna-Barbera history (1993–1996) ===
In 1993, the show saw a production company switch, changing the title to The New Adventures of Captain Planet (produced by Hanna-Barbera Cartoons, which was acquired by Turner in 1991).
During this time, it aired as part of TBS'  Sunday Morning
In Front Of The TV  block, alongside fellow H-B toons SWAT Kats:
The Radical Squadron and 2 Stupid Dogs.
This series revealed more of the past of each of the characters and expanded on it dramatically.
The tone of these episodes was more mature than the initial series.
The animation style was altered.

The DiC seasons' synth-rock soundtrack was replaced by a large number of orchestral pieces, and while the end credits theme was retained, the ending sequence now showcased footage from the Hanna-Barbera episodes.
Full-time voice actors replaced most of the major celebrities that had voiced Gaia and the Eco-Villains during the DiC seasons.
The opening narration was spoken by David Coburn (Captain Planet) rather than LeVar Burton (Kwame) and, in the final season, was replaced by a rap by Fred Schneider of The B-52's.
===
Legacy ===
The Captain Planet Foundation (CPF) was founded in 1991, when series producer Barbara Pyle negotiated a percentage of the show's merchandising revenue to empower young people.
The concept allowed schools and organizations around the world to present their environmental projects to the Foundation and receive seed money to grow their ideas.
In 2001, Time Warner decided to shut down the CPF due to a challenging merger with AOL.
Laura Seydel and her husband Rutherford Seydel worked with Time Warner to orchestrate the transition of the corporate foundation to a public charity - the Captain Planet Foundation.
In 2007, CPF acquired the rights to exhibit previous episodes of Captain Planet and the Planeteers online and on-air, thus "allowing this valuable resource to reach out and educate the children of today!"
As of 2017, the organization's board is chaired by Laura Turner Seydel, daughter of Ted Turner; the board includes Barbara Pyle.

==
Educational goals ==
Various episodes were constructed to touch on relevant themes to a modern audience.

"Mind Pollution"The episode titled "Mind Pollution" (1991)
was notable for dealing with the issue of drug abuse.
This was explained by the fact that the characters thought of drug addiction as "pollution of the mind".
The episode revolved around an epidemic of a designer drug known as "Bliss" created by Verminous Skumm.
It included a scene of Linka's cousin Boris jumping through a window and dying from a drug overdose.

"Population Bomb""Population Bomb" (1991) continued the trend of tackling controversial subject matter atypical for a children's cartoon, in this instance the problem with overpopulation.
Using mice as substitutes for humans, the episode sets Wheeler on a Gulliver's Travels style adventure where he encounters a tribe of sentient mice who are destroyed by overpopulation and irresponsible leadership.
It turns out that the ordeal is something that Wheeler dreamed up, though it serves as a warning for the audience about sustainability and over-consumption.

"A Formula for Hate"The episode titled "A Formula for Hate" (1992) was also unusual for the series in that it was the first episode in an American children's animated series to directly deal with the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
In the episode, Skumm brainwashes a local community into thinking the virus can be spread through casual contact and thus causing people to hate and fear a young man, infected with HIV, named Todd Andrews (voiced by Neil Patrick Harris, with his mother voiced by Elizabeth Taylor).

==
Franchise extension ==
Pyle and Boxer demanded that the series' merchandise be made sustainably; because of this, several of the companies producing Captain Planet-themed merchandise had to completely overhaul their means of production to manufacture recycled and recyclable products.

===
Toys ===
As with many popular cartoons, Captain Planet had a line of action figures and vehicles.
Released by Tiger Toys in 1990, the line ran for several years, long enough to tie into the New Adventures series.
The toys were repackaged and sold by Grand Toys in Canada and Kenner throughout Europe.
The toys were of average poseability, with the common five points – neck, shoulders, and hips.

Finding a comprehensive list of what was released is difficult, since not all toys shown in the initial retailer catalog were even released.
The collector's market is small, the toys being somewhat rare on eBay.
The Captain Planet Foundation still sells a small number of them online, however.
There may have also been further foreign variations of certain toys which may be even more difficult to catalog.
Various toys from the New Adventures waves are not as likely to be well known.

The five Planeteers, five Eco-Villains, Commander Clash, and several versions of Captain Planet, each with a different gimmick or paint scheme, were released, along with several vehicles.
A toy ring with lights and sound and interchangeable lenses for the five elements was also released.
Four small vehicles were also sold through a Burger King promotion.

===
Video games ===
A video game based on the series was developed for the Nintendo Entertainment System by Mindscape called Captain Planet.
The game, which involved a good deal of shooting, received negative reviews from game critics and thus a Sega Mega Drive (Genesis) version of the game was cancelled.
A separate side-scrolling game was developed by Novalogic for the Mega Drive/Genesis, but only saw release in Europe and Australia.
David Perry and Nick Bruty developed a ZX Spectrum and Amstrad CPC game using the license,
a 3-level shoot 'em up.
A game was also released in 1990 for the Commodore Amiga and Atari ST, written by Tony Crowther.
This was a platform game and was briefly bundled with the Amiga 500 "Cartoon Classics" pack released in 1991.
A Commodore 64 game was in development but never released.
Tiger Toys, owners of the action figure license, also created an LCD hand-held game.

Captain Planet appears as a playable character in the fighting game Cartoon Network:
Punch Time Explosion for Nintendo 3DS, Wii, PS3, and Xbox 360.
===
Home media ===
Turner Home Entertainment originally released VHS tapes of the series, which contained a single episode on each.
DIC's main home video distributor Buena Vista Home Video would also release single-episode VHS releases as well.

A DVD with four episodes and bonus features exists but was only available as part of a "Planeteer Pack" purchased from the Captain Planet Foundation.

This promotional DVD contained the episodes "A River Ran Through It", "A Perfect World", "Gorillas Will Be Missed", and "The Big Clam Up".
A short clip titled " Planeteers in Action", which is about the  Captain Planet Foundation, is also included.
The "Planeteer Pack" special is no longer available.

Shout!
Factory under license from Turner and Warner Home Video released a DVD set of the complete first season in the U.S. on April 19, 2011.
The DVD packaging is made of 100% recycled paper.
Madman Entertainment released the first season on July 6, 2016 and the complete collection on October 25, 2017 in Australia.

As of March 25, 2017 it is available on iTunes for purchase.
The whole series was made available on Amazon Instant Video.

===
Film ===
Multiple attempts have been made to create a film adaptation of the series.
The first occurred in 1996 when Boxer and Pyle wrote a film adaptation of Captain Planet originally titled Planet.
Five years later, Michael Reaves revised the concept as Dark Planet or Planet.
The storyline was darker than the series, and set in a post-apocalyptic time period.
However, the script was lost when Turner and Warner Bros. merged in 1996.
The film reached the design stage before it was abandoned.

Other attempts at a film version were made in 2007, 2011, and 2013, but none of these versions came to pass.
In October 2016 Paramount Pictures and Leonardo DiCaprio's Appian Way were attempting to develop a new movie and is in negotiations with Jono Matt and Glen Powell to write the script.
The status of the project is unclear since there were no further news of film adaptation.

===
Comic books ===
Marvel Comics published a comic series titled Captain Planet and the Planeteers.
The series ran twelve issues, cover dated October 1991 through October 1992.

===
OK K.O.!
crossover ===
Captain Planet appeared in a special crossover episode of the Cartoon Network series OK K.O.!
Let's Be Heroes, with David Coburn reprising his role as Captain Planet and LeVar Burton reprising his role as Kwame.
The heroes battled Dr. Blight (accompanied by a silent MAL).
The episode "The Power Is Yours" aired on October 9, 2017.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Planeteer Movement
Captain Planet Foundation
Captain Planet at Don Markstein's Toonopedia.
Archived from the original on April 9, 2012.

Captain Planet and the Planeteers at IMDb
Captain Planet
And The Planeteers at the Big Cartoon DataBase
The New Adventures of Captain Planet at the Big Cartoon DataBase
‹The
template TV.com show is being considered for deletion.› Captain Planet and the Planeteers at TV.com
Kylo Ren is a fictional character and a major antagonist in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens, he is portrayed by Adam Driver.
Kylo Ren is the chosen name of Ben Solo, the only child of original Star Wars trilogy characters Han Solo and Princess Leia Organa.
Though trained by his uncle Luke Skywalker as a Jedi, he was seduced to the dark side of the Force by Supreme Leader Snoke, and aspires to be as powerful as his grandfather, the Sith Lord Darth Vader.
Ren is eventually redeemed like his grandfather before him and helps Rey in her fight against her grandfather, the revived Emperor Palpatine.

Ren is also the master of the Knights of Ren, as well as a commander and later the Supreme Leader of the First Order, an organization spawned from the former Galactic Empire.
He appears in The Force Awakens, The Last Jedi (2017), Star Wars Resistance (2018-2020), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), as well as related media and merchandising.
Driver's performance received acclaim from critics and fans.
For his performance in The Force Awakens, Driver won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor, making him the first Star Wars actor since Alec Guinness to win the award.
Driver received a second nomination in the same category for his performance in The Rise of Skywalker.
Kylo Ren is widely regarded as one of the greatest villains of the 2010s 


==
Concept and creation ==
Abrams requested that Ren's mask be designed to be memorable to a child.
As late as March 2014, the film's main antagonist was only known to the production team as "Jedi Killer", and had gone through numerous unapproved design attempts.
The same month, Glyn Dillon's design for the character's costume was finally approved.
According to Abrams, "the design was meant to be a nod to the Vader mask," and concept designer Doug Chiang says that the character "takes on [the] persona of [Vader] to haunt Luke."
According to The Force Awakens costume designer Michael Kaplan,

I don't know if it was the kind of spaghetti type lines on it or what, but the next time J.J. came by that was what we presented to him
and he loved it.
Also the silver in those lines kind of reflects and changes color with the action.
You know, if he's standing in front of fire you see that, so it almost brings you into the mask.

Driver's casting in the film in an unnamed role was first announced on April 29, 2014.
Kylo Ren was first seen from behind, but still not named, in the 88-second
The Force Awakens teaser trailer released by Lucasfilm on November 28, 2014, wielding a jagged red lightsaber with a crossguard.
The name Kylo Ren, as well as the character's design, was revealed by Entertainment Weekly in a Lucasfilm-designed Topps-style trading card mock-up on December 11, 2014.
A May 2015 Vanity Fair photo shoot by Annie Leibovitz confirmed that Driver would be portraying Kylo.
According to other cast members, Driver is a method actor, which meant that he sometimes stayed in character on set as Ren and left his mask on between scenes.
Driver explained that his goal was "to forget you're in Star Wars and treat it like any other job that's filled with moments and problems," because from the perspective of the characters living within the film's universe, "Darth Vader is real."
==
Character ==
Abrams told Empire in August 2015, "Kylo Ren is not a Sith.
He works under Supreme Leader Snoke, who is a powerful figure on the Dark Side of the Force."
Abrams had previously told Entertainment Weekly that the character, "came to the name Kylo Ren when he joined a group called the Knights of Ren."
Robbie Collin of The Telegraph described Ren as "a hot-headed, radicalised Dark Side jihadi, whose red lightsaber splutters and crackles as violently as his temper".
Abrams noted, "The lightsaber is something that he built himself, and is as dangerous and as fierce and as ragged as the character."
The Telegraph also explains that Ren's wild and erratic temper and "angsty" instability make him dangerous.
Melissa Leon of The Daily Beast describes Ren's use of the Force as "formidable", citing his ability to stop a blaster shot mid-air, immobilize victims and probe their minds against their will.
Kasdan told Entertainment Weekly in August 2015, "I've written four Star Wars movies now, and there's never been a character quite like the one that Adam plays.
I think you're going to see something that's brand new to the saga," noting that the character is "full of emotion".
Abrams explained, "I think that what makes Ren so unique is that he isn't as fully formed as when we meet a character such as Darth Vader ...
He is not your prototypical mustache-twirling bad guy.
He is a little bit more complex than that."
Driver said in December 2015 that, despite the visual similarities to Darth Vader, Ren is "unlike any villain the franchise has seen".
He explained:

I feel there's a recklessness about him that's maybe not normally associated with the Dark Side.
You normally think of order, and structure, and full commitment and no hesitation ...
he's just a little bit more unpolished.
It's in his costume, in his lightsaber—how you kind of get the sense that it could just not work at any moment; that it could just blow up.
That’s kind of like a big metaphor for him.

Driver claimed that he was privy to several details of Kylo Ren's backstory during the making of the films.
According to Lev Grossman, who interviewed the actor in the lead-up to The Rise of Skywalker, Driver reported that “both Han Solo and Leia were way too self-absorbed and into this idea of themselves as heroes to really be attentive parents in the way a young and tender Kylo Ren really needed.”
The backstory of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren was elaborated upon in a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren (written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney), which was published and released by Marvel Comics from December 18, 2019 to March 11, 2020.Certain aspects of Kylo Ren's overall arc across the three films of the Sequel Trilogy were also known to Driver from the start of production on the first film.
He claimed that he “had one piece of information of where it was all going...and things were building towards that.”
He later clarified:
J.J. Abrams told me when I met him for the first time that I should imagine a journey of a character completely opposite to Darth Vader...
someone who starts as a child and becomes a man over the course of three movies.
He becomes closer to his convictions, becomes more assured about his choices, but has metaphorically and physically killed his father to become his own person.

When asked by IGN in December 2017 if he believed Kylo Ren was capable of redemption, The Last Jedi writer/director Rian Johnson replied, “Yeah...
Are you kidding?
Vader was worse than Kylo ever was, I think, and Vader got redeemed.”
Citing the complexity of the character, Johnson articulated, “I don’t see the point of trying to get behind his mask and learn more about him if all we’re going to learn is ‘Yeah, he’s just an evil bad guy that needs to be killed.’”
The Rise of Skywalker co-writer Chris Terrio also supported this position through comparing Kylo with Darth Vader.
According to Terrio, “Vader was complicit in genocide and cruelty and depravity.
Yet there is this inherent optimism in Star Wars that the light in you is never truly gone.
That you can still redeem yourself right up until the last minute – which, in Vader’s case, was literally true...
Leia never really gave up hope that Kylo could be redeemed, and she knew that Rey was probably the way that it would happen.”
Abrams further elaborated on this point:
Maybe it’s the optimist in me, but I would like to think that anyone, even someone who does the most horrendous things, is redeemable.
And certainly because his mother, Leia, is a believer that there is still light in him, it was hard to imagine that she would be wrong about him.

The Rise of Skywalker revealed that Kylo Ren and Rey were two halves of a “dyad” in the Force, which Terrio alternatively described as “sort of soulmate[s] in the Force”  and “twins of fate, twins of destiny.”

==
Appearances ==


===
The Force Awakens (2015) ===
Kylo Ren first appears in The Force Awakens as a high-ranking member in the First Order, a tyrannical regime that has risen from the remains of the Galactic Empire.
After arriving at Jakku to retrieve a map containing the coordinates where Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) is to be found, Ren kills an old priest named Lor San Tekka (Max von Sydow), and captures Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), who has also been sent to recover the map by General Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher).
Ren soon learns that the pilot had entrusted his astromech droid, BB-8, with the map.
Poe flees with the help of rogue stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega), who later finds BB-8, and the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley).
Finn, Rey, and BB-8 escape Jakku in the Millennium Falcon, and are soon intercepted by the ship's former owner, Han Solo (Harrison Ford), and his co-pilot Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).

It is revealed that Ren is the son of Han and Leia, originally named Ben, and was once one of Luke's Jedi pupils.
He was corrupted to the dark side of the Force by the First Order's Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), and helped destroy Luke's new Jedi Academy.
However, Ren still feels the pull of the light side of the Force and seeks the strength to overcome it from his grandfather Darth Vader, whose burnt helmet is in Ren's possession.
Arriving at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong'o) castle on Takodana, Ren captures Rey, who he senses has seen the map.
While interrogating her, he realizes that she is strong with the Force, though unaware of it.
Rey finds herself able to resist his powers and experience Ren's emotions, and confronts him over his fear that he will never be as powerful as his grandfather.
She later uses the "Jedi mind trick" to compel her stormtrooper guard to let her escape.
Han arrives at the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, as part of the Resistance's plan to destroy it.

After Han plants explosives to destroy the base, he confronts Ren—calling him by his real name, Ben—and implores him to abandon the dark side, warning him that Snoke will kill him once he has control of the galaxy.
Ren tells Han he feels conflicted, and asks his father for help, which Han promises to give; Ren then ignites his lightsaber, impaling and killing Han.
An enraged Chewbacca fires at Ren, wounding him.
As Finn and Rey flee the damaged base, Ren follows and confronts them.
Finn fights Ren with Anakin Skywalker's recovered lightsaber, but Ren overpowers and severely wounds him.
Rey then takes up the lightsaber and, using the Force, begins to overcome Ren, striking him on the face with the lightsaber.
Before the duel is finished, they are separated by a seismic fissure created by the collapsing base.
Rey and the others escape as Snoke orders General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson) to evacuate the base and bring Ren to him to complete his training.

===
The Last Jedi (2017) ===
Ren's inner conflict continues into The Last Jedi, particularly through his conversations with Rey, with whom he connects through the Force.
Rey learns from Luke why Ben Solo turned to the dark side:
Luke had seen a vision of the destruction Ben would cause and was briefly tempted to kill him in his sleep; when Ben awoke to see Luke with his lightsaber drawn, he turned on his uncle and apparently destroyed the Jedi Temple.
Rey believes that there is still good in Ren, and resolves to bring him back to the light side.

Meanwhile, Ren is reproached by Snoke for his failure to defeat Rey, and Ren tries to prove himself by leading an attack on a lead Resistance starship.
He hesitates to destroy it after sensing his mother's presence, but his wingmen destroy the ship's bridge, almost killing Leia.
Upon Rey's arrival, Ren captures her and brings her to Snoke, who tortures her for Luke's location before ordering Ren to kill her.
Instead of complying, Ren uses the Force to ignite Luke's lightsaber at Snoke's side and cut him in half, and subsequently slays Snoke's royal guard with Rey's assistance.
After the guards are slain, Ren reveals to Rey his goal to create a new order in the galaxy, separate from the legacies created by Snoke and Luke, and beseeches Rey to join him.
He gets her to acknowledge that her parents abandoned her, and tells her that despite of her being a nobody that comes from nowhere, he truly cares about her.
Rey hesitates and then refuses to join him, realizing that Ren will not turn back to the light side; the two briefly struggle over Anakin's lightsaber with the Force, resulting in the weapon breaking in half and knocking both warriors unconscious.

After Rey escapes, Ren frames her for Snoke's assassination, uses the Force to choke Hux until he acknowledges Ren as the new Supreme Leader of the First Order, and orders his forces to attack the Resistance base on Crait.
When Luke appears during the attack, Ren orders his men to fire on him, to no effect; Luke remains standing, revealing that he is only present as a Force projection, serving as a distraction to allow the Resistance to escape from the First Order.
After Luke vanishes, the First Order storms the base, but the Resistance has already evacuated.
Ren shares a final look with Rey through the Force before Rey slams the door to the Millennium Falcon and escapes with the Resistance.

===
The Rise of Kylo Ren (2019–2020) ===
Ren's past as Ben Solo is depicted in The Rise of Kylo Ren.
As a child, he is trained as a Jedi by his uncle Luke Skywalker alongside his fellow students Voe, Hennix, and his best friend Tai; Voe grows jealous of Ben for his superior Force capability and Luke's perceived favoritism and nepotism.
On a mission to the planet Elphrona to investigate an ancient Jedi outpost with Luke and Lor San Tekka, Ben telepathically communicates with Snoke, whom Luke had recently fought, for which Ben respects him.
Upon arriving on the planet, the trio encounters the Knights of Ren, a group of Force-wielding mercenaries searching the ruins for artifacts.
After a brief confrontation between the group and Luke, their leader, Ren, stops the proceedings by activating a kill switch on his lightsaber.
After he and Luke agreeing to a truce, Ren unmasks and, placing his mask on the ground, offers Ben an open invitation to the group's ranks if he ever desires in the future, sensing great capability for "the Shadow" within him.

Several years later, after collapsing his hut on his uncle Luke after the latter apparently tried to kill him in his sleep, Ben yells towards the Jedi Temple in outrage at Luke's actions and is terrified when a bolt of lightning strikes, destroying it.
Later that night, Voe, Hennix, Tai return from off-planet to find Ben before the burning Temple.
After they are unable to sense Luke's presence, Ben elaborates on the confrontation, believing himself to have killed Luke, and states that he intends to leave the planet.
Believing Ben to be responsible for the Temple's destruction, Voe attacks Ben only to be easily subdued with Hennix and Tai, and Ben leaves the planet on a nearby shuttle, with the trio in close pursuit.
After considering returning to his mother on Hosnian Prime, Ben instead decides to meet Snoke in person after receiving another message from him.
Scarred from a previous encounter with Luke, Snoke encourages Ben to seek out the Knights of Ren.
Traveling to the outpost on Elphrona, Ben retrieves Ren's mask and puts it on, putting the pair in communication.
After mentioning Snoke, Ren invites Ben to meet the Knights on Vanrak, before he is confronted by Voe, having followed him via a tracker in his ship provided by Hennix.

Refusing to fight, only to defend himself from Voe's attacks, Ben uses the Force to catch her after she falls off of a building, witnessed by Tai.
However, Hennix, believing Ben to have killed her, throws his lightsaber in a lethal spin at Ben; in deflecting it, Hennix is bisected.
Leaving, Ben collapses the outpost around Voe and Tai to subdue them and leaves the planet.
Later, Ben meets with Ren and his Knights, who informs him he will need to provide a "good death" for membership.
After telling him of the encounter with Hennix, Ren states that Ben was not responsible for it, and therefore ineligible for membership, although he offers him another chance due to Snoke having vouched for him.
Providing him a uniform, the group proceeds to the Mine Moon of Mimban, where Ben assists the Knights in stealing an artifact known as the Mindsplinter from miners using a variation of the Jedi mind trick taught to him by Snoke.
Ben is horrified when the Knights subsequently execute the smugglers after Ren had promised Ben to merely release them.
Suddenly, Voe and Tai, having followed Ben from Tai reading his mind, arrive.
Voe attacks the Knights of Ren, while Tai reasons with Ben over his decision to leave, and the pair cease fighting.
Witnessing this, Ren snaps Tai's neck, killing him, telling Ben that Snoke was wrong and that he doesn't wish to "live in the shadow".
Declaring that "I am the Shadow", an enraged Ben takes up Tai's lightsaber and his own and duels Ren.
While doing so, Rey senses Ben from across the galaxy without knowing why, Ben's mother Leia senses his fall, Snoke calls out his praises and Palpatine is revealed to be manipulating both Snoke and Ben, and to have destroyed the Jedi Temple, although Ben remains unaware of this.
The duel culminates in Ben impaling Ren, providing him the "good death" he asked for before sending the Knights and Voe flying.

Shocked at Ben killing Ren, Voe attempts to reach for her lightsaber, only for it to be taken by Ben.
Deriding her role in Hennix's and Tai's deaths and declaring that she is "not a Jedi", Ben knights Voe with Ren's lightsaber, before turning to find the Knights of Ren kneeling before him, having accepted him as their new leader.
Later, on Ren's ship, Ben crushes the Kyber crystal from his own lightsaber in his bare hand and forges himself a new crossguard lightsaber in the image of one he had seen on Elphrona, taking the name Kylo Ren, derived from "Skywalker" and "Solo".
===
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ===
In The Rise of Skywalker, Ren has been ruling as the Supreme Leader of the First Order for a year.
In the film's beginning, Ren searches for a Sith wayfinder to lead him to the Sith planet Exegol, with the hopes of killing the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) as a show of his power.
When Ren finds the Wayfinder and arrives on Exegol, Palpatine reveals that he has been manipulating Ren and the First Order, having created Snoke as a means of turning Ren to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order, a massive armada of Xyston-class Star Destroyers designed by the Sith Eternal.
Palpatine offers the armada to Ren in a bid to form a new Sith Empire—with Ren as Emperor—on the condition that he kill Rey.

Ren searches the galaxy for Rey and continues corresponding with her through the Force to discern her location.
Rey has been searching for a second Wayfinder; Ren tries to stop her from finding it.
Eventually, Ren informs Rey that she is Palpatine's granddaughter, and furthermore, they are a dyad in the Force with extremely powerful potential when joined together.
He urges her once more to take his hand and to overthrow Palpatine together.
Rey refuses, but Ren is unwilling to kill her and follows her to Kef Bir, the location of the second Wayfinder.
Meeting her on the wreckage of the second Death Star, Ren destroys Rey's Wayfinder and duels her.
The duel ends with Rey impaling Ren, who had been distracted by his dying mother, Leia, reaching out to him through the Force.
A guilt-ridden Rey (also sensing Leia's death) uses the Force to heal Ren and leaves aboard his ship, after telling him that she wanted to take Ben Solo's hand, but not Kylo Ren's.
Alone on the wreckage, Ren converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber, renouncing his role as Supreme Leader and reclaiming his old identity of Ben Solo.

Ben rushes to help Rey defeat Palpatine on Exegol.
Rey senses his presence and uses their Force connection to give him Anakin's lightsaber, which Ben uses to defeat the Knights of Ren.
Palpatine then senses Rey and Ben's connection as a dyad of the Force, and absorbs their energy to restore his full power, before casting Ben into an abyss.
However, Rey manages to defeat and kill Palpatine before dying from the effort.
Ben climbs out of the abyss and finds Rey's inert body.
Ben manages to transfer all of his life essence into her, successfully resuscitating her but sacrificing his own life in the process.
They share a passionate kiss before Ben dies peacefully in Rey's arms.
His body fades away simultaneously as his mother's body becomes one with the Force at the Resistance base.

===
Related works and promotional material ===
Kylo Ren is a point of view character in the 2015, 2017, and 2019 novelizations of the Star Wars sequel trilogy by Alan Dean Foster, Jason Fry, and Rae Carson.

Kylo is a playable character in the 2015
The Force Awakens add-on to the Disney Infinity 3.0 video game, with an Infinity character figurine available separately.
He is also a character in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.
Hasbro has released a 3 3⁄4-inch (9.5 cm)
Kylo Ren action figure, and a 6-inch (15 cm) figure in their Black Series line.
He is also featured in the Lego Star Wars playsets Kylo Ren's Command Shuttle (2015) and Battle on Takodana (2016), as well as a Lego Buildable Figure.
The Lego version of Kylo also appears in the 2016 short form animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises, and as a playable character in Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In January 2016, Driver reprised the role for a Star Wars/Undercover Boss sketch on Saturday Night Live, with Kylo Ren disguising himself as a radar technician named "Matt" to determine what the Starkiller Base employees really think of him.
Driver again reprised the role in January 2020 for a follow-up Saturday Night Live sketch titled “Undercover Boss:
Where Are They Now?”
in which Kylo goes undercover as “Randy,” an entry-level intern on a star destroyer.
In the 2017 Chuck Wendig novel Star Wars: Aftermath: Empire's End, Ben Solo is stated as having been born on the planet Chandrila on the same day as a peace treaty is signed between the remnants of the Empire and the New Galactic Republic (about a year after Return of the Jedi, or 29 years before The Force Awakens).
Kylo Ren is also mentioned in the 2017 novel Star Wars: Phasma, which takes place before The Force Awakens.

Kylo appears in Star Wars Battlefront II, voiced by Matthew Wood and Roger Craig Smith, masked and unmasked respectively.
In the game, Kylo interrogates Del Meeko about Lor San Tekka's location (who possess the map to Luke Skywalker) using his Force abilities.
When Del finally relents and reveals the map and Lor San Tekka's location, Kylo leaves him for Hask, Del's former comrade in Inferno Squad.
Kylo Ren (voiced once again by Matthew Wood) also appears in the Star Wars:
Resistance series finale episode
"The Escape", where he kills Agent Tierny for failing to destroy the Colossus Resistance.

Matthew Wood also portrayed General Grievous in both Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and the TV series
Star Wars: The Clone Wars.

Kylo Ren is also one of the numerous voices heard in the fourth and final season of Star Wars: Rebels in the episode "A World Between Worlds", with an excerpt of Driver's dialogue from The Force Awakens being used.
Kylo Ren appears as a walk-around character within Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios.
The character appears during Star Tours – The Adventures Continue and
Star Wars:
Rise of the Resistance, with the latter featuring the character in audio-animatronic form with Driver providing the voice.
On November 28, 2019, Ichikawa Ebizō XI starred as Kairennosuke in Star Wars Kabuki: Kairennosuke and the Three Shining Swords (スター・ウォーズ歌舞伎〜煉之介光刃三本〜, Sutā Uōzu Kabuki ~Rennosuke
Kōjin San-pon~)
, a kabuki production that re-enacted key events of Kylo Ren in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi.

== Reception ==
The character and Driver's portrayal have received critical acclaim; Driver won the 2016 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal.
In January 2018, Kylo was voted seventh greatest movie villain of all time by the readers of Empire.

Many reviewers commended Ren's conflicted nature and depth, as well as his costume design, and noted there were many places the character could be taken in future installments.
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian praised the character and the actor alike, saying, "He is gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious – and unlike the Vader of old, he is given to petulant temper tantrums, with his lightsaber drawn."
Terri Schwartz of IGN also called Driver's performance "spectacular", noting that "his performance adds great depth to a character who could have come off as one-dimensional, and the implications of his arc leave a viewer with plenty to think about after they leave the theater.
"
Collin wrote, "To describe Kylo Ren as this film's Vader would be accurate in a sense ...
But it would also be to undersell the deep ingenuity with which this astonishing character has been crafted by Abrams, Kasdan and Arndt, and also the wells of emotional tumult Driver invests in him.
"
Comparing the character to the one-note Vader of the 1977 film, Melissa Leon calls Ren "a living battleground between darkness and light, making him a far more resonant and familiar portrayal of that struggle than we've ever seen in Star Wars ...
[which] makes him a far more interesting villain.
"
Abrams told Entertainment Weekly, "it was a great joy to work with Adam Driver on this role, because he threw himself into it in a deep and remarkable way."
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter noted, "Ren is given a pronounced inferiority complex, a clever bad guy twist that could be taken to interesting places both in the writing and performance."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote, "The bald-faced attempt to clone Vader, one of the greatest badasses in film history, is clankingly obvious, but Driver, masked and unmasked, gives him hypnotic and haunting contours."
Kyle Buchanan of Vulture.com was underwhelmed by the reveal of Driver under the mask.
Leon, however, argued:

But that face—that of a normal, vulnerable young man—is the most subversively terrifying thing about J. J. Abrams' reimagining of A New Hope.
Rather than pure evil, Ren is something far more familiar: He is human.
Just like the real-life young men with minds clouded by fear, hate, and anger who commit unspeakable acts in our world every day ...
all the visual cues that leave the character open to criticisms of not being "evil" enough—are all signs of Ren's struggle between the Dark Side and the Light.

Some viewers noted that Ren's character arc shares similarities with that of the Star Wars Expanded Universe character Jacen Solo, the son of Han Solo and Princess Leia who threatens the galaxy as a fallen Jedi.
Additionally, critics have noted a resemblance between Ren's character design and that of Revan, the protagonist of Knights of the Old Republic.

==
Family tree ==


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Szostak, Phil (2015).
The Art of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419717802.

Szostak, Phil (2017).
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419727054.

Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

Wendig, Chuck (2017).
Star Wars:
Aftermath: Empire's End.
Del Rey.
ISBN 9781101966976.

==
Further reading ==
Scoville, Max (December 20, 2017). "
Star Wars:
Hey, What's Up With The Knights of Ren?".
IGN.

==
External links ==
 Media related to Kylo Ren at Wikimedia Commons
Kylo Ren in the StarWars.com Databank
Kylo Ren on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Kylo Ren on IMDb
Luke Skywalker is a fictional character and the main protagonist of the original film trilogy of the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
Portrayed by Mark Hamill, Luke first appeared in Star Wars (1977), and he returned in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
Three decades later, Hamill returned as Luke in the Star Wars sequel trilogy, appearing in all three films: The Force Awakens (2015),
The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
He reprised the role in The Mandalorian episode "Chapter 16:
The Rescue" (2020), voicing the character that was portrayed by a body double with digital de-aging.

Originally a farmer on Tatooine living with his uncle and aunt, Luke becomes a pivotal figure in the Rebel Alliance's struggle against the Galactic Empire.
The son of fallen Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker (turned Sith Lord Darth Vader) and Padmé Amidala, Luke is the twin brother of Rebellion leader Princess Leia and eventual brother-in-law of the smuggler Han Solo.
Luke trains to be a Jedi under Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, and rebuilds the Jedi Order.
He later trains his nephew, Ben Solo, and mentors Rey.
Though Luke dies at the end of The Last Jedi, he returns as a Force spirit in The Rise of Skywalker, encouraging Rey to face her grandfather, the resurrected Emperor Palpatine.
At the end of the film, the spirits of Luke and Leia give Rey their blessing to adopt the Skywalker surname and continue their family's legacy.

The character also briefly appears in the prequel film Episode III – Revenge of the Sith as an infant.
In the de-canonized Star Wars Expanded Universe (renamed Legends), Luke is a main character in many stories set after Return of the Jedi, which depict him as a powerful Jedi Master, the husband of Mara Jade, father of Ben Skywalker and maternal uncle of Jaina, Jacen and Anakin Solo.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
In the original Star Wars trilogy, Luke Skywalker represents the hero archetype of "the young man, called to adventure, the hero going out facing the trials and ordeals, and coming back after his victory with a boon for the community".

===== A New Hope (1977) =====
In a deleted scene preceding the character's first appearance in the film (preserved in the film's radio dramatization), Luke says goodbye to his best friend Biggs Darklighter, who has just joined the Imperial Academy.
His childhood friends disparagingly call him "Wormie".
In the original 1977 film (later having the extended title, A New Hope), Luke lives at a moisture farm on the desert planet of Tatooine with his Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru.
Luke takes his first steps toward his destiny when he purchases the droids C-3PO and
R2-D2.
While examining R2-D2, he sees a message from Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan.
When R2-D2 goes missing, Luke goes out to search for the droid, and is saved from a band of Tusken Raiders by Obi-Wan Kenobi, an old hermit.
Luke and Obi-Wan retreat to the latter’s home, and R2-D2 plays the full message for Obi-Wan from Leia, beseeching him to help her defeat the Galactic Empire.
Obi-Wan says that he and Luke's father were once Jedi Knights, and that his father was murdered by a traitorous Jedi named Darth Vader.
Obi-Wan presents Luke with his father's lightsaber and offers to take him to Alderaan and train him in the ways of the Force, but Luke declines his offer, feeling obligated to continue farming for his uncle.

Luke changes his mind when he returns home to find out that Imperial stormtroopers have raided the moisture farm, killing his aunt and uncle while away.
He and Obi-Wan then travel to Mos Eisley, where they meet smugglers Han Solo and Chewbacca at a cantina.
They team up and travel on the Millennium Falcon to Alderaan, only to find out that it has been destroyed by the Death Star.
The Falcon is brought into the Star's hangar bay via tractor beam, where Luke and Han disguise themselves and infiltrate the station.
When they discover Princess Leia is there, Luke persuades a reluctant Han and Chewbacca to help rescue her.
Obi-Wan deactivates the tractor beam, and he later sacrifices his life in a duel with Vader, so that Luke and his friends can board the Falcon and escape.

During the Battle of Yavin, Luke joins the Rebel Alliance in attacking the Death Star.
In the trench leading to the Death Star's exhaust port, Luke hears Obi-Wan's voice, telling him to "trust his feelings"; he takes Obi-Wan's advice and switches off his X-wing's missile guidance system, instead using the Force to guide the missiles and destroy the Death Star.
In the film's final scene, he joins Han and Chewbacca in receiving a medal of honor for his heroism.

=====
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
=====
Three years after the destruction of the Death Star, Luke is now the commander of the Rebel Alliance's Rogue Squadron.
While on a mission on the ice planet Hoth, he is captured by a wampa, but manages to escape using his lightsaber.
In the frozen wasteland, he sees Obi-Wan's Force ghost, who tells him to travel to the planet Dagobah and complete his training with the Jedi Master Yoda.
Luke collapses but is later rescued by Han.
When the Empire discovers the Rebel base on Hoth, Luke leads his squadron of Snowspeeders to battle the enemy’s AT-ATs, but he is forced to retreat when his wingmen are overwhelmed.
Escaping in his X-wing, he travels to Dagobah and meets Yoda.
He undergoes rigorous Jedi training, quickly increasing his power in the Force.

During his training, Luke sees a vision of his friends in danger.
Against both Obi-Wan and Yoda's advice to stay and complete his training, he travels to Bespin to save them, unwittingly falling into a trap placed by Darth Vader.
He engages in a lightsaber duel with Vader.
As his mentors warned, Luke proves to be no match for Vader; the Sith Lord easily overpowers Luke and severs his right hand.
Vader then reveals that he is Luke's father, and offers him the chance to turn to the dark side of the Force and rule the galaxy at his side.
Resolving that he would rather die than become an agent of evil, Luke throws himself into a deep reactor chasm.
He survives, but is pulled into a garbage chute to the underside of Cloud City, and left hanging perilously onto a vane rod.
Leia, flying away from Cloud City in the Millennium Falcon, senses Luke's call out to her with the Force, and turns the ship around to save him.
Aboard the ship, he hears Vader telepathically telling him that it is his destiny to join the dark side.
Luke's severed hand is replaced with a bio-mechanical one.

=====
Return of the Jedi (1983) =====
One year after the invasion on Bespin, Luke is now a Jedi Knight, and has constructed his own lightsaber.
He returns to Tatooine with Leia, the droids, and Lando Calrissian to save Han, frozen in carbonate, from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
Luke offers to negotiate with Jabba, who rejects his offer and casts him into a pit to battle a rancor.
When Luke kills the rancor, he, Han, and Chewbacca are sentenced to death in the sarlacc pit.
Luke escapes with R2-D2's help, saving his friends and destroying Jabba's sail barge.

Luke returns to Dagobah, and learns from a dying Yoda that Vader is indeed his father.
Luke then learns from Obi-Wan's spirit that he has a twin sister, whom he immediately realizes is princess Leia.
Both Jedi Masters tell Luke that he must face Vader again to finish his training and save the galaxy, but he is disturbed by the idea of killing his own father.

Arriving on Endor as part of a Rebel commando squad, Luke surrenders to Vader in an attempt to bring his father back from the dark side of the Force.
Vader brings Luke to the second Death Star orbiting around Endor, where his master, the Emperor, tries to tempt Luke to the dark side, revealing his plan to destroy the Rebel fleet.
Luke, enraged at the thought of losing his friends, lashes out at the Emperor with his lightsaber, but Vader blocks his strike, and father and son once again duel with each other.
Luke regains control of his emotions until Vader senses that Luke has a sister, and threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit.
Luke snaps and overpowers Vader, severing his father's mechanical right hand.
The Emperor orders Luke to kill Vader and then take his place.
Luke looks at his own bionic hand and realizes that he is on the verge of suffering his father's fate.
He casts his lightsaber aside, declaring himself a Jedi.

Furious, the Emperor tortures Luke with Force lightning.
In agony, Luke calls out to his father for help; unwilling to let his son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor shaft, but is mortally wounded by the Emperor's Force lightning in the process.
As Rebel fighters head toward the second Death Star's main reactor, Luke removes Vader's mask and looks upon his father's real face for the first and last time.
The redeemed Anakin Skywalker reassures Luke that there was good in him after all before dying, and to tell his sister that he was right about him.
On Endor, Luke burns his father's armor and prosthetics on a funeral pyre, giving him a proper Jedi funeral.
During the Rebels' victory celebrations on Endor, Luke sees his father's spirit appear alongside those of Obi-Wan and Yoda.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
Revenge of the Sith (2005) =====
In the prequel film Revenge of the Sith (2005), during the waning days of the  Clone Wars between the Galactic Republic and the Separatists, Senator Padmé Amidala, wife of Anakin Skywalker, becomes pregnant to Luke and his twin sister Leia.
Foreseen fear of Padmé dying from the birth of Luke and Leia becomes a primary catalyst into Anakin's fall to the dark side as Darth Vader by Darth Sidious, who had secretly orchestrated the Clone Wars from both sides in order to transform the democratic Galactic Republic into the autocratic Galactic Empire mere days before Luke's birth.
After being Force-choked by Vader, Padmé is taken to Polis Massa, where she gives birth to Luke and Leia and dies, having lost the will to live.
At the time, Vader was not aware that Padmé had given birth to twins, believing that he killed her out of his anger.
After the twins are separated in order to be protected from the Sith, Luke is taken by Obi-Wan Kenobi to the desert planet Tatooine, where he is adopted by his father's stepbrother, Owen Lars, and his wife, Beru.
The infant Luke is portrayed by Aidan Barton, the son of Roger Barton, an editor of the film.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens (2015) =====
In the first installment of the sequel trilogy, The Force Awakens (2015), the opening crawl reveals that Luke Skywalker had mysteriously vanished some time in the thirty years after the destruction of the second Death Star.
Luke went into hiding after his nephew and apprentice, Ben Solo, turned to the dark side and was later dubbed Kylo Ren.
When Ren killed all of his fellow apprentices and ushered in the despotic reign of the First Order, Luke felt responsible, and disappeared.
At the end of the film, the Resistance manage to reconstruct a map, which traces the location of the temple from the Empire's archives to his location, and he is subsequently found on the planet
Ahch-To by the young scavenger, Rey, who presents him with the lightsaber previously wielded by both Luke and his father.

The Art of Star Wars:
The Last Jedi notes that Luke's exile is a reversal from his decision to help his friends in The Empire Strikes Back.

=====
The Last Jedi (2017) =====
In The Last Jedi (2017), Luke throws the lightsaber away after being given it by Rey.
He then seals himself in his home, refusing to talk with Rey.
However, when he sees Chewbacca without Han Solo and that Rey came on the Millennium Falcon, he inquires about what has gone on with his family.
Rey informs Luke about Solo's death at the hands of Kylo Ren and that the First Order has risen to rule the galaxy.
Rey asks Luke to train her in the ways of the Force.
Luke is initially reluctant to train Rey, telling her that it is time for the Jedi Order to end.

After some persuasion from R2-D2, Luke starts training Rey, originally for the purpose of showing her why the Jedi Order needs to end, but grows increasingly afraid of her power.
Luke then tells Rey the history of the Jedi Order, how Darth Sidious rose to power and how the Jedi were partly responsible for Darth Vader's rise.
Luke also initially tells Rey that Kylo was corrupted by Supreme Leader Snoke and that when he confronted his nephew, he retaliated by destroying his Jedi temple.
This is proven false, however, and, after a furious moment with his new apprentice, Luke tells Rey that he had briefly considered killing the sleeping Ben after seeing a vision of the destruction he could cause, but immediately relented; Ben woke to see Luke with his lightsaber drawn and turned to the dark side because he felt betrayed.
Upon learning this, Rey urges Luke to help her redeem Ben, but he refuses to participate in this nor help the Resistance, saying, "This is NOT going to go the way you think.
"
When Rey leaves, an embittered Luke tries to burn the Jedi temple next to his home on Ahch-To, but fails and is visited by the spirit of Yoda, who assures Luke that he still has a purpose.

Luke appears on the planet Crait, as the Resistance are staging a standoff against the First Order, and he apologizes to Leia for allowing Ben to fall to the dark side.
Luke steps in front of the First Order's artillery, and unexpectedly survives an onslaught of blaster fire ordered by Ren.
Ren charges at Luke in hand-to-hand combat, seemingly bisecting him with his lightsaber, but Luke remains unscathed;
still on Ahch-To, Luke has sent a projection of himself to Crait, using the Force.
This distraction allows the Resistance to escape the planet.
Luke tells Kylo that he will not be the last Jedi before his projection disappears.
On Ahch-To, Luke collapses then looks off in the horizon to see the planet's two suns setting before he becomes one with the Force and vanishes.

=====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) =====
Luke appears briefly in The Rise of Skywalker, the ninth and final chapter of the series.
When Rey discovers her lineage as the granddaughter of Darth Sidious, she exiles herself on Ahch-To as Luke did.
Meaning to isolate herself, she throws Luke's lightsaber towards the burning wreckage of Kylo Ren's TIE whisper she had traveled there with.
Luke appears as a Force spirit, and reprimands Rey for treating the lightsaber with disrespect just as he did.
Luke then admits that he was wrong to not participate in the Resistance, and thanks Rey for helping him rediscover himself.
Luke convinces Rey to not view herself as a Palpatine, but as the good person Leia saw her as when training her, and not to give up on her battle against the Sith Lord.
Luke lends Rey his old T-65B X-wing and tells Rey to combine his father's lightsaber with Leia's old lightsaber in her battle on Exegol.

After Rey vanquishes Sidious once and for all, she visits the moisture farm on Tatooine where Luke was raised.
She buries Luke and Leia's lightsabers, revealing that she has constructed her own.
A local asks Rey who she is.
As Leia, who died earlier, and Luke appear as Force spirits, Rey names herself Rey Skywalker.

===
Television series ===
At the end of the Star Wars Rebels episode "Twin Suns", a silhouette of Luke Skywalker is seen from afar by Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Luke appears in the animated Disney micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny (with Mark Hamill once again reprising his role).
The episode "The Path Ahead" details him training with Yoda on Dagobah.
He also appears in the episode "Traps and Tribulations", which takes place shortly after the Battle of Endor and shows him and Leia assisting the Ewoks in stopping a rampaging monster known as a Gorax.
Luke appears in the season 2 finale of The Mandalorian after making contact with Grogu through The Force in "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy".
In "Chapter 16: The Rescue", he arrives on Moff Gideon's cruiser and destroys all Dark Troopers in aid of Grogu, Din Djarin and his companions.
He then takes Grogu with him to train him in his New Jedi Order with Djarin's permission.

===
Video games ===
Luke is a playable character in Star Wars Battlefront II, and in the online multiplayer of Star Wars Battlefront.

===
Literature ===
Luke is the main character of the novel Heir to the Jedi and the junior novel
The Legends of Luke Skywalker (the latter of which was adapted as a manga).
He is also a main character of the 2015 comic Star Wars, which takes place between the films of the original trilogy.

====
Heir to the Jedi ====
Star Wars:
Heir to the Jedi was announced as one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
Set between A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back
, Heir to the Jedi chronicles the adventures of Luke as he continues to battle the Empire with his Rebel friends and begins to develop his Force abilities.
The novel is written from the first-person perspective of Luke, and is only the second Star Wars novel to attempt this type of narrative voice.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.
The Legends-branded novels, comic books and video games detail
Luke's exploits following Return of the Jedi.

====
Novels ====
In the novel The Truce at Bakura, set one day after the battle of Endor, Luke and his friend Wedge Antilles recover a message droid from the titular planet, which was being invaded by the Ssi-Ruuk.
Luke commands a task force, turning back the enemy army.
He also meets Dev Sibwarra, a Force-sensitive human who had been captured by the Ssi-Ruuk, who is killed in the battle after turning against his captors.
In the novel The Courtship of Princess Leia, set four years after the Battle of Endor, Luke travels to the planet Dathomir.
There, he discovers a group of Force-sensitive witches called the Witches of Dathomir, banded into two separate groups: a collective of benign, matriarchal clans; the one he is in contact with being the Singing Mountain Clan, and the witches who have turned to the dark side, called the Nightsisters.
Discovering a prophecy in which it was told a Jedi would change the way of life on the land, Luke eventually realizes truly what the Force is for the first time in his life.
While there, he destroys most of the Nightsisters (including their powerful leader, Gethzirion, and the galaxy's most powerful remaining warlord, Warlord Zsinj).
Thanks to the help of the prophecy and witches, Luke recovers old Jedi records left by Yoda about 400 years prior.
He decides to start a new Jedi Academy, something he has been trying to do for six months before the start of the novel by finding old Jedi records and archives.
In The Thrawn Trilogy, Luke meets former Emperor's Hand Mara Jade, who is bound by Palpatine's disembodied voice that repeatedly commands "You will kill Luke Skywalker".
Mara Jade is working with her boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named Talon Karrde, who also plays a crucial role in this era.
Although she was ready to fulfill that order to stop the voice, circumstances force her to keep him alive long enough to have him help escape a mutual danger.
Despite her threats, Luke learns of Mara's curse and vows to free her from it.
Meanwhile, the rest of the New Republic is fighting against Grand Admiral Thrawn, and thanks to Leia's help, he is eventually defeated, although Luke tried several times to get near him and his ally, Joruus C'baoth.
Eventually, the desperate pair fights against Luke's clone, Luuke Skywalker, C'baoth's apprentice.
During the fight, Mara Jade destroys the clone and, with Leia's help, destroys C'baoth.
This entire time, C'baoth has been obsessed with "molding" Luke and Mara to serve him, perhaps due to the fact that the Spaarti cloning cylinders he was made from have a reputation of turning people insane later in life.
Nonetheless, C'baoth is defeated along with Luuke, and Mara's sacrifice silences her curse and completes her reconciliation with the Jedi, whom she later joins.
In the Jedi Academy trilogy, Luke resigns his commission in the New Republic's starfighter corps to pursue his Jedi studies and rebuild the Jedi Order in the Massassi Temple on Yavin 4, a decision some anti-Jedi politicians use against him.
Luke becomes the New Jedi Order's leader.
His students in the ways of the Force include; Gantoris, Kam Solusar, Tionne, Streen, Cilghal, Kirana Ti and others.
He is forced to contend with the spirit of ancient Sith Lord Exar Kun, who lures one of his most powerful students, Kyp Durron, to the dark side.

In the Hand of Thrawn Duology, Luke, now a Jedi Master, works again with Mara Jade, who has learned to better her Force knowledge since her training at Luke's Jedi Academy.
He falls in love with her and they eventually marry.
Later, in Edge of Victory: Rebirth, they have a son whom they name Ben, after Obi-Wan Kenobi's pseudonym.

In the New Jedi Order series, Luke creates a New Jedi Council.
He idealises a new conclave, made up of Jedi, politicians and military officers.
Included in this new Jedi Order are Tresina Lobi, Kenth Hammer, Kyle Katarn, Kyp Durron, Cilghal, Saba Sebatynee and himself.
From the politicians and military came new Chief of State Cal Omas, Admiral Sienn Sovv (Sullustan male) and four others.
In Force Heretic: Remnant, he spearheads the mission into the Unknown Regions during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion to find the mysterious planet of Zonama Sekot, a planet that creates living starships.
After the invasion is defeated with the help of the new Mandalorian Warriors, a Sekotian fleet and a Galactic Alliance-Imperial Remnant fleet, Luke leads the New Jedi Order on Denon, the temporary capital of the Galactic Alliance and the site of the newly rebuilt Jedi Temple on Coruscant.
In The Swarm War, the New Jedi Order moves to Ossus, the site of former famous Jedi temples and libraries that were mostly destroyed 4,000 years prior.
Upon the Killik's invasion of Chiss space and the transformation of most of the Myrkr mission survivors into Killik Joiners, Luke determines that the Killik's collective mind is being unconsciously controlled by a hive called the Dark Nest.
The Dark Nest is controlled by a former Nightsister named Lomi Plo, who became their Unseen Queen with her ability to become invisible by exploiting the doubts of inferiors.
One of the Myrkr mission survivors, Alema Rar, attempted to plant seeds of doubt in Luke's mind by suggesting that his wife, Mara, may be somehow responsible for the death of his mother, Padmé Amidala, which he almost believes because of Mara's previous involvement as the Emperor's Hand.
This allows Lomi to escape from Luke.
Luke discovers recordings of his father Force-choking his mother on Mustafar, his own birth, and his mother's death hidden inside the protective memory archives of R2-D2.
Because of this, he is able to overcome his doubts about Mara and defeat Lomi Plo in the final battle of the Swarm War, cutting her into four pieces.
Luke also withdraws the Jedi from Cal Omas' Advisory Council, as he plans to create a New Jedi Council that will give aid to the Galactic Alliance when needed.
He also becomes the Grand Master of the New Jedi Order to give the Jedi a clear sense of direction.
He has told the Jedi to either follow his leadership or make the order their priority, or leave.
Jedi Danni Quee and Tenel Ka have resigned because of their duties to Zonoma Sekot and Hapes, respectively, while Corran Horn tries to resign, but Luke talks him out of it.
Luke is also forced to exile Tahiri, Lowbacca, and Tesar Sebatayne to Dagobah for divulging secret information to people outside the New Jedi Order.

In the Legacy of the Force series, Luke begins having visions of a figure cloaked in darkness destroying the galaxy and the Jedi Decree.
In his dreams, this figure's presence is much like that of Darth Vader.
Luke has been troubled by the fact that he has been unable to discern the identity of this figure.
Complicating matters even more is the recent schism that has developed between Luke and his nephew, Jacen Solo.
Already a tremendously powerful Jedi Knight, Jacen has begun adopting radical and extreme interpretations of the Force, causing a dramatic change in his personality.
Luke fears that Jacen is pursuing the same path that ultimately led to Anakin Skywalker's fall to the dark side.
In Bloodlines, the situation worsens when Luke's son, Ben, becomes Jacen's apprentice.
Luke must also battle his wife, who refuses to confront Jacen for fear of alienating Ben.
In Tempest, Luke determines that the dark figure from his dreams is Lumiya, a former Emperor's Hand now known as the "Dark Lady of the Sith".
Luke and Lumiya had fought several times over the years, but when Mara is murdered in Sacrifice, Lumiya deceives Luke into believing that she killed her.
They battle again, and Luke saves a weaponless Lumiya from falling to her death simply so that he can kill her himself.
Luke returns to Coruscant where he is found by Ben, standing guard over Mara's body; upon speaking with his son, he realizes that Lumiya could not have killed her.
Later in his private cabin, Luke breaks down over the death of his wife, knowing that her murderer is still at large.
He does not realize that the killer is his own nephew, Jacen, who has now taken the Sith name Darth Caedus.
In Revelation, Ben proves that Jacen killed Mara, but Luke is now reluctant to kill Jacen out of fear that he or his son will fall to the dark side in the process.
(
The decision is taken out of his hands in Invincible, when Jaina kills Jacen in a final lightsaber duel).

In Fate of the Jedi novels, set about 40 years after the first film, Luke Skywalker, now in his early sixties, is deposed by the government from his position as Grand Master, and exiled from Coruscant.
However, if he finds the reason of why Jacen Solo fell to the dark side, he can be allowed to return.
Ben insists on coming with him.
Together, father and son explore dangerous and little-known portions of the galaxy.
Luke and Ben learn much about each other, about the Force, and about the great dangers threatening the Jedi.
The great love the two surviving Skywalkers have for each other grows even greater as they repeatedly save each other's lives and explore the limits and powers and mysteries of the Force.

=====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor =====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor is a standalone novel that chronicles the Battle of Mindor, a fictional event in the Star Wars expanded universe.
The novel was written by Matthew Stover and released in December 2008.

The novel is set shortly after Return of the Jedi and the novel Prophets of the Dark Side, with Luke Skywalker and the Rebel Alliance attempting to stop Lord Shadowspawn and his "shadow stormtroopers", culminating in the Battle of Mindor.
Matthew Stover has said on his personal weblog, Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor is my attempt to get the EU back to its pre-Zahn roots -- specifically, to evoke memories of my all-time favorite Star Wars books, Brian Daley's Han Solo novels.

====
Comic books ====
Luke Skywalker appears in the Marvel-published Star Wars comics adaptations of the original trilogy, as well as an ongoing series that ran from 1977–86.
When Dark Horse acquired the license two years later, he appeared in numerous projects based on the franchise as well.
In Star Wars: Legacy, set 125 years after the events of the original films, Luke appears as a spirit in the Force to his descendant Cade Skywalker and persuades him to once again become a Jedi in order to defeat the evil Darth Krayt and his burgeoning Sith empire.

====
Video games ====
An older and wiser Luke Skywalker also appears in the Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast and Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy video games at the rank of Jedi Master.
In Jedi Outcast, Luke helps Kyle Katarn in his fight against Desann and Empire Reborn by driving them away from the Valley of the Jedi.
Luke appears in the game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed in a downloadable alternate storyline where Starkiller duels Luke.
He also appears in the Disney Lucasfilm video game Star Wars Commander.
Luke is also a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0.
==
Characterization ==


===
Psychoanalytic ===
Each of the Star Wars characters instantiates one of the archetypes in Joseph Campbell's Hero's journey, with Luke Skywalker symbolizing the Hero archetype.
As such, he is a formulaic, relatable protagonist who encounters the basic struggle between good and evil in the same way as other heroic figures such as Harry Potter, Bilbo Baggins, and Jesus Christ.
Luke's central dilemma is the ongoing war between good and evil, both externally and internally.

===
Religious ===
Some argue that Luke mirrors fundamental values of Christianity and Abrahamic religion; Luke's journey is often compared to that of Jesus Christ.
Scholars argue that Luke is a Christ-like figure, while Yoda represents a god and Darth Vader represents the temptations of evil.
Luke's struggle between good and evil is contrasted with that of his father, Anakin Skywalker, in a way that represents the story of the Prodigal Son.

==
Concept and creation ==
Luke was variously conceived of as a 60-year-old grizzled war hero, later as a Jedi Master, and as a woman.
In an interview about his early drafts, Lucas said:

The first [version] talked about a princess and an old general.
The second version involved a father, his son, and his daughter; the daughter was the heroine of the film.
Now the daughter has become Luke, Mark Hamill's character.
There was also the story of two brothers where I transformed one of them into a sister.
The older brother was imprisoned, and the young sister had to rescue him and bring him back to their dad.

Though Luke's surname was "Skywalker" in Lucas's 1973 treatment of The Star Wars, it was changed to "Starkiller" in subsequent drafts, at one point featuring in the title (The Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller).
The "Starkiller" surname remained for the first few months of production; Hamill used the name "Luke Starkiller" the sole time he referred to himself during filming (dubbed "Skywalker" in the film).
"
Starkiller" was dropped due to what Lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with Charles Manson.
An alternative ending pitched by George Lucas for Return of the Jedi was Luke assuming his father's role as Darth Vader after the latter's death and intending to rule in his place.
Though Lawrence Kasdan favored the idea, Lucas ultimately declined, since the films were made for children.
Another conclusion to the film featured the character disappearing into the wilderness akin to "Clint Eastwood in the spaghetti westerns.
"According to Mark Hamill
, during the filming of the original Star Wars film, George Lucas asked him if he would reprise the role for a cameo when he was in his 60s to pass the torch to the next generation.
In 1983, Hamill stated that his return to the franchise would be "either be another plane of existence or not the same character".
Hamill learned of the sequel trilogy over the summer of 2012 at a Star Wars Celebration during lunch when Lucas told him one was in development.
Hamill recalled shaving his beard to portray the Trickster in The Flash, then letting it grow back for the filming of Star Wars.
Luke's lack of screen time in The Force Awakens was due to concerns by screenwriter Michael Arndt that his presence would mean the audience would have less interest in protagonist Rey, leading to an agreement that he be removed from the screen and instead become a plot device.
Hamill attended meetings for script readings, and helped conceal Luke's role in the film; instead of dialogue, he read stage directions.
Abrams said it allowed him to remain involved and that his reading helped make a "better experience for everyone".
According to concept designer Christian Alzmann, Luke's appearance in The Last Jedi was partly inspired by that of Colonel Kurtz in Apocalypse Now (1979).

== Reception ==
In 2015, Luke Skywalker was selected by Empire magazine as the 50th-greatest movie character of all time.
Empire also ranked him as the third greatest Star Wars character.
Luke was also on the ballot for the American Film Institute's 100 Years...
100 Heroes and Villains.
On their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters, Fandomania.com ranked Luke at number 14.
IGN listed Luke as their 4th top Star Wars character, and he was chosen twice by IGN's readers as one of their favorite Star Wars characters.
IGN's Jesse Schedeen also picked Luke Skywalker as one of the characters they most wanted to appear on the Wii, as well as listing Skywalker as one of their favorite Star Wars heroes.
Schedeen also listed the character as one of the Star Wars characters they wanted to see in Soulcalibur.
IGN also called the fight between Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader in Return of the Jedi one of the ultimate movie "boss battles".
In a feature on speeches made by Luke Skywalker, IGN's Todd Gilchrist said that his favorite speech made by Luke was "I am a Jedi, like my father before me".
UGO Networks listed Luke as one of their best heroes of all time, and he was voted as one of the coolest Star Wars characters by UGO's readers.
Inventor Dean Kamen has also code-named his new prosthetic arm system "Luke" in honor of the character.
Mark Hamill was nominated a Saturn Award for Best Actor in for his portrayal of Luke Skywalker in Star Wars, and won the award for his portrayal in The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and The Last Jedi.
In 1976, Mark Hamill had a serious car accident after filming Star Wars, which involved an operation on his face.
It was speculated that the Wampa attack at the beginning of The Empire Strikes Back was written in to explain his facial injuries, but George Lucas specifically disputed this in the DVD commentary of The Empire Strikes Back.
In regards to Luke's portrayal in The Last Jedi, many fans expressed disappointment in how he was depicted "as a grumpy old man whose failures had driven him into hiding" and the actions the character takes in contributing to Kylo Ren's backstory, a stark departure in how Luke was characterized in the original trilogy.
Hamill originally stated that he "pretty much fundamentally [disagreed] with every choice [The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson] made for this character," but that he had the utmost respect for Johnson and was willing to do his part to realize Johnson's vision.
While regarding the possibility of a younger actor playing the role, Hamill expressed support towards Sebastian Stan, whose physical resemblance to a young Hamill went viral.
However he noted that child actor Jacob Tremblay would be his top choice if the story were to be focused on a very young Luke.
In 2016, when asked about the character's sexual orientation and if Luke could be gay, Hamill said Luke's sexual orientation "is meant to be interpreted by the viewer."
He added, "if you think Luke is gay, of course he is.
You should not be ashamed of it.
Judge Luke by his character, not by who he loves.
"
Hamill later said that he considered the possibility that Luke could have found love between Episode VI and Episode VII.

==
Cultural impact ==
Skywalker remains an American icon.
In fact, Luke Skywalker is often still used by child psychotherapists to help children to project their thoughts and state of being in a way that is understandable to both the child and their therapist.
Another way that therapists utilize Star Wars in sessions is to teach their patients that the Force represents the self-understanding that they achieve in therapy.
Children are taught that they are Luke and their therapist
is Obi-Wan as eventually, as Luke no longer needed his mentor, patients will one day no longer need their therapist.
Star Wars has been related back to cultural events of its time, such as the Cold War and Nixon-era politics.
The severing of Luke's hand and Darth Vader's bionic presence supposedly, according to space.com, symbolize the unity of the military and amputees.

==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
Further reading ==
Dunk, Steve (December 28, 2017). "
A Hero's Journey - Luke Skywalker".
TheForce.net.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.

==
External links ==
Luke Skywalker in the StarWars.com Databank
Luke Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Luke Skywalker on IMDb
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back is a scrolling shooter video game written by Rex Bradford for the Atari 2600 and published by Parker Brothers in 1982.
It was the first licensed Star Wars video game.
An Intellivision version was released in 1983.

==
Gameplay ==
The player must control Luke Skywalker in a snowspeeder to battle against Imperial AT-AT walkers on the planet Hoth.
The objective is to hold off the walkers as long as possible before they blow up the power generator at the Rebels' Echo Base.
The difficulty levels included several variables, including the initial speed of the walkers, whether or not the walkers were solid, and whether or not the walkers included a "smart bomb".

The player can destroy a walker by shooting it repeatedly in the head or torso; shots to the legs are ineffective.
As the walker is damaged, it changes colors - transitioning from black (undamaged) through various shades of gray, red, and orange to yellow (critically damaged).
The player can also destroy the walkers by shooting a small flashing spot that randomly appears during gameplay.
On the Intellivision, the walkers require thirty hits to take down, compared to forty-eight hits on the Atari.

The walkers shoot back at the player, whose speeder also changes colors as it receives damage.
The player can land a damaged speeder to repair it.
On some game levels, the walkers are solid, meaning that the player can crash into them, damaging them and destroying the player.
Other levels include a smart bomb which periodically launches from the flashing port on a walker and follows the player for a time.
If the player is hit by the smart bomb his speeder is destroyed.
If the player survives for 20 minutes the speeder is granted the power of the Force for 20 seconds.
When this happens, the speeder flashes colorfully and becomes invulnerable for a short time.

The game ends when the player's fifth speeder is destroyed or when the lead walker reaches Echo Base, destroying it.
As the game progresses, the walkers move more rapidly, increasing the difficulty level.

== Reception ==
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back received mixed reviews.
It was reviewed in Video magazine shortly after its release.
Reviewers praised the game's "zingy graphics" and noted that "the audio-visual effects are absolutely first-rate".
Overall they characterized it as "an entertaining fast-paced contest that belongs in the cartridge libraries of most (Atari)VCS owners".
That same month, rival publication Video Review magazine ran a review of the game written by science fiction author Harlan Ellison.
Ellison blasted the game as a "shamelessly exploitative little toy", "the latest icon of the Imbecile Industry", and a "time-wasting enterprise" with "the potential to emerge as the most virulent electronic botulism of all".
According to Ellison, the game has "extremely simple-minded parameters" and it "bore[d]
[his] ass off"
; however, the brunt of Ellison's criticism came from his dissatisfaction with the game's ending.
Because the game's two end-conditions are both failure conditions (either all of the player's units are destroyed or the lead enemy reaches the player's base)
, Ellison suggested that the game cannot be won and is thus "an analogue for the Myth of Sisyphus" providing "one dreadful life-lesson in those of a youthful intelligence who play it. ...
You can only waste your life struggling and
struggling".
Ed Driscoll reviewed The Empire Strikes Back in The Space Gamer
No.
55.
Driscoll commented that "I'd have to say that the good points outweigh the bad, and it is fun to play.

I'd say that this is an excellent start for a company new to the VCS scene.

May the Force be with you!"

==
References ==


==
External links ==
The Empire Strikes Back at Atari Mania
The Empire Strikes Back at AtariAge
The Empire Strikes Back at Intellivision
Lives
Gametrailers' Star Wars
Retrospective Episode
I
Behind The Scenes of Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back on gamestm
The Atari 2600 version of Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back can be played for free in the browser at the Internet Archive
Lego Star Wars is a Lego theme that incorporates the Star Wars saga and franchise.
Originally it was only licensed from 1999 to 2008, but The Lego Group extended the license with Lucasfilm, first until 2011, then until 2016, then again until 2022.
The brand has spawned an eponymous video game series containing six video games, developed by Traveller's Tales: Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005), Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006), Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga (2007), Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011), Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016) and Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga (TBA).
Many short films and miniseries have also been produced.

==
Construction sets ==
According to Bricklink, The Lego Group released a total of 796 Lego sets and promotional polybags as part of Lego Star Wars theme.
The first few sets based on the original trilogy were released in 1999, coinciding with the release of The Phantom Menace.
The first wave of Lego Star Wars sets included model 7140, an X-wing fighter.
Sets based on the prequel trilogy (Episodes I to III) of Star Wars would follow, starting with Episode I – The Phantom Menace.
As each new film in the prequel trilogy neared its release date, Lego issued new models of ships and scenes in those films, as well as additional sets from the original trilogy.
Lego also produced models based on Clone Wars, The Clone Wars, The Old Republic, The Force Unleashed , Rebels, The Force Awakens, Battlefront, Rogue One, The Last Jedi, Solo, Resistance, The Mandalorian and The Rise of Skywalker.
Sets based on Galaxy's Edge and The Freemaker Adventures have also been produced.

===
Ultimate Collector Series (UCS) ===
In addition to the regular Minifigure-scale sets, Lego has released several sets (between 30-36) for the Ultimate Collector Series.
These models are often considerably larger, more detailed, and meant more for display purposes than other sets.
They often cost more than regular Lego sets as well.
Many of them include an information plaque and often a display stand.
The largest of these is 75192, the 2017 UCS version of the Millennium Falcon, complete with ten Minifigures.
At 7541 pieces, it is the largest Star Wars Lego set ever released; and the second largest set of any collection ever commercially released.
On June 5, 2015, an unopened box of the older 2007 Millennium Falcon Lego set (10179) was auctioned at online auction house Catawiki for 5,000 euros (US$5556.5 at the time) making it the most expensive LEGO set ever.

===
Master Builder Series (MBS) ===
With similar complexity to the Ultimate Collector Series sets, sets under the Master Builder Series are built with the purpose of playing, featuring numerous play features, functions, and interior details as compared to the UCS, which are meant more for display purposes.
The first set of the MBS is the 75222 Betrayal at Cloud City, which was released in 2018.
In 2020, 75290 Mos Eisley Cantina was released as the largest MBS set with over 3,000 pieces and 21 minifigures.

===
The Helmet Collection ===
In 2020, Lego released three brick-built helmets of selected iconic characters from the Star Wars universe.
They are 75277 Boba Fett, 75276 Stormtrooper, and
75274 TIE Fighter Pilot.
Meant to be displayed, name plaques of the helmets' characters are included.
In March 2021, Lego announced that it will be releasing helmets 75304 Darth Vader, and 75305 Scout Trooper on April 26, 2021.

=== Minifigures ===
Most characters from the Star Wars universe have materialized in Lego minifigure form.
The minifigure with the first code, i.e. sw0001, is a tan battle droid that appeared in The Phantom Menace.
Some minifigures repeatedly appear across multiple Lego sets, while others can be very rare, vastly increasing their resale value.
In 2019, the number of Lego Star Wars minifigures has surpassed 1000, with the Battlefront II protagonist Iden Versio bearing code sw1000.
===
Lego Art ===
On August 1, 2020, Lego released 31200 Star Wars
The Sith under the Lego Art theme.
It consists of 3,406 pieces and offers builders the option to recreate any one of the three Star Wars villains (Darth Maul, Kylo Ren, and Darth Vader) in a mosaic-like format using Lego 1x1 studs.

===
BrickHeadz ===
Lego has since released 20 Star Wars themed sets under the BrickHeadz theme.
They include characters from the sequel trilogy, the original trilogy and The Mandalorian.

==
Video games ==
Traveller's Tales president Jon Burton stated in a July 2008 interview with Variety that the series had collectively sold 15 million copies.
As of February 13, 2009, Lego Star Wars: The Video Game has sold over 6.8 million copies worldwide, Lego Star Wars II has sold over 8.3 million, The Complete Saga has sold over 4.1 million, and the three combined have sold over 21 million.
In May 2009, Wired reported combined sales of 20 million.
As of 2012, all Lego Star Wars video games had collectively sold more than 30 million copies.
As of 2016, more than 36 million games were sold.
As of 2019, the series has sold more than 50 million copies of Lego Star Wars video games.

== Films and videos ==
Several films and videos based on Lego Star Wars have been produced; additionally, Lego Star Wars characters cameo in The Lego Movie (2014).

===
Short films ===
Lego Star Wars: Revenge of the Brick is the first computer-animated Lego Star Wars short film.
It premiered on Cartoon Network in mid-2005, in conjunction with the theatrical release of Revenge of the Sith.

Lego Star Wars:
The Quest for R2-D2 is a short movie which aired on Cartoon Network on August 2009, and was uploaded to the Lego Star Wars website, in order to celebrate 10 years of Lego Star Wars,
Lego Star Wars: Bombad Bounty, is another CGI Lego short film, it was released in 2010.
In it, Vader hires Boba Fett to track down the Gungan Jar Jar Binks for an accident he caused to Vader.
The film also takes place at the same time as the original movies showing that Jar Jar was responsible for the destruction of the first Death Star and was with Boba Fett on Jabba's Barge during the events of Return of the Jedi.

===
Television specials ===
Lego Star Wars:
The Padawan Menace released on July 7, 2011, is a 30-minute, exclusive TV special written by Michael Price is about a Jedi Academy field trip.
When Master Yoda leads a group of rambunctious Jedi younglings through Senate chambers when he senses a disturbance in the Force.
Summoned to help save the Republic, he discovers that a young boy pretending to be a Jedi youngling secretly boarded his ship... and has a taste for adventure.
Meanwhile, C-3PO and R2-D2 are put in charge of the boisterous group and find themselves in over their heads.
Yoda and the droids proceed to save the younglings from Sith Lords as well as the vile Jabba the Hutt.
The special premiered in the United States on Cartoon Network on July 22, 2011, at 7 p.m. and in the United Kingdom on October 17 at 5:30.
The DVD and Blu-ray include several special features such as The Quest for R2-D2 and Bombad Bounty as well as other short films.

Lego Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Out released on September 26, 2012, airing on Cartoon Network in the United States, and would be one of the last Star Wars productions to be made before Lucasfilm was sold to The Walt Disney Company a month later.
In this special, Luke Skywalker embarks on a mission to find and destroy an Imperial base on Naboo, but is relentlessly chased by a group of fanatic fangirls, who think of him as a celebrity for destroying the Death Star.
Meanwhile, Darth Vader engages a "sithling" rivalry with Darth Maul, in order to prove he's the best Sith Lord to Emperor Palpatine, who is constructing a second Death Star.

The LEGO Star Wars Holiday Special was released on November 17, 2020 on Disney+, a spiritual successor to and satirisation of the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
In the special, set after Episode IX, Rey begins to doubt her abilities as a teacher to Finn.
She travels to a temple and finds a time key, which allows her to travel to different moments in time throughout the Star Wars saga to observe past Jedi Masters and their students.
However, she loses the key to Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader, who use it to go to the future, meeting Kylo Ren.
After learning from him about his demise at Vader's hands, Palpatine seeks to make Kylo his new apprentice (
unbeknownst to Vader) and ensure he will rule the galaxy forever.
Meanwhile, Finn, Rose and Poe try to organize the perfect Life Day party, but chaos ensues at every step.

===
Television series ===
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles trilogy:
"The Phantom Clone", aired on May 29, 2013.
General Grievous steals the lightsabers of a group of Padawans at the Jedi Training Academy, and he and Count Dooku plan to use the lightsabers' crystals to create an army of super-powered Sith clones on Kamino.
Yoda and Mace Windu embark on a quest to stop them.
Meanwhile, the Padawans try to retrieve their lightsabers, much to C-3PO's concern.

"Menace of the Sith" , aired on September 4, 2013.
The only surviving Sith clone, Jek-14, decides not to fight for the dark side of the force and wants to be left alone to build in peace, but both the Jedi and the Sith want him on their side, with the latter planning to use him to clone an evil army.
Meanwhile, C-3PO quits being the substitute teacher for the Padawans, and the Jedi Council hires Anakin Skywalker as his replacement.

"Attack of the Jedi", aired on November 27, 2013.
After the Sith's plan to create Sith clones has failed, they start teaching a group of "Badawans" on the planet Mustafar.
When the Jedi get a tip of this, they head there to stop them, but when they reach complications, they must persuade Jek-14 to help them, despite him not wanting to fight for either side of the Force.
Meanwhile, Darth Sidious tries to meet up with the evil padawans, but has trouble getting away from C-3PO.The series continued to a second season with five episodes airing in 2014 but now renamed "The New Yoda Chronicles" to avoid legal disputes over ownership between Disney and Cartoon Network.

Lego Star Wars:
Droid Tales aired on Disney XD between July and November 2015, as a 5-part animated mini-series.
The series serves as a comedic re-telling of the first six Star Wars films from C-3PO's point of view.

Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises aired on Disney XD between February and May 2016, as a 5-part animated mini-series.
The series serves as a comedic prequel to Star Wars: The Force Awakens.

Lego Star Wars:
The Freemaker Adventures aired on Disney XD.
It was announced by Disney on February 17, 2016, as a new Lego animated series.
Set between Episode V and Episode VI, it tells the story of the Freemakers, a family of scavengers that find themselves pulled into the conflict between the Rebels and the Empire.

Lego Star Wars:
All-Stars premiered on Disney XD on October 29, 2018.
It consists of five half-hour episodes, the first of which is a compilation of eight separately-released short films.
Set during multiple Star Wars eras, it tells the story of other relatives of the Freemaker family, including their parents Pace and Lena during the time of Solo, and Zander's daughter Moxie during Episode VII and Episode VIII.

== See also ==
Lego Indiana Jones


==
References ==


===
Bibliography ===
LEGO (R) Star Wars Brickmaster.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2010.
ISBN 1-40535-622-7
LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40537-358-X
Lego Star Wars: Anakin: Space Pilot: Space Pilot (3d).
Authored by Ace Landers and Dave White.
Published by Scholastic, 2011.
ISBN 0-54530-440-7
LEGO (R)
Star Wars Heroes Ultimate Sticker Book.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40536-440-8
LEGO (R) Star Wars Villains Ultimate Sticker Book.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40536-439-4
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars:
The Phantom Menace.
Authored by Hannah Dolan.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2012.
ISBN 0-75668-693-8
Ultimate Sticker Collection: LEGO (R)
Star Wars: Minifigures:
More Than 1,000 Reusable Full-Color Stickers.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2012.
ISBN 0-75669-049-8
LEGO (R)
Star Wars Brickmaster Battle for the Stolen Crystals.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 1-40932-605-5
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars: Attack of the Clones.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 0-75668-695-4
DK Readers L3:
Lego Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 1-46540-869-X
Lego Star Wars: A New Hope.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-027-4
Lego Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-029-0
Lego Star Wars: Return of the Jedi.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-031-2
LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia, Updated and Expanded: With Minifigure.
Authored by Hannah Dolan and Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2015.
ISBN 1-10189-852-6
LEGO Star Wars: Yoda Chronicles
Trilogy No Level.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2015.
ISBN 0-54562-901-2
Lego Star Wars: Padawan Menace
No Level.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2015.
ISBN 0-54540-450-9
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
Authored by David Fentiman.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2016.
ISBN 1-46543-819-X
LEGO STAR WARS TALES OF REBELLION.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2016.
ISBN 0-54587-326-6
Ultimate LEGO Star Wars :
Includes two exclusive prints.
Authored by Chris Malloy and Andrew Becraft.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2017.
ISBN 0-24128-844-4
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars:
The Last Jedi.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2019.
ISBN
1-46546-663-0
LEGO Star Wars Visual Dictionary New Edition :
With exclusive Finn minifigure.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2019.
ISBN 0-24135-752-7
LEGO Star Wars Visual Dictionary, New Edition :
With exclusive Finn minifigure
Lego Star Wars Character Encyclopedia New Edition : With Exclusive Darth Maul Minifigure.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 1-46548-956-8
DK Readers Level 2:
Lego Star Wars the Rise of Skywalker.
Authored by Ruth Amos.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 1-46547-907-4
LEGO Star Wars Holiday Sticker Book.
Authored by Tori Kosara.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 0-24147-820-0
LEGO Star Wars Yoda's Galaxy Atlas.
Authored by Simon Hugo.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2021.
ISBN 0-24146-765-9


==
External links ==
Official website 
Brickset:
Your Lego Set Guide
MiniFigs.nl
Lego Star Wars minifigs
LEGO on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: The Last Jedi –
Original Motion Picture Soundtrack is the film score to the 2017 film of the same name composed and conducted by John Williams.
The album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 15, 2017 in digipak CD, Jewel case CD, digital formats, and streaming services.
The score received generally positive reviews from critics, who primarily praised the score's emotional sound and expansion of themes from the Original Trilogy and
The Force Awakens, though some criticized the score for relying too heavily on older themes, especially on the soundtrack album.
Williams was nominated for an Oscar, Grammy, and a Saturn Award for his work on the score.

==
Overview ==
In July 2013, Kathleen Kennedy announced at Star Wars Celebration Europe that John Williams would return to score the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
Williams confirmed his assignment for The Last Jedi at a Tanglewood concert in August 2016, stating he would begin recording the score "off and on" in December 2016 until March or April 2017.
On February 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both Williams and William Ross conducting the sessions.
In lieu of a traditional spotting session with director Rian Johnson, Williams was provided a temp track of music from his previous film scores as a reference for scoring The Last Jedi.

==
Track listing ==
The score introduces several new themes interwoven throughout the film, including identities for the character Rose Tico, the interactions between Rey and Luke Skywalker on Ahch-To Island, and the Resistance's desperate escape from the First Order.

The score also reprises numerous themes and motifs introduced in The Force Awakens, including those for the characters of Rey, Kylo Ren, Poe Dameron, and Snoke, as well as the "March of the Resistance".
Themes introduced in the original trilogy return as well, including "Luke's Theme", "Leia's Theme", "The Rebel Fanfare", the "Force Theme" and a small quote of the "Death Star motif" from A New Hope; "Yoda's Theme", "The Imperial March", and "Han Solo and the Princess" from The Empire Strikes Back; and, "Luke and Leia" and "The Emperor's Theme" from Return of the Jedi, and the Star Wars prequels.

Excerpts of the "TIE Fighter Attack" cue, first heard in A New Hope and reprised for Return of the Jedi, are also included.
"
The Emperor's Theme" is the only returning theme to not be included within the official soundtrack presentation (it was later made accessible through the digital "music only" version of the film); it occurs in the film when Snoke tortures Rey for information.

The score briefly quotes "Aquarela do Brasil" by Ary Barroso in its "Canto Bight" track as a reference to the 1985 Terry Gilliam film Brazil.
It also contains a brief quote of Williams's own theme for The Long Goodbye (co-composed by Johnny Mercer) during Finn and Rose's escape, although this was not included in the official soundtrack release.
On March 13, the digital release of The Last Jedi came with an exclusive "music only" version of the film, which features the film's complete score without any dialogue or sound effects to interfere.
The complete score contains the music from every single scene of the film, and features over 70 minutes of previously unreleased music.
However, the film's presentation of the score is heavily-edited and does not always reflect the original form of Williams' compositions.

All tracks are written by John Williams.

==
Charts ==


==
References ==
Return of the Jedi (also known as Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi)  is a 1983 American epic space opera film directed by Richard Marquand.
The screenplay is by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas from a story by Lucas, who was also the executive producer.
It is the third installment in the original Star Wars trilogy, the third film to be produced, and the sixth film in the "Skywalker saga".
It takes place one year after The Empire Strikes Back.
The film stars Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams, Anthony Daniels, David Prowse, Kenny Baker, Peter Mayhew and Frank Oz.

In the film, the Galactic Empire, under the direction of the Emperor, is constructing a second Death Star in order to crush the Rebel Alliance once and for all.
Since the Emperor plans to personally oversee the final stages of its construction, the Rebel Fleet launches a full-scale attack on the Death Star in order to prevent its completion and kill the Emperor, effectively bringing an end to his hold over the galaxy.
Meanwhile, Luke Skywalker, now a Jedi Knight, struggles to bring his father Darth Vader back to the light side of the Force.

Steven Spielberg, David Lynch and David Cronenberg were considered to direct the project before Marquand signed on as director.
The production team relied on Lucas' storyboards during pre-production.
While writing the shooting script, Lucas, Kasdan, Marquand, and producer Howard Kazanjian spent two weeks in conference discussing ideas to construct it.
Kazanjian's schedule pushed shooting to begin a few weeks early to allow Industrial Light & Magic more time to work on the film's effects in post-production.
Filming took place in England, California, and Arizona from January to May 1982 (1982-05).

The film was released in theaters on May 25, 1983, six years to the day of the release of the first film, receiving mostly positive reviews.
It grossed $374 million during its initial theatrical run, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1983.
Several re-releases and revisions to the film have followed over the decades, which has also brought its total gross to $475 million.

==
Plot ==
A year after Han Solo's capture, C-3PO and R2-D2 are sent to crime lord Jabba
the Hutt's palace on Tatooine in a trade bargain made by Luke Skywalker to rescue Han.
Disguised as the bounty hunter Boushh, Princess Leia infiltrates the palace under the pretense of collecting the bounty on Chewbacca and unfreezes Han, but is caught and enslaved.
Luke soon arrives to bargain for his friends' release, but Jabba drops him through a trapdoor to be eaten by a rancor.
After Luke kills it, Jabba sentences him, Han, and Chewbacca to death by being fed to the Sarlacc, a huge, carnivorous plant-like desert beast.
Having hidden his new lightsaber inside R2-D2, Luke frees himself and his friends, and they battle Jabba's men.
During the chaos, Boba Fett falls into the Sarlacc after Han inadvertently damages his jetpack, and Leia strangles Jabba to death with her chains.
The group destroy Jabba's sail barge and escape.

As the others rendezvous with the Rebel Alliance, Luke returns to Dagobah to complete his Jedi training with Yoda, whom he discovers is dying.
Yoda confirms that Darth Vader, once the Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, is Luke's father, and reveals that there is another Skywalker, before vanishing and becoming one with the Force.
Obi-Wan Kenobi's Force ghost then tells Luke that Leia is his twin sister, and that he must face Vader again to finish his training  and defeat the Empire.

The Alliance learns that the Empire has been constructing a second Death Star under the supervision of the Emperor.
As the station is protected by an energy shield, Han leads a strike team which includes Luke, Leia and Chewbacca to destroy the shield generator on the forest moon of Endor; doing so will allow the Rebel Fleet to destroy the Death Star.
The team uses a stolen Imperial shuttle to arrive undetected, and encounters a tribe of Ewoks, gaining their trust after an initial conflict.
Later, Luke tells Leia that she is his sister, Vader is their father, and that he must confront him.
Surrendering to Imperial troops, he is brought before Vader, and fails to convince him to reject the dark side of the Force.

Vader takes Luke to meet the Emperor, who intends to turn him to the dark side, and reveals that his friends and the Rebel Fleet are headed into a trap.
On Endor, Han's team is captured by Imperial forces, but a counterattack by the Ewoks allows the Rebels to infiltrate the shield generator.
Meanwhile, Lando Calrissian in the Millennium Falcon and Admiral Ackbar lead the rebel assault on the second Death Star, finding its shield still active, and the Imperial fleet waiting for them.

The Emperor reveals to Luke that the Death Star is fully operational and orders the firing of its superlaser, destroying a Rebel starship.
He tempts Luke to give in to his anger.
Luke attempts to attack him, but Vader intervenes and the two engage in a lightsaber duel.
Vader senses that Luke has a sister and threatens to turn her to the dark side if he does not.
Enraged, Luke defeats Vader, severing his prosthetic hand.
The Emperor entreats Luke to kill Vader and take his place, but Luke refuses, declaring himself a Jedi like his father before him.
Furious, the Emperor tortures Luke with Force lightning.
Unwilling to let his son die, Vader betrays the Emperor and throws him down a reactor shaft to his death, but is mortally electrocuted in the process.
At his last request, Luke removes Vader's mask, and the redeemed Anakin Skywalker dies.

After the strike team destroys the shield generator, Lando leads Rebel fighters into the Death Star's core.
While the Rebel fleet destroys the Imperial capital ship, the Executor, Lando and X-wing fighter pilot Wedge Antilles destroy the Death Star's main reactor and escape before the station explodes.
Luke escapes in a shuttle with his father's body.
On Endor, Leia reveals to Han that Luke is her brother.
Luke cremates his father's body on a pyre and reunites with his friends.
As the Rebels and the galaxy celebrate the Empire's defeat, Luke sees the spirits of Yoda, Obi-Wan, and Anakin watching over him.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, one of the last living Jedi Knights, trained by Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda; Leia's twin brother, Han's friend and Darth Vader's son who is also a skilled X-wing fighter pilot in the Rebellion.

Harrison Ford as Han Solo, captain of the Millennium Falcon who becomes a General in the Rebellion; Luke's friend, and Leia's love interest.

Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa, the former princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan, who is a leader of the Rebellion, Luke's twin sister, and Han's love interest.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian, the former Administrator of Cloud City who has become a General in the Rebellion; Han's old friend and the previous owner of the Millennium Falcon.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of the Rebellion and longtime companion of R2-D2.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca, a Wookiee who is Han's longtime friend, co-pilot of the Millennium Falcon, and part of the Rebellion.

Kenny Baker as
R2-D2, an astromech droid in the service of the Rebellion, loyal to Luke, and longtime companion of C-3PO.

Paploo, an Ewok who distracts Scout troopers by hijacking a speeder bike.

Ian McDiarmid as The Emperor, the founder and supreme ruler of the Galactic Empire, and Darth Vader's Sith master.

Frank Oz as Yoda, a wise, centuries-old Jedi Master of an unknown alien species, who lives in exile on Dagobah and trained Luke.

David Prowse as Darth Vader, a powerful Sith Lord, the Emperor's apprentice, and second-in-command of the Empire; Luke and Leia's father.

James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader.

Sebastian Shaw portrays the unmasked Anakin Skywalker, as well as the character's Force ghost, seen at the end of the film.
Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi, the deceased Jedi mentor of Luke, and of his father before him, who continues to guide Luke in his journey as a Force ghost.
Denis Lawson reprises his role as Wedge Antilles, an X-wing pilot in the Rebellion, from the previous two films.
Kenneth Colley and Jeremy Bulloch reprise their roles from The Empire Strikes Back as Admiral Piett, the commander of Darth Vader's flagship, the Executor, and bounty hunter Boba Fett, respectively.
Michael Pennington portrays Moff Jerjerrod, the commander of the second Death Star.
Warwick Davis appears as Wicket W. Warrick, an Ewok who befriends Leia and leads her and her friends to the Ewok tribe.
Baker was originally cast as Wicket, but was replaced by Davis after falling ill with food poisoning on the morning of the shoot.
Davis had no previous acting experience and was cast only after his grandmother had discovered an open call for dwarfs for the new Star Wars film.
Caroline Blakiston portrays Mon Mothma, a co-founder and leader of the Rebel Alliance.
Michael Carter plays Jabba the Hutt's aide, Bib Fortuna (voiced by Erik Bauersfeld), while Femi Taylor and Claire Davenport appear as Jabba's original slave dancers.

To portray the numerous alien species featured in the film a multitude of puppeteers, voice actors, and stunt performers were employed.
Admiral Ackbar, the commander of the Rebel Fleet during the Battle of Endor, was performed by puppeteer Tim Rose, with his voice provided by Erik Bauersfeld.
Nien Nunb, who co-pilots the Millennium Falcon alongside Lando in the film, was portrayed by Richard Bonehill in costume for full body shots, while he was otherwise a puppet operated by Mike Quinn and his voice was provided by Kipsang Rotich.
Rose also operated Salacious B. Crumb, whose voice was provided by Mark Dodson.
Quinn also played Ree-Yees and Wol Cabbashite.
Sy Snootles was a marionette operated by Rose and Quinn, while her voice was provided by Annie Arbogast.
Others included Simon J. Williamson as Max Rebo, a Gamorrean Guard and a Mon Calamari; Deep Roy as Droopy McCool; Ailsa Berk as Amanaman; Paul Springer as Ree-Yees, Gamorrean Guard and a Mon Calamari; Hugh Spight as a Gamorrean Guard, Elom and a Mon Calamari; Swee Lim as Attark the Hoover; Richard Robinson as a Yuzzum; Gerald Home as Tessek and a Mon Calamari officer; Phil Herbert as Hermi Odle; Tik and Tok
(Tim Dry and Sean Crawford)
as Whiphid and Yak-Face; Phil Tippett as the Rancor with Michael McCormick; and Pat Welsh as the voice of Boushh.

Jabba the Hutt was operated by Toby Philpott, David Barclay and Mike Edmonds (who also portrays the Ewok Logray) operated the tail.
Larry Ward portrays the Huttese language voice with Quinn, among other roles, controlling the eyes.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
As with the previous film, Lucas personally financed Return of the Jedi.
Lucas also chose not to direct Return of the Jedi himself, and started searching for a director.
Although Lucas' first choice was Steven Spielberg, their separate feuds with the Director's Guild led to his being banned from directing the film.
Lucas approached David Lynch, who had been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director for The Elephant Man in 1980, to helm Return of the Jedi, but Lynch declined, saying that he had "next door to zero interest".
David Cronenberg was also offered the chance to direct, but he declined the offer to make Videodrome and The Dead Zone.
Lamont Johnson, director of Spacehunter: Adventures in the Forbidden Zone, was also considered.
Lucas eventually chose Richard Marquand.
Lucas may have directed some of the second unit work personally as the shooting threatened to go over schedule; this is a function Lucas had willingly performed on previous occasions when he had only officially been producing a film (e.g. More American Graffiti, Raiders of the Lost Ark).
Lucas did operate the B camera on the set a few times.
Lucas himself has admitted to being on the set frequently because of Marquand's relative inexperience with special effects.
Lucas praised Marquand as a "very nice person who worked well with actors".
Marquand did note that Lucas kept a conspicuous presence on set, joking, "
It is rather like trying to direct King Lear – with Shakespeare in the next room!"

The screenplay was written by Lawrence Kasdan and Lucas (with uncredited contributions by David Peoples and Marquand), based on Lucas' story.
Kasdan claims he told Lucas that Return of the Jedi was "a weak title", and Lucas later decided to name the film Revenge of the Jedi.
The screenplay itself was not finished until rather late in pre-production, well after a production schedule and budget had been created by Kazanjian and Marquand
had been hired, which was unusual for a film.
Instead, the production team relied on Lucas' story and rough draft in order to commence work with the art department.
When it came time to formally write a shooting script, Lucas, Kasdan, Marquand and Kazanjian spent two weeks in conference discussing ideas; Kasdan used tape transcripts of these meetings to then construct the script.
The issue of whether Harrison Ford would return for the final film arose during pre-production.
Unlike the other stars of the first film, Ford had not contracted to do two sequels, and Raiders of the Lost Ark had made him an even bigger star.
Return of the Jedi producer Howard Kazanjian (who also produced Raiders of the Lost Ark) convinced Ford to return:
I played a very important part in bringing Harrison back for Return of the Jedi.
Harrison, unlike Carrie Fisher and Mark Hamill signed only a two picture contract.
That is why he was frozen in carbonite in The Empire Strikes Back.
When I suggested to George we should bring him back, I distinctly remember him saying that Harrison would never return.
I said what if I convinced him to return.
George simply replied that we would then write him in to Jedi.
I had just recently negotiated his deal for Raiders of the Lost Ark with Phil Gersh of the Gersh Agency.
I called Phil who said he would speak with Harrison.
When I called back again, Phil was on vacation.
David, his son, took the call and we negotiated Harrison's deal.
When Phil returned to the office several weeks later he called me back and said I had taken advantage of his son in the negotiations.
I had not.
But agents are agents.

Ford suggested that Han Solo be killed through self-sacrifice.
Kasdan concurred, saying it should happen near the beginning of the third act to instill doubt as to whether the others would survive, but Lucas was vehemently against it and rejected the concept.
Gary Kurtz, who produced Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back but was replaced as producer for Return of the Jedi by Kazanjian, said in 2010 that the ongoing success with Star Wars merchandise and toys led George Lucas to reject the idea of killing off Han Solo in the middle part of the film during a raid on an Imperial base.
Luke Skywalker was also to have walked off alone and exhausted like the hero in a Spaghetti Western but, according to Kurtz, Lucas opted for a happier ending to encourage higher merchandise sales.
Harrison Ford himself has agreed with this sentiment, saying that Lucas "didn't see any future in dead Han toys.
"Yoda was originally not meant to appear in the film, but Marquand strongly felt that returning to Dagobah was essential to resolve the dilemma raised by the previous film.
The inclusion led Lucas to insert a scene in which Yoda confirms that Darth Vader is Luke's father because, after a discussion with a children's psychologist, he did not want younger moviegoers to dismiss Vader's claim as a lie.
Many ideas from the original script were left out or changed.
For instance, the Ewoks were going to be Wookiees and the Millennium Falcon would be used in the arrival at the forest moon of Endor.
Following the defeat of the Emperor, the film was originally intended to end with Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda returning to life from their spectral existence in the Force, along with Anakin Skywalker, thanks to Yoda being able to prevent him from becoming one with the Force.
They would then join the rest of the characters in their celebration on Endor.

===
Filming ===
Filming began on January 11, 1982, and lasted through May 20, 1982, a schedule six weeks shorter than The Empire Strikes Back.
Kazanjian's schedule pushed shooting as early as possible in order to give Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) as much time as possible to work on effects, and left some crew members dubious of their ability to be fully prepared for the shoot.
Working on a budget of $32.5 million, Lucas was determined to avoid going over budget as had happened with The Empire Strikes Back.
Producer Howard Kazanjian estimated that using ILM (owned wholly by Lucasfilm) for special effects saved the production approximately $18 million.
However, the fact that Lucasfilm was a non-union company made acquiring shooting locations more difficult and more expensive, even though Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back had been big hits.
The project was given the working title Blue Harvest with a tagline of "Horror Beyond Imagination."
This disguised what the production crew was really filming from fans and the press, and also prevented price gouging by service providers.
The first stage of production started with 78 days at Elstree Studios in England, where the film occupied all nine stages.
The shoot commenced with a scene later deleted from the finished film where the heroes get caught in a sandstorm as they leave Tatooine.
(
This was the only major sequence cut from the film during editing.)
While attempting to film Luke Skywalker's battle with the rancor beast, Lucas insisted on trying to create the scene in the same style as Toho's Godzilla films by using a stunt performer inside a suit.
The production team made several attempts, but were unable to create an adequate result.
Lucas eventually relented and decided to film the rancor as a high-speed puppet.
In April, the crew moved to the Yuma Desert in Arizona for two weeks of Tatooine exteriors.
Production then moved to the redwood forests of northern California near Crescent City where two weeks were spent shooting the Endor forest exteriors, and then concluded at ILM in San Rafael, California for about ten days of bluescreen shots.
One of two "skeletal" post-production units shooting background matte plates spent a day in Death Valley.
The other was a special Steadicam unit shooting forest backgrounds from June 15–17, 1982, for the speeder chase near the middle of the film.
Steadicam inventor Garrett Brown personally operated these shots as he walked through a disguised path inside the forest shooting at less than one frame per second.
By walking at about 5 mph (8 km/h) and projecting the footage at 24 frame/s, the motion seen in the film appeared as if it were moving at around 120 mph (190 km/h).
Darth Vader's small funeral was filmed at Skywalker Ranch.

Harrison Ford altered some scenes during the shoot, causing Billy Dee Williams to forget some of his lines, which was a source of frustration for Marquand.
Marquand and Anthony Daniels also clashed somewhat, leading to the latter recording his ADR with Lucas instead.

===
Music ===
John Williams composed and conducted the film's musical score with performances by the London Symphony Orchestra.
Orchestration credits also include Thomas Newman.
The initial release of the film's soundtrack was on the RSO Records label in the United States.
Sony Classical Records acquired the rights to the classic trilogy scores in 2004 after gaining the rights to release the second trilogy soundtracks (The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones).
In the same year, Sony Classical re-pressed the 1997 RCA Victor release of Return of the Jedi along with the other two films in the trilogy.
The set was released with the new artwork mirroring the first DVD release of the film.
Despite the Sony digital re-mastering, which minimally improved the sound heard only on high-end stereos, this 2004 release is essentially the same as the 1997 RCA Victor release.

===
Post-production ===
Meanwhile, special effects work at ILM quickly stretched the company to its operational limits.
While the R&D work and experience gained from the previous two films in the trilogy allowed for increased efficiency, this was offset by the desire to have the closing film raise the bar set by each of these films.
A compounding factor was the intention of several departments of ILM to either take on other film work or decrease staff during slow cycles.
Instead, as soon as production began, the entire company found it necessary to remain running 20 hours a day on six-day weeks in order to meet their goals by April 1, 1983.
Of about 900 special effects shots, all VistaVision optical effects remained in-house, since ILM was the only company capable of using the format, while about 400 4-perf opticals were subcontracted to outside effects houses.
Progress on the opticals was severely delayed for a time when ILM rejected about 30,000 metres (100,000 ft) of film when the film perforations failed image registration and steadiness tests.

==
Release ==
Return of the Jedi's theatrical release took place on May 25, 1983.
It was originally slated to be May 27, but was subsequently changed to coincide with the date of the 1977 release of the original Star Wars film.
With a massive worldwide marketing campaign, illustrator Tim Reamer created the image for the movie poster and other advertising.
At the time of its release, the film was advertised on posters and merchandise as simply Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi, despite its on-screen "Episode VI" distinction.
The original film was later re-released to theaters in 1985.In 1997, for the 20th anniversary of the release of Star Wars (re-titled Episode IV: A New Hope), Lucas released the Star Wars Trilogy:
Special Edition.
Along with the two other films in the original trilogy, Return of the Jedi was re-released on March 7, 1997, with a number of changes and additions, which included the insertion of several alien band members and a different song in Jabba's throne room, the modification of the Sarlacc to include a beak, the replacement of music at the closing scene, and a montage of different alien worlds celebrating the fall of the Empire.

===
Title change ===
The original teaser trailer for the film carried the name Revenge of the Jedi.
In December 1982, Lucas decided that "Revenge" was not appropriate as Jedi should never seek revenge and returned to his original title.
By that time thousands of "Revenge" teaser posters (with artwork by Drew Struzan) had been printed and distributed.
Lucasfilm stopped the shipping of the posters and sold the remaining stock of 6,800 posters to Star Wars fan club members for $9.50.Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, released in 2005 as part of the prequel trilogy, later alluded to the dismissed title Revenge of the Jedi.

===
Home media ===
The original theatrical version of Return of the Jedi was released on VHS and Laserdisc several times between 1986 and 1995, followed by releases of the Special Edition in the same formats between 1997 and 2000.
Some of these releases contained featurettes; some were individual releases of just this film, while others were boxed sets of all three original films.

On September 21, 2004, all three original films were released in a boxed set on DVD with additional changes made by George Lucas.
The films were digitally restored and remastered, and the DVD also featured English subtitles, Dolby Digital 5.1 EX surround sound, and commentaries by George Lucas, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher.
The bonus disc included documentaries including Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy and several featurettes including "The Characters of Star Wars", "The Birth of the Lightsaber", and "The Legacy of Star Wars".
Also included were teasers, trailers, TV spots, still galleries, and a demo for Star Wars: Battlefront.

With the release of Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, which depicts how and why Anakin Skywalker turned to the dark side of the Force, Lucas once again altered Return of the Jedi to bolster the relationship between the original trilogy and the prequel trilogy.
The original and 1997 Special Edition versions of Return of the Jedi featured British theater actor Sebastian Shaw playing both the dying Anakin Skywalker and his ghost.
In the 2004 DVD, Shaw's portrayal of Anakin's ghost is replaced by Hayden Christensen, who portrayed Anakin in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
All three films in the original unaltered Star Wars trilogy were later released, individually, on DVD on September 12, 2006.
These versions were originally slated to be available only until December 31, 2006, although they remained in print until May 2011 and were packaged with the 2004 versions again in a new box set on November 4, 2008.

Although the 2004 versions in these sets each feature an audio commentary, no other extra special features were included to commemorate the original cuts.
The runtime of the 1997 Special Edition of the film and all subsequent releases is approximately five minutes longer than the original theatrical version.

A Blu-ray Disc version of the Star Wars saga was announced for release in 2011 during Star Wars Celebration V. Several deleted scenes from Return of the Jedi were included for the Blu-ray version, including a sandstorm sequence following the Battle at the Sarlacc Pit, a scene featuring Moff Jerjerrod and Death Star officers during the Battle of Endor, and a scene where Darth Vader communicates with Luke via the Force as Skywalker is assembling his new lightsaber before he infiltrates Jabba's palace.
On January 6, 2011, 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment announced the Blu-ray release for September 2011 in three different editions and the cover art was unveiled in
May.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Return of the Jedi was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued Return of the Jedi on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Return of the Jedi grossed $309.3 million in the United States and Canada, and $166 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $475.3 million, against a production budget of about $32.5 million.
The film made $23 million from 1,002 theaters in its opening weekend and grossed a record $45.3 million in its opening week.
It finished first at the box office for six of its first seven weeks of release, only coming in second once behind Superman III in its fourth weekend.
Box Office Mojo estimates that
the film sold over 80 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.
When it was re-released in 1985, it made $11.2 million, which totaled its initial theatrical gross to $385.8 million worldwide.

===
Critical response ===
According to the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 82% of critics have given the film a positive review with an average rating of 7.25/10, based on 95 reviews from critics.
The site's critics consensus reads: "Though failing to reach the cinematic heights of its predecessors, Return of the Jedi remains an entertaining sci-fi adventure and a fitting end to the classic trilogy.
"
At Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100 based on 24 reviews from mainstream critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
In 1983, film critic Roger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four, calling it "a complete entertainment, a feast for the eyes and a delight for the fancy.
It's a little amazing how Lucas and his associates keep topping themselves."
Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune also gave the film four stars out of four and wrote, "From the moment that the familiar Star Wars introductory words begin to crawl up the screen, Return of the Jedi is a childlike delight.
It's the best video game around.
And for the professional moviegoers, it is particularly enjoyable to watch every facet of filmmaking at its best."
James Harwood of Variety called the film "a visual treat throughout," but thought that "Hamill is not enough of a dramatic actor to carry the plot load here" and Harrison Ford "is present more in body than in spirit this time, given little to do but react to special effects.
And it can't be said that either Carrie Fisher or Billy Dee Williams rise to previous efforts.
But Lucas and director Richard Marquand have overwhelmed these performer flaws with a truly amazing array of creatures, old and new, plus the familiar space hardware."
Sheila Benson of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the film "is fully satisfying, it gives honest value to all the hopes of its believers.
With this last of the central Star Wars cycle, there is the sense of the closing of a circle, of leaving behind real friends.
It is accomplished with a weight and a new maturity that seem entirely fitting, yet the movie has lost none of its sense of fun; it bursts with new inventiveness.
"Gary
Arnold of The Washington Post said, "Return of the Jedi, a feat of mass enchantment, puts the happy finishing touches on George Lucas' Star Wars saga.
It was worth the wait, and the work is now an imposing landmark in contemporary popular culture—a three-part, 6¼-hour science-fiction epic of unabashed heroic proclivities.
"
The film was also featured on the May 23, 1983, TIME magazine cover issue (where it was labeled "Star Wars III"), where the reviewer Gerald Clarke said that while it was not as exciting as the first Star Wars film, it was "better and more satisfying" than The Empire Strikes Back, now considered by many as the best of the original trilogy.
Vincent Canby of The New York Times called Return of the Jedi "by far the dimmest adventure of the lot" and stated, "The joys of watching space battles as envisioned by wizards in studios and laboratories are not inexhaustible."
Pauline Kael of The New Yorker stated, "Some of the trick effects might seem miraculous if the imagery had any lustre, but Return of the Jedi is an impersonal and rather junky piece of moviemaking.
"Christopher
John reviewed The Return of the Jedi in Ares Magazine #15 and commented that "Star Wars may not be dead, but Return of the Jedi is a failure, and is a cheap and tarnished crown for the series which shook the world of film when it started out . . .
a long time ago, in that galaxy far, far away.
"Colin
Greenland reviewed Return of the Jedi for Imagine magazine, and stated that "You would think a series like Star Wars, fuelled by public adoration, coasting along on the hyperdrive of its own hyperboles, would get inexorably worse.
It is not.
It is getting better.
"James
Kendrick of Q Network Film Desk, reviewing the 1997 Special Edition re-release, assessed Return of the Jedi as "the least of the three" original films, but "still a magnificent experience in its own right.
Its main problem is that it tends to lean too much on the slick commercialism generated by the first two installments."
ReelViews.net's James Berardinelli wrote of the Special Edition:

Although it was great fun
re-watching Star Wars and The Empire
Strikes Back again on the big screen
, Return of the Jedi doesn't generate the same sense of enjoyment.
And, while Lucas worked diligently to re-invigorate each entry into the trilogy, Jedi needs more than the patches of improved sound, cleaned-up visuals, and a few new scenes.
Still, despite the flaws, this is still Star Wars, and, as such, represents a couple of lightly-entertaining hours spent with characters we have gotten to know and love over the years.
Return of the Jedi is easily the weakest of the series, but its position as the conclusion makes it a must-see for anyone who has enjoyed its predecessor.

While the Sarlacc battle sequence, the speeder bike chase, the space battle, and Luke's duel against Vader are all well-regarded, the battle between Ewoks and stormtroopers remains controversial.
Fans are divided on the likelihood of Ewoks (being a primitive race of small creatures) defeating an armed ground force comprising the Empire's "best troops".
Lucas has defended the scenario, saying that the Ewoks' purpose was to distract the Imperial troops and they did not really win.
His inspiration for the Ewoks' victory came from the Vietnam War, where the indigenous Vietcong forces prevailed against the technologically superior United States.

===
Accolades ===
At the 56th Academy Awards in 1984, Richard Edlund, Dennis Muren, Ken Ralston, and Phil Tippett received the "Special Achievement Award for Visual Effects."
Norman Reynolds, Fred Hole, James L. Schoppe, and Michael Ford were nominated for "Best Art Direction/Set Decoration".
Ben Burtt received a nomination for "Best Sound Effects Editing".
John Williams received the nomination for "Best Music, Original Score".
Burtt, Gary Summers, Randy Thom and Tony Dawe all received the nominations for "Best Sound".
At the 1984 BAFTA Awards, Edlund, Muren, Ralston, and Kit West won for "Best Special Visual Effects".
Tippett and Stuart Freeborn were also nominated for "Best Makeup".
Reynolds received a nomination for "Best Production Design/Art Direction".
Burtt, Dawe, and Summers also received nominations for "Best Sound".
Williams was also nominated "Best Album of Original Score Written for a Motion Picture or Television Special".
The film also won for "Best Dramatic Presentation", the older award for science fiction and fantasy in film, at the 1984 Hugo Awards.

American Film Institute Lists
AFI's 100 Years ...
100 Movies – Nominated
AFI's 100 Years ...
100 Thrills –
Nominated


==
Marketing ==


===
Novelization ===
The novelization of Return of the Jedi was written by James Kahn and was released on May 12, 1983, thirteen days before the film's release.
===
Radio drama ===
A radio drama adaptation of the film was written by Brian Daley with additional material contributed by John Whitman and was produced for and broadcast on National Public Radio in 1996.
It was based on characters and situations created by George Lucas and on the screenplay by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas.
The first two Star Wars films were similarly adapted for National Public Radio in the early 1980s, but it was not until 1996 that a radio version of Return of the Jedi was heard.
Anthony Daniels returned as C-3PO, but Mark Hamill and Billy Dee Williams did not reprise their roles as they had for the first two radio dramas.
They were replaced by newcomer Joshua Fardon as Luke Skywalker and character actor Arye Gross as Lando Calrissian.
John Lithgow voiced Yoda, whose voice actor in the films has always been Frank Oz.
Bernard Behrens returned as Obi-Wan Kenobi and Brock Peters reprised his role as Darth Vader.
Veteran character actor Ed Begley, Jr. played Boba Fett.
Edward Asner also guest-starred speaking only in grunts as the voice of Jabba the Hutt.
The radio drama had a running time of three hours.

===
Comic book adaptation ===
Marvel Comics published a comic book adaptation of the film by writer Archie Goodwin and artists Al Williamson, Carlos Garzon, Tom Palmer, and Ron Frenz.
The adaptation appeared in Marvel Super Special #27 and as a four-issue limited series.
It was later reprinted in a mass market paperback.
===
Book-and-record set ===
Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set.
Released in 1983, the 24-page Star Wars: Return of the Jedi read-along book was accompanied by a 33⅓ rpm 18-centimetre (7 in) gramophone record.
Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the film with an abridged and condensed version of the story.
The record was produced by Buena Vista Records.

==
Prequels and sequels ==
A prequel trilogy began with Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, released in 1999, and set three decades before the original trilogy.
A sequel trilogy began with Episode VII
– The Force Awakens in 2015, set 30 years after Return of the Jedi.

== See also ==
Princess Leia's bikini


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==


==
External links ==
Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
Episode VI Return of the Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Return of the Jedi at IMDb
Return of the Jedi at the TCM Movie Database
Return of the Jedi at AllMovie
Return of the Jedi at the American Film Institute Catalog
Star Wars Forces of Destiny is a 2D animated web series by Lucasfilm Animation released through Disney's YouTube channel.
Set across multiple eras of the Star Wars franchise, it is a collection of two- to three-minute shorts centering on female characters featured in previous Star Wars installments.
The series premiered on July 3, 2017, beginning the daily release of a set of eight episodes; these episodes subsequently began broadcasting on Disney Channel on July 9.
An additional eight episodes were released in Fall 2017, and a second season of eight episodes were released in 2018.

First announced and presented in April 2017 during Star Wars Celebration Orlando
, Forces of Destiny is part of a franchise expansion initiative by Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media and includes a companion toy line by Hasbro and a series of youth-aimed books.
The series is the first 2D animated series produced by Lucasfilm since the 2003 Star Wars: Clone Wars series and the first 2D project by Lucasfilm Animation, which formed after the development of Star Wars: Clone Wars.

==
Premise ==
An animated micro-series starring female characters such as Princess Leia Organa, Sabine Wren, Jyn Erso, Rose Tico, Ahsoka Tano, Padmé Amidala, Hera Syndulla, and Rey.
== Cast and characters ==
Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano
Felicity Jones (season 1) and Helen Sadler (season 2)
as Jyn Erso
Vanessa Marshall as Hera Syndulla
Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata
Daisy Ridley as Rey
Tiya Sircar as Sabine Wren
Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala
Shelby Young as Leia Organa
Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico
Olivia Hack
as Qi'raFrom
both The Clone Wars and Rebels
, Matt Lanter reprised his role as Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, Tom Kane reprised his role as Jedi Master Yoda, Jim Cummings reprised his role as Hondo Ohnaka, Taylor Gray reprised his role as Jedi Padawan Ezra Bridger, Gina Torres reprised her role as bounty hunter Ketsu Onyo and Ritesh Rajan reprised his role as Tristan Wren.
Film actor John Boyega reprised his role as defected First Order stormtrooper Finn, Mark Hamill reprised his role as Luke Skywalker, son of Anakin and Padmé and Anthony Daniels reprised his role as the droid C-3PO.
Other characters to appear include smugglers Han Solo and Chewbacca, droids R2-D2, BB-8 and Chopper.

==
Production ==
Forces of Destiny was announced on April 12, 2017, and a special preview of the series presented at Star Wars Celebration Orlando on April 14.
The series is the first 2D animated series produced by Lucasfilm since the 2003 Clone Wars series and the first 2D animation project created by Lucasfilm Animation; previous 2D animated series such as Ewoks, Droids, and early installments of Clone Wars were created before the formation of the studio.
The series is part of Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media's franchise expansion initiative.
Forces of Destiny was created as a series of web shorts because it was felt to better appeal to children's watching patterns: "The way that kids are consuming content today, they're still watching linear television, but increasingly they're consuming content digitally, online.
We've created a story format here that reflects that.
It's a combination of digital and linear.
"
Each episode is written by Jennifer Muro and directed by Brad Rau.
==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2017) ===


===
Season 2 (2018) ===
A second season of fifteen additional episodes was announced in September 2017.
The episodes were released on March 19, 2018 online and aired on Disney Channel on March 25, 2018.

==
Distribution ==
Forces of Destiny premiered on July 3, 2017, through Disney's YouTube channel, beginning the daily release of a set of eight episodes.
It was initially announced that this release would culminate in the broadcast premiere of the eight episode set on Disney Channel on July 9 as a thirty-minute special, but on July 9, Disney announced via Twitter that only two episodes were going to be broadcast.
A second set of eight episodes was released in October 2017.
It was subsequently announced that episodes will air in two half-hour specials on Disney Channel on October 1 and 29.
The series is available on the Disney+ streaming service, which launched on November 12, 2019.

==
Books ==
A series of youth books adapted the episodes.
Daring Adventures: Volume 1 adapted shorts about Sabine, Rey, and Padmé, and Daring Adventures:
Volume 2 adapted shorts about Jyn, Ahsoka, and Leia.
IDW Publishing published Star Wars: Forces of Destiny, a weekly all-ages five-issue comic book miniseries that ran from January to May 2018.

==
Merchandising ==
Alongside the initial series announcement, Lucasfilm also announced a related toy line from Hasbro and an apparel line.
The toy line features a new class of figures, adventures figures fill the space between action figures and dolls.
These 11-inch articulated figures of the six core female characters and smaller paired figures of other characters launched on August 1, 2017 alongside accessories such as lightsabers.
Other characters, including Luke Skywalker and Kylo Ren, are intended to be released.

==
Awards ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Forces of Destiny at IMDb
Star Wars Forces of Destiny playlist on YouTube
Inside Forces of Destiny and Star Wars Animation on the Star Wars official YouTube Channel
Star Wars: Forces of Destiny on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
This is a list of all video game lists on Wikipedia, sorted by varying classifications.

==
By platform producers ==


===
Acorn ===
List of Acorn Electron games


===
Apple ===
List of Apple Arcade games
List of Apple II games
List of Apple IIGS games
List of iOS games
List of Macintosh games


===
Amstrad ===
List of Amstrad CPC games
List of Amstrad PCW games


===
Atari ===
List of Atari 2600 games
List of Atari 5200 games
List of Atari 7800 games
List of Atari Jaguar games
List of Atari Jaguar CD games
List of Atari Lynx games
List of Atari ST
games
List of Atari XEGS games


===
Bandai ===
List of Bandai RX-78 games
List of Bandai Super Vision 8000 games
List of Design Master Senshi Mangajukuu
games
List of Playdia games
List of Pippin games
List of Terebikko games
List of WonderSwan games
List of WonderSwan Color games


===
Casio ===
List of Casio Loopy games
List of Casio PV-1000 games


===
Commodore ===
List of Commodore PET games
List of Amiga games
List of Amiga CD32 games
List of Commodore
64 games
List of Commodore VIC-20 games


===
Fujitsu ===
List of FM Towns games


===
Google ===
List of Android games
List of Stadia games


===
Leapfrog ===
List of ClickStart games
List of Leapfrog
Didj games
List of Leapfrog Leapster games
List of Leapfrog Leapster Explorer games


===
Linux ===
List of Linux games


===
Mattel ===
List of Aquarius games
List of Hyperscan games
List of Intellivision games
List of Pixter games


===
Microsoft ===


==== DOS and Windows ====
Index of DOS games
Index of Windows games
List of Games for Windows titles
List of Games for Windows –
Live titles
List of Windows Games on Demand
List of Xbox Live games on Windows 8.x
List of Xbox Live games on Windows 10


====
MSX ====
List of MSX games


====
Xbox ====
List of Xbox games
List of Xbox games on Windows Phone
List of Xbox System Link games
List of Xbox 360 games
List of Xbox 360 games (A–L)
List of Xbox 360 games (M–Z)
List of Xbox 360 System Link games
List of Xbox games compatible with Xbox 360
List of Xbox
One games
List of Xbox One games
(A–L)
List of Xbox One games
(M–Z)
List of backward-compatible games for Xbox One
List of Xbox One X enhanced games
List of Xbox Series X games


===
NEC ===
List of PC-FX games
List of TurboGrafx-16 games


===
Nintendo ===
====
Nintendo home consoles ====
List of Family Computer games
List of Family Computer Disk System games
List of Nintendo Entertainment System games
List of Super Nintendo Entertainment System games
List of Satellaview broadcasts
List of Virtual Boy games
List of Nintendo 64 games
List of GameCube games
List of Wii games
List of WiiWare games
List of Virtual Console games for Wii (Japan)
List of Virtual Console games for Wii (North America)
List of Virtual Console games for Wii (PAL region)
List of Virtual Console games for Wii (South Korea)
List of Wii U games
List of Wii games on Wii U eShop
List of Virtual Console games for Wii U (Japan)
List of Virtual Console games for Wii U (North America)
List of Virtual Console games for Wii U (PAL region)
List of Nintendo Switch games


====
Nintendo handheld consoles ====
List of Game & Watch games
List of Game Boy games
List of multiplayer Game Boy games
List of Game Boy Color games
List of Super Game Boy games
List of Game Boy Advance games
List of Nintendo DS games
List of DSiWare games and applications
List of Nintendo
3DS games
List of Virtual Console games for Nintendo 3DS (Japan)
List of Virtual Console games for Nintendo 3DS (North America)
List of Virtual Console games for Nintendo 3DS (PAL region)
List of Virtual Console games for Nintendo 3DS (South Korea)
List of Virtual Console games for Nintendo 3DS (Taiwan and Hong Kong)
List of Pokémon Mini games


===
Phillips ===
List of
CD-i games
List of Magnavox Odyssey² games


===
Sega ===
List of SG-1000 games
List of Master System games
List of TecToy Master System 131 games
List of Sega Genesis games
List of 32X games
List of Sega CD games
List of Game Gear games
List of Sega Pico games
List of Advanced Pico Beena games
List of Sega Saturn games
List of Dreamcast games


===
Sinclair ===
List of ZX Spectrum games


===
SNK ===
List of Neo Geo games
List of Neo Geo Pocket Color games


===
Sony ===
List of PlayStation games
List of PlayStation games
(A–L)
List of PlayStation games
(M–Z)
Lists of PS one Classics
List of PlayStation 2 games
List of PlayStation 2 games
(A–K)
List of PlayStation 2 games
(L–Z)
List of PlayStation 3 games
List of PlayStation 3 games
(A–C)
List of PlayStation 3 games
(D–I)
List of PlayStation 3 games (J–P)
List of PlayStation 3 games (Q–Z)
List of PlayStation 2 Classics for PlayStation 3
List of PlayStation
4 games
List of PlayStation 4 games (A–L)
List of PlayStation 4 games
(M–Z)
List of PlayStation 4 free-to-play games
List of PlayStation 2 games for PlayStation 4
List of PlayStation VR games
List of PlayStation
5 games
List of PlayStation Portable games
List of downloadable PlayStation Portable games
List of PlayStation minis
List of PlayStation Vita games
List of PlayStation Vita games (A–L)
List of PlayStation Vita games (M–O)
List of PlayStation Vita games (P–R)
List of PlayStation Vita games (S)
List of PlayStation Vita games (T–V)
List of PlayStation Vita games
(W–Z)
Lists of PlayStation Store games
List of PlayStation Store TurboGrafx-16 games
List of Sony Pictures mobile games


===
Tandy ===
List of TRS-80 games


===
VTech ===
List of VTech CreatiVision games
List of VTech Socrates games
List of VTech
V.Flash games
List of VTech
V.Smile games


===
Other platforms ===
List of 3DO games
List of Action Max games
List of APF Imagination Machine games
List of arcade video games
List of Arcadia 2001 games
List of Bally Astrocade games
List of BBC Bridge Companion games
List of browser games
List of Cassette Vision games
List of ColecoVision games
List of Coleco Adam games
List of Creatronic Mega Duck games
List of Entex Select-A-Game games
List of Epoch Game Pocket Computer games
List of Fairchild Channel F games
List of Gakken Compact Vision TV Boy games
List of Gamate games
List of Game Master games
List of Game.com games
List of Gizmondo games
List of GP2X games
List of commercial GP32 games
List of HP3000 games
List of Interton VC
4000 games
List of Kaypro games
List of Memorex VIS games
List of N-Gage games
List of Nichibutsu My Vision games
List of Nuon games
List of Ouya games
List of Palladium Tele-Cassetten Game games
List of PC games
List of free PC games
List of PC Booter games
List of Pioneer LaserActive games
List of RCA Studio II games
List of SAM Coupé games
List of SHG Black Point games
List of Super A'Can games
List of Super Cassette Vision games
List of Takara Video Challenger
games
List of View-Master Interactive Vision games
List of Tapwave Zodiac games
List of Tomy Tutor games
List of Vectrex games
List of Watara Supervision games
List of XavixPORT games
List of
Zapit Game Wave games
List of Zeebo games


==
By developer ==


==
By publisher ==
List of Activision video games
List of Atari,
Inc. games
List of Atari,
Inc. (Atari, SA subsidiary) games
List of Atlus games
List of Blizzard Entertainment games
List of Capcom games
List of Cygames games
List of Disney Interactive Studios games
List of Electronic Arts games
List of King games
List of Koei games
List of Kojima Productions games
List of Konami games
List of Namco games
Lists of Nintendo games
List of Nintendo products
List of Rockstar games
List of Sega games
List of SNK games
List of Sony Interactive Entertainment video games
List of Ubisoft games
List of Xbox Game Studios video games


==
By hardware ==
List of accessories to video games by system
List of dedicated video game consoles
List of handheld game consoles
List of home video game consoles
List of microconsoles
List of retro style video game consoles


==
By date ==
List of video games in development


==
By character or franchise ==
List of longest-running video game franchises
List of .hack media
List of Beatmania video games
List of Bleach video games
List of Bomberman video games
List of Castlevania media
List of Dance Dance Revolution video games
List of Digimon video games
List of Disney video games
List of
Eamon adventures
List of F-Zero media
List of Final Fantasy video games
List of Final Fantasy media
List of Guitar Freaks and Drum Mania video games
List of Kirby media
List of The Legend of Zelda media
List of Mega Man video games
List of Metroid media
List of Mortal Kombat media
List of Nancy Drew video games
List of Naruto video games
List of Pokémon video games
List of Resident Evil media
List of The Simpsons video games
List of Sonic
the Hedgehog video games
List of Star Wars video games
List of StarCraft media
List of Story of Seasons video games
List of Transformers video games
List of Xenosaga characters
List of video games featuring Miis
List of WWE 2K Games video games
===
Mario ===
List of Donkey Kong video games
List of Luigi video games
List of Mario educational games
List of Mario puzzle games
List of Mario racing games
List of Mario role-playing games
List of Mario sports games
List of Wario video games
List of Yoshi video games
List of video games featuring Mario


==
By feature ==
List of computer games with spawn versions
List of augmented reality games
List of stereoscopic video games
List of video games that support cross-platform play


==
By region ==
List of video games developed in Canada
List of video games developed in the Czech Republic
List of video games developed in France
List of video games developed in Germany
List of video games developed in India
List of video games developed in Japan
List of video games developed in the Netherlands
List of video games developed in Spain
List of video games developed in the United Kingdom
List of video games developed in the United States
==
By engine ==
List of CryEngine games
List of Frostbite games
List of GameMaker Studio games
List of GoldSrc mods
List of Ren'Py games
List of RenderWare games
List of Source mods
List of Unity games
List of Unreal Engine games
==
By genre ==


===
Action ===
List of beat 'em
ups
List of fighting games
List of first-person shooters
List of gun games
List of platform game series
List of third-person shooters


===
Casual and puzzle ===
List of party video games
List of puzzle video games
List of maze video games
List of Tetris variants
List of quiz arcade games


===
Role-playing ===
List of role-playing video games
List of massively multiplayer online role-playing games
List of text-based MMORPGs
List of roguelikes


===
Simulation ===
List of business simulation video games
List of city-building video games
List of racing video games
List of god video games
List of simulation video games
List of space flight simulation games


===
Sports ===
List of American football video games
List of association football video games
List of Australian rules football video games
List of baseball video games
List of basketball video games
List of Formula One video games
List of golf video games
List of ice hockey video games
List of licensed professional wrestling video games
List of NASCAR video games
List of rugby union video games
List of snowboarding video games
List of sumo video games
List of Olympic video games
List of volleyball video games
List of WWE video games


===
Strategy ===
List of 4X video games
List of artillery video games
List of chess software
List of grand strategy video games
List of multiplayer online battle arena games
List of real-time strategy video games
List of real-time tactics video games
List of turn-based strategy video games
List of turn-based tactics video games
List of tactical role-playing
video games


===
Other ===
List of card game-based video games
List of Christian video games
List of educational video games
List of erotic video games
List of eroge
List of graphic adventure games
List of horror video games
List of music video games
List of ninja video games
List of text-based computer games
List of vampire video games
List of Western video games
List of World War
I video games
List of World War II video games
List of zombie video games
==
By technology ==
List of cel-shaded video games
==
By license ==
List of freeware video games
List of freeware first-person shooters
List of open-source video games
List of commercial video games released as freeware
List of commercial video games with available source code
List of crossovers in video games
List of video games based on anime or manga
List of video games based on cartoons
List of video games based on comics
List of video games based on DC Comics
List of video games based on films
==
By player type ==
List of cooperative video games
List of massively multiplayer online games
List of free massively multiplayer online games
List of massively multiplayer online first-person shooter games
List of massively multiplayer online real-time strategy games
List of massively multiplayer online turn-based strategy games
List of free multiplayer online games
List of multiplayer browser games


==
By reception ==
List of banned video games
List of best-selling game consoles
List of best-selling video games
List of best-selling PC games
List of best-selling video game franchises
List of highest-grossing arcade games
List of highest-grossing mobile games
List of commercial failures in video games
List of controversial video games
List of recalled video games
List of video games considered the best
List of video games notable for negative reception


==
Other ==
List of most expensive video games to develop
List of pinball manufacturers
List of vaporware
List of video game collector and limited editions
List of video game console emulators
List of video game remakes and remastered ports
List of video games considered artistic
List of video games derived from modifications
List of video games in the Museum of Modern Art
List of video games notable for speedrunning
List of video games with LGBT characters


==
See also ==
List of video game websites
List of video gaming topics
The Star Wars franchise has spawned multiple films and television series.
Two animated series were released in the mid-1980s.
Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the prequel trilogy-era Clone Wars.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only The Clone Wars was kept in the canon of continuity of the episodic Star Wars films.
Two additional half-hour animated series were created: Rebels, which ties into the original trilogy, and Resistance, which ties into the sequel trilogy.
An additional series spun off from The Clone Wars, titled The Bad Batch, will debut on Disney+
in 2021.

At least seven original Star Wars series will be released on Disney+.
The first live-action series in the franchise, The Mandalorian, premiered in November 2019, and spawned three spin-offs, The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic and Ahsoka.
Additional live-action series include Andor, Obi-Wan Kenobi, The Acolyte, and Lando.

==
Animated series ==


===
Droids and Ewoks (1985–1987) ===
Nelvana, the animation studio that produced the animated segment of the Holiday Special, was hired to create two animated series which aired together on ABC: Droids (1985–1986) follows the adventures of C-3PO and R2-D2, and its sister series Ewoks (1985–1987) features Wicket and other members of the titular species from Return of the Jedi, both set before the events of the original trilogy.
One reviewer calls Droids "rudimentary" and Ewoks "unremarkable", but writes that both "marked the first major effort to expand the Star Wars 'brand' beyond its original live-action film existence."
===
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) ===
George Lucas created his own animation company, Lucasfilm Animation, and used it to produce his first in-house Star Wars CGI-animated series, using Cartoon Network's 2003 Clone Wars micro-series as a "pilot".
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) was introduced through a 2008 animated film of the same name.
The series is set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith of the prequel trilogy.
It focuses mainly on the Jedi characters of Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi, as well as Anakin's Padawan apprentice, Ahsoka Tano (an original character created by Filoni for the series), with other characters from the live-action films in supporting roles.
The series marked the beginning of Dave Filoni's involvement in Star Wars animation projects.

After Disney's acquisition of the Star Wars franchise, The Clone Wars was cancelled in 2014 before its intended final episodes were completed.
The remaining unaired episodes were released on Netflix as "The Lost Missions".
The chronological storyline order was released after the series had initially finished airing.
The film and series were included in the canon established in 2014.
The show was later revived for an additional final season that premiered on February 21, 2020, on the streaming service Disney+.
===
Rebels (2014–2018) ===
In 2014, Disney XD began airing Star Wars Rebels, the first CGI-animated series produced following the Disney acquisition.
It follows a band of rebels as they fight the Galactic Empire in the years leading up to A New Hope.
It closed some of the arcs introduced in The Clone Wars.
Due to the film Rogue One being produced at the same time, the film and the series acknowledged each other.
The series also included an in-canon version of Grand Admiral Thrawn from the Legends  Thrawn trilogy.

===
Resistance (2018–2020) ===
The animated series Star Wars Resistance debuted in late 2018, shifting the animation style towards anime-inspired cel-shading visuals, and focuses on a young Resistance pilot Kazuda Xiono before and during The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, leading up to The Rise of Skywalker.
Sequel trilogy characters such as Captain Phasma, General Hux, and Kylo Ren appear.
The second and final season premiered on October 6, 2019.
===
The Bad Batch ===
Set after the events of The Clone Wars, The Bad Batch follows the titular squadron making their way through the galaxy as mercenaries in the early days of the Empire.
The series was announced in July 2020, to debut on Disney+
on May 4, 2021.
Dave Filoni, Athena Portillo, Brad Rau, and Jennifer Corbett serve as executive producers, with Carrie Beck as co-executive producer and Josh Rimes as producer.
Rau also serves as supervising director with Corbett the head writer.

===
Visions ===
Announced on December 10, 2020, Star Wars: Visions is an anime anthology series of ten short films by different creators set in the Star Wars universe.
It is scheduled for release on Disney+
in 2021.

== Micro-series ==


=== Clone Wars (2003–2005) ===

After the release of Attack of the Clones, developed and drawn by Genndy Tartakovsky.
Cartoon Network produced and aired the micro-series Clone Wars from 2003 to weeks before the 2005 release of Revenge of the Sith, as the series featured events set between those films.
The plot in the series was intended as prequel to then upcoming feature movie Episode III: Revenge of The Sith and directly leads to the starting point in the movie.

It won the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program in 2004 and 2005.
===
Blips (2017) ===
Star Wars Blips is an animated micro-series created to promote The Last Jedi.
It features droids such as
BB-8 and R2-D2, in addition to porgs.

===
Forces of Destiny (2017–2018) ===
The animated micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny debuted in 2017; it focuses on the female characters of the franchise and is set in various eras.

===
Galaxy of Adventures (2018–2020) ===
Star Wars Galaxy of Adventures debuted on the "Star Wars Kids" YouTube channel and website in late 2018.
Using stylized animation, the series of shorts reimagine key scenes from the saga, initially leading up the release of Episode IX.
The shorts feature audio from the original films (with narration by Dante Basco) and are animated by Titmouse,
Inc.


==
=
Roll Out (2019–2020) ===
Star Wars Roll Out debuted on the Star Wars Kids YouTube channel and website in August 2019.
The shorts depict the main characters from the franchise as ball-shaped, similar to BB-8, and utilize a kid-friendly cutout animation style.
io9 calls the design of the series "adorable".

== Live-action series ==


===
The Mandalorian (2019–present) ===
In March 2018, Jon Favreau was hired to write and produce a live-action Star Wars series for Disney+.
The series follows "a lone gunfighter in the outer reaches of the galaxy far from the authority of the New Republic" a few years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
In August 2018, it was reported that the series would cost about "$100 million for 10 episodes".
Pedro Pascal stars as the titular character, and is joined by supporting actors Gina Carano, Nick Nolte, Giancarlo Esposito, Emily Swallow, Carl Weathers, Omid Abtahi, and Werner Herzog.
The series premiered on November 12, 2019, with the launch of Disney+.
The second season premiered on October 30, 2020.
===
The Book of Boba Fett ===
In November 2020, Deadline Hollywood reported that a miniseries focused on Boba Fett could begin filming before the end of the year, before a third season of The Mandalorian went into production.
The series, known as The Book of Boba Fett, was revealed the following month, and confirmed to be in production ahead of The Mandalorian season three.
Favreau and Filoni executive produce along with Robert Rodriguez, with Temuera Morrison and Ming-Na Wen reprising their roles as Boba Fett and Fennec Shand, respectively.
It will be released in December 2021.
===
Andor ===
The series will follow Rebel spy Cassian Andor, five years before the events of Rogue One, during the formative years of the Rebellion.
In November 2018, a prequel series to the 2016 film Rogue One centered on Cassian Andor was confirmed to be in development, and described as a "rousing spy thriller".
Diego Luna will reprise his role for the series.
Stephen Schiff was hired to serve as showrunner and executive producer of the series, which was developed by Jared Bush, who wrote a series bible and a draft of the pilot episode.
In April 2019, Alan Tudyk was confirmed to be reprising his role of K-2SO.
In April 2020, Tony Gilroy, who worked on the reshoots of Rogue One, replaced Schiff as showrunner.
Gilroy was going to write and direct the pilot, and direct other episodes as well.
It was also revealed in April 2020 that Stellan Skarsgård, Kyle Soller,
Denise Gough had joined the cast in undisclosed roles, along with Genevieve O'Reilly reprising her role of Mon Mothma.
In September 2020, it was announced that Gilroy would step down from his directing duties in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and would be replaced by Toby Haynes, who is set to direct the first three episodes.
Filming began in late November 2020 in London.
Andor will be released in 2022, and consist of 12 episodes.

===
Obi-Wan Kenobi ===
In August 2019, it was reported that a streaming series focused on Obi-Wan Kenobi was in development, with Ewan McGregor in talks to reprise his role from the prequel trilogy.
The series was initially thought to have been developing as a standalone film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the performance of Solo at the box office.
During the 2019 D23 Expo, Lucasfilm officially announced that the series was in development, with McGregor confirmed to reprise his role as the titular character.
It will take place eight years after Revenge of the Sith and prior to the events of A New Hope, thus exploring the time during Kenobi's exile on Tatooine.
In September 2019, Deborah Chow and Hossein Amini were announced as the series' director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive producers alongside McGregor.
In October 2019, McGregor said the series would comprise six episodes.
According to Amini, filming for the series was set to begin around July 2020, but after he departed from the series, it was reported in January 2020, that production had been pushed to January 2021.
In April 2020, it was announced that Joby Harold would officially be taking over writing duties from Amini.
In August 2020, Kennedy told TheWrap that it would be a limited series.
In September 2020, McGregor said that the series is now scheduled to begin filming in early 2021.On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that Hayden Christensen would reprise his role as Darth Vader, and that the series would be titled Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Obi-Wan Kenobi is scheduled to be released in 2022, and will consist of 6 episodes.

===
The Acolyte ===
In April 2020, Variety reported that a female-centric live-action Star Wars series is in development for Disney+
with Russian Doll co-creator Leslye Headland serving as a writer and showrunner.
In early November, Headland expounded that the series would be set "in a pocket of the universe and a pocket of the timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the geography of the Star Wars universe than its existing visuals.
On November 5, Deadline reported that the series was expected to be an "action thriller with martial arts elements".
On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that it would take place during the late High Republic era.

===
Ahsoka ===
In December 2020, Ahsoka was announced.
Developed by Favreau and Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett and Rangers of the New Republic through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".
Rosario Dawson headlines the series, reprising her role as Ahsoka Tano.
It will be a limited series set sometime after Rebels.

===
Lando ===
In December 2020, Lando was announced as a Disney+ limited series, focusing on the titular character, with a story by Justin Simien.

===
Rangers of the New Republic ===
In December 2020, Rangers of the New Republic was announced.
Developed by Favreau and Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett and Ahsoka through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".

==
Game show ==


===
Jedi Temple Challenge (2020) ===
Star Wars:
Jedi Temple Challenge is a web-based children's game show developed by Lucasfilm.
First announced in December 2019, the series debuted on the Star Wars Kids website and YouTube channel on June 10, 2020.
The series features young contestants competing as Jedi Padawans in a series of obstacle courses and knowledge tests in the attempt to gain the rank of Jedi Knight.
The show is hosted by Ahmed Best, who plays the character of Kelleran Beq, the Jedi Master mentor of the contestants who is joined by his droid companions, AD-3
(voiced by Mary Holland and performed by Gordon Tarpley) and LX-R5.
Sam Witwer provides the voice of an unknown character of the Dark Side of the Force during the final challenge of each episode.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings ===


===
Critical response ===


===
Emmy Awards ===


==
Abandoned projects ==


===
Underworld ===
In 2005, plans for a live-action television series set between the prequel and original trilogies were announced at Star Wars Celebration.
In 2007, Lucas described the project as "one show that will split into four shows, focusing on different characters.
"
It entered development in early 2009.
The series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as Han Solo, Chewbacca, Lando Calrissian, Boba Fett, C-3PO, and Emperor Palpatine.
Lucas described the series as "more talky.
It's more of what I would call a soap opera with a bunch of personal dramas in it.
It's not really based on action-adventure films from the '30s—
it's actually more based on film noir movies from the '40s!"
Producer Rick McCallum revealed the working title, Star Wars: Underworld, in 2012, and that it would focus on criminal and political power struggles in the "period when the Empire is trying to take things over.
"Over one hundred 42-minute episodes were planned, with 50 scripts written.
These were mostly second drafts, but due to their complex content, were too expensive to produce.
Ronald D. Moore was one of the writers, and extensive artwork including character, costume, and set designs were developed at Skywalker Ranch under the close supervision of Lucas and McCallum.
The project was still being considered after Lucasfilm was sold to Disney, including by ABC, with stories being reviewed as of December 2015.
According to Kathleen Kennedy,
That's an area we've spent a lot of time, reading through the material that he developed is something we very much would like to explore. ...
So our attitude is, we don't want to throw any of that stuff away.
It's gold.
And it's something we're spending a lot of time looking at, pouring [sic] through, discussing, and we may very well develop those things further.
We definitely want to.

The plot of the anthology film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story was originally pitched as an episode of the series.
The story of Han winning the Millennium Falcon from Lando was planned to be featured and later developed as Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
In early 2020, Stargate Studios shared test footage made to promote the series to networks, as well as a Google Doc listing production details for the series.

===
Detours ===
Star Wars Detours is an unaired animated parody series from the creators of Robot Chicken, which was postponed in 2013 and ultimately unaired.
Production began in 2012 prior to the Disney acquisition, with 39 episodes completed and 62 additional scripts finished.

===
Cara Dune-centered series ===
A Mandalorian spin-off series centered on the character Cara Dune was reportedly considered for Disney+ by November 2020, which Lucasfilm had intended to announce at Disney's Investor Day event the next month.
However, after Gina Carano, who portrayed Dune in The Mandalorian, posted a series of controversial social media posts in both November 2020 and February 2021, any such project was cancelled and Disney severed its ties with the actress.

== See also ==
Lego Star Wars § Films and videos
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars films


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars: The Last Jedi (also known as Star Wars: Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi) is a 2017 American epic space opera film written and directed by Rian Johnson.
Produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the second installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015), and the eighth episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Gwendoline Christie, Kelly Marie Tran, Laura Dern, and Benicio del Toro.
The Last Jedi follows Rey as she seeks the aid of Luke Skywalker, in hopes of turning the tide for the Resistance in the fight against Kylo Ren and the First Order, while General Leia Organa, Finn, and Poe Dameron attempt to escape a First Order attack on the dwindling Resistance fleet.
The film features the first posthumous film performance by Fisher, who died in December 2016, and the film is dedicated to her.
The Last Jedi is part of a new trilogy of films announced after Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012.
It was produced by Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy and Ram Bergman and executive produced by The Force Awakens director J. J. Abrams.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score.
A number of scenes were filmed at Skellig Michael in Ireland during pre-production in September 2015, but principal photography began at Pinewood Studios in England in February 2016 and wrapped that July.

The Last Jedi premiered in Los Angeles on December 9, 2017, and was released in the United States on December 15.
It grossed over $1.3 billion worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing film of 2017 and the ninth-highest-grossing film of all time during its theatrical run.
It is also the second-highest-grossing Star Wars film and turned a net profit of over $417 million.
The film received positive reviews, with praise for its ensemble cast, musical score, visual effects, action sequences, and emotional weight.
The film received four nominations at the 90th Academy Awards, including Best Original Score and Best Visual Effects, as well as two nominations at the 71st British Academy Film Awards.
The sequel, The Rise of Skywalker, was released in December 2019.

==
Plot ==
Shortly after the battle of Starkiller Base, General Leia Organa is leading the Resistance forces in evacuating their base when the First Order fleet arrives.
Against Leia's orders, Poe Dameron leads a costly counterattack that destroys a First Order dreadnought.
The remaining Resistance escapes into hyperspace, but the First Order uses a device to track them, and attacks again.
Kylo Ren hesitates to fire on the lead Resistance ship after sensing his mother Leia's presence on board, but his wingmen destroy the bridge, killing most of the Resistance's leaders.
Leia is dragged into space but survives by using the Force.
While Leia recovers, Vice-Admiral Holdo assumes command of the Resistance.
Running low on fuel, the remaining fleet is pursued by the First Order.

On Ahch-To, Rey attempts to recruit Luke Skywalker to the Resistance.
Under self-imposed exile, Luke refuses to help and says that the Jedi should end.
After encouragement from R2-D2, he agrees to give Rey three lessons in the ways of the Force.
Rey and Kylo begin communicating through the Force, which puzzles them both.
Kylo tells Rey that Luke feared his power; Luke confesses that he momentarily contemplated killing Kylo upon sensing that Snoke was corrupting him, which prompted Kylo to destroy Luke's new Jedi Order.
Convinced that Kylo can be redeemed, Rey leaves Ahch-To.
Luke prepares to burn the Jedi library but hesitates.
The spirit of Luke's master Yoda appears and destroys the library by summoning a bolt of lightning.
He encourages Luke to learn from his failure.

Meanwhile, Poe entrusts Finn, mechanic Rose, and BB-8 with a secret mission to disable the First Order's tracking device.
Maz Kanata directs them to the casino town of Canto Bight, where they meet the hacker DJ.
Pursued by the local security, they escape Canto Bight with the help of stablehand children and racing animals they set free.
Finn, Rose, and DJ infiltrate Snoke's flagship but are captured by Captain Phasma.
Kylo brings Rey to Snoke, who reveals that he connected their minds to discover Luke's whereabouts.

Holdo plans to evacuate the remaining members of the Resistance using small transport vessels.
Believing her plan cowardly and futile, Poe leads a mutiny.
A recovered Leia stuns Poe with a blaster and proceeds with the evacuation.
Holdo remains aboard the ship as a decoy to mislead Snoke's fleet as the others flee to an abandoned base on Crait.
DJ buys his freedom by revealing the Resistance's plan to General Hux, and the First Order fleet begins firing on the evacuation transports, destroying many.

Ordered to kill Rey, Kylo instead kills Snoke and defeats his Praetorian Guard with her help.
Rey hopes that Kylo has abandoned the dark side, but he instead asks her to rule the galaxy with him.
Refusing, she battles him for control of Luke's lightsaber, bisecting the weapon.
Holdo sacrifices herself by slicing through Snoke's flagship at lightspeed, crippling the First Order fleet.
Rey escapes the destruction while Kylo declares himself Supreme Leader.
BB-8 frees Finn and Rose; they defeat Phasma and join the survivors on Crait.
When the First Order arrives, Poe, Finn, and Rose attack with obsolete speeders.
Rey and Chewbacca draw TIE fighters away in the Millennium Falcon, while Rose stops Finn from sacrificing himself.
The First Order penetrates the Resistance fortress using a siege cannon.

Luke appears and confronts the First Order, allowing the surviving Resistance to escape.
Kylo orders the First Order's forces to fire on Luke, but they fail to harm him.
He then engages Luke in a lightsaber duel; upon striking Luke, Kylo realizes that Luke is not physically present, but projecting his image through the Force.
Rey helps the remaining Resistance escape on the Falcon.
Exhausted, Luke dies peacefully on Ahch-To, becoming one with the Force.
Rey and Leia sense his death, and Leia tells Rey that the Resistance can rise again.

At Canto Bight, the stablehands recount the story of Luke Skywalker; afterward, one of them moves a broom with the Force and gazes into space.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, a powerful Jedi Master who has been in self-imposed exile on the planet Ahch-To.
Hamill voices Dobbu Scay, named after the film's editor, Bob Ducsay.
On Canto Bight, the character mistakes BB-8 for a slot machine.

Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa, twin sister to Luke, former princess of Alderaan, and a leading general in the Resistance.

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren, Supreme Leader Snoke's disciple, who is strong with the Force.
He is the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa, and Luke's nephew.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a highly Force-sensitive scavenger from the desert planet Jakku who joined the Resistance and goes to find Luke.

John Boyega as Finn, a former stormtrooper of the First Order who defected to the Resistance.

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot in the Resistance.

Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke, the leader of the First Order and Kylo Ren's master.

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a pirate and ally of the Resistance.

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the former head of the First Order's Starkiller Base.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of Leia Organa.

Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma, the commander of the First Order's stormtroopers.

Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a member of the Resistance who works in maintenance.

Laura Dern as Vice-Admiral Amilyn Holdo, an officer in the Resistance.

Benicio del Toro as DJ, an underworld codebreaker.
Frank Oz returns as Yoda, the deceased former Jedi Master and Luke's wise mentor, who appears as a Force spirit.
Joonas Suotamo appears as Chewbacca, taking over the role from Peter Mayhew after previously serving as his body double in The Force Awakens.
Mayhew, who suffered from chronic knee and back pain, and was credited as "Chewbacca consultant".
Billie Lourd, Mike Quinn, and Timothy D. Rose reprise their roles as Lieutenant Connix, Nien Nunb, and
Admiral Ackbar, respectively; with Tom Kane voicing Ackbar.
Amanda Lawrence appears as Commander D'Acy, and Mark Lewis Jones and Adrian Edmondson play Captains Canady and Peavey, respectively.
BB-8 is controlled by puppeteers Dave Chapman and Brian Herring, with initial voice work by Ben Schwartz and final sound effects voiced by Bill Hader modulated through a synthesizer.
Jimmy Vee portrays R2-D2, taking over the role from Kenny Baker, who died in August 2016.
Veronica Ngo portrays Rose's sister Paige Tico, a Resistance gunner who sacrifices her life to destroy a First Order dreadnought.
Justin Theroux plays the master codebreaker, while Lily Cole plays his companion.
Joseph Gordon-Levitt has a voice cameo as Slowen Lo, and Warwick Davis plays Wodibin.
Rogue One (2016)
director Gareth Edwards has a cameo appearance as a Resistance Soldier, with Edgar Wright and Joe Cornish also cameo in the film.
Hermione Corfield appears as Tallissan "Tallie" Lintra, a Resistance A-Wing pilot and squadron leader, and Noah Segan and Jamie Christopher appear as Resistance pilots Starck and Tubbs.
Hugh Skinner cameos as a Resistance Officer; while Hamill's children, Griffin, Nathan, and Chelsea, cameo as Resistance soldiers.
Prince William, Duke of Cambridge; Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex; and Gary Barlow have cameo appearances as stormtroopers, and Tom Hardy also has an appearance as a stormtrooper, but his cameo was dropped from the final cut.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney announced a new trilogy of Star Wars films.
J. J. Abrams was named director of the first episode in the trilogy, The Force Awakens, in January 2013.
In June 2014, director Rian Johnson was reported to be in talks to write and direct its sequel, Episode VIII, and to write a treatment for the third film, Episode IX, with Ram Bergman producing both films.
Johnson confirmed in August that he would direct Episode VIII.In January 2015, Disney CEO Bob Iger stated that Episode VIII would be released in 2017.
In December, Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said that the film had not been mapped out and that Abrams was collaborating with Johnson, who would in turn work with (then)
Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition.
Additionally, Abrams served as an executive producer along with Tom Karnowski and Jason McGatlin.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm announced the title for Episode VIII as Star Wars: The Last Jedi.

===
Writing ===
The Last Jedi story begins immediately after The Force Awakens.
Johnson had his story group watch films such as Twelve O'Clock High (1949),
The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957), Gunga Din (1939), Three Outlaw Samurai (1964), Sahara (1943), and Letter Never Sent (1960) for inspiration while developing ideas.
He felt it was difficult to work on the film while The Force Awakens was being finished.
Johnson wrote the scene with the mirrored versions of Rey to symbolise her search for identity; when she asks for a vision of her parents, she sees only herself.
Rey learns that her parents were "nobodies" as it would be "the hardest thing" she and the audience could hear; Johnson likened the scene to Luke Skywalker learning that Darth Vader is his father in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980).
During production, Hamill expressed disagreement with the direction of his character, Luke, feeling his character's disillusioned state was at odds with his character.
Hamill later said he regretted making his initial misgivings public and compared his disagreements to his clashes with George Lucas during the filming of Return of the Jedi (1983).

===
Casting ===
In September 2015, Disney shortlisted the female cast members to Gina Rodriguez, Tatiana Maslany, and Olivia Cooke.
That same month, Benicio del Toro confirmed his involvement in the film, but denied that he was playing a villain, and Mark Hamill was also confirmed.
Joaquin Phoenix was also courted to portray the role of DJ, but would end up passing on the offer.
In October 2015, Gugu Mbatha-Raw was rumored to have been cast in the film.
In November, Kennedy announced at the London premiere of The Force Awakens that the entire cast would return for Episode VIII, along with "a handful" of new cast members.
In February 2016, at the start of filming, it was confirmed that Laura Dern and Kelly Marie Tran had been cast in undisclosed roles.
In April 2017, at the Star Wars Celebration Orlando, Lucasfilm announced that Tran would play Resistance maintenance worker Rose Tico, which Johnson described as the film's largest new role.
To keep Frank Oz's return as Yoda a secret, producers excluded Oz's name in the billing for the film's pre-release marketing and ensured that Oz stayed on set during filming.

===
Filming ===
Second unit photography began during pre-production at Skellig Michael in Ireland on September 14, 2015, due to the difficulties of filming at that location during other seasons.
It would have lasted five days, but filming was canceled for the first day due to poor weather and rough conditions.
In September 2015, del Toro revealed that principal photography would begin in March 2016.
The production began work on the 007 Stage at Pinewood Studios on November 15, 2015.
Rick Heinrichs served as production designer.
In January 2016, production of Episode VIII was delayed until February due to script rewrites.
Filming was in danger of being delayed further due to an upcoming strike between the Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television and the Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union.
On February 10, 2016, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed that principal photography had begun under the working title Space Bear.
Additional filming took place in Dubrovnik, Croatia from March 9 to 16, as well as in Ireland in
May. Malin Head in County Donegal and a mountain headland, Ceann Sibeal in County Kerry, served as additional filming locations.
To increase the scenes' intimacy Driver and Ridley were both present when filming Kylo and Rey's Force visions.
Location filming for the battle scenes on the planet
Crait took place at the Salar de Uyuni salt flats in Bolivia.
Additional filming took place in Mexico.
Principal photography wrapped on July 22, 2016, though as of early September, Nyong'o had not filmed her scenes.
In February 2017, it was announced that sequences from the film were shot in IMAX.
Production designer Rick Heinrichs said the original script called for 160 sets, double what might be expected, but that Johnson did some "trimming and cutting".
Ultimately, 125 sets were created on 14 sound stages at Pinewood Studios.
According to creature designer Neal Scanlan, The Last Jedi has more practical effects than any Star Wars film, with 180 to 200 creatures created with practical effects, some cut from the final edit.
For Yoda's appearance in the film as a Force ghost, the character was created using puppetry, as was done in the original Star Wars trilogy (as opposed to computer-generated imagery, which was used to create Yoda in most of the prequel trilogy).

===
Music ===
In July 2013, Kennedy confirmed at the Star Wars Celebration Europe that John Williams would return to score the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
Williams confirmed his assignment for The Last Jedi at a Tanglewood concert in August 2016, stating he would begin recording the score "off and on" in December 2016 until March or April 2017.
On February 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both Williams and William Ross conducting the sessions.
In lieu of a traditional spotting session with Johnson, Williams was provided a temp track of music from his previous film scores as a reference for scoring The Last Jedi.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 15, 2017.

==
Marketing ==
On September 19, 2017, Australia Post released a set of stamp packs.
On October 12, Royal Mail released a set of eight promotional postage stamps designed by Malcolm Tween.
Several tie-in books were released on the same day as the film's release, including The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary, and various children's reading and activity books.
Related novelizations included the prequel book Cobalt Squadron, and the Canto Bight, a collection of novellas about the Canto Bight Casino.
As with The Force Awakens, there is no official tie-in game for The Last Jedi, in favor of integrating content from the film into other Star Wars video games, including Star Wars Battlefront II, which introduced various content from the film, during the game's first "season".

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film had its world premiere at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles on December 9, 2017, and was released in the United States on December 15.
The film was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on May 26; however, it was pushed back to December to avoid competition with Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017).
===
Home media ===
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars:
The Last Jedi digitally in HD and 4K via digital download and Movies
Anywhere on March 13, 2018, with an Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD physical release on March 27.
The 4K version of the film was later re-released in "The Skywalker Saga" 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi  grossed $620.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $712.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.333 billion.
It had a worldwide opening of $450.8 million, the eighth-biggest of all time, including $40.6 million that was attributed to IMAX screenings, the second biggest for IMAX.
It was estimated that the film would need to gross $800 million worldwide to break even; Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $417.5 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues, making it the most profitable release of 2017.

====
United States and Canada ====
Pre-sale tickets went on sale in the United States on October 9, 2017, and as with The Force Awakens and Rogue One, ticket service sites such as Fandango had their servers crash due to heavy traffic and demand.
In the United States and Canada, industry tracking had The Last Jedi grossing around $200 million from 4,232 theaters in its opening weekend.
The film made $45 million from Thursday night previews, the second-highest amount ever (behind The Force Awakens' $57 million).
It went on to make $104.8 million on its first day (including previews), and $220 million over the weekend, both the second-highest amounts of all time.
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend of $25 million, the biggest IMAX opening of the year, and the second biggest ever behind The Force Awakens.
After dropping by 76% on its second Friday, the worst Friday-to-Friday drop in the series, the film fell by a total of 67% in its second weekend, grossing $71.7 million.
It was the largest second-weekend drop of the series, although it remained atop the box office.
It made $52.4 million in its third weekend, again topping the box office.
It also brought its domestic total to $517.1 million, overtaking the Disney film Beauty and the Beast (2017) as the highest of 2017.
It grossed $23.6 million and was surpassed the following weekend by Jumanji:
Welcome to the Jungle (2017) (which was in its third week) and Insidious:
The Last Key (2018).
====
Other countries ====
In its first two days of release the film made $60.8 million from 48 markets.
The top countries were the United Kingdom ($10.2 million), Germany ($6.1 million), France ($6 million), Australia ($5.6 million), and Brazil ($2.5 million).
By the end of the weekend, the film made $230 million outside the United States and Canada.
All-time opening weekend records were set in various countries, including France, Germany, Spain, United Kingdom, and Finland.
On its second weekend, it grossed $76.1 million outside the United States and Canada and became the fourth-highest-grossing film of the year in Europe.
As of January 21, the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($109.3 million), Germany ($79.8 million), France ($63.5 million), Japan ($60.8 million), and Australia ($43.5 million).The film had a $28.7 million opening weekend in China.
A week after its debut, China's movie exhibitors dropped the film's showtimes by 90%.
The film grossed $910,000 in its third weekend, dropping to ninth place at the Chinese box office, overshadowed by new releases including Bollywood film Secret Superstar (2017), Hollywood films
Ferdinand (2017)
and Wonder (2017), and
Chinese film
A Better Tomorrow 2018.
The Last Jedi grossed $42.5 million in China.

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 90% of 476 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.1/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi honors the saga's rich legacy while adding some surprising twists — and delivering all the emotion-rich action fans could hope for."
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 56 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 84 out of 100, The Last Jedi received "universal acclaim".
Metacritic analysis found the film was the 25th-most mentioned film on "best of the year" film rankings and the 22nd-most mentioned on "best of the decade" film rankings.
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film four stars out of four, praising the surprises and risks that it took, writing that "The movie works equally well as an earnest adventure full of passionate heroes and villains and a meditation on sequels and franchise properties", in which the film "includes multiple debates over whether one should replicate or reject the stories and symbols of the past.
"
Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the cast and the direction, and the film "ranks with the very best Star Wars epics (even the pinnacle that is The Empire Strikes Back) by pointing the way ahead to a next generation of skywalkers".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the action sequences and humor, said that the film "doesn't pack quite the same emotional punch [as The Force Awakens] and it lags a bit in the second half,
[but] this is still a worthy chapter in the Star Wars franchise", and containing a few callbacks of "previous characters and iconic moments.
"Will Gompertz, arts editor of BBC News, gave the film four stars out of five, writing "Rian Johnson [...] has not ruined your Christmas with a turkey.
His gift to you is a cracker, a blockbuster movie packed with invention, wit, and action galore.
"
The unpredictability of the plot was appreciated by reviewers such as Alex Leadbeater of Screen Rant, who commented specifically that the death of Snoke was "the best movie twist in years".
Creator of the franchise George Lucas, who was not involved with the film's production, described The Last Jedi as "beautifully made" shortly after its release.
His reaction to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens was generally more negative.
Conversely, Richard Brody of The New Yorker wrote that the film "comes off as a work that's ironed out, flattened down, appallingly purified."
Kate Taylor of The Globe and Mail gave the film two stars out of four, saying the film suffered from too many new additions, and writing the film that "seeks to uphold a giant cultural legacy, this unfolding trilogy struggles to maintain a balance that often seems just out of reach."
Owen Gleiberman of Variety criticized the film for being too derivative of the past movies by saying that "it's now repeating things that have already been repeated", with such attempts by having a "mood and darkening design of The Empire Strikes Back", making the sequel trilogy becoming "an official monument to nostalgia."
===
Audience reception ===
Audience reception measured by scientific polling methods was highly positive.
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, and those at PostTrak gave the film an 89% overall positive score, a 79% "definite recommend", and a rare five-star rating.
User-generated scores at Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic were more negative.
At Rotten Tomatoes, 42% of users rated the film 3.5 stars or higher out of 5, while at Metacritic, the average user score is 4.2 out of 10.
Audience scores on such sites require only registration and do not ensure that contributing voters have seen the film.
Several reviewers speculated that coordinated vote brigading from internet groups and bots contributed to the low scores.
Quartz noted that some new accounts gave negative ratings to both The Last Jedi and Thor: Ragnarok (2017), while Bleeding Cool stated that reviews for Thor: Ragnarok had tapered off but then "skyrocketed".
In response to tampering claims shortly after the film's release, a Fandango executive stated that Rotten Tomatoes detected no unusual activity on The Last Jedi aside from a noticeable "uptick in the number of written user reviews".
In 2019, a Rotten Tomatoes spokesperson said the film had been "seriously targeted" by a review-bombing campaign.
Reviewers characterized The Last Jedi as divisive among audiences.
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox found that dissatisfied fans saw the film as too progressive, disliked its humor, plot, or character arcs, or felt betrayed that it ignored fan theories.
Other reviewers made similar observations.
Particularly divisive was the reveal that Rey's parents are insignificant; many fans had expected her to be Luke's daughter or to share a lineage with another character from the original trilogy.
There was also sentiment that Snoke's character was underdeveloped and that Luke's actions contradicted his previous heroic portrayal.
Reviewers stated that fan theories were held so strongly among some viewers that it was difficult for them to accept different stories, but that other viewers appreciated the film's action, tone, and deviation from Star Wars tradition.

===
Accolades ===


==
Sequel ==
The Rise of Skywalker, the final installment of the sequel trilogy, was released on December 20, 2019.
Colin Trevorrow was expected to direct the film, but on September 5, 2017, Lucasfilm announced that he had stepped down.
A week later, Lucasfilm announced that J. J. Abrams would return to direct the film and co-write it with Chris Terrio.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars: The Last Jedi at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: The Last Jedi at Disney A to Z
Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life.
About 29.2% of Earth's surface is land consisting of continents and islands.
The remaining 70.8% is covered with water, mostly by oceans, seas, gulfs, and other salt-water bodies, but also by lakes, rivers, and other fresh water, which together constitute the hydrosphere.
Much of Earth's polar regions are covered in ice.
Earth's outer layer is divided into several rigid tectonic plates that migrate across the surface over many millions of years, while its interior remains active with a solid iron inner core, a liquid outer core that generates Earth's magnetic field, and a convective mantle that drives plate tectonics.

Earth's atmosphere consists mostly of nitrogen and oxygen.
More solar energy is received by tropical regions than polar regions, and is redistributed by atmospheric and ocean circulation.
Greenhouse gases also play an important role in regulating the surface temperature.
A region's climate is not only determined by latitude, but also by elevation, and by proximity to moderating oceans, among other factors.
Severe weather, such as tropical cyclones, thunderstorms, and heat waves, occurs in most areas and has a large impact on life.

Earth's gravity interacts with other objects in space, especially the Moon, which is Earth's only natural satellite.
Earth orbits around the Sun in about 365.25 days.
Earth's axis of rotation is tilted with respect to its orbital plane, producing seasons on Earth.
The gravitational interaction between Earth and the Moon causes tides, stabilizes Earth's orientation on its axis, and gradually slows its rotation.
Earth is the densest planet in the Solar System and the largest and most massive of the four rocky planets.

According to radiometric dating estimation and other evidence, Earth formed over 4.5 billion years ago.
Within the first billion years of Earth's history, life appeared in the oceans and began to affect Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the proliferation of anaerobic and, later, aerobic organisms.
Some geological evidence indicates that life may have arisen as early as 4.1 billion years ago.
Since then, the combination of Earth's distance from the Sun, physical properties and geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive.
In the history of life on Earth, biodiversity has gone through long periods of expansion, occasionally punctuated by mass extinctions.
Over 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth are extinct.
Almost 8 billion humans live on Earth and depend on its biosphere and natural resources for their survival.
Humans increasingly impact Earth's surface, hydrology, atmospheric processes and other life.

==
Etymology ==
The modern English word  Earth developed, via Middle English, from an Old English noun most often spelled eorðe.
It has cognates in every Germanic language, and their ancestral root has been reconstructed as *erþō.
In its earliest attestation, the word eorðe was already being used to translate the many senses of Latin terra and Greek γῆ
gē: the ground, its soil, dry land, the human world, the surface of the world (including the sea), and the globe itself.
As with Roman Terra/Tellūs and Greek Gaia, Earth may have been a personified goddess in Germanic paganism: late Norse mythology included Jörð ('Earth'), a giantess often given as the mother of Thor.
Historically, earth has been written in lowercase.
From early Middle English, its definite sense as "the globe" was expressed as the earth.
By Early Modern English, many nouns were capitalized, and the earth was also written the Earth, particularly when referenced along with other heavenly bodies.
More recently, the name is sometimes simply given as Earth, by analogy with the names of the other planets, though earth and forms with the remain common.
House styles now vary:
Oxford spelling recognizes the lowercase form as the most common, with the capitalized form an acceptable variant.
Another convention capitalizes "Earth" when appearing as a name (for example, "Earth's atmosphere") but writes it in lowercase when preceded by the (for example, "the atmosphere of the earth").
It almost always appears in lowercase in colloquial expressions such as "what on earth are you doing?"Occasionally, the name Terra  is used in scientific writing and especially in science fiction to distinguish humanity's inhabited planet from others, while in poetry Tellus  has been used to denote personification of the Earth..
Terra is also the name of the planet in some Romance languages (languages that evolved from Latin) like Italian and Portuguese, while in other Romance languages
​​the word gave rise to names with slightly altered spellings (like the Spanish Tierra and the French Terre).
The Latinate form Gæa or Gaea
(English: ) of the Greek poetic name Gaia (Γαῖα; Ancient Greek:
[ɡâi̯.a] or [ɡâj.ja]) is rare, though the alternative spelling Gaia has become common due to the Gaia hypothesis, in which case its pronunciation is  rather than the more classical English .There are a number of adjectives for the planet Earth.
From Earth itself comes earthly.
From the Latin Terra comes terran , terrestrial , and (via French) terrene , and from the Latin Tellus comes tellurian  and telluric.

==
Chronology ==


===
Formation ===
The oldest material found in the Solar System is dated to 4.5682+0.0002−0.0004 Ga (billion years) ago.
By 4.54±0.04 Ga the primordial Earth had formed.
The bodies in the Solar System formed and evolved with the Sun.
In theory, a solar nebula partitions a volume out of a molecular cloud by gravitational collapse, which begins to spin and flatten into a circumstellar disk, and then the planets grow out of that disk with the Sun.
A nebula contains gas, ice grains, and dust (including primordial nuclides).
According to nebular theory, planetesimals formed by accretion, with the primordial Earth being estimated as likely taking anywhere from 70 to 100 million years to form.
Estimates of the age of the Moon range from 4.5 Ga to significantly younger.
A leading hypothesis is that it was formed by accretion from material loosed from Earth after a Mars-sized object with about 10% of Earth's mass, named Theia, collided with Earth.
It hit Earth with a glancing blow and some of its mass merged with Earth.
Between approximately 4.1 and 3.8 Ga, numerous asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment caused significant changes to the greater surface environment of the Moon and, by inference, to that of Earth.

===
Geological history ===
Earth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing.
Water vapor from these sources condensed into the oceans, augmented by water and ice from asteroids, protoplanets, and comets.
Sufficient water to fill the oceans may have been on Earth since it formed.
In this model, atmospheric greenhouse gases kept the oceans from freezing when the newly forming Sun had only 70% of its current luminosity.
By 3.5 Ga, Earth's magnetic field was established, which helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind.
As the molten outer layer of Earth cooled it formed the first solid crust, which is thought to have been mafic in composition.
The first continental crust, which was more felsic in composition, formed by the partial melting of this mafic crust.
The presence of grains of the mineral zircon of Hadean age in Eoarchean sedimentary rocks suggests that at least some felsic crust existed as early as 4.4 Ga, only 140 Ma after Earth's formation.
There are two main models of how this initial small volume of continental crust evolved to reach its current abundance: (1) a relatively steady growth up to the present day, which is supported by the radiometric dating of continental crust globally and (2) an initial rapid growth in the volume of continental crust during the Archean, forming the bulk of the continental crust that now exists, which is supported by isotopic evidence from hafnium in zircons and neodymium in sedimentary rocks.
The two models and the data that support them can be reconciled by large-scale recycling of the continental crust, particularly during the early stages of Earth's history.
New continental crust forms as a result of plate tectonics, a process ultimately driven by the continuous loss of heat from Earth's interior.
Over the period of hundreds of millions of years, tectonic forces have caused areas of continental crust to group together to form supercontinents that have subsequently broken apart.
At approximately 750 Ma, one of the earliest known supercontinents, Rodinia, began to break apart.
The continents later recombined to form Pannotia at 600–540 Ma, then finally Pangaea, which also began to break apart at 180 Ma.
The most recent pattern of ice ages began about 40 Ma, and then intensified during the Pleistocene about 3 Ma.
High- and middle-latitude regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw, repeating about every 21,000, 41,000 and 100,000 years.
The Last Glacial Period, colloquially called the "last ice age", covered large parts of the continents, up to the middle latitudes, in ice and ended about 11,700 years ago.
===
Origin of life and evolution ===
Chemical reactions led to the first self-replicating molecules about four billion years ago.
A half billion years later, the last common ancestor of all current life arose.
The evolution of photosynthesis allowed the Sun's energy to be harvested directly by life forms.
The resultant molecular oxygen (O2) accumulated in the atmosphere and due to interaction with ultraviolet solar radiation, formed a protective ozone layer (O3) in the upper atmosphere.
The incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of complex cells called eukaryotes.
True multicellular organisms formed as cells within colonies became increasingly specialized.
Aided by the absorption of harmful ultraviolet radiation by the ozone layer, life colonized Earth's surface.
Among the earliest fossil evidence for life is microbial mat fossils found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone in Western Australia, biogenic graphite found in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks in Western Greenland, and remains of biotic material found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia.
The earliest direct evidence of life on Earth is contained in 3.45 billion-year-old Australian rocks showing fossils of microorganisms.
During the Neoproterozoic, 1000 to 541 Ma, much of Earth might have been covered in ice.
This hypothesis has been termed "Snowball Earth", and it is of particular interest because it preceded the Cambrian explosion, when multicellular life forms significantly increased in complexity.
Following the Cambrian explosion, 535 Ma, there have been at least five major mass extinctions and many minor ones.
Apart from the proposed current Holocene extinction event, the most recent was 66 Ma, when an asteroid impact triggered the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles, but largely spared small animals such as insects, mammals, lizards and birds.
Mammalian life has diversified over the past 66 Mys, and several million years ago an African ape gained the ability to stand upright.
This facilitated tool use and encouraged communication that provided the nutrition and stimulation needed for a larger brain, which led to the evolution of humans.
The development of agriculture, and then civilization, led to humans having an influence on Earth and the nature and quantity of other life forms that continues to this day.

===
Future ===
Because carbon dioxide (CO2) has a long lifespan in the atmosphere, moderate human CO2 emissions may postpone the next glacial inception by 100,000 years.
Earth's expected long-term future is tied to that of the Sun.
Over the next 1.1 billion years, solar luminosity will increase by 10%, and over the next 3.5 billion years by 40%.
Earth's increasing surface temperature will accelerate the inorganic carbon cycle, reducing CO2 concentration to levels lethally low for plants (10 ppm for C4 photosynthesis) in approximately 100–900 million years.
The lack of vegetation will result in the loss of oxygen in the atmosphere, making animal life impossible.
Due to the increased luminosity, Earth's mean temperature may reach 100 °C (212 °F) in 1.5 billion years, and all ocean water will evaporate and be lost to space within an estimated 1.6 to 3 billion years.
Even if the Sun were stable, a fraction of the water in the modern oceans will descend to the mantle, due to reduced steam venting from mid-ocean ridges.
The Sun will evolve to become a red giant in about 5 billion years.
Models predict that the Sun will expand to roughly 1 AU (150 million km; 93 million mi), about 250 times its present radius.
Earth's fate is less clear.
As a red giant, the Sun will lose roughly 30% of its mass, so, without tidal effects, Earth will move to an orbit 1.7 AU (250 million km; 160 million mi) from the Sun when the star reaches its maximum radius.

==
Physical characteristics ==


===
Size and shape ===
The shape of Earth is nearly spherical.
There is a small flattening at the poles and bulging around the equator due to Earth's rotation, so that a better approximation of Earth's shape is an oblate spheroid, whose equatorial diameter is 43 kilometres (27 mi) larger than the pole-to-pole diameter.
The point on the surface farthest from Earth's center of mass is the summit of the equatorial Chimborazo volcano in Ecuador (6,384.4 km or 3,967.1 mi).
The average diameter of the reference spheroid is 12,742 kilometres (7,918 mi).
Local topography deviates from this idealized spheroid, although on a global scale these deviations are small compared to Earth's radius: the maximum deviation of only 0.17% is at the Mariana Trench (10,925 metres or 35,843 feet below local sea level), whereas Mount Everest (8,848 metres or 29,029 feet above local sea level) represents a deviation of 0.14%.In geodesy, the exact shape that Earth's oceans would adopt in the absence of land and perturbations such as tides and winds is called the geoid.
More precisely, the geoid is the surface of gravitational equipotential at mean sea level (MSL).Sea surface topography are water deviations from MSL, analogous to land topography.

===
Chemical composition ===
Earth's mass is approximately 5.97×1024 kg (5,970 Yg).
It is composed mostly of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminum (1.4%), with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements.
Due to mass segregation, the core region is estimated to be primarily composed of iron (88.8%), with smaller amounts of nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than 1% trace elements.
The most common rock constituents of the crust are nearly all oxides: chlorine, sulfur, and fluorine
are the important exceptions to this and their total amount in any rock is usually much less than 1%.
Over 99% of the crust is composed of 11 oxides, principally silica, alumina, iron oxides, lime, magnesia, potash, and soda.

===
Internal structure ===
Earth's interior, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into layers by their chemical or physical (rheological) properties.
The outer layer is a chemically distinct silicate solid crust, which is underlain by a highly viscous solid mantle.
The crust is separated from the mantle by the Mohorovičić discontinuity.
The thickness of the crust varies from about 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) under the oceans to 30–50 km (19–31 mi) for the continents.
The crust and the cold, rigid, top of the upper mantle are collectively known as the lithosphere, which is divided into independently moving tectonic plates.
Beneath the lithosphere is the asthenosphere, a relatively low-viscosity layer on which the lithosphere rides.
Important changes in crystal structure within the mantle occur at 410 and 660 km (250 and 410 mi) below the surface, spanning a transition zone that separates the upper and lower mantle.
Beneath the mantle, an extremely low viscosity liquid outer core lies above a solid inner core.
Earth's inner core may be rotating at a slightly higher angular velocity than the remainder of the planet, advancing by 0.1–0.5° per year, although both somewhat higher and much lower rates have also been proposed.
The radius of the inner core is about one fifth of that of Earth.

Density increases with depth, as described in the table on the right.

=== Heat ===
The major heat-producing isotopes within Earth are potassium-40, uranium-238, and thorium-232.
At the center, the temperature may be up to 6,000 °C (10,830 °F), and the pressure could reach 360 GPa (52 million psi).
Because much of the heat is provided by radioactive decay, scientists postulate that early in Earth's history, before isotopes with short half-lives were depleted, Earth's heat production was much higher.
At approximately 3 Gyr, twice the present-day heat would have been produced, increasing the rates of mantle convection and plate tectonics, and allowing the production of uncommon igneous rocks such as komatiites that are rarely formed today.

The mean heat loss from Earth is 87 mW m−2, for a global heat loss of 4.42×1013
W. A portion of the core's thermal energy is transported toward the crust by mantle plumes, a form of convection consisting of upwellings of higher-temperature rock.
These plumes can produce hotspots and flood basalts.
More of the heat in Earth is lost through plate tectonics, by mantle upwelling associated with mid-ocean ridges.
The final major mode of heat loss is through conduction through the lithosphere, the majority of which occurs under the oceans because the crust there is much thinner than that of the continents.

===
Tectonic plates ===
Earth's mechanically rigid outer layer, the lithosphere, is divided into tectonic plates.
These plates are rigid segments that move relative to each other at one of three boundaries types: at convergent boundaries, two plates come together; at divergent boundaries, two plates are pulled apart; and at transform boundaries, two plates slide past one another laterally.
Along these plate boundaries, earthquakes, volcanic activity, mountain-building, and oceanic trench formation can occur.
The tectonic plates ride on top of the asthenosphere, the solid but less-viscous part of the upper mantle that can flow and move along with the plates.
As the tectonic plates migrate, oceanic crust is subducted under the leading edges of the plates at convergent boundaries.
At the same time, the upwelling of mantle material at divergent boundaries creates mid-ocean ridges.
The combination of these processes recycles the oceanic crust back into the mantle.
Due to this recycling, most of the ocean floor is less than 100 Ma old.
The oldest oceanic crust is located in the Western Pacific and is estimated to be 200 Ma old.
By comparison, the oldest dated continental crust is 4,030 Ma, although zircons have been found preserved as clasts within Eoarchean sedimentary rocks that give ages up to 4,400 Ma, indicating that at least some continental crust existed at that time.
The seven major plates are the Pacific, North American, Eurasian, African, Antarctic, Indo-Australian, and South American.
Other notable plates include the Arabian Plate, the Caribbean Plate, the Nazca Plate off the west coast of South America and the Scotia Plate in the southern Atlantic Ocean.
The Australian Plate fused with the Indian Plate between 50 and 55 Ma.
The fastest-moving plates are the oceanic plates, with the Cocos Plate advancing at a rate of 75 mm/a (3.0 in/year) and the Pacific Plate moving
52–69 mm/a (2.0–2.7 in/year).
At the other extreme, the slowest-moving plate is the South American Plate, progressing at a typical rate of 10.6 mm/a (0.42 in/year).

===
Surface ===
The total surface area of Earth is about 510 million km2 (197 million sq mi).
Of this, 70.8%, or 361.13 million km2 (139.43 million sq mi), is below sea level and covered by ocean water.
Below the ocean's surface are much of the continental shelf, mountains, volcanoes, oceanic trenches, submarine canyons, oceanic plateaus, abyssal plains, and a globe-spanning mid-ocean ridge system.
The remaining 29.2%, or 148.94 million km2 (57.51 million sq mi), not covered by water has terrain that varies greatly from place to place and consists of mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other landforms.
The elevation of the land surface varies from the low point of −418 m (−1,371 ft) at the Dead Sea, to a maximum altitude of 8,848 m (29,029 ft) at the top of Mount Everest.
The mean height of land above sea level is about 797 m (2,615 ft).The continental crust consists of lower density material such as the igneous rocks granite and andesite.
Less common is basalt, a denser volcanic rock that is the primary constituent of the ocean floors.
Sedimentary rock is formed from the accumulation of sediment that becomes buried and compacted together.
Nearly 75% of the continental surfaces are covered by sedimentary rocks, although they form about 5% of the crust.
The third form of rock material found on Earth is metamorphic rock, which is created from the transformation of pre-existing rock types through high pressures, high temperatures, or both.
The most abundant silicate minerals on Earth's surface include quartz, feldspars, amphibole, mica, pyroxene and olivine.
Common carbonate minerals include calcite (found in limestone) and dolomite.
Erosion and tectonics, volcanic eruptions, flooding, weathering, glaciation, the growth of coral reefs, and meteorite impacts are among the processes that constantly reshape Earth's surface over geological time.
The pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's continental surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes.
The total arable land is 10.9% of the land surface, with 1.3% being permanent cropland.
Close to 40% of Earth's land surface is used for agriculture, or an estimated 16.7 million km2 (6.4 million sq mi) of cropland and 33.5 million km2 (12.9 million sq mi) of pastureland.

===
Gravitational field ===
The gravity of Earth is the acceleration that is imparted to objects due to the distribution of mass within Earth.
Near Earth's surface, gravitational acceleration is approximately 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2).
Local differences in topography, geology, and deeper tectonic structure cause local and broad, regional differences in Earth's gravitational field, known as gravity anomalies.

===
Magnetic field ===
The main part of Earth's magnetic field is generated in the core, the site of a dynamo process that converts the kinetic energy of thermally and compositionally driven convection into electrical and magnetic field energy.
The field extends outwards from the core, through the mantle, and up to Earth's surface, where it is, approximately, a dipole.
The poles of the dipole are located close to Earth's geographic poles.
At the equator of the magnetic field, the magnetic-field strength at the surface is 3.05×10−5 T, with a magnetic dipole moment of 7.79×1022 Am2 at epoch 2000, decreasing nearly 6% per century.
The convection movements in the core are chaotic; the magnetic poles drift and periodically change alignment.
This causes secular variation of the main field and field reversals at irregular intervals averaging a few times every million years.
The most recent reversal occurred approximately 700,000 years ago.

====
Magnetosphere ====
The extent of Earth's magnetic field in space defines the magnetosphere.
Ions and electrons of the solar wind are deflected by the magnetosphere; solar wind pressure compresses the dayside of the magnetosphere, to about 10 Earth radii, and extends the nightside magnetosphere into a long tail.
Because the velocity of the solar wind is greater than the speed at which waves propagate through the solar wind, a supersonic bow shock precedes the dayside magnetosphere within the solar wind.
Charged particles are contained within the magnetosphere; the plasmasphere is defined by low-energy particles that essentially follow magnetic field lines as Earth rotates.
The ring current is defined by medium-energy particles that drift relative to the geomagnetic field, but with paths that are still dominated by the magnetic field, and the Van Allen radiation belts are formed by high-energy particles whose motion is essentially random, but contained in the magnetosphere.
During magnetic storms and substorms, charged particles can be deflected from the outer magnetosphere and especially the magnetotail, directed along field lines into Earth's ionosphere, where atmospheric atoms can be excited and ionized, causing the aurora.

== Orbit and rotation ==


===
Rotation ===
Earth's rotation period relative to the Sun—its mean solar day—is 86,400 seconds of mean solar time (86,400.0025 SI seconds).
Because Earth's solar day is now slightly longer than it was during the 19th century due to tidal deceleration, each day varies between 0 and 2 ms longer than the mean solar day.
Earth's rotation period relative to the fixed stars, called its stellar day by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), is 86,164.0989 seconds of mean solar time (UT1), or 23h 56m 4.0989s.
Earth's rotation period relative to the precessing or moving mean March equinox (when the Sun is at 90° on the equator), is 86,164.0905 seconds of mean solar time (UT1) (23h 56m 4.0905s).
Thus the sidereal day is shorter than the stellar day by about 8.4 ms.
Apart from meteors within the atmosphere and low-orbiting satellites, the main apparent motion of celestial bodies in Earth's sky is to the west at a rate of 15°/h = 15'/min.
For bodies near the celestial equator, this is equivalent to an apparent diameter of the Sun or the Moon every two minutes; from Earth's surface, the apparent sizes of the Sun and the Moon are approximately the same.

===
Orbit ===
Earth orbits the Sun at an average distance of about 150 million km (93 million mi)
every 365.2564 mean solar days, or one sidereal year.
This gives an apparent movement of the Sun eastward with respect to the stars at a rate of about 1°/day, which is one apparent Sun or Moon diameter every 12 hours.
Due to this motion, on average it takes 24 hours—a solar day—for Earth to complete a full rotation about its axis so that the Sun returns to the meridian.
The orbital speed of Earth averages about 29.78 km/
s (107,200 km/h; 66,600 mph), which is fast enough to travel a distance equal to Earth's diameter, about 12,742 km (7,918 mi), in seven minutes, and the distance to the Moon, 384,000 km (239,000 mi), in about 3.5 hours.
The Moon and Earth orbit a common barycenter every 27.32 days relative to the background stars.
When combined with the Earth–Moon system's common orbit around the Sun, the period of the synodic month, from new moon to new moon, is 29.53 days.
Viewed from the celestial north pole, the motion of Earth, the Moon, and their axial rotations are all counterclockwise.
Viewed from a vantage point above the north poles of both the Sun and Earth, Earth orbits in a counterclockwise direction about the Sun.
The orbital and axial planes are not precisely aligned: Earth's axis is tilted some 23.44 degrees from the perpendicular to the Earth–Sun plane (the ecliptic), and the Earth–
Moon plane is tilted up to ±5.1 degrees against the Earth–Sun plane.
Without this tilt, there would be an eclipse every two weeks, alternating between lunar eclipses and solar eclipses.
The Hill sphere, or the sphere of gravitational influence, of Earth is about 1.5 million km (930,000 mi) in radius.
This is the maximum distance at which Earth's gravitational influence is stronger than the more distant Sun and planets.
Objects must orbit Earth within this radius, or they can become unbound by the gravitational perturbation of the Sun.
Earth, along with the Solar System, is situated in the Milky Way and orbits about 28,000 light-years from its center.
It is about 20 light-years above the galactic plane in the Orion Arm.

===
Axial tilt and seasons ===
The axial tilt of Earth is approximately 23.439281° with the axis of its orbit plane, always pointing towards the Celestial Poles.
Due to Earth's axial tilt, the amount of sunlight reaching any given point on the surface varies over the course of the year.
This causes the seasonal change in climate, with summer in the Northern Hemisphere occurring when the Tropic of Cancer is facing the Sun, and in the Southern Hemisphere when the Tropic of Capricorn faces the Sun.
In each instance, winter occurs simultaneously in the opposite hemisphere.
During the summer, the day lasts longer, and the Sun climbs higher in the sky.
In winter, the climate becomes cooler and the days shorter.
Above the Arctic Circle and below the Antarctic Circle there is no daylight at all for part of the year, causing a polar night, and this night extends for several months at the poles themselves.
These same latitudes also experience a midnight sun, where the sun remains visible all day.
By astronomical convention, the four seasons can be determined by the solstices—the points in the orbit of maximum axial tilt toward or away from the Sun—and the equinoxes, when Earth's rotational axis is aligned with its orbital axis.
In the Northern Hemisphere, winter solstice currently occurs around 21 December; summer solstice is near 21 June, spring equinox is around 20 March and autumnal equinox is about 22 or 23 September.
In the Southern Hemisphere, the situation is reversed, with the summer and winter solstices exchanged and the spring and autumnal equinox dates swapped.
The angle of Earth's axial tilt is relatively stable over long periods of time.
Its axial tilt does undergo nutation; a slight, irregular motion with a main period of 18.6 years.
The orientation (rather than the angle) of Earth's axis also changes over time, precessing around in a complete circle over each 25,800-year cycle; this precession is the reason for the difference between a sidereal year and a tropical year.
Both of these motions are caused by the varying attraction of the Sun and the Moon on Earth's equatorial bulge.
The poles also migrate a few meters across Earth's surface.
This polar motion has multiple, cyclical components, which collectively are termed quasiperiodic motion.
In addition to an annual component to this motion, there is a 14-month cycle called the Chandler wobble.
Earth's rotational velocity also varies in a phenomenon known as length-of-day variation.
In modern times, Earth's perihelion occurs around 3 January, and its aphelion around 4 July.
These dates change over time due to precession and other orbital factors, which follow cyclical patterns known as Milankovitch cycles.
The changing Earth–Sun distance causes an increase of about 6.8% in solar energy reaching Earth at perihelion relative to aphelion.
Because the Southern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun at about the same time that Earth reaches the closest approach to the Sun, the Southern Hemisphere receives slightly more energy from the Sun than does the northern over the course of a year.
This effect is much less significant than the total energy change due to the axial tilt, and most of the excess energy is absorbed by the higher proportion of water in the Southern Hemisphere.

==
Earth-Moon system ==


===
Moon ===
The Moon is a relatively large, terrestrial, planet-like natural satellite, with a diameter about one-quarter of Earth's.
It is the largest moon in the Solar System relative to the size of its planet, although Charon is larger relative to the dwarf planet Pluto.
The natural satellites of other planets are also referred to as "moons", after Earth's.
The most widely accepted theory of the Moon's origin, the giant-impact hypothesis, states that it formed from the collision of a Mars-size protoplanet called Theia with the early Earth.
This hypothesis explains (among other things)
the Moon's relative lack of iron and volatile elements and the fact that its composition is nearly identical to that of Earth's crust.
The gravitational attraction between Earth and the Moon causes tides on Earth.
The same effect on the Moon has led to its tidal locking: its rotation period is the same as the time it takes to orbit Earth.
As a result, it always presents the same face to the planet.
As the Moon orbits Earth, different parts of its face are illuminated by the Sun, leading to the lunar phases.
Due to their tidal interaction, the Moon recedes from Earth at the rate of approximately 38 mm/a (1.5 in/year).
Over millions of years, these tiny modifications—and the lengthening of Earth's day by about 23 µs/yr—add up to significant changes.
During the Ediacaran period, for example, (approximately 620 Ma) there were 400±7 days in a year, with each day lasting 21.9±0.4 hours.
The Moon may have dramatically affected the development of life by moderating the planet's climate.
Paleontological evidence and computer simulations show that Earth's axial tilt is stabilized by tidal interactions with the Moon.
Some theorists think that without this stabilization against the torques applied by the Sun and planets to Earth's equatorial bulge, the rotational axis might be chaotically unstable, exhibiting large changes over millions of years, as is the case for Mars, though this is disputed.
Viewed from Earth, the Moon is just far enough away to have almost the same apparent-sized disk as the Sun.
The angular size (or solid angle) of these two bodies match because, although the Sun's diameter is about 400 times as large as the Moon's, it is also 400 times more distant.
This allows total and annular solar eclipses to occur on Earth.
===
Asteroids and artificial satellites ===
Earth's co-orbital asteroids population consists of quasi-satellites, objects with a horseshoe orbit and trojans.
There are at least five quasi-satellites, including 469219 Kamoʻoalewa.
A trojan asteroid companion, 2010 TK7, is librating around the leading Lagrange triangular point, L4, in Earth's orbit around the Sun.
The tiny near-Earth asteroid 2006
RH120 makes close approaches to the Earth–Moon system roughly every twenty years.
During these approaches, it can orbit Earth for brief periods of time.
As of April 2020, there are 2,666 operational, human-made satellites orbiting Earth.
There are also inoperative satellites, including Vanguard 1, the oldest satellite currently in orbit, and over 16,000 pieces of tracked space debris.
Earth's largest artificial satellite is the International Space Station.

==
Hydrosphere ==
The abundance of water on Earth's surface is a unique feature that distinguishes the "Blue Planet" from other planets in the Solar System.
Earth's hydrosphere consists chiefly of the oceans, but technically includes all water surfaces in the world, including inland seas, lakes, rivers, and underground waters down to a depth of 2,000 m (6,600 ft).
The mass of the oceans is approximately 1.35×1018 metric tons or about 1/4400 of Earth's total mass.
The oceans cover an area of 361.8 million km2 (139.7 million sq mi) with a mean depth of 3,682 m (12,080 ft), resulting in an estimated volume of 1.332 billion km3 (320 million cu mi).
If all of Earth's crustal surface were at the same elevation as a smooth sphere, the depth of the resulting world ocean would be 2.7 to 2.8 km (1.68 to 1.74 mi).
About 97.5% of the water is saline; the remaining 2.5% is fresh water.
Most fresh water, about 68.7%, is present as ice in ice caps and glaciers.
In Earth's coldest regions, snow survives over the summer and changes into ice.
This accumulated snow and ice eventually forms into glaciers, bodies of ice that flow under the influence of their own gravity.
Alpine glaciers form in mountainous areas, whereas vast ice sheets form over land in polar regions.
The flow of glaciers erodes the surface changing it dramatically, with the formation of U-shaped valleys and other landforms.
Sea ice in the Arctic covers an area about as big as the United States, although it is quickly retreating as a consequence of climate change.
The average salinity of Earth's oceans is about 35 grams of salt per kilogram of sea water (3.5% salt).
Most of this salt was released from volcanic activity or extracted from cool igneous rocks.
The oceans are also a reservoir of dissolved atmospheric gases, which are essential for the survival of many aquatic life forms.
Sea water has an important influence on the world's climate, with the oceans acting as a large heat reservoir.
Shifts in the oceanic temperature distribution can cause significant weather shifts, such as the El Niño–Southern Oscillation.

==
Atmosphere ==
The atmospheric pressure at Earth's sea level averages 101.325 kPa (14.696 psi), with a scale height of about 8.5 km (5.3 mi).
A dry atmosphere is composed of 78.084% nitrogen, 20.946% oxygen, 0.934% argon, and trace amounts of carbon dioxide and other gaseous molecules.
Water vapor content varies between 0.01% and 4% but averages about 1%.
The height of the troposphere varies with latitude, ranging between 8 km (5 mi) at the poles to 17 km (11 mi) at the equator, with some variation resulting from weather and seasonal factors.
Earth's biosphere has significantly altered its atmosphere.
Oxygenic photosynthesis evolved 2.7 Gya, forming the primarily nitrogen–oxygen atmosphere of today.
This change enabled the proliferation of aerobic organisms and, indirectly, the formation of the ozone layer due to the subsequent conversion of atmospheric O2 into O3.
The ozone layer blocks ultraviolet solar radiation, permitting life on land.
Other atmospheric functions important to life include transporting water vapor, providing useful gases, causing small meteors to burn up before they strike the surface, and moderating temperature.
This last phenomenon is known as the greenhouse effect: trace molecules within the atmosphere serve to capture thermal energy emitted from the ground, thereby raising the average temperature.
Water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone are the primary greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Without this heat-retention effect, the average surface temperature would be −18 °C (0 °F), in contrast to the current +15 °C (59 °F), and life on Earth probably would not exist in its current form.

===
Weather and climate ===
Earth's atmosphere has no definite boundary, slowly becoming thinner and fading into outer space.
Three-quarters of the atmosphere's mass is contained within the first 11 km (6.8 mi) of the surface.
This lowest layer is called the troposphere.
Energy from the Sun heats this layer, and the surface below, causing expansion of the air.
This lower-density air then rises and is replaced by cooler, higher-density air.
The result is atmospheric circulation that drives the weather and climate through redistribution of thermal energy.

The primary atmospheric circulation bands consist of the trade winds in the equatorial region below 30° latitude and the westerlies in the mid-latitudes between 30° and 60°.
Ocean currents are also important factors in determining climate, particularly the thermohaline circulation that distributes thermal energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions.
The amount of solar energy reaching Earth's surface decreases with increasing latitude.
At higher latitudes, the sunlight reaches the surface at lower angles, and it must pass through thicker columns of the atmosphere.
As a result, the mean annual air temperature at sea level decreases by about 0.4 °C (0.7 °F) per degree of latitude from the equator.
Earth's surface can be subdivided into specific latitudinal belts of approximately homogeneous climate.
Ranging from the equator to the polar regions, these are the tropical (or equatorial), subtropical, temperate and polar climates.
Further factors that affect a location's climates are its proximity to oceans, the oceanic and atmospheric circulation, and topology.
Places close to oceans typically have colder summers and warmer winters, due to the fact that oceans can store large amounts of heat.
The wind transports the cold or the heat of the ocean to the land.
Atmospheric circulation also plays an important role:
San Francisco and Washington DC are both coastal cities at about the same latitude.
San Francisco's climate is significantly more moderate as the prevailing wind direction is from sea to land.
Finally, temperatures decrease with height causing mountainous areas to be colder than low-lying areas.
Water vapor generated through surface evaporation is transported by circulatory patterns in the atmosphere.
When atmospheric conditions permit an uplift of warm, humid air, this water condenses and falls to the surface as precipitation.
Most of the water is then transported to lower elevations by river systems and usually returned to the oceans or deposited into lakes.
This water cycle is a vital mechanism for supporting life on land and is a primary factor in the erosion of surface features over geological periods.
Precipitation patterns vary widely, ranging from several meters of water per year to less than a millimeter.
Atmospheric circulation, topographic features, and temperature differences determine the average precipitation that falls in each region.
The commonly used Köppen climate classification system has five broad groups (humid tropics, arid, humid middle latitudes, continental and cold polar), which are further divided into more specific subtypes.
The Köppen system rates regions based on observed temperature and precipitation.
Surface air temperature can rise to around 55 °C (131 °F) in hot deserts, such as Death Valley, and can fall as low as −89
°C (−128 °F) in Antarctica.
===
Upper atmosphere ===
Above the troposphere, the atmosphere is usually divided into the stratosphere, mesosphere, and thermosphere.
Each layer has a different lapse rate, defining the rate of change in temperature with height.
Beyond these, the exosphere thins out into the magnetosphere, where the geomagnetic fields interact with the solar wind.
Within the stratosphere is the ozone layer, a component that partially shields the surface from ultraviolet light and thus is important for life on Earth.
The Kármán line, defined as 100 km (62 mi) above Earth's surface, is a working definition for the boundary between the atmosphere and outer space.
Thermal energy causes some of the molecules at the outer edge of the atmosphere to increase their velocity to the point where they can escape from Earth's gravity.
This causes a slow but steady loss of the atmosphere into space.
Because unfixed hydrogen has a low molecular mass, it can achieve escape velocity more readily, and it leaks into outer space at a greater rate than other gases.
The leakage of hydrogen into space contributes to the shifting of Earth's atmosphere and surface from an initially reducing state to its current oxidizing one.
Photosynthesis provided a source of free oxygen, but the loss of reducing agents such as hydrogen is thought to have been a necessary precondition for the widespread accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere.
Hence the ability of hydrogen to escape from the atmosphere may have influenced the nature of life that developed on Earth.
In the current, oxygen-rich atmosphere most hydrogen is converted into water before it has an opportunity to escape.
Instead, most of the hydrogen loss comes from the destruction of methane in the upper atmosphere.

==
Life on Earth ==
A planet's life forms inhabit ecosystems, whose total forms the biosphere.
The biosphere is divided into a number of biomes, inhabited by broadly similar plants and animals.
On land, biomes are separated primarily by differences in latitude, height above sea level and humidity.
Terrestrial biomes lying within the Arctic or Antarctic Circles, at high altitudes or in extremely arid areas are relatively barren of plant and animal life; species diversity reaches a peak in humid lowlands at equatorial latitudes.
Estimates of the number of species on Earth today vary; most species have not been described.

Over 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth are extinct.
A planet that can sustain life is termed habitable, even if life did not originate there.
The distance of Earth from the Sun, as well as its orbital eccentricity, rate of rotation, axial tilt, geological history, sustaining atmosphere, and magnetic field all contribute to the current climatic conditions at the surface.
Earth provides liquid water—an environment where complex organic molecules can assemble and interact, and sufficient energy to sustain metabolism.
Plants can take up nutrients from the atmosphere, soils and water.
These nutrients are constantly recycled between different species.
Extreme weather, such as tropical cyclones (including hurricanes and typhoons), occurs over most of Earth's surface and has a large impact on life in those areas.
From 1980 to 2000, these events caused an average of 11,800 human deaths per year.
Many places are subject to earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, tornadoes, blizzards, floods, droughts, wildfires, and other calamities and disasters.
Human impact is felt in many areas due to pollution of the air and water, acid rain, loss of vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation, desertification), loss of wildlife, species extinction, soil degradation, soil depletion and erosion.
There is a scientific consensus that humans are causing global warming by releasing greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
This is driving changes such as the melting of glaciers and ice sheets, a global rise in average sea levels, and significant shifts in weather.

==
Human geography ==
Earth's human population passed seven billion in the early 2010s, and is projected to peak at around ten billion in the second half of the 21st century.
Most of the growth is expected to take place in sub-Saharan Africa.
Human population density varies widely around the world, but a majority live in Asia.
By 2050, 68% of the world's population is expected to be living in urban, rather than rural, areas.
The Northern Hemisphere contains 68% of the world's land mass.
Partly due to the predominance of land mass, 90% of humans live in the Northern Hemisphere.
It is estimated that one-eighth of Earth's surface is suitable for humans to live on—three-quarters of Earth's surface is covered by oceans, leaving one-quarter as land.
Half of that land area is desert (14%), high mountains (27%), or other unsuitable terrains.
States claim the planet's entire land surface, except for parts of Antarctica and a few other unclaimed areas.
Earth has never had a planetwide government, but the United Nations is the leading worldwide intergovernmental organization.
The first human to orbit Earth was Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961.
In total, about 550 people have visited outer space and reached orbit as of November 2018, and, of these, twelve have walked on the Moon.
Normally, the only humans in space are those on the International Space Station.
The station's crew, made up of six people, is usually replaced every six months.
The farthest that humans have traveled from Earth is 400,171 km (248,655 mi), achieved during the Apollo 13 mission in 1970.

===
Natural resources and land use
===
Earth has resources that have been exploited by humans.
Those termed non-renewable resources, such as fossil fuels, only renew over geological timescales.
Large deposits of fossil fuels are obtained from Earth's crust, consisting of coal, petroleum, and natural gas.
These deposits are used by humans both for energy production and as feedstock for chemical production.
Mineral ore bodies have also been formed within the crust through a process of ore genesis, resulting from actions of magmatism, erosion, and plate tectonics.
These metals and other elements are extracted by mining, a process which often brings environmental and health damage.
Earth's biosphere produces many useful biological products for humans, including food, wood, pharmaceuticals, oxygen, and the recycling of organic waste.
The land-based ecosystem depends upon topsoil and fresh water, and the oceanic ecosystem depends on dissolved nutrients washed down from the land.
In 2019, 39 million km2 (15 million sq mi) of Earth's land surface consisted of forest and woodlands, 12 million km2 (4.6 million sq mi) was shrub and grassland, 40 million km2 (15 million sq mi) were used for animal feed production and grazing, and 11 million km2 (4.2 million sq mi) were cultivated as croplands.
Of the 12–14% of ice-free land that is used for croplands, 2 percent point was irrigated in 2015.
Humans use building materials to construct shelters.

== Cultural and historical viewpoint ==
Human cultures have developed many views of the planet.
The standard astronomical symbol of Earth consists of a cross circumscribed by a circle, , representing the four corners of the world.
Earth is sometimes personified as a deity.
In many cultures it is a mother goddess that is also the primary fertility deity.
Creation myths in many religions involve the creation of Earth by a supernatural deity or deities.
The Gaia hypothesis, developed in the mid-20th century, compared Earth's environments and life as a single self-regulating organism leading to broad stabilization of the conditions of habitability.
Images of Earth taken from space, particularly during the Apollo program, have been credited with altering the way that people viewed the planet that they lived on, emphasizing its beauty, uniqueness and apparent fragility.
Scientific investigation has resulted in several culturally transformative shifts in people's view of the planet.
Initial belief in a flat Earth was gradually displaced in Ancient Greece by the idea of a spherical Earth, which was attributed to both the philosophers Pythagoras and Parmenides.
Earth was generally believed to be the center of the universe until the 16th century, when scientists first concluded that it was a moving object, comparable to the other planets in the Solar System.
It was only during the 19th century that geologists realized Earth's age was at least many millions of years.
Lord Kelvin used thermodynamics to estimate the age of Earth to be between 20 million and 400 million years in 1864, sparking a vigorous debate on the subject; it was only when radioactivity and radioactive dating were discovered in the late 19th and early 20th centuries that a reliable mechanism for determining Earth's age was established, proving the planet to be billions of years old.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Earth – Profile –
Solar System Exploration – NASA
Earth Observatory – NASA
Earth – Videos –
International Space Station:
Video (01:02) – Earth (time-lapse)
Video (00:27) –
Earth and auroras
(time-lapse)
Google Earth 3D, interactive map
Interactive 3D visualisation of the Sun, Earth and Moon system
GPlates Portal (University of Sydney)
Geordie Shore is a British reality television series broadcast on MTV and based in Newcastle upon Tyne, England.
It was first broadcast on 24 May 2011, and is the British offshoot of the American show Jersey Shore.
The programme follows the daily lives of 8–12 housemates, as they live together for a number of weeks.
In the first series, the house was located in Jesmond, a suburb of Newcastle.
Since the second series, the show has used a house in the Oceana Business Park in Wallsend.

== Series ==


===
Series 1 (2011) ===
The first series of the show began airing on 24 May 2011 and concluded on 28 June 2011, consisting of six episodes.
It was then followed by a reunion show hosted by Russell Kane where the cast discussed the series in front of an audience.
This episode aired on 5 July 2011, and was followed by a Best Bits special which counted down the best moments from the first series in an episode airing 12 July 2011.
The series included the turbulent relationship of Holly (who entered the house three days late) and Dan coming to an end, the beginning of Gaz and Charlotte's ongoing love/hate relationship, and Jay and Vicky's rocky relationship.
In June 2011, two summer specials based in Magaluf were announced.
These episodes aired from 23 August 2011 to 30 August 2011.
This was the only series to feature Greg Lake.

=== Series 2 (2012) ===
The second series of the show began airing on 31 January 2012 and concluded on 20 March 2012, consisting of eight episodes.
Like the first series, this series included a reunion special and a Best Bits special episode.
The series was confirmed on 15 August 2011 when Geordie Shore was recommissioned for a second series with an extended eight-episode run.
After the Magaluf specials, Greg Lake announced he leaving the show.
Rebecca Walker and Ricci Guarnaccio were cast as replacements.
The series featured Sophie and Joel's rocky relationship coming to an end, Vicky being torn between her boyfriend Dan and new cast member Ricci, Charlotte admitting she'd finally had enough of seeing Gaz with other girls, and the beginning of Holly and James.
For series two the cast moved from their home in Jesmond to a new house in a converted warehouse on the outskirts of the city.

=== Series 3 (2012) ===
The third series of the show began airing on 26 June 2012 and concluded on 14 August 2012, consisting of eight episodes.
After the run of episodes, two Best Bits episodes aired counting down the series' top 10 moments.
Series 3 began filming in early March and aired on MTV in June, it was later confirmed by cast member Gary Beadle via Twitter.
The series is therefore also known as Chaos in Cancun.
This is the last series to include cast members Rebecca Walker and Jay Gardner, who both departed during the final episode.
This series featured Vicky and Ricci's relationship on the rocks before they finally got engaged, Holly and James growing closer when James broke his leg, and more bickering and flirting between Gaz and Charlotte.
=== Series 4 (2012) ===
The fourth series of the show began airing on 6 November 2012 and concluded on 18 December 2012, consisting of eight episodes.
For the first time this series there was no special episodes counting down the best bits.
This was the first series to feature new cast members Daniel Thomas-Tuck and Scott Timlin.
The series included Vicky and Ricci's ongoing arguments continuing to the point of the engagement being temporarily called off, James leaving Holly distraught by the announcement of him having a girlfriend, and a huge bust-up between Vicky and Sophie which had the whole house divided.
During the series, on 11 November 2012, the cast made guest appearances during the 2012 MTV Europe Music Awards where they presented the award for Best Male, which Justin Bieber won.

=== Series 5 (2013) ===
The fifth series of the show began airing on 19 February 2013 and concluded on 16 April 2013, consisting of eight episodes.
The series was followed by another Best Bits episode airing 16 April 2013.
The series was confirmed on 10 January 2013 when MTV announced that the fifth series of Geordie Shore would follow the cast in several locations across Europe including Amsterdam, Barcelona, Prague and Tignes.
Filming for Series 5 began on 14 November 2012, as confirmed by several cast members on Twitter, and concluded in December.
This was the final series to include cast members Daniel Thomas-Tuck and Ricci.

=== Series 6 (2013) ===
The sixth series of the show began airing on 9 July 2013 and concluded on 27 August 2013, consisting of eight episodes.
The series was officially announced on 25 February 2013 when it was revealed the series would be located in Sydney and would air in summer 2013.
Filming for this series began on 2 April as confirmed by cast member Gaz on Twitter.
However, Charlotte was absent from the beginning of filming and joined the remaining cast on 7 April.
The series featured a one off return of former cast member Jay Gardner.
During the series, Charlotte entered the Celebrity Big Brother house to compete in the twelfth series of the show and eventually won on 14 September 2013.

=== Series 7 (2013) ===
The seventh series of the show began airing on 17 September 2013 and concluded on 22 October 2013, consisting of six episodes.
Shooting was suspended when Holly and Vicky were both arrested on a night out for assault during filming.
On 12 July 2013, Sophie was axed from the show after exhibiting offensive behaviour on the night when Holly and Vicky were arrested.
Holly Hagan was cleared on 21 August 2013.
Marnie Simpson, the cousin of Sophie, joined the show for this season.
Jay Gardner also made another one off return during this series.
After the series, on 15 December 2013, in a bid to reach Christmas number one, Gaz released his debut single which features vocals from The Risk, who previously featured in the eighth series of The X Factor.

=== Series 8 (2014) ===
The eighth series of the show began airing on 22 July 2014 and concluded on 9 September 2014, consisting of eight episodes.
The series was confirmed on 22 October 2013 when Holly indicated that Series 7 was not the last and that another series would be filmed.
Filming began for the series on 25 March 2014, and featured two new cast members, Aaron Chalmers and Kyle Christie.
During the series, Ricci entered the Celebrity Big Brother house to participate in the fourteenth series.
He followed in the footsteps of fellow cast member Charlotte who won the series in 2013.
However he was evicted in a double eviction just two days before the final on 10 September.
Ahead of the series, in 2014, Charlotte landed her own TV series, which aired on TLC.
It was also revealed that had Vicky joined the cast of Ex on the Beach.
She was later joined by fellow Geordie Shore cast member Ricci as well as Australian fling Dan Conn who briefly appeared in the sixth series of the show.

=== Series 9 (2014) ===
The ninth series of the show began airing on 28 October 2014 and concluded on 16 December 2014, consisting of eight episodes.
On 15 May 2014, Gaz confirmed that the ninth series would be filmed in July/August 2014 and hinted at it being abroad.
However the series remained in Newcastle.
A new trailer confirmed that Vicky would be in charge, taking the role of 'Queen V' upon its return.
On 28 October 2014, ahead of the Series 9 premiere, Vicky announced that this series would be her last.

=== Series 10 (2015) ===
The tenth series of the show began airing on 7 April 2015 and concluded on 26 May 2015, consisting of eight episodes.
The series of the show was also confirmed on 1 November 2014 when it was revealed by Gary Beadle that filming had commenced.
On 17 November 2014, MTV announced the tenth series would be James' last series.
The tenth series added two new cast members, Chloe Ferry and Nathan Henry.
=== Series 11 (2015) ===
The eleventh series was announced on 23 May 2015 when MTV renewed the series for a further three series.
The show began on 20 October 2015 and concluded on 22 December 2015.
This was the first series not to include original cast member James Tindale after he departed at the start of the previous series.

Series 11 was shot in Greece.
At 10 episodes, it was the longest season to date.
Cast member Kyle Christie departed the series after four seasons.
The cast had traveled to Zante, Malia, Ios, Santorini, Mykonos, and Athens for the series.

=== Series 12 (2016) ===
Series 12 was filmed in October and November 2015 and began airing on 15 March 2016.
It was the first series to include new cast members Chantelle Connelly and Marty McKenna, who had previously appeared on the third series of Ex on the Beach.
Marnie Simpson would also rejoin for the twelfth series having left at the end of the previous series.

===
Big Birthday Battle (2016) ===
On 12 February 2016, MTV announced that cast members, past and present, would be reuniting for a mini-series to celebrate five years of the show.
The series would be a six-part special and would begin on 10 May 2016.
All of the current cast members would return, as well as former cast members Daniel Thomas-Tuck, James Tindale, Jay Gardner, Kyle Christie, Ricci Guarnaccio, and Sophie Kasaei.
The series also featured the show's 100th episode.

On 1 June 2016, original cast member Charlotte Crosby quit the show, making the Birthday Battle her final series.

=== Series 13 (2016) ===
Series 13 was shot in June and July 2016 and began on 25 October 2016.
This series featured the return of former cast members Sophie Kasaei and Kyle Christie, who previously made a brief return during the Big Birthday Battle anniversary series.
This series was filmed on various party islands including Kavos, Ibiza and Magaluf.
On 24 June 2016, it was reported that Chantelle Connelly had quit the show halfway through filming, resulting in this series being her final one.
On 27 September 2016, the previous reports were confirmed with the announcement that Chantelle Connelly had quit the show mid-series.
It was also later announced that this would be Holly Hagan's last series after she quit in the series finale, along with Kyle Christie.

=== Series 14 (2017) ===
The fourteenth series was confirmed on 31 October 2016 when Scotty T announced that he would be taking a break from the series to focus on other commitments.
The series was filmed in November 2016, and began airing on 28 March 2017.
Ahead of the series, it was also confirmed that original cast member Holly had quit the show, following her exit in the previous series.
Eight new cast members joined for this series: Zahida Allen, Chelsea Barber, Sam Bentham, Sarah Goodhart, Abbie Holborn, Elettra Lamborghini, Billy Phillips and Eve Shannon.
Goodhart and Allen both previously appeared on Ex on the Beach, with the former appearing on the third series of the show as the ex-girlfriend of current cast member Marty (before he joined the cast).
Lamborghini has also appeared on Super Shore and participated in the fifth season of Gran Hermano VIP, the Spanish version of Celebrity Big Brother.

=== Series 15 (2017) ===
The fifteenth series was confirmed on 8 August 2017 when a teaser video was released.
The series began on 29 August 2017, and concluded after nine episodes on 17 October 2017.
This was the final series to include Scotty T and Marty McKenna after they were both axed from the show, as well as original cast member Gaz Beadle following his decision to quit.
The series also featured the brief return of Elettra Lamborghini, when the cast jetted off to Rome.
It also features Aaron taking part in his debut
MMA fight in Birmingham.
Former cast member James Tindale made a one-off return during the eighth episode of the series.

=== Series 16 (2018) ===
The sixteenth series was filmed in September 2017 and began on 9 January 2018, and concluded after ten episodes on 13 March 2018.
New cast members for this series include Sam Gowland, who had previously appeared on the third series of Love Island, as well as Steph Snowdon.
However it was later revealed that Steph had been axed from the show and would therefore not return for the seventeenth series.
During this series, cast members Aaron Chalmers and Marnie Simpson both announced that they'd quit the show – therefore this was their final series.

=== Series 17 (2018) ===
The seventeenth series of the show was filmed in February 2018 and began on 15 May 2018.
The series was filmed in Australia rather than Newcastle, making this the second series to be filmed here following the sixth series in 2013.
Former cast member Holly Hagan returned to the show in this series.

Six new cast members joined the series:
Grant Molloy, Adam Guthrie, and four Australians: Alexander MacPherson, Nick Murdoch, Dee Nguyen, and Chrysten Zenoni.
===
Series 18 (2018) ===
The eighteenth series of the show was filmed in July 2018 and began airing on 16 October 2018.
This was the first series to include new cast member Faith Mullen.
Original cast members Holly Hagan and James Tindale returned to the series along with Kyle Christie as part-time cast members, Scotty T also returned as Anna's deputy.

=== Series 19 (2019) ===
The nineteenth series of the show was confirmed in January 2019 when it was announced that filming had already begun.
It began airing in March 2019.
Abbie Holborn and Adam Guthrie returned to the show on a part – time basis.
It also included four new cast members; Beau Brennan, Tahlia Chung, Bethan Kershaw, and Natalie Phillips.
They replaced former cast member Faith Mullen who did not return to the show.

=== Series 20 (2019) ===
The twentieth series of the show began airing on 29 October 2019.
Former cast members James Tindale and Abbie Holburn returned to the series as full-time cast members, while mainstays of the show Holly Hagan, Sophie Kasaei and Scotty T departed the show as series regulars.

=== Series 21 (2020) ===
The twenty-first series of the show began filming in October 2019, it was slated to premiere in April 2020, but due to the COVID-19 pandemic, production on the series was put on hiatus due to restrictions put in place by the UK government, the country where filming is taking place.
The X Factor singer and former Celebrity Big Brother housemate Amelia Lily is confirmed to have joined the cast alongside fellow newcomers Anthony Kennedy and Louis Shaw.
Sam Gowland and Tahlia Chung are the cast members from series 20 not to return to the show.

=== Series 22 (2021) ===
The twenty-second series of the show will begin filming in June 2021 in Colombia.
Original plans to film the series in 2020 were postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and again in early 2021 due to continued UK restrictions preventing the series from taking place in Newcastle upon Tyne.
As the series will mark the show's tenth anniversary, it is reported that it will feature one-off returns for a number of past cast members as well as including the current cast.

== Cast ==
This is a list of the current cast members appearing in the show in order of their first appearance.

== Reception ==
In a column for Metro, Christopher Hooton described the show as "a gaudy kaleidoscope of six packs, shots, fights, simulated fellatio and exposed breasts," but said that criticism of the show was futile given its intent, noting that "being shocked by the lasciviousness of Geordie Shore is like being shocked by the lack of nutrition in a Pot Noodle."
Newcastle Central MP Chi Onwurah has described the show as "bordering on pornographic", and announced she will be raising questions in Parliament about the issues raised by the programme.
Newcastle has also benefited from the show by increased tourism.
Hotels and travel agents have attributed increased bookings, up by as much as three of four times in 2012 from 2011, due to the popularity of the program.
Series 12 features the most watched episode to date, watched by 1,367,000, the show's peak viewership.
Series 12 was the most watched series on average with 1,237,000 viewers per week.

Series 21 currently has the lowest average viewers to date, averaging at 202.000.The episode
broadcast on 4 August 2020
(Series 21, Episode 2) currently is the least watched episode in the history of the show.

==
Music ==
In December 2013, Gaz released his debut single "Party Like a Rockstar (Up Your Game)" in a bid to reach Christmas number one.
Vocals from the track come from Australian recording artist Emily Williams and
The X Factor series eight finalists The Risk.
Vicky also appears in the music video.
In August 2014, Holly released her debut single, a cover version of Milkshake, which was previously released in 2003 by Kelis and charted at number 2 in the UK.In February 2018, Elettra Lamborghini who was featured in series 14 & 15, released her debut single "Pem Pem".
===
Singles ===


==
Internet distribution ==
The uncensored episodes are available to buy on the UK iTunes Store the day after episodes are aired.

== Broadcast ==
Geordie Shore premiered in Canada in 2011 on MTV Canada.
In Australia the programme began airing in 2011 on MTV Australia.
In September 2011, the show was bought by Network Ten and now broadcasts the series on its digital channel Eleven also in Australia, this concluded in 2013.
In 2012 it began airing in New Zealand on MTV (New Zealand).
The United States premiere was in 2012 on MTV.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Geordie Shore at IMDb
This list of characters from the Star Wars franchise contains only those which are considered part of the official Star Wars canon, as of the changes made by Lucasfilm in April 2014.
Following its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the novels, comics, video games and other works produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars as Star Wars Legends and declared them non-canon to the rest of the franchise.
As such, the list contains only information from the Skywalker Saga films, the 2008 animated TV series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and works published after April 2014.

The list is organized in humans and various alien species.
No droid characters are included, so for those, see the list of Star Wars droid characters.
Some of the characters featured in this list have additional or alternate plotlines in the non-canonical Legends continuity.
To see those or characters who do not exist at all in the current Star Wars canon, see the list of Star Wars Legends characters and list of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters.

==
Humans ==
Humans are a sentient, sapient species in the fictional Star Wars universe.
They are the most numerous and dominant species, with apparently millions of major and minor colonies galaxy-wide.
Humans are native to many different worlds, and they are characterized by multidimensional complex personalities that are both individual and unique.
They are the only race accepted as pure by Emperor Palpatine.

By the time the hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a few scattered worlds throughout the galaxy; according to the New Essential Chronology, the humans of Coruscant managed to send out a number of 'sleeper ships' between the fall of the Rakatan Infinite Empire and the invention of the hyperdrive.
Star Wars humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life humans.
The presence of ordinary humans in the story is important dramatically and the first movie establishes their vulnerability and weakness.
Luke Skywalker's introduction early in the first movie was rewritten to establish this.
In the Star Wars mythology, the human homeworld, according to the New Essential Chronology, is generally believed to be Coruscant.
However, there is actually no real consensus on the issue; according to releases from the official Starwars.com site, the ancient human home world has simply been lost to history.

Star Wars humans live on many different worlds throughout the galaxy, with many populations living together with several other species—something which is most common either on the cosmopolitan worlds at the core, such as on Coruscant, or on the frontier at the Outer Rim of the galaxy, such as on Tatooine.

===
Skywalker and Solo families ===


====
Extended family ====
Naberrie family - Padmé Amidala's family
Lars family - Luke's adoptive familyOrgana
family - Leia's adoptive family


===
Force-wielders ===
Human Force-sensitive characters.
They are divided into Jedi and those affiliated with the light side of the Force; and Sith and those affiliated with the dark side (such as Dark Jedi, who are former Jedi who have fallen to the dark side, and Inquisitors, who are Jedi hunters trained by Darth Vader and serving the Empire).
===
Mandalorians ===
Mandalorians are a culture of humans from the planet Mandalore with strong warrior traditions.
Most of them wear armor and helmets, the strongest ones made from beskar, a blaster-resistant steel that is originally from Mandalore.
The Mandalorian culture was carried on by humans from Mandalore around the galaxy.
The name of their home planet, "Mandalore", is the same as the title given to their leader.
The Mandalorians are also associated with the Darksaber, a black-bladed lightsaber built by Tarre Vizsla, the first Mandalorian Jedi, which has since become a symbol of power for the Mandalorian people and is passed from a leader to the next.
===
Galactic Republic ===
The Galactic Republic is a democractic government, overseen by a Galactic Senate, that governed most of the known galaxy for thousands of years.
With the help of the Jedi Order, it maintained intergalactic peace, but during its last years, it became highly corrupt, causing numerous planets and systems to abandon the Republic and form the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
The ensuing conflict between the two factions became known as the Clone Wars, which Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious and the mastermind behind the war, took advantage of to manipulate the Republic's Senators and citizens into supporting his plans for the government's reorganization into the Galactic Empire for the purpose of intergalactic "peace".
The Republic serves as the protagonist faction of the prequel trilogy, which depicts its downfall and conversion into the Empire.

====
Clone troopers ====
Clone troopers were the soldiers of the Galactic Republic's army during the Clone Wars.
Created from Jango Fett's DNA, they were genetically modified to have accelerated growth and be predisposed toward unquestioning obedience to the chain of command, including being outfitted with mind-controlling biochips, which were put to use during Order 66, when the clone troopers turned on and tried to kill their Jedi Generals.

===
Confederacy of Independent Systems ===
The Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) is an organization of multiple planets and systems formerly part of the Galactic Republic, who decided to secess after becoming annoyed with the corruption and injustice within the Galactic Senate.
Formed by Count Dooku under the orders of his master, Darth Sidious, it is the main antagonistic faction of the prequel trilogy.
Most of the planets that made up the Confederacy attempted to earn their freedom by force, engaging in the three year-long Clone Wars with the Republic using an army of battle droids.
Once Sidious achieved his goal of scaring the people of the Republic into supporting his plans for the formation of a Galactic Empire, he ended the Clone Wars by having his new apprentice, Darth Vader, kill the Separatist Council leaders.
The remaining systems of the Confederacy were subsequently reabsorbed into the newly formed Empire.
===
Rebel Alliance ===
The Rebel Alliance is an organization of multiple planets and systems that oppose the rule of the Galactic Empire, with which it engages in the five year-long Galactic Civil War.
It serves as the protagonist faction of the original trilogy.
The Partisans are a faction or rebels led by Saw Gerrera known for their extreme methods, who have distanced themselves from the rest of the Alliance.
Rogue One is a squad of Rebel soldiers formed in the film of the same name that embarked on a suicide mission to steal the Death Star's schematics.

====
Erso and Gerrera families ====


===
Galactic Empire ===
The First Galactic Empire is an autocracy formed by Emperor Palpatine at the end of the Clone Wars, replacing the old Galactic Republic.
Palpatine's rise to power and manipulation of the Galactic Senate into supporting his plans for the formation of an empire and extermination of the Jedi Order with the purpose of intergalactic "peace" are depicted in the prequel trilogy.
In the original trilogy, the Empire serves as the main antagonistic faction.
At its peak, the Empire sprawled most of the known Star Wars galaxy.
The Empire was eventually defeated by the Rebel Alliance and collapsed, but some remnants continued to exist for 30 years and reunited to form the First Order.

The stormtroopers are the elite, faceless shock troops serving the Empire's military.
Originally the clone troopers of the Republic's army, over time they became mostly human recruits.

===
Resistance ===
The Resistance is a military organization founded and led by Leia Organa, and the successor of the Rebel Alliance.
It fought against the First Order to defend the New Republic and maintain peace in the galaxy, 30 years after the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War.
It is the protagonist faction of the sequel trilogy.

===
New Republic ===
The New Republic is a democractic government established in the aftermath of the Galactic Empire's defeat.
Formed from the Rebel Alliance and meant to be a restoration of the old Galactic Republic, it governed most of the known galaxy, until it fell after the First Order destroyed its capital, the Hosnian Prime system.
The New Republic is only briefly featured in the sequel trilogy, but has a more prominent presence in related works.
===
First Order ===
The First Order is an autocratic military dictatorship and the successor of the Galactic Empire, formed from its remnants.
Its main goal is to overthrow the New Republic and destroy the Resistance and Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi.
It is the central antagonistic faction of the sequel trilogy.
Ruled by Supreme Leader Snoke, a Force-sensitive being created by the resurrected Darth Sidious to act as his puppet ruler, the First Order succeeded in destroying the New Republic and conquering much of the known galaxy, especially during Kylo Ren's reign, who killed Snoke and became the next Supreme Leader.
Near the end of its one-year-long war with the Resistance, it allied itself with the Sith Eternal, a secret cult of Sith loyalists led by Sidious on Exegol, though both were ultimately defeated by the remains of the Resistance and the civilians of the galaxy, who finally gathered the courage to rise against their oppressors.

Much like the Empire before it, the First Order uses stormtroopers as its main military.
Most stormtroopers are children who had been abducted from their homes and brainwashed into serving the First Order.

===
Bounty hunters, mercenaries, and criminals ===


===
Naboo humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Naboo.

===
Tatooine humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Tatooine.
===
Sorgan humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Sorgan.
===
Versio family ===


===
Uncategorized humans ===


==
Other sentient species ==
A mix of non-human characters from the Star Wars galaxy, organized by species, in alphabetical order.

===
A–E ===


====
Abednedos ====
Abednedos are a humanoid, sentient species native to the planet Abednedo.
They have either brown or tan skin, mouth tendrils, long faces, and widely spaced fleshy nostrils.
Abednedos are known for their ingenuity, and generally peaceful nature, being acceptant of other species.

====
Abyssins ====
Abyssins are a humanoid, cycloptic, sentient species native to Byss.
They have green or blue skin, can regenerate missing limbs, and can live for up to 300 years.

====
Aleena ====
The Aleena are a short, humanoid, sentient species native to Aleen.
They have scaly skin, elongated skulls, and large mouths with tiny teeth.

====
Anacondans ====
Anacondans are a large, snake-like sentient species.

====
Anzellans ====
Anzellans are a diminutive sentient species native to Anzellan.
Their eyes have corneal micro-lenses that can see microscopic details.

====
Aqualish ====
The Aqualish are a species of tusked humanoids from the planet Ando.
They can have either two or four eyes, fur around their cheeks, and varying skin color and number of fingers.
The Aqualish have a reputation of being nasty, crude, and aggressive.

====
Ardennians ====
Ardennians are a species of short, four-armed, monkey-like humanoids from the planet Ardennia.

====
Artiodacs ====
Artiodacs are a hulking, humanoid, sentient species from Artiod Minor.
They are distinguished by their broad, flat noses, bulging arms, and deep, rumbling voices.

====
Askajians ====
Askajians are a near-human species from Askaji, whose bulky appearance is given by their internal water storages.
They are also distinguished by their wrinkled foreheads and six breasts (present at females).

====
Bardottans ====
Bardottans are a humanoid, reptilian-like sentient species from Bardotta.
They are distinguished by their long, curving necks, pointed snouts, and crested heads, and are a generally insular and secretive society.

====
Besalisks ====
Besalisks are a humanoid, four-armed, sentient species from Ojom.
Often thick-set, they are also distinguished by their bony, three-pronged headcrests, inflatable wattles, and wide mouths, with large, pudgy lips.
Besalisks are known to be industrious and hardworking.

====
Bith ====
The Bith are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Bith.
They are distinguished by their bald, domed heads, black, glassy eyes, and skin flaps on their faces, which are used to smell because they lack noses.
They are a generally intelligent and peaceful species, and are known to be good scientists, engineers, and musicians.

====
Blarina ====
The Blarina are a species of short, pudgy, sentient humanoids from the planet Rina Major.
They have snouts, tough skin, and small eyes.
The Blarina are famously accomplished liars, and are known to be highly sociable and fond of words, often talking very quickly and incomprehensibly.

====
Cereans ====
Cereans are a near-human species from the planet Cerea, distinguished by their coned skulls, which hold their binary brains.
They are known to be an intelligent species, although their homeworld lacks most of the advanced technology found on other planets.

====
Chagrians ====
Chagrians are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from the planet Champala.
They are distinguished by their long horns, head tentacles with additional horns, forked tongue, and varying skin color.
Chagrians are known for their skills as military commanders.

====
Chiss ====
The Chiss are a near-human species native to Csilla, distinguished by their blue skin, red eyes, and dark blue-black hair.
Prior to Thrawn's rise within the ranks of the Galactic Empire, the Chiss had relatively very little contact with the rest of the galaxy, and some even considered their existence a myth.

====
Clawdites ====
Clawdites are a species of sentient, shape-shifting, reptilian humanoids from the planet Zolan.
With their unique ability they can impersonate virtually any humanoid, although the shape-shifting requires great concentration and they return to their true, reptilian form if knocked unconscious or killed.

====
Cloddograns ====
Cloddograns are a humanoid species with four arms and nose tendrils.

====
Cosians ====
Cosians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species native to Cosia.
They are short in stature and have beaked mouths, four-fingered hands, and medium-length tails.
A genetically-engineered subspecies called Nu-Cosians also exists.

==== Crolutes ====
Crolutes are a species of hulking, amphibian, sentient humanoids from the planet Crule, distinguished by their blobfish-like faces.
They are all males, while their mates, called Gilliands, are exclusively female.
Crolutes rarely travel beyond their homeworld and its moons.

====
Delphidians ====
Delphidians are a near-human species from the planet Delphidian Cluster, with dark gray, leathery, and striated skin.

====
Devaronians ====
Devaronians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Devaronian.
They are distinguished by their two horns (present only at males), pointed ears, and sharp teeth.
The males are known for their spirit of travel and are among the first species in the galaxy to develop interstellar travel, while the females usually remain on their homeworld to look after the children and govern the place.

====
Dianoga ====
The Dianoga are large, highly adaptable cephalopods from the planet Vodran.
They live in semi-aquatic environments, like swamps and sewers, and are a sentient, but primitive species.

====
Dowutins ====
Dowutins are a species of large, sentient humanoids native to Dowut.
They have a bulky build, brown-orange skin, and two chin horns.
They are known for their strength, and can live for several centuries.

====
Dressellians ====
Dressellians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Dressel, distinguished by their round, hairless, wrinkled faces.

====
Dugs ====
Dugs are a sentient species from the planet Malastare, distinguished by their elongated faces, and the fact that they walk on their arms.
They are known to be very greedy.

====
Duros ====
Duros (or "Durosians") are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Duro, with large, ovular heads, red eyes and blue skin.
They are known for their superior astronavigational skills, and were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the development of hyperdrives and other related technological advancements.

====
Er'Kit ====
The Er'Kit are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Er'Kit.
They have white-blue skin, long skinny legs, and elongated skulls.

====
Ewoks ====
Ewoks are a small, furry, sentient species who live in trees on the forest moon of Endor.
While primitive, they have proven themselves to be loyal, skilled hunters, and ingenious in designing their traps.

===
F–J ===


====
Falleen ====
The Falleen are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species native to Falleen.
They have green skin, ridged skulls, and long, black hair, usually worn in ponytails.

====
Faust ====
The Faust are a species of tall, slender, gray or purple-skinned humanoids native to Adana.
They are recognized by their narrow faces and two sets of eyelids.

====
Gabdorins ====
Gabdorins are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species with large, round heads, ridged nostrils, and massive sweat glands.

====
Gamorreans ====
Gamorreans are a humanoid, pig-like, sentient species native to Gamorr.
They have green, thick, and hairless skin, large-nostriled snouts, and upturned tusks.
Gamorreans are known for their low intelligence, strength, and love of conflict and violence.

====
Gand ====
The Gand are a humanoid, insectoid, sentient species native to Gand.
They have three-fingered hands, two-toed feet, and large, silver-coloured eyes.
They wear respiratory masks in oxygen-rich environments, because it is toxic to them.

====
Geonosians ====
Geonosians are a humanoid, winged, insectoid sentient species native to Geonosis.
They live in large colonies like insects, and are generally regarded as a primitive species, but are skilled engineers and operated the Confederacy of Independent Systems' battle droid factories during the Clone Wars.

====
Gossams ====
Gossams are a humanoid, sentient species native to Castell.
They have wrinkled skin, squat bodies, and long, thin necks.
They are known to care about status, power, and wealth, and most wear expensive jewelry for this reason, such as neck rings.

====
Gran ====
The Gran are a humanoid, three-eyed, sentient species native to Kinyen and Malastare, and with major colonies on several other planets, such as Hok and Varkana.
They have brown-orange skin, goat-like snouts, bulky hands, and small antennae-like nubs.
The Gran of Kinyen are known for their peaceful nature, pursuing simple careers like farmers, while others have more dangerous pastimes.

====
Gungans ====
Gungans are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient and sapient species native to the swamps of Naboo.
They have a very flexible skeletal structure, long necks and head tails, and muscular tongues.
While usually regarded as clumsy and primitive, they have proven themselves to be very loyal and ingenious.

====
Harches ====
Harches are a humanoid, spider-like, sentient species native to Secundus Ando.
They have six arms, six red eyes, fangs, and brown or white hair that covers most of their body, and can supposedly live for centuries.

====
Hutts ====
Hutts are a portly, grotesque, slug-like sentient species native to Nal Hutta.
They are often depicted as being very greedy and very gluttonous.
Some famous Hutts, such as Jabba the Hutt, are crime lords, and speak in their native language, Huttese.

====
Iktotchi ====
The Iktotchi are a near-human species from the planet Iktotch, recognized their large cranian horns.

====
Ithorians ====
Ithorians are a species of humanoids from the planet Ithor, with curved necks and two mouths, located on the sides of the neck.
Their faces resemble those of hammerhead sharks, for which reason they were nicknamed "hammerheads".
===
K–O ===


====
Kaleesh ====
The Kaleesh are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from the planet Kalee.
They have red skin, elongated ears, and flat noses (which are rarely seen because they wear masks), and are known for being skilled and merciless warriors and hunters.

====
Kaminoans ====
Kaminoans are a species of tall, thin, amphibian, sentient humanoids from the ocean planet Kamino.
They have white skin, large eyes, and long necks and limbs.
Kaminoans are skilled scientists specialized in cloning technology, and were responsible for the creation of the Republic's Clone army during the Clone Wars.

====
Karkarodon ====
The Karkarodon are a humanoid, shark-like, amphibian sentient species from the planet Karkaris.
With their webbed feet and hands and sharp teeth, they are fast swimmers and skilled hunters.

====
Kel Dors ====
Kel Dors are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Dorin.
Their body is covered by a leathery hide, which allows them to survive the vacuum of space for a brief time, and they wear respiratory masks and protective eye goggles on planets with oxygen-rich atmospheres, because it is toxic to them.

====
Kiffar ====
The Kiffar are a near-human species from the planets Kiffu and Kiffex, distinguished by their ceremonial tattoos and scarlet blood.

====
Kitonak ====
The Kitonak are a species native to Kirdo III, distinguished by their white-pink and tough skin, large hands and feet, and tiny eyes, ears and mouths.
They are known to be slow and patient, but also skilled musicians.

====
Klatooinians ====
Klatooinians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Klatooine.
They are distinguished by their leathery skin, imposing brows, and toothy underbites.

==== Koorivar ====
The Koorivar are a near-human sentient species with reptilian-like skin and a large cranial horn that spirals upwards from their skull.

====
Kowakian monkey-lizards ====
Kowakian monkey-lizards are a small, semi-sentient species from Kowak.
They have beak-like mouths, long ears, medium-length tails, and a distinct laughter, which is used to scare predators on their homeworld.
Most are kept as pets by members of the underworld.

====
Kubaz ====
The Kubaz are a humanoid sentient species from Kubindi, distinguished by their long snouts, dark skin, protective eyewear, and unique manner of speech, consisting of a series of whirring syllables.

====
Kyuzo ====
The Kyuzo are a humanoid, sentient species from Phatrong.
They have green skin, wrinkled faces, and yellow eyes, and are known for their exceptional combat abilities and fast reflexes.
When not on their homeworld, Kyuzo always wear masks to filter the atmosphere, which conceal most of their faces.

====
Lanniks ====
Lanniks are a species of short humanoids from the planet Lannik, with long, droppy ears.
They are known for their honor and bravery.

====
Lasats ====
Lasats are a humanoid, sentient species native to Lira San, though they later settled on Lasan.
They are very tall, strong, and agile, and possess superior sight and hearing thanks to their large eyes and ears, respectively.
Lasats are distinguished by their prehensile feet, and varying fur patterns, which are unique for every individual.
The species was nearly driven to extinction by the Empire.

====
Latero ====
The Latero are a short, four-armed, humanoid sentient species from Lateron.
They have small, pointed ears, gray skin, and gray sideburns hair.

====
Lepi ====
The Lepi are species of bipedal, humanoid, sentient rabbits.

====
Lurmen ====
The Lurmen are a species of diminutive, lemur-like humanoids from Mygeeto.
They have brown and gray fur, large yellow eyes, and medium-length tails.
Pacifists by nature, they have often found themselves oppressed for this reason.

====
Melitto ====
The Mellito are a humanoid, insectoid, sentient species from Li-Torran.
They lack eyes and mouths, and are capable of sensing their environment using super-sensitive hairs called cilia.
They also wear masks and use breathing tubes to filter other planets' atmospheres, as most contain substances that are toxic to them.

====
Miraluka ====
The Miraluka are a species of near-humans, distinguished by their lack of eyes.
The only known member of this species, Prosset Dibs, could use the Force to make up for his lack of eyesight and become familiar with his surroundings


====
Mirialans ====
Mirialans are a near-human species from Mirial.
They are distinguished from humans by their skin color (yellow, green, pink, or purple), and geometric tattoos on their faces.
Mirialans are known for their spirituality and strong connection with the world around them.

==== Mon Calamari ====
Mon Calamari are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species native to Mon Cala.
They have salmon-coloured skin (though their skin may have other tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a high-domed head with large, sideways eyes, and webbed hands.
They are known for their swimming and engineering abilities.

====
Mortis Gods ====
The Mortis Gods are a family of three mythical, immortal, and god-like beings who are the sole inhabitants of the Force realm Mortis.
They are believed to be the embodiments of the Force itself: the light side, the dark side, and the balance between the two.

====
Muuns ====
Muuns are a tall, thin, humanoid sentient species with elongated skulls and flat noses.
Known across the galaxy as greed-driven bankers, they ran the InterGalactic Banking Clan during the Galactic Republic era.

====
Mythrol ====
The Mythrol are a humanoid, sentient species with blue skin and amphibious traits.

====
Nautolans ====
Nautolans are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Glee Anselm.
They are distinguished by their head tentacles, which allow them to detect chemicals, and large, black, pupil-less eyes.
Nautolans are a generally peaceful species, but can be strong warriors when needed to.

====
Neimoidians ====
Neimoidians are a humanoid large-eyed, amphibian, and reptilian-like sapient species native to Neimoidia.
They are known for their dishonesty, wealth, and cowardice, as well as for being in charge of the Trade Federation during the Galactic Republic era.

====
Nikto ====
The Nikto are a humanoid sentient species native to Kintan.
There are at least three known subspecies: the Red Nikto (Kajain'sa'Nikto), the Green Nikto (Kadas'sa'Nikto), and the Mountain Nikto (Esral'sa'Nikto); the former two have scaly, coarse skin and horns and spikes on their face, while the latter present no horns and have facial fins instead.

====
Noghri ====
The Noghri are a humanoid, short, sentient species native to Honoghr.
They have grey, leathery skin with a row of horns on their head, sharp teeth, and clawed fingers, and are known for their exceptional combat abilities and keen sense of smell.

====
Nosaurians ====
Nosaurians are a humanoid sentient species from the planet New Plympto.
They are distinguished by their six horns, red eyes, and orange, white, and yellow skin, and are considered to be ill-tempered.

====
Ongrees ====
Ongrees a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Skustell.
They are distinguished by sideways eyes, located underneath their mouths, four nostrils, and lipless mouths.
Most Ongrees are considered to be even-minded individuals and are skilled diplomats and negotiators.

====
Ortolans ====
Ortolan are a species of squat, blue-skinned, sentient humanoids from Orto.
They are distinguished by their large, floppy ears, trunk-like noses, and black eyes, and are known to consume large amounts of nutrients through their fingers.
Some Ortolans have no arms.

====
Ovissians ====
Ovissians are a humanoid, sentient species, distinguished by their four head horns (two sideways horns, and two extending from the chin).
They can have either green or orange skin, which matches the color of their blood.

===
P–T ===


====
Pa'lowicks ====
Pa'lowicks are a sentient species from Lowick.
They have bulbous bodies supported by long, reed-thin legs, small eyes located in stalks on the top of their heads, and long, thin, trunk-like mouths.

====
Palliduvans ====
Palliduvans are a near-human species, with chalky white skin, and long, bony fingers, with which they can draw blood.

====
Pantorans ====
Pantorans are a near-human species from the moon of Pantora, distinguished by their blue skin.

====
Pau'ans ====
Pau'ans are a species of gaunt, tall, and long-limbed humanoids from Utapau.
They have white or gray skin, sunken eyes, and sharp, jugged teeth.
Pau'ans are an intelligent and peaceful species, though they often seem afraid of outsiders.

====
Phindians ====
Phindians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Phindar.
They have green-yellow skin, long arms, and elongated skulls, and are known to be very cautious.

====
Pykes ====
Pykes are a humanoid, sentient species from Oba Diah.
They are distinguished by their elongated, tapered skulls with an undersized face.
The Pykes are best known for running the Pyke Syndicate, an illegal spice-dealing group.

====
Quarren ====
The Quarren are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Mon Cala.
They have four tentacles protruding from their jaws, for which reason they are nicknamed "squid heads" around the galaxy, as well as suction-cup tipped fingers, and the ability to spit ink in self-defense.
They are more introverted than the Mon Calamari, with whom they share their homeworld, and rarely invite strangers to their planet.

====
Quermians ====
Quermians are a species of gaunt, tall, long-necked and white-skinned humanoids from Quermia.

====
Rodians ====
Rodians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Rodia.
They have green skin, antennas, large pupil-less eyes, a row of spike on the back of their head, slender snouts, and fingers with suction cups at the end.

====
Shawda Ubb ====
The Shawda Ubb are a diminutive, amphibian, sentient species with green skin and small faces that sport heavy brow ridges.

====
Skakoans ====
Skakoans are a humanoid, sentient species native to Skakoa.
They have crown-shaped skulls and are required to wear special suits with breathing masks to survive off their homeworld.
Skakoans are best known for running the Techno Union during the Galacic Republic era.

====
Snivvians ====
Snivvians, also known as "snaggletooths", are a short, humanoid, sentient species native to Cadomai Prime.
They have a protruding lower jaw with two small tusks, and large nostrils.
Snivvians have great tracking skills, and are good scouts and trackers.

====
Sullustans ====
Sullustans are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sullust.
They are mouse-eyed and have two flaps of jowls around their cheeks.
Sullustans are a sophisticated species and experts at manufacturing, scientific and technological development, and economics.

====
Tarsunt ====
The Tarsunt are a humanoid, sentient species from Tarsunt.
They have long faces, widely spaced nostrils, and hair on various places of their body, including their faces, where it resembles a beard.

====
Teedos ====
Teedos are a short, humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Jakku.
They have three-fingered hands and feet, and are almost always wrapped completely in clothing.
All Teedos are identical, sharing the same name and a telepathic connection that allows one Teedo to recount events experienced by another.

====
Terrelian Jango Jumpers ====
Terrelian Jango Jumpers are a humanoid, sentient species from Terrelia.
They are tall, slender and very acrobatic, while having blue, gray, and white skin.

====
Thisspiasians ====
Thissipiasians are a humanoid, serpentine, sentient species from Thisspias.
While the lower part of their bodies is snake-like, they have arms and can grow facial hair.

====
Tholothians ====
Tholothians are a near-human species from Tholoth, distinguished by their scaled craniums and head tendrils.

====
Togruta ====
The Togruta are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Shili.
They are distinguished by their three, rarely four "head tails" called lekku (similar to those of Twi'leks), which are striped to help them blend in with their natural surroundings.
Togrutas are known for their solidarity and for possessing a form of passive echolocation by means of their hollow montrals, which allows them to sense space and the proximity and movement of physical objects around them.

====
Toong ====
The Toong are a humanoid, sentient species from Tund, with disproportionately large heads for their bodies.

====
Toydarians ====
Toydarians are a species of short, winged humanoids from Toydaria.
They have long snouts, tusks, and webbed feet, and have been shown to be strong-willed, resisting Force mind tricks.

====
Trandoshans ====
Trandoshans are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Trandosha, known for their hunting abilities and bad history with the Wookiees.
They are tall and muscular and have a pointed skull, sharp teeth, long claws, and four fingers on their hands and three on their feet.

====
Triffians ====
Triffians are a humanoid, sentient species recognized by their triangle-shaped appendages that extend from their shoulders to their heads.

====
Trodatome ====
The Trodatome are a slug-like sentient species that lack arms, but possess sensory antennas and flippers.

====
Troigs ====
Troigs are a two-headed and four-armed humanoid sentient species from Pollillus.

====
Tusken Raiders ====
Tusken Raiders, also known as Sand People or simply Tuskens, are a culture of nomadic, primitive sentients indigenous native to Tatooine.
They are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing their identity.
Tuskens are known for their aggressivity towards strangers, which they consider possible threats, and unique manner of speech, which combines vocal sounds (mostly screams) with sign language.

====
Twi'leks ====
Twi'leks are a humanoid, sentient species native to Ryloth.
They are distinguished by their "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the back of their head, and varying skin color.
Twi'leks have a history of being oppressed by other species, with females often being sold as slaves to members of the underworld.

===
U–Z ===


====
Ugnaughts ====
Ugnaughts are a short, humanoid, sentient species from the planet Gentes, with pig-like faces.
They are considered to be one of the hardest-working species in the galaxy.

====
Umbarans ====
Umbarans are a near-human species from Umbara, distinguished by their pale skin and colorless eyes, with which they can see in the ultraviolet spectrum.
They have developed technology much more advanced than that found in the rest of the galaxy.

====
Veknoids ====
Veknoids are a humanoid, sentient species from Moonus Mandel, distinguished by their large under-bites, sharp teeth, slender tails, and fleshy ears.

====
Vulptereens ====
Vulptereens are a species of stocky humanoids, recognizable by their shovel-like snouts which sport six tusks and a single long feeler.

====
Vurk ====
The Vurk are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sembla.
They are distinguished by their bony crests on the top of their heads (similar to those of the parasaurolophus), and three-fingered hands.
While regarded as a primitive species, the Vurk are highly empathetic and skilled mediators.

====
Weequays ====
Weequays are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sriluur.
They are distinguished by their though, leathery skin, which helped them survive the harsh life conditions of their homeworld.
Most of them are pirates, mercenaries, and bounty hunters, as a result of the Hutts' takeover of Sriluur.

====
Wookiees ====
Wookiees are a large, hairy, primate-like sentient species native to Kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the modern-day depictions of Sasquatch.
They are known for their strength, loyalty, unique manner of speech (depicted as a series of growls and purrs), and bad history with the Trandoshans.

====
Xexto ====
The Xexto are a species of short, four-armed humanoids from the planet Troiken.
They have white skin, glassy eyes, and long necks and fingers.

====
Yakora ====
The Yakura (also known as Yakorans) are a humanoid, sentient species, with yak-like faces.

====
Yoda's species ====
"Yoda's species" is the name given to a species of diminutive, green-skinned, sentient creatures, of which the popular character Yoda is a member.
The species is characterised by their pointy ears, strong connection to the Force, and slow aging, for which reason they can live for several centuries.
Much about the species, including its name and origins, has been deliberately left vague.

====
Yuzzums ====
Yuzzums are a humanoid, round-bodied, furred, sentient species from the forest moon of Endor.
They have long limbs compared to the rest of their body, medium-length antennae, big mouths, and no neck.
Yuzzums are considered a primitive and unintelligent species.

====
Zabraks ====
Zabraks are a near-human, sentient species, distinguished by their horns and tattoos.
Most originate from Iridonia (in which case they are also referred to as Iridonians), though some males also lived on Dathomir (in which case they are referred to as Dathomirians), as part of the warrior clan called the Nightbrothers, who served the witches known as the Nightsisters.

====
Zygerrians ====
Zygerrians are a humanoid, feline-like sentient species from Zygerria, who had built and run the biggest slave empire in the galaxy, until the Jedi overthrew them and outlawed slavery.
Attempts to rebuild the empire were made during the Clone Wars and the Imperial Era, but were thwarted.

===
Unknown species ===


==
See also ==
List of The Mandalorian characters
List of Star Wars creatures
List of Star Wars droid characters
List of Star Wars Legends characters
List of Star Wars Rebels characters
List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars cast members
List of Star Wars books
== Notes ==


==
References ==
The fictional universe of the Star Wars franchise features multiple planets and moons.
While only the feature films and selected other works are considered canon to the franchise since the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, some canon planets were first named or explored in works from the non-canon Star Wars
expanded universe, now rebranded Star Wars Legends.

In the theatrical Star Wars films, many settings for scenes set on these planets and moons were filmed at real-world locations on Earth.
For example, the resort city of Canto Bight located on the planet Cantonica, seen in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), was filmed in Dubrovnik, Croatia.

==
Star Wars canon astrography ==
The Star Wars galaxy contains several broad sub-regions.
Their exact definitions fluctuated somewhat during the Legends continuity, but were later formally updated by the new canon continuity when Disney purchased Lucasfilm.
The new canon map is broadly similar to the later versions of the Legends galactic map.

As a general rule, most of the galaxy's wealth, power, and population are concentrated near the middle of the galactic circle – the "Core Worlds".
The first major interstellar powers in the core are stated to have risen many millennia ago, gradually coalescing into the early Galactic Republic, with its capital at Coruscant.
Waves of colonization (and conquest) by the Republic gradually spread outward from the Core, into the sparser systems at the galaxy's edge, such as Tatooine.
Worlds of the Outer Rim are rich in raw resources but lack the population, infrastructure, or political power of the Core.
Major galactic sub-regions are further divided into quadrants, sectors, etc.,
down to individual star systems and planets.

The galaxy has at least two companion-satellite dwarf galaxies, one of which is known as the Rishi Maze, but they are very lightly settled or explored.

The canon map depicts a top-down view of the galactic disk, with "north" as the side of the galactic center that Coruscant is located on.
As the capital planet of the Republic and later the Empire, Coruscant is used as the reference point for galactic astronomy, set at XYZ coordinates 0-0-0.
Standardized galactic time measurements are also based on Coruscant's local solar day and year.

According to the updated Visual Dictionary series made by Pablo Hidalgo for the Sequel Trilogy, these are the general regions of the galaxy spreading outward from the Core:
Deep Core – the innermost brightly lit region of space, with a supermassive black hole at the center which binds the galaxy together.
Densely-packed with stars, nebulae, and other anomalies, it is therefore thinly settled due to the resulting high radiation levels and lack of stable hyperspace routes.

Core Worlds – powerful and wealthy planets with millennia-long histories, many of them founding members of the Galactic Republic.
On-screen examples include Coruscant, Corellia, Alderaan, and Hosnian Prime.

The Colonies – the first colonies founded by the nascent Galactic Republic in ancient times.
The name is somewhat of a misnomer, as they have grown nearly as powerful as the "Core Worlds" themselves, though their histories aren't quite as long or prestigious (i.e. comparable to how the United States or Canada could be called "the colonies" of Great Britain).
Mentioned by name in The Rise of Skywalker.

Inner Rim – the original edge of the Galactic Republic, where expansion waves stopped for many generations.

Expansion Region – nestled between the "Inner Rim" and the "Mid Rim", anachronistically named due to a new colonization wave starting again.

Mid-Rim
– Generally industrialized though not very important planets, but more developed than the true "frontier" in the Outer Rim.
On-screen examples include Naboo and Kashyyyk.

Outer Rim – a vast region including all of the last major star systems up to the galaxy's edge.
As the last region that the Republic expanded into, it is relatively the least developed, a frontier more often than not exploited by the central galactic government for its resources.
On-screen examples include Tatooine, Yavin, Hoth, Bespin, Endor, Geonosis, Utapau, Mustafar, and Kessel.

Wild Space – star systems located beyond the Outer Rim – because a galaxy's "edge" is not a fixed border line, but a concentration of stars tapering off in frequency.
Unlike the Outer Rim, these sparse few systems around the galaxy's circumference were never formally charted.
More broadly, Attack of the Clones established that the Star Wars galaxy actually possesses at least three small satellite galaxies, never colonized and considered largely inhospitable.
The secret cloner-world Kamino, however, is located in one of these minor galactic clusters beyond the Outer Rim.

Unknown Regions – the new Canon map establishes that, due to the stability of hyperspace lanes, inhabited planets are weighted toward the "eastern" quadrant of the galactic plane with the "western" one being mostly unexplored.
These Unknown Regions are home to the first Jedi temple on Ahch-To and the Chiss Ascendancy, into which Grand Admiral Thrawn was born.
The remnants of the Empire retreated here after their defeat at Endor, reforming into the First Order – as well as, secret even to the First Order, Palpatine's Sith forces reconstituting on Exegol.

Western Reaches – the sectors once controlled by the Republic that border the Unknown Regions of the galactic "west".
Essentially similar to the Outer Rim in terms of their history and economic development, the only difference being that instead of being located at the galaxy's physical edge, they are located at the edge of galactic exploration in the "western" side of the Republic.
In The Force Awakens, it is stated in dialogue that Jakku is in the Western Reaches.
Apart from these broad regions radiating out from the galactic core, there are also several major galactic sub-regions of note:

Mandalorian space – technically located in the Outer Rim, but relatively close to the border with the Mid-Rim, near Kashyyyk, in the galactic "northeast".
The planet Mandalore had its own regional space empire in ancient times, led by their formidable warrior culture.
The Mandalorians were the most difficult enemies the Jedi ever faced short of the Sith: they were not Force-wielders, but were a culture of regular humans who had honed themselves to possess the pinnacle of combat training, equipment, and battle tactics.
During a series of long wars with the Republic, however, many centuries before the Clone Wars, the Jedi were eventually able to fight them into submission - though with heavy losses.
In the Star Wars: Clone Wars animated series, both the Republic and the Separatists compete for support from rival Mandalorian factions, and in the later Star Wars: Rebels animated series, Mandalorians again divide into a proxy war between pro-Imperial and pro-Rebel forces.
According to The Mandalorian TV series, this eventually resulted in the devastation of Mandalorian space by the Empire, with surviving enclaves scattering across the Outer Rim.
Hutt Space – a fairly large swath of space along the "eastern" quadrant of the galactic plane, loosely straddling the border between the Mid-Rim and Outer-Rim.
The Hutts are a kleptocratic Mafia state, derided as "gangsters" composed of several rival clans.
The Hutts' resources and power are formidable enough that both the Republic and the Empire never bothered to conquer them, while the Hutts were too divided by their own internal politics to seriously challenge the Republic (unlike the Mandalorians).This official galactic astrography was later re-confirmed for the first time in on-screen, live-action dialogue in The Mandalorian.
In the second season's fourth episode, "The Siege", a classroom is briefly shown on a planet in the Outer Rim, in which a lesson on galactic astrography is being taught by a protocol droid.
The teacher not only lists off each of these major regions from the Visual Dictionary, but lists them in the exact same order, from the Outer Rim to the Core:
"Who can name one of the five major trade routes in the galaxy?
The Hydian Way [runs] from the Outer Rim to as far away as the Core Worlds.
However, there are several other regions within our galaxy.
They are the Mid Rim, the Expansion Region, the Inner Rim, the Colonies, the Core, and the Deep Core."
==
Star Wars canon planets and moons ==
The following list names prominent planets and moons from the Star Wars films or other canon media.

==
Star Wars Legends planets and moons =
=
These are planets with multiple appearances in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, now rebranded as Star Wars Legends.
The accompanying works were declared non-canon by Lucasfilm in April 2014, following its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company in October 2012.

==
Similarities to real-world planets ==
The discovery of exoplanets in the real-world universe gained pace in the early 21st century.
In 2015, the US space agency NASA published an article which stated that many of the newly discovered astronomical bodies possessed scientifically confirmed properties that are similar to planets in the fictional Star Wars universe.

Kepler-452b, a rocky super-Earth-type planet
, is said to be similar to the Star Wars planet Coruscant.
Likewise, the planets Kepler-16b and Kepler-453b, planets discovered orbitting binary stars probably resemble the desert world Tatooine.
The hot, molten worlds of Kepler-10b and Kepler-78b are comparable to the volcanic planet Mustafar.
OGLE-2005-BLG-390Lb, a cold, remote exoplanet, is like the ice planet Hoth.
Kepler-22b, thought by scientists to be an ocean planet, is compared to the planet Kamino.
According to NASA, there are also similarities to Alderaan and Endor in the real-world universe.

===
Solar System ===
Two non-canonical works also feature the real-life Solar System's planets.
Monsters and Aliens from George Lucas (1993) contains a feature, presented as a clip from a gossip column, in which a pair of Duros are abducted by humans and taken to "Urthha" (Earth), where they create havoc by misunderstanding terrestrial objects and food.
In issue #19 of the comic series Star Wars Tales (2004), the story "Into the Great Unknown" finds Han Solo and Chewbacca in the Millennium Falcon, fleeing the Imperial Navy.
They jump to hyperspace without doing calculations and find themselves in the middle of our Solar System, overpassing Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars while decelerating and landing in Northern America.
Han is killed by Native Americans, and a mourning Chewbacca leaves the Falcon to live in the trees, where the natives believe him to be a sasquatch.
In an epilogue set 126 years later, archaeologist Dr. Jones and his sidekick Short Round, searching for the sasquatch, find the Falcon and Han's remains.

==
See also ==
List of Star Wars filming locations
Planets in science
fiction


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
Content in this article was copied from The galaxy at the Wookieepedia, the Star Wars Wiki, which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share
Alike 3.0 (Unported)
(CC-BY-SA 3.0) license.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2015).
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-3816-4.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2017).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-5551-2.

Luceno, James (2005).
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 0-7566-1128-8.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2019).
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-7903-7.

Wallace, Daniel (1998).
Star Wars: The Essential Guide to Planets and Moons.
Del Rey.
ISBN 0345420683.

==
External links ==
Galaxy Building, from Alderaan to Utapau at StarWars.com (official)
Star Wars Canon:
Just How Realistic Are the Single-Biome Planets?
at The Escapist
List of planets on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Interactive map of Star Wars galaxy
International Workers' Day, also known as Labour Day in most countries and often referred to as May Day, is a celebration of labourers and the working classes that is promoted by the international labour movement and occurs every year on May Day
(1 May).While
it may belong to a tradition of spring festivals, the date was chosen in 1889 for political reasons by the Marxist International Socialist Congress, which met in Paris and established the Second International as a successor to the earlier International Workingmen's Association.
They adopted a resolution for a "great international demonstration" in support of working-class demands for the eight-hour day.
The date had been chosen by the American Federation of Labor to continue an earlier campaign for the eight-hour day in the United States, which had culminated in the Haymarket affair, which occurred in Chicago on 4 May 1886.
May Day subsequently became an annual event.
The 1904 Sixth Conference of the Second International, called on "all Social Democratic Party organisations and trade unions of all countries to demonstrate energetically on the First of May for the legal establishment of the eight-hour day, for the class demands of the proletariat, and for universal peace.
"The
first of May is a national, public holiday in many countries across the world, in most cases as "International Workers' Day" or a similar name.
Some countries celebrate a Labour Day on other dates significant to them, such as the United States and Canada, which celebrate Labor Day on the first Monday of September.

==
Origin ==
On 21 April 1856, Australian stonemasons in Victoria undertook a mass stoppage as part of the eight-hour workday movement.
It became a yearly commemoration, inspiring American workers to have their first stoppage.
1
May was chosen to be International Workers' Day to commemorate the 1886 Haymarket affair in Chicago.
In that year beginning on 1 May, there was a general strike for the eight-hour workday.
On 4 May, the police acted to disperse a public assembly in support of the strike when an unidentified person threw a bomb.
The police responded by firing on the workers.
The event led to the deaths of seven police officers and at least thirty-eight civilians; sixty police officers were injured, as were one hundred and fifteen civilians.
Hundreds of labour leaders and sympathizers were later rounded-up and four were executed by hanging, after a trial that was seen as a miscarriage of justice.
The following day on 5 May, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, the state militia fired on a crowd of strikers killing seven, including a schoolboy and a man feeding chickens in his yard.
In 1889, a meeting in Paris was held by the first congress of the Second International, following a proposal by Raymond Lavigne that called for international demonstrations on the 1890 anniversary of the Chicago protests.
On May 1, 1890, the call encouraged May Day demonstrations took place in the United States and most countries in Europe.
Demonstrations were also held in Chile and Peru.
May Day was formally recognized as an annual event at the International's second congress in 1891.
Subsequently, the May Day riots of 1894 occurred.
The International Socialist Congress, Amsterdam 1904 called on "all Social Democratic Party organisations and trade unions of all countries to demonstrate energetically on the First of May for the legal establishment of the 8-hour day, for the class demands of the proletariat, and for universal peace."
The congress made it "mandatory upon the proletarian organisations of all countries to stop work on 1 May, wherever it is possible without injury to the workers.
"In
the United States and Canada, a September holiday, called Labor or Labour Day, was first proposed in the 1880s.
In 1882, Matthew Maguire, a machinist, first proposed a Labor Day holiday on the first Monday of September while serving as secretary of the Central Labor Union (CLU) of New York.
Others argue that it was first proposed by Peter J. McGuire of the American Federation of Labor in May 1882, after witnessing the annual labour festival held in Toronto, Canada.
In 1887, Oregon was the first state of the United States to make it an official public holiday.
By the time it became an official federal holiday in 1894, thirty US states officially celebrated Labor Day.
Thus by 1887 in North America, Labour Day was an established, official holiday but in September, not on 1 May.

May Day has been a focal point for demonstrations by various socialist, communist and anarchist groups since the Second International.

May Day is one of the most important holidays in communist countries such as China, North Korea, Cuba and the former Soviet Union countries.
May Day celebrations in these countries typically feature elaborate workforce parades, including displays of military hardware and soldiers.

In 1955, the Catholic Church dedicated 1 May to "Saint Joseph the Worker".
Saint Joseph is the patron saint of workers and craftsmen, among others.
Today, the majority of countries around the world celebrate a workers' day on 1 May.


===
Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc under communist governments ===
Eastern Bloc countries such as the Soviet Union and most countries of central and eastern Europe that were under the rule of Marxist-Leninist governments held official May Day celebrations in every town and city, during which party leaders greeted the crowds.
Workers carried banners with political slogans and many companies decorated their company cars.
The biggest celebration of 1 May usually occurred in the capital of a particular communist country and usually included a military display and the presence of the president and the secretary general of the party.
During the Cold War, May Day became the occasion for large military parades in Red Square by the Soviet Union and attended by the top leaders of the Kremlin, especially the Politburo, atop Lenin's Mausoleum.
It became an enduring symbol of that period.
In Poland, since 1982, party leaders led the official parades.
In Hungary, May Day was officially celebrated under the communist regime, and remains a public holiday.
Traditionally, the day was marked by dancing around designated "May trees".
Some factories in communist countries were named in honour of International Workers' Day, such as 1 Maja Coal Mine in Wodzisław Śląski, Poland.
In East Germany, the holiday was officially known as Internationaler Kampf-
und
Feiertag der Werktätigen für Frieden und Sozialismus ("International Day of the Struggle and Celebration of the Workers for Peace and Socialism")
; similar names were used in other Eastern Bloc countries.

==
By country ==


===
Africa ===


====
Algeria ====
In Algeria, 1 May is a public holiday celebrated as Labour Day.

====
Angola ====
1
May is recognized as public holiday in Angola and called Workers' Day.

====
Egypt ====
In Egypt, 1 May is known as Labour Day and is considered a paid holiday.
The President of Egypt traditionally presides over the official May Day celebrations.

====
Ethiopia ====
In Ethiopia, 1 May is a public holiday and celebrated as Worker's Day.

====
Ghana ====
1
May is a holiday in Ghana.
It is a day to celebrate all workers across the country.
It is celebrated with a parade by trade unions and labour associations.
The parades are normally addressed by the Secretary General of the trade union congress and by regional secretaries in the regions.
Workers from different workplaces through banners and T-shirts identify their companies.

====
Kenya ====
In Kenya, 1 May is a public holiday and celebrated as Labour Day.
It is a big day addressed by the leaders of the workers' umbrella union body – the Central Organisation of Trade Unions (COTU).
The Minister for Labour (and occasionally the President) address the workers.
Each year, the government approves (and increases)
the minimum wage on Labour Day.

====
Libya ====
In Libya, International Workers' Day was declared a national public holiday by the National Transitional Council in 2012
the first year of the post-Qaddafi era.
On 1 May 1978, then Libyan leader Colonel Mu'ammar Al-Qaddafi addressed the nation in the capital city of Tripoli calling for administrative and also economic reforms across Libya.

====
Morocco ====
In Morocco, 1 May is recognized as a public holiday on 1 May.


====
Mozambique ====
Celebrates workers day on 1 May in Mozambique.

====
Namibia ====
1
May is recognized as public holiday in Namibia and celebrated as Workers' Day.

====
Nigeria ====
Since 1981, 1 May is a public holiday in Nigeria.
On the day, people gather while, traditionally, the president of the Nigeria Labour Congress and other politicians address workers.

====
Somalia ====
In Somalia, 1 May is a public holiday and celebrated as the Labour Day.

====
South Africa ====
In South Africa, Workers' Day has been celebrated as a national public holiday on 1 May each year since 1995.
May Day started to get more attention by African workers in 1928, which saw thousands of workers in a mass march.
In 1950, the South African Communist Party called for a strike on 1 May in response to the Suppression of Communism Act declaring it illegal.
Police violence caused the death of 18 people across Soweto.
It has its origins within the historical struggles of workers and their trade unions internationally for solidarity between working people in their struggles to win fair employment standards and more importantly, to establish a culture of human and worker rights and to ensure that these are enshrined in international law and the national law.
In 1986, the hundredth anniversary of the Haymarket affair, the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) called for the government to establish an official holiday on
1 May. It also called for workers to stay home from work that day.
COSATU was joined by a number of prominent anti-apartheid organizations, including the National Education Crisis Committee and the United Democratic Front (South Africa).
The call was also supported by a number of organizations regarded as conservative, such as the African Teachers' Association of South Africa, the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce, and the Steel and Engineering Industries Federation of South Africa, an organization that represented employers in the metal industries.
More than 1,500,000 workers observed the call and stayed home, as did thousands of students, taxi drivers, vendors, shopkeepers, domestic workers, and self-employed people.
In the following years, 1 May  became a popular, if not official, holiday.
As a result of the killings on May Day 1950 and the success of COSATU's call in 1986, 1 May became associated with resistance to the apartheid government.
After its first universal election in 1994, 1 May was adopted as a public holiday, celebrated for the first time in 1995.
On its website, the city of Durban states that the holiday "celebrate[s]
the role played by trade unions and other labour movements in the fight against South Africa's apartheid regime".
====
Tanzania ====
In Tanzania, it is a public holiday on 1 May and celebrated as the Worker's Day.

====
Tunisia ====
1 May is recognized as Labour Day within Tunisia.

====
Uganda ====
In Uganda, Labour Day is a public holiday on 1 May.


====
Zimbabwe ====
1
May is recognized as public holiday in Zimbabwe and called Workers' Day.
===
Americas ===


====
Argentina ====
In Argentina, Workers' Day is an official holiday on 1 May, and is frequently associated with labour unions.
Celebrations related to labour are held including demonstrations in major cities.

The first Workers' Day celebration was in 1890, when Argentinian unions organized several celebrations in Buenos Aires and other cities, at the same time that the international labour movement celebrated it for the first time.
In 1930, it was established as an official holiday by the Radical Civic Union president Hipólito Yrigoyen.
The day became particularly significant during the worker-oriented government of Juan Domingo Perón (1946–55).
He permitted and endorsed national recognition of the holiday during his tenure in office.

====
Bolivia ===
=
1
May is known as Labour Day and is a holiday.

====
Brazil ====
In Brazil, Workers' Day is an official holiday that is celebrated on 1 May, and unions commemorate it with day-long public events.

====
Canada ====
In Canada, Labour Day is celebrated in September.
In 1894, the government of Prime Minister John Sparrow David Thompson declared the first Monday in September as Canada's official Labour Day.
Labor Day in the United States is on the same day.

May Day is however marked by unions and leftists.
It is celebrated on
1 May. May Day is an important day of trade union and community group protest in the province of Quebec (though not a provincial state holiday).
Celebration of the International Labour Day (or "International Workers' Day"; French: Journée internationale des travailleurs) in Montreal goes back to 1906, organized by the Mutual Aid circle.
The tradition had a renaissance at the time of a mass strike in 1972.
On the 1973 May Day, the first contemporary demonstration was organized by the major trade union confederations; over 30,000 trade unionists took part in this demonstration.

Further, it is the customary date on which the minimum wage rises.

====
Chile ====
President Carlos Ibáñez del Campo decreed 1 May a national holiday in 1931, in honour of the dignity of workers.
All stores and public services must close for the entire day, and the major trade unions of Chile, represented in the national organization Workers' United Center of Chile (Central Unitaria de Trabajadores), organize rallies during the morning hours, with festivities and cookouts in the later part of the day, in all the major cities of Chile.
During these rallies, representatives of the major left-wing political parties speak to the assemblies on the issues of the day concerning workers' rights.

====
Colombia ====
1
May has long been recognized as Labour Day and almost all workers respect it as a national holiday.
As in many other countries, it is common to see rallies by the trade unions in all over the main regional capitals of the country.

====
Costa Rica ====
First celebrated in 1913, labor day is a public holiday, and at the same time an important day for government activities.

On this day, the President of Costa Rica gives a speech to the citizens and the legislature of Costa Rica about the duties that were undertaken through the previous year.
The president of the legislature is also chosen by its members.

====
Cuba ====
This day is known as Labour Day in Cuba.
People march in the streets, showing their support to the Cuban Communist government and the Cuban Revolution during the whole morning.

====
Dominican Republic ====
1
May is a national holiday known as Labour Day and celebrated by workers' parades and demonstration.

====
Ecuador ====
In Ecuador, 1 May is an official public holiday known as Labour Day.
People do not go to work and spend time with their relatives or gather for demonstrations.

====
El Salvador ===
=
1
May is an official public holiday known as Labour Day.

====
Guatemala ====
1
May is an official public holiday known as Labour Day.

====
Haiti ====
1
May is an official public holiday known as Agriculture and Labour Day.

====
Honduras ===
=
1
May is an official holiday, known as "Labour Day" within Honduras.

====
Mexico ====
1
May is a federal holiday.
It also commemorates the Cananea Strike of 1906 in the Mexican state of Sonora.

====
Panama ===
=
1
May is an official public holiday, known as "Labour Day" within Panama.

====
Paraguay ====
1
May is an official public holiday, known as "Labour Day" within Paraguay.

====
Peru ====
1
May is an official public holiday, known as "Labour Day" within Peru.

====
United States ====
In the United States, a "Labor Day", celebrated on the first Monday of each September was given increasing state recognition from 1887, and became an official federal holiday in 1894.Efforts to switch Labor Day from September to 1
May have not been successful.

In 1947, 1 May was established as Loyalty Day by the U.S. Veterans of Foreign Wars as a way to counter communist influence and recruitment at May Day rallies.
Loyalty Day was celebrated across the country with patriotic parades and ceremonies, however the growing conflict over U.S. involvement in Vietnam detracted from the popularity of these celebrations.
In 1958, the American Bar Association campaigned to have 1 May designated as Law Day, which was acknowledged in 1961 by a joint resolution of Congress.
Law Day exercises, such as mock trials and courthouse tours, are often sponsored by the American Bar Association.

Unions and radical organizations including anarchist groups and socialist and communist parties have kept the international May Day tradition alive with rallies and demonstrations.
In 1919 especially large demonstrations took place, and violence greeted the normally peaceful parades in Boston, New York, and Cleveland and a number of people were killed.
In Milwaukee, an annual commemoration takes place at the site of the killing of seven workers during an 8 hour march.
Some of the largest examples of this occurred during the Great Depression of the 1930s, when hundreds of thousands of workers marched in May Day parades in New York's Union Square, while cities like Chicago and Duluth saw large demonstrations organized by the communist party.

In 2006, 1 May was chosen by mostly Latino immigrant groups in the United States as the day for the Great American Boycott, a general strike of undocumented immigrant workers and supporters to protest H.R. 4437, immigration reform legislation that they felt was draconian.

From 10 April to 1 May of that year, immigrant families in the U.S. called for immigrant rights, workers' rights and amnesty for undocumented workers.
They were joined by socialist and other leftist organizations on
1 May. On 1 May 2007, a mostly peaceful demonstration in Los Angeles in support of undocumented immigrant workers ended with a widely televised dispersal by police officers.
In March 2008, the International Longshore and Warehouse Union announced that dockworkers will move no cargo at any West Coast ports on 1 May 2008, as a protest against the continuation of the Iraq War and the diversion of resources from domestic needs.
On 1 May 2012, members of Occupy Wall Street and labor unions held protests together in a number of cities in the United States and Canada to commemorate May Day and to protest the state of the economy and economic inequality.

On 1 May 2017, immigrants' rights advocates, labor unions and leftists held protests against the immigration and economic policies of President Donald Trump in cities throughout the US, Chicago and Los Angeles having some of the largest marches.
On 1 May 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, "workers from at Amazon, Whole Foods, Instacart, Walmart, FedEx, Target, and Shipt say they will walk off the job ... to protest their employers’ failure to provide basic protections for frontline workers who are risking and losing their lives at work."
Additionally, on the same day, there will be a rent strike, the largest in nearly a century.

====
Uruguay ====
In Uruguay, 1 May – Workers' Day – is an official holiday.
Even when it is associated with labour unions, almost all workers tend to respect it.
Since the late 1990s, the main event takes place at the First of May Square in Montevideo.

====
Venezuela ====
1
May is an official holiday in Venezuela.
El Día del Trabajador is celebrated on 1 May in Venezuela since 1936, but from 1938 to 1945 it was held on 24 July, by an order of Eleazar López Contreras.
However, Isaías Medina Angarita changed it back to 1 May in 1945.

===
East Asia ===


====
China ====
=====
Mainland China =====
1
May is a statutory holiday in the People's Republic of China.
Prior to 2008, it was a three-day holiday, but is now just the one day.
However, it is usually supplemented by two other days to give the appearance of a three-day holiday, but not being statutory holidays the extra days have to be "made up" by working either the preceding or following weekend.
For example, in 2013, 1 May fell on Wednesday.
Most workplaces, including all government offices, took Monday 29 April, Tuesday 30 April, and Wednesday 1 May off.
As the first two days were not statutory holidays they had to be "made up" by working the preceding weekend (27 and 28 April).

=====
Hong Kong =====
In Hong Kong, 1 May is known as Labour Day and has been considered a public holiday since 1999.

=====
Macau =====
In Macau, it is a public holiday and is officially known as Dia do
Trabalhador (Portuguese for "Workers' Day").
====
Taiwan ====
1
May is known as Labor Day in Taiwan, an official holiday, though not everybody gets a day off.
Students and teachers do not have this day off.

====
Japan ====
May Day is not officially designated by the Japanese government as a national holiday, but as it lies between other national holidays, it is a day off work for the vast majority of Japanese workers.
Many employers give it as a day off, and otherwise workers take it as "paid leave".
1
May occurs during "Golden Week", together with 29 April ("Shōwa Day")
, 3 May ("Constitution Memorial Day"), 4 May ("Greenery Day") and 5 May ("Children's Day").
Workers generally take the day off work not so much to join street rallies or labour union gatherings, but more to go on holiday for several consecutive days (in Japanese corporate culture, taking weekdays off for personal pleasure is widely frowned upon).

Some major labour unions organize rallies and demonstrations in Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya.
Japan has a long history of labour activism and has had a communist and socialist party in the Diet since 1945.
In 2008, the National Confederation of Trade Unions (Zenrōren) held a rally in Yoyogi Park attended by 44,000 participants, while the National Trade Unions Council (Zenrōkyō) held its May Day rally at Hibiya Park.
Rengō, the largest Japanese trade union, held its May Day rally on the following Saturday (3 May), allegedly to distance itself from the more radical labour unions.

====
North Korea ====
In the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 1 May is known as International Workers' Day, and is a public holiday.
Celebrations, local meetings and rallies are held every year throughout the country to honor the holiday.
The Rungnado May Day Stadium in the capital of Pyongyang is named in honor of the holiday.

====
South Korea ====
In the Republic of Korea, 1 May is known simply as "Workers' Day".
It is not a public holiday, but a paid holiday for workers by the Designation of Workers' Day Act.

===
Europe ===


====
Albania ====
Labour Day (Albanian: Dita e punëtorëve) is an official holiday celebrated on 1 May and thus schools and most businesses are closed.

====
Armenia ====
Labour Day
(Armenian:
Աշխատանքի օր, ashxatanki or) is an official holiday celebrated on 1 May.


====
Austria ====
Labour Day (Tag der Arbeit), officially called Staatsfeiertag (state's holiday), is a public holiday in Austria.
Left parties, especially social democrats organize celebrations with marches and speeches in all major cities.
In smaller towns and villages those marches are held the night before.

====
Belgium ====
In Belgium, Labour Day (Dutch:
Dag van de Arbeid, Feest van de Arbeid, French: Journée des travailleurs, Fête du travail), is observed on 1 May and is an official holiday since 1948.
Various socialist and communist organizations hold parades and other events in different cities.

====
Bosnia and Herzegovina ====
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, 1 and 2 May (Bosnian and Serbian: Prvi Maj / Први Mај, Croatian: Prvi Svibanj) are an official holiday and day-off for public bodies and schools at the national level.
Most people celebrate this holiday by visiting natural parks and resorts.
Additionally, in some places public events are organized.
In its capital city, Sarajevo, 12 and 13 June are also celebrated as Labour day due to its many natural parks and springs.

====
Bulgaria ====
Labour Day is one of the public holidays in Bulgaria, where it is known as Labour Day and International Workers' Solidarity Day (Bulgarian:
Ден на труда и
на
международната работническа солидарност) and celebrated annually on
1 May. The first attempt to celebrate it was in 1890 by the Bulgarian Typographical Association.
In 1939, Labour Day was declared an official holiday.
Since 1945 the communist authorities in the People's Republic of Bulgaria began to celebrate the holiday every year.
After the end of socialism in Bulgaria in 1989 Labour Day continues to be an official and public holiday, but state authorities are not committed to the organization of mass events.

====
Croatia ====
In Croatia, 1 May is a national holiday.
Many public events are organized and held all over the country where bean soup is given out to all people as a symbol of a real workers' dish.
Red carnations are also handed out to symbolise the origin of the day.
In Zagreb, the capital, a major gathering is in Maksimir Park, which is located in the east part of Zagreb.
In Split, city on the coast, people go to Marjan, a park-forest at the western end of Split peninsula.

====
Cyprus ====
In Cyprus, 1 May (Greek: Εργατική Πρωτομαγιά) is considered as an official Public Holiday (Labour Day).
In general, all stores remain closed in public and private sector.
The Labor Union and Syndicates celebrate with various festivals and events across the country.

====
Czech Republic ====
In the Czech Republic, 1 May is an official and national holiday known as Labour Day
(Czech: Svátek práce).

====
Denmark ====
In Denmark, 1 May is not an official holiday, but a variety of individuals, mostly in the public sector, construction industry, and production industry, get a half or a whole day off.
It was first celebrated in Copenhagen in 1890.
The location of the first celebration, the Fælledparken, still plays an important part today with speeches by politicians and trade unionists to mark the occasion.
Many other events are also held around the country to commemorate the day.

====
Estonia ====
In Estonia, 1 May is a public holiday and celebrated as part of May Day (Kevadpüha).
It also coincides with Walpurgis Day (volbripäev).

====
Finland ====
In Finland, 1 May is an official and national holiday.
Apart from Workers' Day (officially: suomalaisen työn päivä, "day of Finnish labour"), it is also celebrated as a feast of students, and spring, called vappu or Walpurgis Night.

====
France ====
In France, 1 May is a public holiday.
It is, in fact, the only day of the year when employees are legally obliged to be given leave, save professions that cannot be interrupted due to their nature (such as workers in hospitals and public transport).
Demonstrations and marches are a Labour Day tradition in France, where trade unions organize parades in major cities to defend workers' rights.

It is also customary to offer a lily of the valley to friends or family.
This custom dates back to 1561, when king Charles IX, aged 10, waiting for his accession to the throne, gave a lily of the valley to all ladies present.
Today, the fiscal administration exempts individuals and workers' organizations from any tax or administrative duties related to the sales of lilies of the valley, provided they are gathered from the wild, and not bought to be resold.

====
Germany ====
In April 1933, the recently installed Nazi government declared 1 May the "Day of National Work", an official state holiday, and announced that all celebrations were to be organized by the government.
Any separate celebrations by Communists, Social Democrats or labour unions were banned.
After World War II, 1 May remained a state holiday in both East and West Germany.
In communist East Germany, workers were de facto required to participate in large state-organized parades on May Day.
Today in Germany it is simply called "Labour Day" (Tag der Arbeit), and there are numerous demonstrations and celebrations by independent workers' organizations.
Today, Berlin witnesses yearly demonstrations on May Day, the largest organised by labour unions, political parties, the far left and the leftist Autonomen.

Since 1987, May Day has also become known for riots in some districts of Berlin.
After police actions against radical leftists in that year's annual demonstrations, the Autonomen scattered and sought cover at the ongoing annual street fair in Kreuzberg.
Three years prior to the reunification of Germany, violent protests would only take place in the former West Berlin.
The protesters began tipping over police cars, violently resisting arrest, and began building barricades after the police withdrew due to the unforeseen resistance.
Cars were set on fire, shops plundered and burned to the ground.
The police eventually ended the riots the following night.
These violent forms of protests by the radical left later increasingly involved participants without political motivation.
Annual street fairs have proven an effective way to prevent riots, and May Day in 2005 and 2006 have been among the most peaceful known to Berlin in nearly 25 years.
In recent years, neo-Nazis and other groups on the far right, such as the National Democratic Party of Germany, have used the day to schedule public demonstrations, often leading to clashes with left-wing protesters, which turned especially violent in Leipzig in 1998 and 2005.May Day violence flared up again in 2010.
After an approved far-right demonstration was blocked by leftists, a parade by an estimated 10,000 leftists and anarchists turned violent and resulted in an active response by the Berlin Police.

====
Greece ====
In Greece 1 May is an optional public holiday.
The Ministry of Labour retains the right to classify it as an official public holiday on an annual basis, and it customarily does so.

The day is called Ergatikí Proto-magiá (Εργατική Πρωτομαγιά
, lit.
"
Workers' 1 May") and
celebrations are marked by demonstrations in which left-wing political parties, anti-authority groups, and workers' unions participate.

On May Day in 2010, there were major protests all over Greece, most notably Athens and Thessaloniki, by many left, anarchist and communist supporters and some violent clashes with riot police who were sent out to contain the protesters.
They opposed economic reforms, an end to job losses and wage cuts in the face of the government's proposals of massive public spending cuts.
These reforms are to fall in line with the IMF-EU-ECB loan proposals, which demand that Greece liberalize its economy and cut its public spending and private sector wages, which many believe will decrease living standards.

====
Hungary ====
Hungary celebrates 1 May as a national holiday, with open-air festivities and fairs all over the country.
Many towns raise May poles and festivals with various themes are organized around the holiday.
Left-wing parties and trade unions hold public rallies commemorating Labour Day.

====
Iceland ====
In Iceland the Labour Day (Icelandic: Baráttudagur verkalýðsins) is a public holiday.
The first demonstration for workers rights in Iceland occurred in 1923.
A parade composed of trade unions and other groups marches through towns and cities across the country and speeches are delivered.
However, some private businesses are open, mainly in the capital.

====
Ireland ====
The Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ITUC) marks May Day with rallies take place in Belfast and Dublin and other events such as lectures, concerts and film screenings
also take place around a wider May Day festival.
The first Monday in May has been a public holiday in the Republic of Ireland since 1994 and in Northern Ireland since 1978.
In the Republic the public holiday was demanded by the ITUC and proposed by the Labour Party in negotiating its 1992–94 coalition government with Fianna Fáil, and marked the centenary of the ITUC's predecessor, the Irish Trades Union Congress.
The public holiday has no official designation, as "Workers' Day" or otherwise.
In 2005, Labour's Ruairi Quinn condemned, as a slight to workers, an alleged Fianna Fáil proposal to replace the May holiday with one on 24 April commemorating the 1916 Rising; in fact the proposal was for an extra holiday.

====
Italy ====
The first May Day celebration in Italy took place in 1890.
It started initially as an attempt to celebrate workers' achievements in their struggle for their rights and for better social and economic conditions.
It was abolished under the Fascist regime and immediately restored after the Second World War.
(
During the fascist period, a "Holiday of the Italian Labour" (Festa del lavoro italiano) was celebrated on 21 April, the date of Natale di Roma, when ancient Rome was allegedly founded.)
May Day is now an important celebration in Italy and is a national holiday regardless of what day of the week it falls.
The Concerto del Primo Maggio ("1st of May Concert"), organized by Italian labour unions in Rome in Piazza di Porta San Giovanni has become an important event in recent years.
Every year the concert is attended by a large audience of mostly young people and involves the participation of many famous bands and songwriters, lasting from 3 pm until midnight.
The concert is usually broadcast live by Rai 3.
====
Lithuania ====
First May Day is an official public holiday celebrated as International Work Day (Lithuanian: Tarptautinė darbo diena).
Celebrations for workers' day were mandatory during the Soviet occupation, and carry a negative connotation as a result today.
As Lithuania declared its independence in 1990, Work Day lost its public holiday status, but regained it in 2001.

====
Latvia ====
First May Day is an official public holiday celebrated as Convocation of the Constituent Assembly of the Republic of Latvia, Labour Day.

====
Luxembourg ====
In Luxembourg, 1 May, called the Dag vun der Aarbecht
("Day of Labour"), is a legal holiday traditionally associated with large demonstrations by trade unions in Luxembourg City and other cities.

====
Malta ====
In Malta, 1 May is an official public holiday celebrated as "Workers' Day", together with the religious feast of "Saint Joseph the Worker".
(
Saint Joseph's Day, 19 March, the saint's main feast, is also a public holiday in Malta.)
A free music event takes place on
1 May. The Maltese also celebrate Maltese accession to the European Union on 1 May 2004.

====
Montenegro ====
1
May is an official public holiday and a day off work and a day out of school.
It is the only official holiday from socialist times that is still officially celebrated.

====
Netherlands ====
In the Netherlands, 1 May or Labour Day (Dutch: Dag van de Arbeid)
is not an official holiday.

====
North Macedonia ====
In North Macedonia, 1 May (Macedonian:
Ден на Трудот, Den na Trydot) is an official public holiday.
Before 2007, 2 may was also a public holiday.
People celebrate with friends and family at traditional picnics across the country, accompanied by the usual outdoor games, various grilled meats and beverages.
Left organizations and some trade unions organize protests on 1
May.


====
Norway ====
In Norway, Labour Day (Norwegian: Arbeidernes Dag) is celebrated 1 May and is an official public holiday.
It is traditionally a day of marches, speeches and parties organized by labour unions, leftist political parties and feminist and anti-racist organizations to voice political concerns and celebrate solidarity.

====
Poland ====
In Poland, since the fall of communism, 1 May is officially celebrated as May Day, but is commonly called Labour Day.

it is currently celebrated without a specific connotation, and as such it is May Day.
However, due to historical connotations, most of the large organized celebrations are focused around Labour Day festivities.
It is customary for labour activists to organize parades in cities and towns across Poland.
The holiday is also commonly referred to as "Labour Day" (Polish: Święto Pracy).

In Poland, May Day is closely followed by May 3rd Constitution Day.
These two dates combined often result in a long weekend called Majówka, which may last for up to 9 days from 28 April to 6 May, at the cost of taking only 3 days off.
People often travel, and Majówka is unofficially considered the start of barbecuing season in Poland.
Between these two, on 2 May, there is a patriotic holiday, the Day of the Polish Flag
(Dzień Flagi Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej), introduced by a Parliamentary Act of 20 February 2004.
The day, however, does not force paid time off.

In Soviet times, streets, places, squares, parks and also factories were frequently named in honor of International Workers' Day, such as 1 Maja Coal Mine in Wodzisław Śląski.

====
Portugal ====
In Portugal, the 1 May celebration (Portuguese: Primeiro de Maio) was suppressed during the dictatorship of António de Oliveira Salazar and Marcelo Caetanos Estado Novo regime.
The first workers' day demonstration was held a week after the Carnation Revolution of 25 April 1974.
It is still the largest demonstration in the history of Portugal.
It is used as an opportunity for workers and  workers' groups to voice their discontent over working conditions in demonstrations across Portugal, the largest being held in Lisbon.
It is an official public holiday.

====
Romania ====
In Romania, 1 May, known as the International Labour Day (Romanian:
Ziua internațională a muncii), the International Workers' Day
(Ziua internațională a oamenilor muncii), or simply 1/
First of May (1/Întâi Mai),  is an official public holiday.
During the communist regime, like in all former Eastern Bloc countries, the day was marked by large state-organized parades in most towns and cities.
After the Romanian Revolution of 1989, 1 May continues to be an official public holiday, but without any state organized events or parades.
Most people celebrate together with friends and family, organising picnics and barbecues.
It is also the first day of the year when people, especially those from the southeastern part of the country including the capital Bucharest, go to spend the day in one of the Romanian Black Sea resorts.

====
Russia ====
May Day, also known in Russia as the Day of International Workers Solidarity, the 1st of May (Russian: День международной солидарности трудящихся Первое ма́я) was celebrated illegally in the country until the February Revolution enabled the first legal celebration in 1917.
The following year, after the Bolshevik seizure of power, the May Day celebrations were boycotted by Mensheviks, Left Socialist Revolutionaries and anarchists.
It became an important official holiday of the Soviet Union, celebrated with elaborate popular parade in the centre of the major cities.
The biggest celebration was traditionally organized in Red Square, where the General Secretary of the CPSU and other party and government leaders stood atop Lenin's Mausoleum and waved to the crowds.
Until 1969, the holiday was marked by military parades throughout the RSFSR and the union republics.
The following was the order of the march past:

Parade commander holding the appointment of commanding officer of the Moscow Military District
Corps of Drums of the Moscow Military Music CollegeFrunze Military Academy
V.I. Lenin Military Political Academy
Felix Dzerzhinsky Artillery Academy
Military
Armored Forces Academy Marshal Rodion Malinovsky
Military Engineering Academy
Military Academy of Chemical Defense and Control
Yuri Gagarin Air Force Academy
Prof. Nikolai Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy
Delegation of naval officer cadets from the Soviet Navy
98th Guards Airborne Division
Moscow Border Guards Institute of the Border Defence Forces of the KGB "Moscow City Council"
Separate Operational Purpose Division
336th
Marine Brigade of the Baltic Fleet
Suvorov Military School and Nakhimov Naval Schools
Moscow Military Combined Arms Command Training School
"Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR"
Mobile Column
2nd Guards Motor Rifle Division
4th Guards Tank Division
Missile Troops and Artillery of the Moscow Military District
1st Aerospace Defense Army
Northern Fleet and Baltic Fleet Coastal Defense, Surface and Submarine Forces (until 1974)
Massed Bands of the Moscow Military District
(parade finale)The
first of these parades were held 1918, when Vladimir Lenin presided over a ceremony at Khodynka Field.
Notable parades included the parade of 1941 (which saw the presence of a Wehrmacht delegation led by Ernst August Köstring) and 1963 (where Cuban leader Fidel Castro was a guest).
The only parades on 1 May to be cancelled were the parades scheduled during the years of the Second World War and the 1965 parade (this was cancelled to make way for the 1965 Moscow Victory Day Parade nine days later).
In 1979, ten years after the last annual parade, a brief exhibition drill and military tattoo of the forces of the Moscow Garrison took place.
In 1991, which preceded the last year that demonstrations were held in Red Square, May Day grew into high-spirited political action.
Around 50,000 people participated in a rally in Red Square in 1991 after which the tradition was interrupted for 13 years.
In the early post-Soviet period the holiday turned into massive political gatherings of supporters of radically minded politicians.
For instance, an action dubbed as "a rally of communist-oriented organisations" was held in Red Square in 1992.
The rally began with performance of the Soviet Union anthem and raising the Red Flag and ended with appeals from the leader of opposition movement Working Moscow, Viktor Anpilov, "for early dismissal of President Boris Yeltsin, ousting Moscow Mayor Gavriil Popov from power and putting the latter on trial".
Since 1992, May Day is officially called "The Day of Spring and Labour", and remains a major holiday in present-day Russia.

Since 2014 a national civil parade is held on that day on Red Square with similar events held in major cities and regional capitals.

====
Serbia ====
In Serbia, 1 May (and also 2 May) is a day off work and a day out of school.
It is one of the major popular holidays, and the only official holiday from socialist times that is still officially celebrated.
People celebrate it all over the country.
By tradition 1 May is celebrated by countryside picnics and outdoor barbecues.
May is marked by warm weather in Serbia.
In Belgrade, the capital, most people go to Avala or Košutnjak, which are parks located in Rakovica and Čukarica.
People go around the country to enjoy nature.
A major religious holiday of Djurdjevdan is on 6
May
so quite often days off work are given to connect these two holidays and weekend, creating a small spring break.
1
May is celebrated by most of the population regardless of political views.

==== Slovakia ====
In Slovakia, 1 May is an official holiday.
Celebrations are held surrounding workers' day but are also connected with the commemoration of the entry of the Slovak Republic into the European Union (1 May 2004).
====
Slovenia ====
In Slovenia, 1 May and 2
May are public holidays.
There are many official events all over the country to celebrate workers' day.
In Ljubljana, the capital, the main celebration is held on Rožnik Hill in the city.
On the night of 30 April, bonfires are traditionally burned.

====
Spain ====
The first Día del Trabajador was celebrated in 1889 but only became a public holiday with the beginning of the Spanish Second Republic in 1931.
It was banned afterwards by the Franco regime in 1937.
The year after it was decreed that the "Fiesta de la Exaltacion del Trabajo," or Labor Festival, be held on 18 July, the anniversary of the Francoist military coup, instead.
After the death of Francisco Franco in 1975 and the move towards democracy, the first large rallies on 1
May began again in 1977.
It was re-introduced as a public holiday in 1978.
Commonly, peaceful demonstrations and parades occur in major and minor cities.

====
Sweden ====
1 May has been an important part of Swedish history since the late 19th century.
The day was made a public holiday in 1938 but had been celebrated by the Swedish Social Democratic Party and the left since 1890.
The first May Day celebration gathered more than 50,000 people in central Stockholm.
The crowd went to hear speeches by the leading figures in the Swedish labour movement such as Hjalmar Branting (later prime minister), August Palm and Hinke Bergegren.
During World War
I the demonstrations mainly had a peace message and the Liberal Party
also joined the demonstrations.
The eight-hour working day and women's suffrage were the principal themes during the troubled times after World War I.
Recognizing the central contributions of workers and international worker solidarity in Swedish social, economic, political and cultural development, May Day demonstrations are an important part of Swedish politics and culture for social democrats, left parties, and unions.
In Stockholm the  Social Democratic Party always marches towards Norra Bantorget, the historical, physical centre of the Swedish labour movement, where they hold speeches in front of the headquarters of the Swedish Trade Union Confederation, while the smaller Left Party marches in larger numbers towards Kungsträdgården.

Since 1967, the Communist Party and its youth wing, Revolutionary Communist Youth, have held their own May Day march, known as Röd Front ('Red Front').
In 2016, Röd Front marches were held at 33 locations across the country.
The largest Röd Front marches are usually held in the industrial and financial port town of Gothenburg, Sweden's second-largest city and one of the party's strongholds.

====
Switzerland ====
In Switzerland, the status of 1 May differs depending on the canton and sometimes on the municipality.
Labour Day is known as Tag der Arbeit in German-speaking cantons, as Fête du travail in the French-speaking cantons, and as Festa del lavoro in the Italian-speaking canton of Ticino.

In the cantons of Basel-Landschaft, Basel-Stadt, Jura, Neuchâtel, and Zürich, Labour Day is an official public holiday equal to Sundays, based on federal law
(Bundesgesetz über die Arbeit in Industrie, Gewerbe und Handel, article 20a).

In the cantons of Schaffhausen, Thurgau, and Ticino, Labour Day is an official "day off" (Ruhetag).
This is equal in practice to an official public holiday, but is not based on federal law and cantonal regulations may differ in details.

In the canton of Solothurn it is an official half-day holiday (starting at 12 noon).

In the canton of Fribourg, public servants get the afternoon off, many companies follow this practice.

In the canton of Aargau it is not an official holiday, but most employees get the afternoon off.

In the municipalities of Hildisrieden and Schüpfheim (both in the canton of Lucerne) as well as in Muotathal (canton of Schwyz), 1 May is an official public holiday, but as commemoration day of the local patron saint, not as Labour Day.
In the other parts of the cantons of Lucerne and Schwyz, 1 May is a regular work day.

In all other cantons, 1 May is a regular work day.
The largest Labour Day celebrations in Switzerland are held in the city of Zürich.
Each year, Zürich's 1 May committee, together with the Swiss Federation of Trade Unions, organizes a festival and 1 May rally.
It is the largest rally held on a regular basis in Switzerland.

====
Turkey ====
1
May is an official holiday celebrated in Turkey.
It was a holiday until 1981 when it was cancelled after the 1980 coup d'état.
In 2010, the Turkish government restored the holiday after some casualties and demonstrations.
Taksim Square is the centre of the celebrations due to the Taksim Square massacre.

Workers' Day was first celebrated in 1912 in İstanbul and in 1899 in İzmir.
After the establishment of the Turkish Republic, it became an official holiday.
In 1924, it was forbidden by a decree and in both 1924 and 1925, demonstrations were intervened by arm floats.
In 1935, The National Assembly declared Workers' Day to be a holiday again.
During the events leading to the 1980 Turkish coup d'etat, a massacre occurred on 1 May 1977 (Taksim Square massacre), in which unknown people (agents provocateurs) opened fire on the crowd.

The crowd was the biggest in Turkish workers' history with the number of people approximating 500,000.
In the next two years, provocations and confusion continued and peaked before the 1980 coup d'etat.
The Workers' Day holiday was cancelled once again.
Still, demonstrations continued with small crowds, and in 1996, three people were killed by police bullets, and a plain-clothes man who spied in the crowd was revealed and lynched by workers.
On the same evening, a video broadcast on TV showed that two participants in the demonstration were lynched by far right-wing nationalist groups and this lynching occurred in front of police forces who were watching the scene with happy faces.
Thus, 1 May 1996 has been remembered by workers' movements.
In 2007, the 30th anniversary of the Taksim square massacre, leftist workers' unions wanted to commemorate the massacre in Taksim Square.
Since the government would not let them into the square, 580–700 people were stopped and 1 person died under police control.
After these events, the government declared 1 May as "Work and Solidarity Day" but not as a holiday.
In the next year, the day was declared as a holiday, but people were still not allowed to gather in Taksim Square.
The year 2008 was remembered with police violence in Istanbul.
Police fired tear gas grenades among the crowds, and into hospitals and a primary school.
Workers pushed forward so that in 2010, 140,000 people gathered in Taksim, and in 2011 there were more than half a million demonstrators.

After three years of peaceful meetings in 2013, meetings in Taksim Square were forbidden by the government.
Clashes occurred between police and workers; water cannon and tear gas have been widely used.

====
Ukraine ====
It is a public holiday in Ukraine, inherited from the Soviet era.
May Day as a day of workers' solidarity in Kiev began as early as 1894.
Until 2018, 2 May was also a public holiday (as in the Soviet era), instead in 2017 Western Christianity's Christmas celebrated 25 December became a new Ukrainian public holiday.
The 1 May International Workers' Day remained a Ukrainian public holiday, although it was renamed (also in 2017) from "Day of International Solidarity of Workers" to "Labour Day".
In 2015, May Day rallies were banned in Kyiv and Kharkiv.
Late May 2015 laws that ban communist symbols came into effect in Ukraine, thus banning communist symbols, singing the Soviet national hymn or the Internationale.
According to Interior Minister Arsen Avakov during the 2016 May Day rallies in some major cities the number of police officers far outnumbered the number of rally participants.
With in Dnipro 193 policemen protecting 25 rally participants.

==== United Kingdom ====
A public bank holiday in the United Kingdom known as May Day was created in 1978 and is held on the first Monday in May each year.
There are many traditional May Day rites and celebrations, some of which have been held for hundreds of years.
However, it was not until the late 20th century that May Day in Great Britain became linked to International Workers' Day, and the holiday is not officially a "Labour Day".

In recent years, the anti-capitalist movement has organized a number of large protests in London, Glasgow, Edinburgh, and Doncaster.
In London, these have resulted in clashes with the police.
In 2000, the clashes ended with a branch of McDonald's being smashed and a statue of Winston Churchill being given a grass Mohawk hairstyle.
The Cenotaph was also defaced with graffiti.
In the last few years, demonstrations have been more peaceful, with marches and gatherings, particularly in central London.
The Conservative-led coalition government in March 2011 announced plans to move the May Day bank holiday to October to lengthen the tourist season, although as of 2017 nothing had come of this.
A London rally on May Day is organized by the London May Day Organising Committee.

===
Oceania ===


====
Australia ====
While unofficial activities and commemorations associated with International Workers Day occur on May Day in Australia, Labour Day in the various states and territories generally falls on other days.
Only in the Northern Territory (where it is called May Day)
and Queensland is Labour Day celebrated on the first Monday in May, which is a public holiday under the name of "May Day".
Queensland holds the biggest rallies in Australia, with the rally in Brisbane averaging 30,000 people.
In Australia, one of the first May Day marches occurred in Queensland on 1 May 1891.
There are also rallies held in Cairns, Rockhampton, Townsville, Barcaldine, Ipswich, Toowoomba, Bundaberg, Maryborough, Sunshine Coast, Gold Coast and other regional centres.

====
New Zealand ====
New Zealand workers were among the first in the world to claim the right for an eight-hour working day when, in 1840, the carpenter Samuel Parnell won an eight-hour day in Wellington.
Labour Day was first celebrated in New Zealand on 28 October 1890.
Labour day falls every year on the fourth Monday of October.

===
South Asia ===


====
Bangladesh ====
In Bangladesh, 1 May Day is a public holiday and called May Day.
A parade and other events are held on the day to commemorate the occasion.

====
India ====
In India, Labour Day is a public holiday held on
every 1 May. The holiday is tied to labour movements for communist and socialist political parties.
Labour Day is known as "Uzhaipalar dhinam" in Tamil and was first celebrated in Madras, "Kamgar Din" in Hindi, "Karmikara Dinacharane" in Kannada,"Karmika Dinotsavam" in Telugu, "Kamgar Divas" in Marathi, "Thozhilaali Dinam" in Malayalam and "Shromik Dibosh" in Bengali.
Since Labour day is not a national holiday, Labour day is observed as public holiday at State Government's discretion.
Many parts especially in North Indian States
it is not a public holiday.
The first celebration in India was organized in Madras (now Chennai) by the Labour Kisan Party of Hindustan on 1 May 1923.
This was also the first time the red flag was used in India.
The party leader Singaravelu Chettiar made arrangements to celebrate May Day in two places in 1923.
One meeting was held at the beach opposite to the Madras High Court; the other meeting was held at the Triplicane beach.
The Hindu newspaper, published from Madras reported,
The Labour Kisan party has introduced May Day celebrations in Madras.
Comrade Singaravelar presided over the meeting.
A resolution was passed stating that the government should declare May Day as a holiday.
The president of the party explained the non-violent principles of the party.
There was a request for financial aid.
It was emphasised that workers of the world must unite to achieve independence.

1
May is also celebrated as "Maharashtra Day" and "Gujarat Day" to mark the date in 1960, when the two western states attained statehood after the erstwhile Bombay State was divided on linguistic lines.
Maharashtra Day is held at Shivaji Park in central Mumbai.
Schools and offices in Maharashtra remain closed on
1 May. A similar parade is held to celebrate Gujarat Day in Gandhinagar.

Vaiko (Vai Gopalsamy), General Secretary of Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, appealed to the then Prime Minister V. P. Singh to declare 1 May as a national holiday, to which the PM heeded and from then on it became a national holiday to celebrate International Labour Day.

====
Maldives ====
Maldives first observed the holiday in 2011, after a declaration by President Mohamed Nasheed.
He noted that this move highlighted the government's commitment as well as efforts of private parties to protect and promote workers' rights in the Maldives.

====
Nepal ====
1 May Day has been celebrated in Nepal since 1963.
The day became a public holiday in 2007.

====
Pakistan ====
International Labour Day is observed in Pakistan on 1 May to commemorate the social and economic achievements of workers.
It is a public and national holiday.
Many organized street demonstrations take place on Labor Day, where workers and labor unions protest against labor repression and demand for more rights, better wages and benefits.

====
Sri Lanka ====
In Sri Lanka, it is observed on 1 May and is a government and public holiday.
The government has held official May Day celebrations in major towns and cities, with the largest being in the capital, Colombo.
During celebrations, it is common to witness party leaders greeting the crowds.
Workers frequently carry banners with political slogans and many parties decorate their vehicles.

===
Southeast Asia ===


====
Cambodia ====
In Cambodia, it is known as International Labour Day and is a public holiday.
No marches for labour day were permitted in Cambodia for several years after the 2013 Cambodian general election and surrounding mass protetsts.
A tightly controlled march on a limited scale was first permitted again in 2019.

====
Indonesia ====
May Day (often referred locally as Labour Day) in Indonesia was first observed as a public holiday from 2014.
Every year on the day, labourers take over the streets in major cities across the country, voicing their demands for better income & a supportive policy by the ministries.

====
Malaysia ====
Malaysia began observing the holiday in 1972 following an announcement by the late Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister, Ismail Abdul Rahman.

====
Myanmar ====
In Myanmar, 1 May is known as Labour Day (Burmese: အလုပ်သမားနေ့)  and is a public holiday.

====
Philippines ===
=
1
May is known as Labor Day
(Filipino:
Araw ng mga Manggaggawa) and is a public holiday in the Philippines.
On this day, labour organizations and unions hold protests in major cities.

On 1 May 1903, during the American colonial period the Unión Obrera Democrática Filipina (Filipino Democratic Labor Union) held a 100,000-person rally in front of the Malacañang Palace demanding workers' economic rights and Philippine independence.
Ten years later, the first official celebration was held on 1 May 1913 when 36 labour unions convened for a congress in Manila.
On 1 May 2001, a mass demonstration occurred near Malacañang Palace known as EDSA 3 or 1 May Riots.

During the Presidency of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, a policy was adopted called holiday economics policy that moved holidays to either a Monday or a Friday to create a long weekend of three days.
In 2002, Labor Day was moved to the Monday nearest to
1 May. Labour groups protested, as they accused the Arroyo administration of belittling the holiday.
By 2008, Labor Day was excluded in the holiday economics policy, returning the commemorations to 1 May, no matter what day of the week it falls on.
====
Singapore ====
In Singapore, it is known as Labour Day and is a public holiday.

====
Thailand ====
In Thailand, the day is known in English as National Labour Day, and is one of 17 official public holidays in Thailand.

====
Vietnam ====
In Vietnam, it is known as International Labour Day
(Vietnamese:
Ngày Quốc tế
Lao động) and is a public holiday.
It was first celebrated in 1913.

===
West Asia ===


====
Bahrain ====
In Bahrain, 1 May is known as Labour Day and is a public holiday.

====
Iran ====
In Iran, 1 May is known as the International Workers' Day.
It is not a public holiday but according to article 63 of Iranian labour law on top of the official public holidays observed in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Labour Day shall be considered an official holiday for workers.

====
Iraq ====
In Iraq, it is known as the International Workers' Day and is a public holiday.

====
Israel ====
After historically varying popularity of Labour Day, 1 May is not an official holiday in the State of Israel.
In the 1980s there were several large marches in Tel Aviv, numbering as much as 350.000 in 1983 and perhaps even more in 1988, but a steady decline in numbers led to only 5000 marchers in 2010.
During the 1990s businesses began to treat it like a regular working day as the number of May Day-related activities decreased.
1
May is largely celebrated by the former Soviet Jews who immigrated to Israel in the 1990s.

====
Jordan ====
1
May is known as Labour Day and is a public holiday.

====
Lebanon ====
1 May known as the Workers' Day and is a public holiday.
Left-wing parties and workers' unions organize marches on 1 May.


====
Palestine ===
=
1
May is known as Labour Day and is a public holiday.

====
Syria ====
1
May is known as Labour Day and is a public holiday.

== See also ==
Workers' Memorial Day
Pervomaysky (disambiguation)


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Foner, Philip Sheldon (1986).
May day: a short history of the international workers' holiday, 1886–1986.
New York:
International Publishers.
ISBN 978-0-7178-0624-9.
==
External links ==
 Media related to International Workers' Day at Wikimedia Commons
 Media related to May Day at Wikimedia Commons
May Day Archive at the Marxists Internet Archive
Photos of May Day in Red Square during the Soviet Union
Star Wars is a first-person rail shooter designed by Mike Hally and released in arcades by Atari, Inc. in 1983.
It uses 3D color vector graphics to simulate the assault on the Death Star from the 1977 film Star Wars.
Developed during the Golden Age of Arcade Games, Star Wars has been included on lists of the greatest video games of all time.

The game features digitized samples of voices from the movie, including Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi, James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, Harrison Ford as Han Solo, David Ankrum as Wedge Antilles, the mechanized beeps of R2-D2, and the growls of Chewbacca.

==
Gameplay ==
Assuming the role of Luke Skywalker ("Red Five"), the player pilots an X-wing fighter from a first-person perspective.
The controls consist of a yoke control with four buttons — two trigger style and two in position to be pressed by the thumbs — each of which fired a laser positioned on the four leading edges of the X-Wings.

The player does not have to destroy every TIE Fighter and gun turret in order to advance through the game; instead, the player must survive for a set length of time, either avoiding or destroying enemies and the shots they fire.
The player begins with six shields, one of which is lost for every collision with an enemy or projectile.
If the player loses all shields and is hit again, the game ends.

Each wave of the game consists of three attack phases, culminating in the destruction of the Death Star.

===
Phase 1 ===
In the first phase, the Imperial March or another part of John Williams' Star Wars score is briefly played electronically and the player engages in a dogfight with Darth Vader and enemy TIE fighters in outer space near the Death Star.
After the TIE fighter waves, when flying towards the Death Star, the yellow grid lines on the Death Star spell out either "MAY THE FORCE BE WITH YOU" on odd-numbered waves or names of some of the developers on even numbered waves.

===
Phase 2 ===
In the second phase, the player must fly across the surface of the Death Star to reach its equatorial trench.
This section is omitted during the first wave of the game.
During the second wave the player is attacked by artillery bunkers, while in the third and subsequent waves laser turrets on towers rise to confront the player.
The player is awarded a bonus for destroying every turret.

===
Phase 3 ===
In the third phase, the player must navigate the trench until finally firing a proton torpedo for a direct hit on the exhaust port target.
If the player is successful, the Death Star explodes and the player is awarded a bonus shield, to a maximum of six (can be set internally for a maximum of eight).
Should the player fail to hit the exhaust port, a shield is lost and the player must attempt the trench again.
If the player manages to destroy the Death Star without firing at anything but the exhaust port, a bonus is awarded for "using the Force."

The game then resets to the first phase.
Each successive wave greatly increases the difficulty; TIE Fighters shoot more often, artillery bunkers and laser towers appear in the second phase, and obstacles appear in the trench during the third.
Unlike the movie, where the units shoot beams similar to lasers, the enemy units in this game shoot projectiles resembling fireballs, which give the player a chance of destroying the shots.

==
Development ==
Development on the game started in 1981 under the title "Warp Speed" and was initially headed up by Ed Rotberg (who also worked on the vector-based Battlezone).
Rotberg left Atari in October 1981, after which Atari signed a licensing agreement with LucasFilm and finished the game.

==
Ports ==
Star Wars was converted first by Parker Brothers in 1983 and 1984 to the Atari 2600, Atari 5200, the Atari 8-bit family, ColecoVision, and Commodore 64.
The ColecoVision version was programmed by Wendell Brown.

The same game was converted again, in 1987 and 1988, for the Amiga, Atari ST, Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum, Acorn Electron, BBC Micro and Enterprise 64; the game was also converted again for the Atari 8-bits and the Commodore 64.
All conversions were developed by UK-based Vektor Grafix (the Atari 8-bit version by Zeppelin Games being an exception) and were published in Europe by Domark.
That same year Broderbund acquired the rights to develop Star Wars games from Lucasfilm.
Broderbund published the Apple II, Macintosh, Commodore 64, and MS-DOS versions of the arcade game in North America in 1988, in addition to republishing the Atari ST and Amiga versions in 1989.

The Amiga and Atari ST allow mouse control and include digitized sound effects.
The Macintosh version contains sampled speech from the films, but has no in-game music other than a monophonic theme during the "attract" mode.

Star Wars also appears in the GameCube game Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike as a bonus minigame that can be unlocked after completing a certain level or entering a cheat code.

In the United States and some European countries, anyone who pre-ordered the game received a special copy of the game in which Star Wars is immediately unlocked on startup.

== Reception ==
The game was one of the top-selling games of 1983, as Atari produced 12,695 total units.
In Japan, Game Machine listed Star Wars on their November 1, 1983 issue as being the most-successful upright arcade unit of the month.
COMPUTE!
praised the Atari ST version of Star Wars, calling it "amazing, smoothly animated".
The MS-DOS, Amiga, Atari ST, and Commodore 64 versions by Broderbund Software were reviewed in 1989 in Dragon #145 by Hartley, Patricia, and Kirk Lesser in "The Role of Computers" column.
The reviewers gave the game 3 out of 5 stars.
Macworld praised the Macintosh version's gameplay, stating that it has "fast-paced action" and is "extremely challenging in higher levels".
The magazine also praised the sound effects and 3D graphics, stating that the latter "enhance the game's action and excitement".
Macworld criticized the master disk-based copy protection, and the game only having three playable scenarios with "limited" replay value.
In 1996, Next Generation listed the arcade version as number 58 on their "Top 100 Games of All Time".
Citing "Awesome vector graphics, multiple triggers, a deluxe cabinet with powerful speakers in the back, [and] digitized voices", they ventured that it was "Probably the best licensed game ever.
"
In 1999, Next Generation listed Star Wars as number 24 on their "Top 50 Games of All Time", commenting that, "Besides giving you the opportunity to reenact what many of us consider to be the greatest cinematic experience of our youth, Star Wars delivered fast-shooting gameplay with all the subtleties, and the combination of tight control and vector graphics make it equally fun today.
"
In 2001 it was voted one of the top 100 arcade games of all time by the members of Killer List of Videogames.

==
Legacy ==
Star Wars arcade machines can be converted into The Empire Strikes Back via a conversion kit.
As mentioned above, a complete emulation of Star Wars, along with The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi is included as bonus content for Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike.

In October 2019, Tastemakers LLC's Arcade1up division released a 3/4 scale recreation of the original Atari arcade cabinet featuring emulated versions of the coin-op Star Wars arcade, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi games.

===
High scores ===
In 1984 Robert Mruczek scored 300 million points in 49 hours of gameplay (the world record for an individual) and in 2005, Brandon Erickson set a world endurance record of 54 hours on a single credit (with a score of 283 million).

In June 1985 Flavio Tozzi, Dave Roberts and Mike Ohren played as a team in turns for five days, two hours and 26 minutes on a single credit to attain the world record score of 1,000,000,012 points.
It was verified in the September 1985 edition of the Computer and Video Games.
Their efforts raised money for a local charity.
The score counter of this game "turns over" at 100 million points.

It was decided to put the machines on a harder setting for the annual Twin Galaxies International Scoreboard/Guinness Book Masters Tournament: initial shields and no bonus shields.
In the 1986 Tournament, David Palmer scored 31,660,614 points in about 7 hours, a score which was published in the Guinness Book of World Records and remains the world record to this day.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars at the Killer List of Videogames
Star Wars at the Arcade History database
Star Wars at MobyGames
The following is a list of episodes for the British television programme, Geordie Shore that first aired on MTV on 24 May 2011.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Series 1 (2011) ===


===
Magaluf Specials ===


===
Series 2 (2012) ===
=== Series 3 (2012) ===


===
Series 4 (2012) ===


===
Series 5 (2013) ===
=== Series 6 (2013) ===


===
Series 7 (2013) ===
=== Series 8 (2014) ===


===
Series 9 (2014) ===


===
Series 10 (2015) ===


===
Series 11 (2015) ===
=== Series 12 (2016) ===


===
Big Birthday Battle (2016) ===
=== Series 13 (2016) ===
=== Series 14 (2017) ===
=== Series 15 (2017) ===


===
Series 16 (2018) ===


===
Series 17 (2018) ===


===
Series 18 (2018) ===


===
Series 19 (2019) ===


===
Series 20 (2019) ===


===
Series 21 (2020) ===


==
Specials ==


==
References ==
The original cast members of Running Man are Yoo Jae-suk, Gary, Haha, Ji Suk-jin, Kim Jong-kook, Lee Kwang-soo, and Song Joong-ki.
Song Ji-hyo was originally a guest for the second (episode 2-3) and third landmark (episode 4-5).
She officially joined the program in the fourth landmark (episode 6) but was unable to attend until the fifth landmark (episode 7).

In April 2011, Song Joong-ki recorded his last episode (episode 41) in May, and has left the program to focus on his acting career but returned on episode 66 as a guest after leaving for almost half a year, and later made cameo appearances in several episodes.
Lizzy was initially a guest for episode 13 and episode 14, but later officially joined the program, starting episode 18.
However, she has left the crew since episode 26 due to schedule conflicts with After School, the K-pop group she joined.
She later makes a comeback as a guest in episode 292, after 5 years since her last appearance.
On October 25, 2016, Gary announced to be leaving the show to focus on his music career after being with Running Man for 6 years, but later returned as a guest, only a week after his final recording.
On April 3, 2017, it was confirmed through various media outlets that Running Man is adding actress Jeon
So-min and comedian
Yang Se-chan.

On 27 April 2021, Lee Kwang-soo announced his departure, becoming the third original cast member to leave the show.

==
Timeline ==


== Cast ==


===
Current cast ===


===
Former cast ===


==
Relationships ==


===
Current relationships ===


===
Former relationships ===


==
References ==
Geordie Shore:
Big Birthday Battle, a spin-off series of Geordie Shore, a British television programme based in Newcastle upon Tyne was confirmed on 6 February 2016 following cast member Scott's win on Celebrity Big Brother
it was announced that he'd be filming for the next series of Geordie Shore the next day.
However, on 12 February 2016 it was confirmed that the cast past and present would be reuniting for a mini-series to celebrate five years of the show.
The series began airing on 10 May 2016.
It features all of the current cast members and the return of former cast members Daniel Thomas-Tuck, James Tindale, Jay Gardner, Kyle Christie, Ricci Guarnaccio and Sophie Kasaei.
The only past cast members that did not return for this series were Greg Lake, Rebecca Walker and Vicky Pattison.
This series is classified as "Geordie Shore: Big Birthday Battle" and not billed as the thirteenth series.
The series also features a new twist with Gaz and Charlotte going head-to-head as team captains planning the best nights out for their team.
This series includes a special episode airing on the fifth birthday, on 24 May 2016 featuring the Geordie's reactions of previous episodes.
The series also includes the show's 100th episode, airing on 31 May 2016.
On 1 June 2016 it was announced that original cast member Charlotte Crosby had quit the show and that this would be her final series.

== Cast ==


=== Duration of cast ===
  =
Cast member is featured in this episode.

=
Cast member voluntarily leaves the house.

= Cast member returns to the house.

= Cast member leaves the series.

= Cast member returns to the series.

=
Cast member does not feature in this episode.

=
Cast member is not officially a cast member in this episode.

==
Episodes ==


==
Ratings ==


==
References ==
Over one hundred video games based on the Star Wars franchise has been released, dating back to some of the earliest home consoles.
Some are based directly on films while others rely heavily on the Star Wars Expanded Universe.

Star Wars games have gone through three significant development eras:
early licensed games (1979-1993), games developed after the creation of LucasArts (1993-2013), and games created after the closure of LucasArts (2014–present), which are currently licensed to Electronic Arts, and include an EA Star Wars logo.

The first Star Wars games were developed by a variety of companies after Star Wars creator George Lucas licensed the rights to Star Wars video games; several of these games were released under the “Lucasfilm Games” banner.
Early licensed games, released during the 8-bit and 16-bit eras of gaming, barely featured any kind of narrative, and many were action titles that either retold the stories of the original trilogy (1977-1983) or focused on a single scene of a film.

Later on, Lucas took interest in the increasing success of the video game market, and decided to create his own video game development company, LucasArts, so he could have more creative control over the games and their narratives.
During this era, graphics evolved enough for games to be able to tell complex narratives, leading to games that featured more advanced retellings of the stories of the films, with voice-overs and CGI cut scenes, as well as original titles with new narratives that were set in the same continuity as the films.
After The Walt Disney Company's purchase of Lucasfilm in 2012 and the closure of LucasArts the following year, the games developed during the first two eras were discarded from the canon in 2014 and reassigned to the non-canonical Star Wars Legends label.

Following LucasArts' closure, the rights to produce Star Wars video games were reassigned solely to Electronic Arts.
Games published during this era are considered canonical to the franchise, and have featured more influence from the Lucasfilm Story Group, responsible for managing aspects of Star Wars canon.
The EA Star Wars license had been set to expire in 2023, but in 2021, Lucasarts announced new partnerships for others to produce Star Wars and other Lucasfilm games alongside Electronic Arts.

Although many hobbyists and independent game developers have created freeware games based on the Star Wars movie series and brand, this page lists only the games that have been developed or published by LucasArts, or officially licensed by Lucasfilm.

As of 2020, there have been over 90 million copies of Star Wars games sold.

==
Early licensed games (1979-1993) ==
In 1978, Apple Computer produced an unlicensed Star Wars game on cassette tape for its Apple II.
As a "space pilot trainee", the player destroys TIE fighters using a first-person heads-up display.
The first video game cartridge bearing the name Star Wars appeared that year on the RCA Studio II clones Sheen M1200 and Mustang Telespiel Computer.

The first official licensed Star Wars electronic game was Kenner's 1979 table-top Star Wars Electronic Battle Command.
The game had three levels of play (basic, intermediate, and advanced).
Players took turns examining star systems with the aim of avoiding black holes, locating enemies, and searching for MAGNA, "the FORCE-giving star".
The game was billed as "the most exciting computer game you will ever play".
===
The original trilogy ===
Licensed releases for the Atari 2600  began with The Empire Strikes Back (1982) in which the player piloted a snowspeeder during the Battle of Hoth, destroying AT-AT walkers.
Several other games appeared, such as Return of the Jedi: Death Star Battle (1983), where the player controlled the Millennium Falcon in a mission to destroy the second Death Star, and Jedi Arena (1983), the first game to attempt to simulate a lightsaber battle (in this case, clearly inspired by the Star Wars scene, where Luke Skywalker trains with a seeker).
In 1983, the Star Wars arcade game was released by Atari based on the 1977 film.
In this game (featuring color vector graphics and the first ever digitized speech from a film)
the player enters the seat of Luke's Red Five X-Wing fighter, battles waves of TIE fighters led by Darth Vader, weaves through towers across the surface of the Death Star, and plummets through the battle station's trench in an attempt to destroy it.
The sequel for the game, The Empire Strikes Back, used the same technology to re-create scenes from the second film, including battles with AT-AT walkers and an asteroid field.

Due to the video game crash of 1983, which temporarily killed the home console market, no further games based on the franchise were released until 1987 when UK software publisher Domark released several 8-bit versions of the Star Wars vector arcade game, followed by similar conversions in 1988 of The Empire Strikes Back machine.
In 1987, Namco developed a Star Wars game for the Nintendo Family Computer (Famicom) for the Japanese market exclusively, based on the 1977 film, but with several liberties taken with its storyline.

In 1991, the platformer Star Wars was released for the Nintendo Entertainment System (the Famicom's Western counterpart), Sega Master System, Game Boy and Game Gear, and one year later, Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back covered the plotline of the fifth episode of the saga.
Also in 1992, Super Star Wars was released for the SNES, followed by the remaining games in the trilogy:
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1993) and Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1994), the latter also receiving conversions for the Game Boy and Game Gear in 1995.

The following is a list of Star Wars games that are based on the feature films, developed during this development era:


====
Episode IV:
A New Hope ====
Star Wars (1983–88) -
Arcade
Re-released for: Atari 2600, Atari 5200, Commodore 64, Atari 8-bit family, ColecoVision, BBC Micro, ZX Spectrum, Acorn Electron, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Apple II, DOS, Macintosh, Amiga.

Death Star Interceptor (1984/85, System 3 Software Ltd) - Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum
Star Wars (1987) -
Famicom
Star Wars:
Attack on the Death Star (1991) - PC-9801, X68000
Star Wars (1991–93) - NES, Game Boy, Master System, Game Gear
Super Star Wars (1992, the first game in the Super Star Wars trilogy)
- SNES
Re-released for: Wii Virtual Console, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita
Star Wars Arcade (1993) -
Arcade
Re-released for: 32X


====
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back ====
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1982)
- Atari 2600,
Intellivision
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1985/88)
- Arcade
Re-released for: BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari.

Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992)
- NES, Game Boy
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1993
, the second game in the Super Star Wars trilogy)
- SNES
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


===
=
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ====
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Death Star Battle (1983/84) -
Atari 2600, Atari 8-bit family, Atari 5200, ZX Spectrum
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984/88) -
Arcade, BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST,
GameCube
Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1994, the third game in the Super Star Wars trilogy) - SNES, Game Boy, Game Gear
Re-released for: Wii Virtual Console
Canceled:
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Ewok Adventure - Atari 2600
(unreleased)


===
Stand-alone titles ===


====
1980s ====
Star Wars: Jedi Arena (1983) -
Atari 2600
Re-released for: Mobile (2005)
Star Wars: Droids (1988) - Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum – based on the Star Wars:
Droids series


==
LucasArts and modern self-published games (1993-2013) ==
In the early 1980s George Lucas decided to invest in videogames.
So through Lucasfilm, Lucas started his own video game company, which he named LucasArts.
However, since Lucas had already licensed the rights to develop Star Wars games, the company instead developed original adventure games and World War II flight combat games.
LucasArts regained the rights to develop Star Wars games in 1993, at that point the videogame company put their previous experience in flight simulators to use, and released a Star Wars: X-Wing, the first self-published Star Wars video game and the first space flight simulation based on the franchise.
===
The prequel trilogy ===
As The Phantom Menace release approached, dozens of licensed Episode
I tie-in
titles appeared, even educational titles, the market was flooded with several games, most of them of questionable quality.
However at the same time, titles based on the Expanded Universe flourished with critical acclaim, such as the expansion to Jedi Knight, Star Wars Jedi Knight: Mysteries of the Sith and the first game in the Rogue Squadron series.

====
The Phantom Menace ====
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999)
- Windows, PlayStation
Star Wars:
Episode I (1999) - Pinball
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Episode
I: Jedi Power Battles (2000/01) - PlayStation, Dreamcast, Game Boy Advance
Star Wars
Episode
I: Battle for Naboo (2000/01) - Nintendo 64, Windows
Star Wars
Episode
I:
Obi-Wan's Adventures (2000) -
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox,
Arcade
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Obi-Wan (2001)
-
XboxAfter
the release of Episode I in theaters in 1999, games from the prequel trilogy were released for most major platforms.
The first releases were video game adaptation (action-adventure) and
Star Wars Episode
I: Racer, based on the podracing sequence in movie.
Others, including Battle for Naboo and Jedi Power Battles, were released, but with little success.
The first strategic game in the Star Wars expanded universe was titled Star Wars: Rebellion and broke new ground in that it incorporated ships and planets not found in the original canon, such as the Rebel Assault Frigate and the Bulwark Cruiser.
But for all its ground-breaking new looks, it was not as successful as would have been hoped.
The second strategic title, Star Wars:
Force Commander was also released, but failed to keep up with other RTS games, since it was more focused on battling (with no resource gathering) and used a primitive 3D engine.
About a decade later, resource gathering lost popularity in favor of faster-paced combat-centric RTS games.

====
Attack of the Clones ====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2002)
(Action) PlayStation 2, GameCube, Xbox
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) - Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: The New Droid Army (
2002) - Game Boy AdvanceIn 2002, Attack of the Clones premiered in theaters, and another wave of Star Wars based games, including The Clone Wars, Star Wars Racer Revenge, and Bounty Hunter were released, this time focusing on events and characters from Attack of the Clones such as bounty hunter Jango Fett and the Clone Wars.

Star Wars:
Jedi Starfighter was released, allowing the player to be a Jedi Master flying a Jedi starfighter.
A third RTS game with a much more conventional approach to the genre's norms and using the Age of Kings engine, Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds, offered a better alternative to those seeking strategy in the Star Wars universe.

====
Revenge of the Sith ====
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005) - PlayStation 2,  Xbox
Handheld and mobile: Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance, MobileAdjoining the release of Revenge of the Sith, a video game adaptation (action) was also released close to the premiere, with various degrees of success.
Star Wars:
Republic Commando was also released in 2005.

===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels (2008) -
Wii
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance (2008) - Nintendo DS
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes (2009)
- Windows, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii
Clone Wars Adventures
(2010)
- Windows, Mac (Shutdown)


===
Legends franchises ===
Formerly known as Star Wars Expanded Universe, this continuity was renamed into Legends in 2014 and all media based on them, including video games, ceased to be canon.
The X-Wing series marked the start of the Star Wars games moving away from remaking the official films and began to focus more on the Expanded Universe.
Other titles were published or licensed by LucasArts, such as The Software Toolworks's Star Wars Chess  who also used the first "multimedia explosion" to release Rebel Assault (1993), which used FMV and photos extensively.

The 1996
Nintendo 64 title
Star Wars:
Shadows of the Empire was part of a LucasArts attempt to create a story between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of Jedi, putting the player in control of mercenary Dash Rendar.
Shadows of the Empire featured fan-favorite parts from the Super Star Wars line, such as another reenactment of the Battle of Hoth, piloting a snowspeeder and tying a cable around AT-ATs legs.
After the original trilogy was re-released as the "Special Editions" in 1997, LucasArts published other titles, including Star Wars: Yoda Stories and Star Wars Monopoly, as well as a Star Wars-themed fighting game, Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi.

==== X-Wing ====

Star Wars: X-Wing (1993) - DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s):
Imperial Pursuit (1993) and B-Wing (1993)Compilation: X-Wing (Collector's CD-ROM) (1994)
Star Wars: TIE Fighter (1994) - DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s): Defender of the Empire (1994)Compilation:
TIE Fighter (Collector's CD-ROM) (1995)
Star Wars: X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter (1997)
- Windows
Expansions:
Balance of Power Campaigns (1997), and Flight School (1998)
Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance (1999)
- WindowsStar Wars:
X-Wing was one of the best-selling games of 1993, and established the beginning of the X-Wing computer game series, which garnered numerous awards and recognition.
Star Wars:
X-Wing was followed by several sequels and expansions, such as Star Wars: TIE Fighter, Star Wars: X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter, and Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance.

====
Rebel Assault ====
Star Wars: Rebel Assault (1993) DOS, Mac, Sega CD, 3DO
Star Wars: Rebel Assault II:
The Hidden Empire (1995) DOS, PlayStation,
Mac


====
Jedi Knight ====
Star Wars:
Dark Forces (1995) DOS, Mac, PlayStation
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II
(1997)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Mysteries of the Sith (1998)
Windows
Star Wars Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast (2002)
Windows, Mac, Xbox, GameCube
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy (2003)
Windows, Mac, XboxThe
first step towards modern games was done with 1995's Dark Forces, the first Star Wars first-person shooter video game.
A hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy
, it featured new gameplay features and graphical elements not then common in other games, made possible by LucasArts' custom-designed game engine, called the Jedi.
The game was well received and well reviewed, the game put the player in the role of Kyle Katarn, who would later appear in multiple games, novels, and comics.
After the Special Edition original trilogy re-release in 1997, LucasArts published Star Wars Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II, then Star Wars Jedi Knight: Mysteries of the Sith released in 1999.
In 2002, its sequel Jedi Outcast was released and gave players the first chance to experience advanced lightsaber duels, and it also detached itself from the usual idea of movie tie-ins.
One year later, the last game in the Jedi Knight series, Jedi Academy was released.
Katarn is a former Imperial stormtrooper who joins the Rebellion and ultimately becomes a Jedi, a plot arc similar to that of Finn in the 2015 film The Force Awakens.

====
Rogue Squadron ====
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron (1998)
Windows, Nintendo 64
Star Wars Rogue Squadron II:
Rogue Leader (2001)
GameCube
Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike (2003)
GameCube
Note: The co-op campaign of Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike, is composed of all the missions of the single player campaign of the previous game, Rogue Leader (except for two missions which are not included), and such missions can only be played in multiplayer, and can not be played in single-player.
Additionally as a bonus, the game includes the Arcade games of Star Wars, The Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi.

====
Star Wars Racer ====
Star Wars Episode
I: Racer (1999)
Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo
64
Handheld:
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000)
Arcade
Star Wars Racer Revenge (2002)
PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation Store (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Racer-related title:
Star Wars: Super Bombad Racing (2001) PlayStation 2


====
Galactic Battlegrounds ====
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds (2001)
Windows, Mac
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns (2002)
Windows,
Mac


====
Starfighter ====
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001)
Windows, PlayStation 2
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter (2002)
Xbox, PlayStation 2


====
Knights of the Old Republic ====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (2003) Windows, Xbox, Mac, iOS, Android
Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords (2004)
Windows, Xbox, Mac
Star Wars:
The Old Republic (2011) (MMORPG)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Rise of the Hutt Cartel (2013), Galactic Starfighter (2014), Galactic Strongholds (2014), Shadow of Revan (2014), Knights of the Fallen Empire (2015), Knights of the Eternal Throne (2016) and Onslaught (2019).

Canceled:
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic III Windows, Xbox
Mobile:
Star Wars Knights of the Old Republic (2013)
iOS, AndroidIn 2003, Knights of the Old Republic, a BioWare RPG that debuted on the Microsoft Xbox and PC.
Knights (also known as KotOR among fans) was critically acclaimed, even winning "Game of the Year" at the Game Developers Choice Awards, (along with many other critics) in 2003.
Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords was developed by Obsidian Entertainment and released in 2004.
The Sith Lords was praised for its cerebral writing and moral ambiguity, similar to The Empire Strikes Back, but criticized for being derivative of the first game and being released in an incomplete state.
Another MMORPG titled Star Wars:
The Old Republic was developed by BioWare, which released globally on December 20, 2011.
Pre-orders went up for sale in July 2011 and open beta weekends were confirmed for September 2011.

====
Star Wars: Battlefront (Pandemic Studios) ====
Star Wars: Battlefront (2004) PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, Mac
Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005) PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, PlayStation Portable
Canceled:
Star Wars: Battlefront III (2008) (PC, PS3, Xbox 360)Handheld:
Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007)
PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron (2009)
PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Mobile:
Star Wars: Battlefront Mobile (2005)
Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons (2009)Pandemic Studios' Battlefront consisted of two games, Star Wars: Battlefront (2004) and Star Wars: Battlefront II in 2005, both games sharing three common console platforms: the Xbox and PlayStation 2.

A third Star Wars:
Battlefront title was planned for 2006 but was cancelled.
Two spin-offs were released, Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron, released in 2007 for the PlayStation Portable and Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron on November 3, 2009 for the Nintendo DS and the PlayStation Portable.
Elite Squadron is the first Battlefront game to offer a transition from space to ground battles at the players choice.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm and the restructuring of the Star Wars canon, the Battlefront series was rebooted by EA DICE.

====
Empire at War ====
Star Wars: Empire at War (2006
) Windows, Mac OS X
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Empire at War: Forces of Corruption  (2006
) WindowsCompilation:
Star Wars: Empire at War:
Gold Pack (game and expansion package) (2007)
Windows


====
The Force Unleashed ====
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed
(2008) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Wii
Complete edition re-release with all DLCs:
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed - Ultimate Sith Edition (2009)
Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360,
PlayStation 3
Handheld: Nintendo DS,
iOS (Star Wars: The Force Unleashed Mobile)
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II
(2010) Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii
Handheld:
Nintendo DS, iOSStar Wars:
The Force Unleashed, released for the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Wii, uses a new, detailed graphics engine.
The Wii version utilizes the motion sensing and accelerometer capabilities of the Wii Remote (simulating the ability to swing a lightsaber) and its Nunchuk attachment (used to perform Force powers).
Its sequel, Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II, was released in the United States on October 26, 2010.

===
Stand-alone games ===


==== 1990s
====
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire (1996)
(3rd person shooter)
Nintendo 64, Windows
Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi (1997)
(Fighting) PlayStation
Star Wars: Yoda Stories (1997)
(Adventure) Windows
Handheld: (1997)
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Rebellion (Star Wars: Supremacy - UK) (1998) (Real-time strategy)
Windows
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade (1998) (Rail shooter)
Arcade
Star Wars Millennium Falcon CD-Rom Playset (1998)
(Rail shooter-adventure)
Windows


====
2000s ====
Star Wars: Force Commander (2000) (Real-time strategy)
Windows
Star Wars: Demolition (2000) (Vehicular combat) PlayStation, Dreamcast
Star Wars: Bounty Hunter (2002)
(Third person action)
GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox
Star Wars: Republic Commando (2005)
(First person shooter)
Xbox, Windows
Mobile:
Star Wars: Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2005)
Compilation:
Star Wars: The Best of PC (2006)
(Compilation)
Windows


====
2010s ====
Star Wars Battle Pod (2014) (Rail shooter)
Arcade


====
Stand-alone handheld and mobile games ====
The following is a list of Star Wars titles that are handheld and mobile games.
Additional handheld and mobile games are listed above.
Unless otherwise mentioned, these games are also released for mobile phones.

Star Wars:
Flight of the Falcon (2003) (Action/Space simulation) Game
Boy Advance
Star Wars Trilogy:
Apprentice of the Force (2004)
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars:
Battle For The Republic (2005)
Star Wars: Grievous Getaway (2005)
Star Wars Imperial Ace 3D
Star Wars:
The Battle Above Coruscant (2005)
Star Wars: Lightsaber Combat (2005)
Star Wars Trivia (2005)
Star Wars:
Ask Yoda (2005)
Star Wars: Puzzle Blaster (2005)
Star Wars: Lethal Alliance (2006)
(Action-adventure)
PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS – set between episodes III & IV
Star Wars Cantina (2010)
Star Wars:
Trench Run (2009) - iOS, Unity
Star Wars Battle of Hoth (2010)
Star Wars Arcade: Falcon Gunner (2010)
Star Wars: Imperial Academy (2010)
Star Wars:
Force Collection (2013)
Star Wars: Tiny Death Star (2013)


===
Miscellanea games ===
The following games are more of Star Wars themed, rather than actually influencing the franchise's fictional plot, they are classified together because of sharing the same genre, rather than officially being part of the same series.
Excluded are the games listed above.
====
Jakks Pacific Plug
It In & Play TV Games ====
Star Wars: Lightsaber Battle Game (2005)
Handheld TV game
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005) - Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars GameKey (expansion)
(2006)
Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (2007)
Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars: Republic Squadron (2009)
Jakks Pacific TV Game


====
Kinect Motion Sensor ====
Kinect Star Wars (2012)
(Kinect) Xbox
360
====
Educational ====
Developed by Lucas Learning:
Star Wars: Yoda's Challenge
Star Wars: The Gungan Frontier
Star Wars: Droid Works (1999)
Windows, Mac
Star Wars:
Pit Droids Windows, iOS
Star Wars Math:
Jabba's Game Galaxy (Developed by Argonaut Games)
Star Wars: JarJar's Journey Adventure Book
Star Wars:
Anakin's Speedway
Star Wars:
Early Learning Activity CenterOther educational:
Star Wars: Behind the Magic (1998) (Multimedia encyclopedia)
Windows, Macintosh
Star Wars: Jedi Math (2008) (Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars: Jedi Reading (2008) (Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008)
(Platform/Educational)
Didj
Star Wars: Jedi Trials (2009)
Didj


====
Star Wars Galaxies (MMO/RPG) ====
Star Wars Galaxies:
An Empire Divided (2003)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Star Wars Galaxies:
Jump to Lightspeed (2004)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Episode III Rage of the Wookiees (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Trials of Obi-Wan (2005),
Spin-off : trading card game : Star Wars Galaxies:
Trading Card Games - Champions of the Force (2008
, PC),Compilations
: Star Wars Galaxies: Starter Kit (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
The Total Experience (2005), and Star Wars Galaxies:
The Complete Online Adventures (2006)
The first MMORPG, titled Star Wars Galaxies: An Empire Divided, was also released in 2003 and was subsequently followed in 2004 by its first expansion Jump to Lightspeed.
Two more games, Star Wars Galaxies:
Episode III Rage of the Wookiees (its second expansion, which ties in with the concurrently-released Revenge of the Sith),
and after the films, more Star Wars titles continued to be developed and released.
Empire at War (an RTS), was released in early 2006.
While released and being active for years, Star Wars Galaxies' servers shut down on December 15, 2011.
Notwithstanding the game's closure, there are several private emulator projects in various stages of development that intend to allow users to experience Star Wars Galaxies in different incarnations of the game's existence.
However, since the game can no longer be played the way it was originally meant, the game is considered to be cancelled.

====
Closure of LucasArts and cancelled stand-alone-games ====
At E3 2012, EA with LucasArts announced Star Wars 1313, which focuses more on the life of a bounty hunter as he descends to the level 1313 on Coruscant to unravel a criminal plot.
The game focuses more on gunplay and bounty hunter gameplay rather than the Force users and lightsabers combat.
It was set to release in Fall 2013 for Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and Windows.
1313 has subsequently been cancelled by LucasArts following its purchase by Disney.
The following are the stand-alone Star Wars videogames that were canceled, the canceled titles that were part of a series are listed along its respective series.

Star Wars 1313 (2013)
(Action-adventure)
Star Wars Outpost (2013)
Star Wars: First Assault (2013) (First-person shooter)
Star Wars: Attack Squadrons (2014)
Star Wars: Battle of the Sith Lords (Action-adventure)
Star Wars: Rivals (2018)
(Third-person shooter)With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, it was announced that LucasArts' development arm would stop making video games indefinitely.
In addition to this, various online browser games have shut down their servers, and can no longer be played.

==
Electronic Arts gains the Star Wars license, and the restructuring of the Star Wars canon (2013-2020) ==
After LucasArts was shut down, on May 6, 2013, Disney and Lucasfilm revealed a partnership with Electronic Arts that granted EA exclusive rights to produce Star Wars games for consoles and PC, with Disney retaining the freedom to handle the games for mobile platforms, such as smartphones, tablets and browsers.
This deal was set to expire in 2023.

On April 25, 2014, most of the previous licensed Star Wars video games, novels, comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise on April 25, 2014.Among the EA subsidiaries responsible for creating the Star Wars games within the deal, were the developers DICE, BioWare, Visceral Games and Respawn Entertainment.
After the canon restructuring, EA announced their new games would fall under the restructured canon.
As of the release of Jedi: Fallen Order, all EA-produced Star Wars games are considered canonical, although only the ones with an actual "story mode" narrative.

===
Reboots ===
====
Battlefront (EA DICE) ====
Star Wars Battlefront (2015) - PlayStation 4, Windows, Xbox One
Multiplayer only.

Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) - PlayStation 4, Windows, Xbox One
Singleplayer and Multiplayer.
After the restructuring of the Star Wars canon, the Battlefront series formerly developed by Pandemic was rebooted by EA DICE.
The first game was released in 2015, rushed into the market to tie-in with to the release of The Force Awakens.
As a result of the shorter development time, developer EA DICE decided to take a significant departure from all previous installments of the franchise and focus the game entirely on online multiplayer, completely axing the inclusion of a single player campaign or any sort of narrative; the move was heavily criticized by fans, including Finn actor John Boyega.
Only original trilogy characters (Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia, Han Solo, Boba Fett, Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine) and planets (Tatooine, Hoth and Endor) were playable on launch.
Downloadable content later added the planets
Jakku (from The Force Awakens), Bespin (from The Empire Strikes Back), Scarif (from Rogue One), in addition to the Death Star battle station (from A New Hope), and heroes Nien Numb, Greedo (Outer Rim), Lando Calrissian, Dengar (Bespin), Chewbacca, Bossk (Death Star), and Jyn Erso and Director Krennic (Rogue One: Scarif).
The first Battlefront also received a PlayStation VR add-on mission, the Rogue One X-Wing VR Mission.

The second Battlefront is the first in the series to be considered part of the Star Wars canon.
It addresses a major criticism of the previous game by including a singleplayer campaign with a story-mode set between the ending of Return of the Jedi and the beginning of The Force Awakens, in which the player controls an Imperial special forces commander named Iden Versio; additionally, characters from the films, including Luke Skywalker, Leia Organa, Han Solo, Lando Calrissian and Kylo Ren are playable.
The multiplayer mode features characters from the original, prequel, and sequel trilogies, as well as anthology films.
Future content was originally going to be distributed in a "season" system, though this was changed to monthly updates.

===
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order (2019) ===
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order is a singleplayer game developed by Respawn Entertainment.
It was released on November 15, 2019 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.
The story revolves around a survivor of Order 66, Cal Kestis, who is on the run from the Empire and its Inquisitors.
Jedi:
Fallen Order takes place between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope.

===
Star Wars: Squadrons (2020) ===
Star Wars:
Squadrons is an action video game developed by Motive Studios.
It was revealed on June 15, 2020, and was released on October 2, 2020, for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, with a singleplayer campaign and multiplayer modes, alongside cross-platform play between all three platforms and virtual reality support for the PS4 and PC versions.

=== Cancelled Games ===


===
"Project Ragtag" ===
Prior to its closure in 2017, Visceral Games was working on an untitled game set in the time between Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens.
Amy Hennig, former Naughty Dog writer and director who oversaw the Uncharted series, joined Visceral as creative lead on the project codenamed Ragtag.
On October 17, 2017, EA announced the closure of Visceral Games.
EA reassigned the game to its EA Worldwide Studios, led by EA Vancouver, and said they will revamp the gameplay, which had been described as a linear, story-heavy title, into "a broader experience that allows for more variety and player agency".
On 15 January 2019, Kotaku's Jason Schreier reported that the game codenamed "Project Ragtag" had been canceled according to three people familiar with goings-on at EA.
Rogue One writer Gary Whitta openly criticized Electronic Arts for the cancelation, adding that he hoped Disney would hand the Star Wars licence to other companies.

===
Future ===
Following the massive player reception of Star Wars Battlefront II and the success of Star Wars: Jedi Fallen Order, EA CEO Andrew Wilson said that they're doubling down on the Star Wars games, meaning that a possible revival for the Battlefront series or more video games that has yet to be reported in development.

===
Other rumored console games ===
The lower than expected sales and mixed fan reception towards Electronic Arts' handling of the Battlefront sub-franchise has led to rumors of Lucasfilm considering to change the terms of the license, originally set to expire in 2024.
Lucasfilm was rumored to be courting either Ubisoft or Activision to either replace EA, or sharing rights to develop Star Wars games with them.

===
Mobile games ===
Star Wars: Assault Team (2014)
Star Wars: Commander - Android, iOS, Windows Phone (2014)
Star Wars:
Galactic Defense - Android, iOS (2014).
Spans both the prequel and original trilogies.

Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes - Android, iOS (2015).
As of November 2019, the game covers the prequel, original and sequel eras, and the Expanded Universe; most of the EU content originates from the Knights of the Old Republic series of games.

Star Wars:
Uprising - Android, iOS (2015, discontinued November 17, 2016)
Star Wars:
Heroes Path - iOS (2015)
Star Wars Rebels:
Recon Missions - Android, iOS, Windows Phone (2015)
Journeys series:
Journeys:
The Phantom Menace - iOS (2014)
Journeys: Beginnings - iOS (2014)
Star Wars: Force Arena (2017)
- Force Arena was a player versus player real-time strategy mobile game for iOS and Android.
It was developed and published by Netmarble Games in association with Lucasfilm.
Force Arena is set in the Rebellion era of the Star Wars storyline.
Players control customized squads of characters and vehicles in a multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA) environment.
The roster of over 80 available characters included Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia, Han Solo, Darth Vader, Palpatine, Grand Admiral Thrawn, Grand Moff Tarkin, Doctor Aphra, Ezra Bridger, and Jyn Erso.
The game was shut down in March 2019, following an announcement on December 19, 2018.

== Non-exclusivity of Star Wars titles (2021-present) =
=
In January 2021, Lucasfilm revived the Lucasfilm Games label as the licensing brand for all IP from the Lucasfilm production.
This included a new Indiana Jones game to be produced by MachineGames, as well as a new open world Star Wars game to be produced by Ubisoft and Massive Entertainment, the first major non-EA Star Wars game.
Lucasfilm did not speak to the state of EA's prior exclusive license to develop Star Wars games but affirmed EA would still be making such games, but stated that they "feel like there's room for others".
In February 2021, a free-to-play competitive arena combat game developed by Zynga called Star Wars: Hunters was announced.
The game will be released for the Nintendo Switch and on the Apple and Google Play appstores.

==
Star Wars crossover-based video game franchises developed by other companies ==
In some cases Lucasfilm has allowed other videogames franchises to do their own Star Wars games, resulting in crossover hybrid franchises, that are developed by other studios.

===
Table games ===
Star Wars Chess (1993)
(Chess engine) DOS, Sega CD, Windows
Monopoly Star Wars (1996)
Windows


===
Pinball and virtual pinball ===


====
Physical pinball ====
The Empire Strikes Back by Hankin
(1980)Star Wars by Data East (1992)
-Star
Wars is a 1992 pinball machine released by Data East.
It is based on the Star Wars original trilogy of films.
A semi-official update, tweaking and refining the gameplay rules was released 20 years later.

Star Wars
Original Trilogy by Sega Pinball (1997)
Star Wars
Episode
I by Williams (1999)
Star Wars by Stern Pinball
(2017)
Star Wars
The Pin by Stern Pinball (2019)


====
Virtual pinball ====
Zen Studios developed nineteen virtual pinball tables based on the Star Wars franchise, with none of them being imitations of previously released Star Wars physical pinball tables.

All of them are released as downloadable content add-ons for the sequels to Pinball FX and Zen Pinball.

A compilation of all 19 tables, titled Star Wars Pinball, is also available on iOS, Android and Nintendo Switch.

The mobile versions of Star Wars Pinball, are paid apps whose price unlocks one particular table and all other tables are unlocked via in-app purchases, while the Switch version, released in 2019 as both a retail and digital title, includes immediate access to all tables, plus additional features.

An Amazon Luna port of Star Wars Pinball has also been announced as a launch title.

Star Wars Pinball
(2013) Windows, Mac, Wii U, Xbox 360, 3DS, PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Kindle Fire, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (2013)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Boba FettStar Wars Pinball:
Balance of the Force (2013)
Xbox 360,
PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Darth Vader
Star Wars Pinball:
Starfighter AssaultStar Wars Pinball:
Heroes Within (2014)
Xbox 360, PSVita, PS3, PS4, Android, iOS

Star Wars Pinball: Masters of the Force
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Droids
Star Wars Pinball:
Han SoloStar Wars Pinball:
Star Wars Rebels (2015)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Force Awakens (2016)
Star Wars Pinball:
Star Wars: Resistance
Star Wars Pinball:
Might of the First OrderStar Wars Pinball: Rogue One (2017)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi (2018)

Star Wars Pinball:
Ahch-To Island
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi - SurviveStar Wars Pinball:
Solo Pack (2018)
Star Wars Pinball:
Solo
Star Wars Pinball:
Calrissian Chronicles
Star Wars Pinball:
Battle of MimbanA twentieth pinball table, based on the first season of The Mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late October of 2020 and due for a spring 2021 release.

===
Lego Star Wars ===
Lego has licensed videogames based on their Lego Star Wars toys, as part of their Lego video games franchise.
Due to the technical limitations of handhelds, the handheld versions always result in an entirely different game telling the same story as the console version, however the PlayStation handheld versions tend to imitate more closely the console versions albeit with some reduced areas and features.

Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005):
Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, GameCube, Mac
Handheld(s):  Nintendo DS,
Game Boy Advance
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006): Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Xbox 360, GameCube,
Mac
Handheld(s):
Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011): PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Windows, Mac
Handheld(s): Nintendo DS, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3,  Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U,  Mac
Handheld(s): Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita
Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga (2020):
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo SwitchCompilation(s): Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007), consisting of Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, and Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Mac

Handheld(s):
Nintendo DS
Mobile: iOS, Android.
====
Other Lego mobile and web browser games ====
Lego Star Wars: The Quest for R2-D2 (2009):
Unity
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault (2011)
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault 2
(2012)
Lego Star Wars:
Battle Orders (2012):
Unity
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles (2013):
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: The New Yoda Chronicles (2014):
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Microfighters (2014):
Android, iOS


===
Angry Birds Star Wars ===
Angry Birds made two Star Wars games.

Angry Birds Star Wars (2012)
Angry Birds Star Wars II
(2013)


===
Disney Infinity ===
The third installment of the Disney Infinity series included Star Wars characters for the first time as playable characters, alongside characters from other franchises owned by Disney, including characters from the Marvel and Pixar films.

Disney Infinity 3.0 (2015):
Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii U, iOS,
Android


==
Cultural impact ==


===
Guest-appearances of Star Wars characters in other videogame franchises ===
This category refers to videogames from other franchises where the inclusion of Star Wars characters is very minor and restricted only to small easter eggs or an unlockable character cameo.

====
Multiple guest-appearances in a series ====
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater series:
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 (2001), Activision – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Darth Maul.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 (2002), Activision – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Jango Fett.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Indiana Jones series:
Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings (2009), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo.
Wii, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable
LEGO Indiana Jones series:
Lego Indiana Jones:
The Original Adventures (2008), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo and cameos from other Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Windows
Lego Indiana Jones 2:
The Adventure Continues (2009), LucasArts - Action-adventure game featuring cameos from Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable,
Windows
Minecraft (2009)
- Various Star Wars DLC packs with Star Wars character skins released.
PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Windows, Switch
Fortnite (2017) - A playable Stormtooper skin was added to Fortnite in 2019.
Din Djarin and Grogu from The Mandalorian also appear as playable skins in the 2020 chapter two, season five event, Zero Point.
Djarin's Amban sniper rifle and his jetpack were included in the event as usable items.

The Sims 4: Journey to Batuu (2020) - The ninth game pack for the life simulation video game
The Sims 4, is a collabration with Star Wars.
Titled The Sims 4: Journey to Batuu, the DLC is focused on adventures on the distant planet of Batuu.
It was released on PC, Mac, Xbox One and PlayStation 4 on September 8, 2020.

====
Single appearances ====
Night Shift (1990), Lucasfilm Games – Platform game featuring action figures of various Star Wars characters.
Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, Mac, PC, Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum
Secret Weapons Over Normandy (2003), LucasArts – Flight simulation game featuring unlockable X-Wing and TIE Fighter.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
, PC
Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction (2005), LucasArts – Features unlockable character Han Solo.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
Soulcalibur IV (2008), Namco Bandai Games – Fighting game.
At release featuring Darth Vader exclusively in the PlayStation 3 version, with Yoda exclusively in the Xbox 360 version, and Darth Vader's apprentice Galen Starkiller Marek in both versions.
Months after the release, Darth Vader and Yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable content, each at the version they were absent at release.
Each of the Star Wars characters had his own ending on the "Story Mode".
However, in late 2016, all of the DLC in Soulcalibur IV was removed from the PlayStation and Microsoft stores for unknown reasons.
It was later revealed to be due to unexpected licensing legal problems caused by Disney's purchase of Star Wars.

===
Fan-made Star Wars games ===
Star Wars MUSH was an unlicensed text-based role-playing game active in the early 1990s.

====
Galaxy in Turmoil ====
On January 25, 2016, Frontwire Studios began an attempt to produce an unofficial Battlefront installment called Galaxy in Turmoil.
The fan made game was in production using Unreal Engine 4 and was based on the cancelled Star Wars: Battlefront III by Free Radical Design.
Although early versions of the game contained assets from Free Radical Design, they soon became "place holders" as the full game planned to be released using assets and music made from the ground up.
On June 4, 2016, Galaxy in Turmoil gained a distribution deal through Valve and was planned to be released for free on Steam which generated a fair amount of attention.
On June 22, 2016 Lucasfilm requested the production of Galaxy in Turmoil be halted.

On July 31, 2016, Frontwire Studios announced the cancellation of the game was due to the "possibility of Galaxy in Turmoil taking away attention from Electronic Arts' Battlefront franchise".
Proposals of Galaxy in Turmoil falling under the paywall of Electronic Arts, and ideas of Lucasfilm giving Frontwire Studios a Star Wars IP licence were both rejected due to an agreement between Electronic Arts and Lucasfilm.
Although Frontwire Studios may have fallen within Fair Use laws, legal conflict was avoided and the fan made Star Wars inspired project was canceled.
There is a playable alpha that contains assets from Free Radical Design that was released to the public then removed early on within Galaxy in Turmoil's lifetime.
Galaxy in Turmoil is now planned to be released as a brand new "cyber-punk" themed IP without any Star Wars references, but still with Battlefront III-inspired mechanics including space-to-ground battles.

==
Further reading ==
Barr, Matthew (16 December 2020).
"
The Force Is Strong with This One (but Not That One):
What Makes a Successful Star Wars Video Game Adaptation?".
Arts.
9 (4): 131.
doi:10.3390/arts9040131.
Retrieved 21 December 2020.

Williams, Kyle; Radtke, C. "Star Wars: A Video Game Saga".
UGO.
Archived from the original on April 22, 2007.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars games at MobyGames
IPDB entry for Star Wars.

Recent Auction Results for Star Wars
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed is an action-adventure game developed by LucasArts and part of The Force
Unleashed  multimedia project.
It was initially developed for the PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Wii, and Xbox 360 consoles and on iOS, second-generation N-Gage, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, and Java-equipped mobile phone handhelds.
The game was released in North America on September 16, 2008, in Australia and Southeast Asia on September 17, and in Europe on September 19.
LucasArts released downloadable content for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles.
An Ultimate Sith Edition of the game, containing both new and previously released downloadable content, was released in November 2009, and later ported to the macOS and Microsoft Windows.

The project bridges
the first two Star Wars trilogies, acting as an origin story for both the united Rebel Alliance and the Galactic Civil War depicted in the original trilogy.
The game introduces a new protagonist named "Starkiller", a powerful Force user trained as Darth Vader's secret apprentice, who is tasked with hunting down Jedi survivors of the Great Jedi Purge while trying to keep his existence a secret.
However, after he is tasked with planting the seeds of what would become the Rebel Alliance, which Vader plans to take advantage of to overthrow the Emperor, Starkiller begins to question his own morality and to slowly redeem himself.
Following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in 2012, the game became part of the non-canonical Star Wars Expanded Universe (also known as Star Wars Legends), and an alternative origin for the Rebel Alliance and the Galactic Civil War was given in other pieces of Star Wars media.

Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed received generally mixed to positive reviews from critics, with praise for its story, voice acting, physics, art and soundtrack, but criticism for its linear gameplay and technical issues.
The game was a bestseller in the United States and Australia, with over one million copies sold its debut month.
As of February 2010, the game had sold over seven million copies, and was the fastest-selling Star Wars video game of its time.
A sequel, Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II, was released in October 2010.

==
Gameplay ==
The Force Unleashed is a third-person action game in which the player's character's weapons are the Force and a lightsaber.
Developers treated the main character's lightsaber like another Force power, and wanted to ensure "something visceral and cool" happened with each button-push.
The game has a combo system for stringing lightsaber attacks and for combining lightsaber attacks with Force powers.
Experience points earned by killing enemies and finding artifacts can be used to increase Starkiller's powers and traits.
The gameplay is intended to be easy to learn; the development team included "horrible" gamers to help ensure the game's accessibility.
Players can casually run and gun through the game, but the game rewards those who take a stealthy, more tactical approach.
The game includes enemies that are easy to overcome; game difficulty arises from presenting these enemies in large numbers that can wear down the player's character.
Additionally, enemies learn from the player's character's attacks; using the same attack on different characters can sometimes lead to the player's character doing less damage.
The enemies, which number over 50, have various strengths and weaknesses; developers faced the difficulty of effectively placing them throughout the game's varied environments.

===
Version differences ===
The Force Unleashed has different features across platforms.

The PlayStation 3 and Xbox
360 versions, powered by the Ronin engine, utilize high-definition graphics and advanced dynamic destruction effects.

These versions also support downloadable content in the form of two expansions that expand upon the game's plot.

The Nintendo versions use motion controls to implement Starkiller's attacks, with the Wii version using the Wii Remote to execute lightsaber attacks and the Nunchuk to wield Force powers, while the Nintendo DS version utilizes the touchscreen to execute attacks, where single actions can be executed by tapping a certain region of the screen (with each region corresponding to a particular action, such as jumping or Force pushing), while more advanced attacks can be performed by dragging the stylus across neighboring regions of the screen.
The PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable versions are identical in content to the Wii version, which is different than the PS3 and Xbox 360 version due to these three systems lacking their horsepower.

Since these versions do not support or use downloadable content, they exclusively intersperse certain levels with three of the five Jedi trials that Starkiller completes at the Jedi temple in Coruscant to further hone his abilities, which are all included in a DLC pack for the PS3 and Xbox
360 versions.

The PSP version also exclusively features five additional "historical" bonus levels that re-enact pivotal scenes and duels throughout the Star Wars saga, as well as special scenarios that can be played with as different Star Wars characters who have the same abilities in the standard single-player mode.

The Nintendo DS version utilizes 3-D graphics like all other major versions, but lacks voice acting.

The Wii and handheld versions support multiplayer.

Two players duel against each other as famous Jedi and Sith in the Star Wars saga in the Wii version, while the handheld versions utilize wireless multiplayer for a four-player battle mode.

==
Plot ==
The game begins shortly after Revenge of the Sith, during the highest point of the Galactic Empire's rule.
After Imperial spies track down a Jedi survivor of the Great Purge named Kento Marek on the planet Kashyyyk, Darth Vader personally leads the search for him while overseeing the Imperial invasion of the planet.
During the first level, players control Vader as he fights his way through Wookiees to reach Marek, eventually finding and defeating him.
Before Vader can murder him, Marek's son Galen grabs his lightsaber with the Force.
Realizing the boy's strong connection to the Force, Vader finishes off Marek and takes Galen with him, raising him to become his apprentice, unbeknownst to the Emperor.

Years later, after Galen (given the alias "Starkiller" by Vader) reaches adulthood and completes his training, he is sent by his master to eliminate a select group of Jedi survivors across the galaxy as a final test to prepare him for Vader's ultimate goal: assassinating the Emperor so that Vader and Starkiller could rule the galaxy together.
Starkiller travels between missions aboard his personal ship, the Rogue Shadow, developing a close relationship with his crew:
lightsaber training droid PROXY (who is programmed to regularly attack him) and Imperial pilot Juno Eclipse.
Starkiller's targets include Rahm Kota, a Clone Wars veteran and leader of a small militia, who attacks a TIE fighter shipyard above Nar Shaadda to lure out Vader; Kazdan Paratus, who became insane after years of isolation on Raxus Prime; and Shaak Ti, who is hiding out on Felucia.
Before she dies, Shaak Ti warns Starkiller that he will eventually be betrayed.
Once all the Jedi have been killed, Vader brings Starkiller before the Emperor, only to swiftly impale him and hurl him through a window into space to prove his loyalty to his master.
Unbeknownst to the Emperor, Vader has Starkiller rescued and resuscitated, believing his apprentice still has his uses.

Vader sends Starkiller to foster a rebellion among the Empire's enemies, as part of his master plan to destabilize the Empire and create the proper conditions to depose the Emperor.
Although Vader orders him to cut his ties to his past, Starkiller rescues Juno, who was arrested and branded a traitor to the Empire, and escapes with her and PROXY.
Looking for allies to aid his mission, Starkiller approaches Kota on Cloud City, who survived their previous encounter, but was blinded and reduced to alcoholism, and rescues him from Imperial forces and an Emperor's Shadow Guard.
The group then travels to Kashyyyk to rescue Princess Leia Organa, who was arrested by the Empire, but Starkiller temporarily abandons his quest to visit his old home, where he meets his father's spirit and discovers his true identity  After liberating the enslaved Wookiees and killing Captain Ozzik Sturn, Starkiller earns Leia's gratitude, who agrees to join the rebellion.
Afterward, learning Leia's adoptive father, Senator Bail Organa, went missing on Felucia, Starkiller goes to find him, discovering Organa was captured by Shaak Ti's former apprentice Maris Brood, who, like the other inhabitants, succumbed to the Dark Side after her master's death.
After defeating Brood and her pet Bull Rancor, Starkiller spares her life and convinces Organa to join the rebellion.

To convince more senators to do the same, Vader suggests that Starkiller attack a Star Destroyer facility on Raxus Prime to show that the Empire is vulnerable.
Juno learns Starkiller is still working for Vader and chastises him, but agrees to keep silent.
During his mission, Starkiller is attacked by PROXY, who attempts to fulfill his programming by killing him, but Starkiller defeats him, destroys the facility, and pulls a Star Destroyer out of the sky using the Force .
Following this, Organa meets with fellow senators Mon Mothma and Garm Bel Iblis on Corellia to formally organize a rebellion, only for Vader to come and arrest them and Kota.
After overpowering Starkiller, Vader explains that he was merely a tool to lure out and destroy the Empire's enemies, and that his plans to overthrow the Emperor never included him.

Surviving thanks to PROXY sacrificing himself to distract Vader, Starkiller vows to rescue the senators and Kota, and uses the Force to ascertain their location: the Death Star.
After sharing a goodbye kiss with Juno, Starkiller battles his way through the station to reach the Emperor's throne room.
Vader confronts him on the way there, but Starkiller defeats him and faces the Emperor, who tries to goad him into finishing off his former master so Starkiller can take his place.
While the Emperor is distracted, Kota steals the Emperor's lightsaber and tries to attack him from behind, but is subdued with Force lightning.
At this point, the player must choose between saving Kota (Light Side) or killing Vader (Dark Side).

If the player chooses the Light Side, Starkiller defeats the Emperor, but spares him at Kota's urging.
The Emperor unleashes more Force lightning, but Starkiller absorbs it, sacrificing himself to allow Kota and the senators escape on the Rogue Shadow.
Later, the Emperor and Vader look over Starkiller's corpse, concerned that he has become a martyr to inspire the newly formed Rebel Alliance.
On Kashyyyk, the senators decide to proceed with the rebellion and Leia chooses Starkiller's family crest as their symbol.
Outside, Juno talks to Kota, who tells her that among Starkiller's dark thoughts, Juno herself was one bright spot that he held onto right until his death.
This is the canonical ending of the game, as confirmed by its novelization.

If the player chooses the Dark Side, Starkiller finishes off Vader and is congratulated by the Emperor, who commands him to kill Kota to sever his ties to the Jedi and become a Sith Lord.
Instead, Starkiller attacks the Emperor, who blocks the attack and crushes him with the Rogue Shadow, severely injuring Starkiller and killing Juno, Kota, and the senators.
Starkiller later awakens to find his broken body being grafted with armor so that he could continue serving the Emperor, though he assures Starkiller that he, like Vader, will be replaced once he finds a new, more promising apprentice.

===
Downloadable content ===
Three downloadable content (DLC) levels for the game were released.
The first one is set during the events of the main story and explores more of Starkiller's background, while the second and third ones expand upon the non-canonical Dark Side of the game, taking place in their own alternate timeline.
In the Coruscant level, Starkiller, at some point before traveling to Kashyyyk, decides to visit the abandoned Jedi Temple to learn more about his identity and connection to the Force.
After fighting his way past the Imperial security forces, he reaches the old Council Chambers, where Kento Marek's spirit appears before him and tells him that he needs to pass the Jedi trials of mind, body, and spirit.
Upon doing so, Starkiller is faced with a mysterious Sith warrior, revealed to be a dark reflection of himself created by his own fear.
Following his defeat, Starkiller finds a holocron left by Marek, who reveals himself as his father and tells him it's not too late to return to the light side.
Having finally received the closure he sought, Starkiller returns to the Rogue Shadow to resume his current mission.

The Tatooine and Hoth levels are set during alternate depictions of A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back, respectively, and present Starkiller as the Emperor's trusted assassin, referred to as "Lord Starkiller".
In the Tatooine mission, called A Fragile Hope, he is tasked with retrieving the Death Star plans stolen by the Rebel Alliance, which have been tracked to Tatooine.
He decides to visit Jabba the Hutt, who has knowledge on the plans' whereabouts, revealing they are in the possession of two droids at Mos Eisley.
However, when Starkiller refuses to work for him, Jabba tries to have him be eaten by his rancor.
Killing the beast, Starkiller escapes from Jabba's palace after massacring his men, including Boba Fett.
At Mos Eisley, Starkiller kills Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi after a duel that allows the droids to board the Millennium Falcon, though Starkiller manages to place a tracking device on the ship before it takes off.
In the Hoth mission, called Wrath of the Empire, Starkiller partakes in the Battle of Hoth, where the Empire attacks the weakened Rebel Alliance's base on Hoth to crush it once and for all.
During the battle, Starkiller infiltrates the base with special orders to capture Luke Skywalker, who began training as a Jedi.
He eventually finds and defeats Skywalker in the base's hangar, severing his right hand.
When the Falcon tries to take off, Starkiller seizes the ship with the Force while goading Skywalker to give into the Dark Side to rescue his friends.
Skywalker attacks Starkiller with Force lightning, causing him to let go of the ship and congratulate Skywalker for embracing the Dark Side, planning to make him his apprentice the same way Vader did to him.

== Cast and characters ==
Sam Witwer as Galen Marek/Starkiller — The forbidden child of a Jedi, Starkiller was adopted by his father's killer, Darth Vader, who, aware of his strong connection to the Force, raised him to be his secret apprentice.
Once his training is complete, Starkiller is dispatched by his master to kill several prominent Jedi who survived the Great Jedi Purge.
Although initially acting as a villain, Starkiller is "really just [a] damaged kid."
Developers decided not to give Starkiller a name in the game, but the novelization reveals his real name as "Galen Marek".
Although Starkiller starts as Vader's apprentice, a focus of the game is to allow the character to evolve into "something more heroic, something greater."
Audio director David Collins saw a resemblance between Starkiller concept art and his friend, Witwer; Collins asked for Witwer's headshot and an audition reel, and a few weeks later Witwer sat for a 45-minute audition.
Witwer secured the role by demonstrating to developers his deep understanding of the character; in portraying Starkiller, Witwer brought many new ideas about the character and imbued him with a sense of humanity.
Developers tried not to make Starkiller so evil that players would have difficulty connecting to him, aiming to strike a balance between loyalty to his master and his growing sense of disillusionment with the Empire.
The character's name is an homage to "Anakin Starkiller," the original name of the character that eventually became Luke Skywalker.

Matt Sloan as Darth Vader — A powerful Dark Lord of the Sith, high-ranking enforcer of the Empire, and Starkiller's master, who discovers Starkiller as a child and trains him.
In training Starkiller by having him hunt the few remaining Jedi survivors, Vader intends to prepare him to overthrow the Emperor, although there are "twists and turns" in this scheme.
The events depicted in The Force Unleashed are pivotal to Darth Vader's history and development, depicting him as being largely responsible for the events leading to the Galactic Civil War, depicted in the original Star Wars trilogy.

Nathalie Cox as Juno Eclipse — Rogue Shadow’s pilot and Starkiller's love interest.
Eclipse was not originally part of the game; early concepts had the apprentice as an older character who develops a connection with a young Princess Leia.
Star Wars creator George Lucas, uncomfortable with this idea, encouraged the developers to create a love interest.
The apprentice, who has had limited interaction with women when the game begins, does not at first know how to act around her.
Her introduction early in the game allows the relationship with Starkiller to develop, and her inclusion helps "recapture that rich ensemble feel of the original Star Wars".
According to Sean Williams, who wrote the novelization, the romantic storyline is the key to The Force Unleashed.
The name "Juno Eclipse" was originally proposed as a name for the character eventually called "Asajj Ventress" — it was ultimately rejected as insufficiently villainous.
The Force Unleashed project lead
Haden Blackman brought the name back for the mythic quality of the name "Juno" and the duality suggested by an "eclipse."
Cox, in addition to strongly resembling the character's concept art, had "integrity and poise" appropriate to Juno Eclipse that helped the actor secure the role.

Cully Fredricksen as General Rahm Kota —
A Jedi Master and Clone Wars veteran who provides Starkiller with additional insight into the Force and helps connect him to his Jedi heritage.
Developers realized early that Starkiller would require insight into the Force from someone other than Darth Vader; after rejecting the idea of this coming from the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn or some version of Darth Plagueis, they decided to fill this role with one of Starkiller's Jedi opponents.
The character was conceived as a "tough-as-nails" contrast to the more traditional image of a Jedi represented by Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Senior concept artist Amy Beth Christianson drew upon samurai influences for Kota's appearance.
The character changed little after being conceived; Fredricksen's own traits made the character tougher.
Fredricksen was the first actor cast for the project.

Adrienne Wilkinson as Maris Brood —
A Zabrak survivor of the Jedi Purge and Shaak Ti's apprentice.
After her master's death at Starkiller's hands, Brood falls to the dark side and uses Felucia's inhabitants to wage war on the Imperial forces trying to occupy the planet.
The character was originally conceived as a pirate captain, and Christianson's early art included Brood's distinctive lightsaber tonfas.
Wilkinson brought strength to her performance, leading to an expansion of the role with more dialogue.

David W. Collins as PROXY — Starkiller's droid sidekick,
designed to constantly test his lightsaber and Force abilities, as well as deliver important messages through holographic projection.
Collins said PROXY has C-3PO's innocence but also is "really dangerous."
The companion trade paperback describes the conflict between PROXY's primary programming to kill Starkiller and its self-imposed desire to help him; PROXY is eager to please Starkiller, but does not know how dangerous it can be or that there is a conflict between its programming and Starkiller's wishes.
Trying to avoid having PROXY's dialogue become too reminiscent of either C-3PO or the villainous HK-47 of Knights of the Old Republic, developers focused on PROXY's friendly naïvety.

Jimmy Smits as Bail Organa —
The Emmy Award-winning Smits voices the character he played in the Star Wars prequels: a Galactic Senator from Alderaan and Princess Leia's adoptive father who becomes a founding member of the Rebel Alliance.
Other performances include Tom Kane as Kento Marek and Captain Ozzik Sturn, Larry Drake as Kazdan Paratus, Susan Eisenberg as Shaak Ti, and Catherine Taber as Princess Leia Organa.
In addition to voicing Starkiller, Witwer also provided the voice of Emperor Palpatine.
R2-D2 also makes an appearance in the game alongside Leia.
The game's downloadable content features David W. Collins as Jabba the Hutt, Dee Bradley Baker as Boba Fett, Rob Rackstraw as Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Lloyd Floyd as Luke Skywalker.

==
Development ==


===
Concept ===
Game planning began in summer 2004.
Initially, about six developers started with a "clean slate" to conceptualize a new Star Wars game; the small group of engineers, artists, and designers spent more than a year brainstorming ideas for what might make a good game.
Over 100 initial concepts were whittled down to 20 to 25 that included making the game the third entry in the Knights of the Old Republic series or having the protagonist be a Wookiee "superhero", Darth Maul, a bounty hunter, a smuggler, a mercenary, or the last member of the Skywalker family.
The decision to focus on the largely unexplored period between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope helped energize the design team.
Consumer feedback helped the developers narrow in on seven concepts, and elements from those seven went into The Force Unleashed's overall concept.
Production was greatly aided by concept art, which was intended to visually bridge the two Star Wars trilogies, convey the impression of a "lived-in" universe, show how the galaxy changes under Imperial rule, and to seem familiar yet new.
An off-hand comment about the Force in the game being powerful enough "to pull a Star Destroyer out of the sky" inspired an image by senior concept artist Amy Beth Christenson that became an important part of the developers' idea pitches and evolved into a major moment in the game.
These illustrations also inspired the creation of dozens of simple, three-dimensional animations.
Eventually, a one-minute previsualization video highlighting the idea of "kicking someone's ass with the Force" helped convince the designers that The Force Unleashed would be "a great game";
George Lucas, upon seeing the one-minute video, told the designers to "go make that game".
Once the concept was solidified, the development team grew from ten to twenty people.
The idea of "reimagining" the Force as "amped up" in The Force Unleashed aligned with LucasArts' overall goal of harnessing the power of the latest video game consoles to "dramatically" change gaming, specifically through the use of simulation-based gameplay.

=== Story ===
In April 2005, after several months of planning, the LucasArts team received Lucas' encouragement to create a game centered on Darth Vader's secret apprentice in the largely unexplored period between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope,  drawing the two trilogies together.
LucasArts spent six months developing the story.
Lucas spent hours discussing with the developers the relationship between Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine and provided feedback on what Vader would want out of and how he would motivate an apprentice.
Lucas Licensing reviewed many game details to ensure they fit into canon.
Focus group feedback indicated that, while hunting down Jedi at Vader's order would be fun, the character should be redeemed, in keeping with a major Star Wars motif.
Although the game introduces new characters, developers felt the presence of characters already part of Star Wars would help anchor the game within the official continuity.
Before the game's release, Lucasfilm claimed it would "unveil new revelations about the Star Wars galaxy" with a "redemption" motif.
The story progresses through a combination of scripted events, in-game cinematics, cutscenes, and dialogue.

===
Technology ===
During pre-production, about 30 people were on the project team.
LucasArts spent several years developing the tools and technology to create The Force Unleashed.
Prototyping, level construction, marketing, and public relations took about a year.
Until late 2006, the production team was ascertaining "how many polygons, lights, [and] characters" next-generation platforms supported; a year of full production began in early 2007.
A series of quickly-produced "play blast
" videos helped the developers focus on mechanics, the user interface, and finishing moves.
Development of the Xbox 360 version came first; PlayStation 3 development started when the production team had enough development kits.
Making the game run on both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 was "a monumental task".
The game is based on LucasArts' proprietary "Ronin" game engine but also integrates third-party technology
: Havok for rigid body physics, Pixelux Entertainment's "Digital Molecular Matter" (DMM) for dynamically destructible objects, and NaturalMotion's Euphoria for realistic non-player character artificial intelligence.
LucasArts' programmers had to overcome technical hurdles to get
Havok-,
DMM- and Euphoria-coded components to interact.
Developers also had to strike a balance between realistic and entertaining physics.
LucasArts initially opted not to release a personal computer version of The Force Unleashed, stating that doing the game well would be too processor-intensive for typical PCs and that scaling down the game's procedural physics for the PC platform would "fundamentally" change The Force Unleashed's gameplay.
However, LucasArts later announced Windows and Mac versions of the game, developed in conjunction with Aspyr Media, for release in
Fall 2009.Lacking Havok, Euphoria, and DMM, Krome's Wii version relies on the company's in-house physics engine.
Some character animations may be ragdoll while others are preset; in developing the game, Krome tried to blur the distinction between the two.
The lighting system in the Wii version is more advanced than that in the PS2 version, which Krome also built; the PS2 includes more graphic details than their PSP version.

===
ILM collaboration and cast performance ===
The Force Unleashed is intended to make players think they are "actually, finally, in a Star Wars movie".
It is the first game on which LucasArts and Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) collaborated since they both relocated to the Letterman Digital Arts Center in San Francisco, California.
This collaboration allowed the companies to co-develop tools to make film-quality effects.
LucasArts worked with ILM's Zeno tool framework and helped ILM build its Zed game editor.
Lucas said having the two companies working together in the same building was "a great
collaboration".
It took Senior Manager of Voice and Audio Darragh O'Farrell four months to cast The Force Unleashed.
ILM's face- and motion-capture "CloneCam" technology recorded actors' voice and physical performances.
This led to a change in LucasArts' casting process: for the first time, actors needed to match characters' age and gender.
Actors performed their lines together, rather than in isolation, to better get the sense of their characters interacting with each other.
Consequently, the script's dialogue was reduced while reliance on characters' expressions — captured through the CloneCam — increased.
CloneCam technology had previously been used in producing the Pirates of the Caribbean movies.

===
Music ===
LucasArts music supervisor Jesse Harlin said the music matches the game's motif of redemption and goal of bridging the gap between Revenge of the Sith and
A New Hope:
We had to make sure that the game's score started off rooted within the Prequel Trilogy feel of ethnic percussion and sweeping themes that spoke to the nobility and grandeur of the old Jedi Order.

As the game progresses, however, the Empire gains more control, the Jedi are hunted, and the ordered control of the Prequels gives way to the more romantic temperament of the Original Trilogy.

The game's soundtrack includes material composed by John Williams for the films in addition to material created specifically for The Force Unleashed.
Jesse Harlin composed the game's main theme, while Mark Griskey composed the score.
Griskey made use of several motifs from the film scores as well as Harlin's main theme.
The 90-minute soundtrack was recorded by the Skywalker Symphony Orchestra and mixed at Skywalker Sound in Lucas Valley in September and October 2007.
During gameplay, a proprietary engine combines "musical elements according to the pace, plot, and environment of the game at any given moment", resulting in a unique musical experience.
A promotional soundtrack album was made available online through Tracksounds.com in 2008.

===
Expansion ===
Two weeks after the game's release, LucasArts announced development on two downloadable expansion packs for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game.
The first expansion added "skins" that allow the player's character to appear as Star Wars figures other than Starkiller, such as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, Qui-Gon Jinn, Jango Fett, C-3PO, Luke Skywalker, Darth Maul, Darth Sion, Mace Windu, Plo Koon, Kit Fisto and Ki-Adi-Mundi.
The skins chosen to be part of the expansion were based in part on fans' feedback.
The second expansion pack added a new mission that expands on Starkiller's background.
Although a moment in the game's main story was considered as a "jumping off point" for the expansion, LucasArts decided instead to make the new mission instantly accessible to players.
The mission's location — the Jedi Temple on Coruscant — appears in the Wii, PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable versions of The Force Unleashed, but was cut during planning from the PS3 and Xbox 360 platforms.
The Tatooine Downloadable Content, released August 27, 2009, is the first of two expansions that occur in an "Infinities" storyline, an alternate history in which Starkiller kills Vader and becomes Palpatine's assassin.
The second Infinities expansion, which takes place on Hoth, was originally only available as part of the Ultimate Sith Edition, which also includes all previous downloadable content.
However, the Hoth expansion was later made available for download on the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live.

== Reception ==
1.738 million unit sales of The Force Unleashed across all platforms
made it the third best-selling game globally in the third quarter of 2008; as of July 2009, it had sold six million copies.
The Force Unleashed was both the fastest-selling Star Wars game and LucasArts' fastest-selling game.
The Force Unleashed won a Writers Guild of America award for Best Video Game Writing.

===
PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and PC ===
The Force Unleashed received mixed to fairly positive reviews.
Electronic Gaming Monthly said the game is "ambitious--yet dissatisfying"; however, GameSpot said the game "gets more right than it does wrong".
GameSpot said the PC port of the game retained all of the game's strengths and weaknesses, but that the port failed to take advantage of the PC platform.
GameSpot called the game's story "more intimate and more powerful" than the Star Wars franchise's prequel trilogy; X-Play identified the game's story as one of the game's "few bright spots" and said the game's visuals successfully convey Star Wars' "classic used universe" feel.
GamePro and GameSpot praised the game's art and physics, and GamePro also commended Starkiller's "cool powers".
IGN praised the game's voice acting, particularly Witwer's performance as Starkiller.
The Washington Times identified Mark Griskey's soundtrack as "another star" of the game, and Tracksounds called it "the most entertaining Star Wars score since Return of the Jedi".
Time called The Force Unleashed the seventh best video game of 2008.
The game received GameSpot's 2008 award for Best Use of a Creative License and was nominated for Best Voice Acting.
Gaming Target selected the game as one of their "40 Games
We'll Still Be Playing From 2008".
Conversely, Entertainment Weekly called The Force Unleashed the second-worst game of 2008 and
GameTrailers called it the most disappointing game that year; it was also a nominee for GameSpot's Most Disappointing Game recognition.
Official Xbox Magazine cited the game's linear gameplay and lack of multiplayer as reasons the game falls short of being "an all-engrossing Star Wars experience".
gamesTM suggested that allowing players to take a hack-and-slash approach means many "will never view the title's full potential".
IGN and X-Play criticized some boss battles and enemies' behavior; GamePro also faulted "disappointing" boss battles and the game's "uneven" combat.
Rather than feeling more powerful as the game progresses, GamePro felt that increases in Starkiller's powers were dampened by increasingly difficult enemy abilities and positions; X-Play commented that despite a good level-up system, Starkiller and his enemies are "pretty much on even ground most of the time".
Wired.com, X-Play, and GameSpot criticized the game's third-person camera and the sequence that requires the player to make Starkiller pull a Star Destroyer out of the sky.
Wired.com speculated that LucasArts could have recognized the frustration of the Star Destroyer sequence and removed it, but left it in because they hyped the sequence before the game's release.
Wired.com and GameSpot further criticized the load times and abrupt gameplay-cinematic transitions.
GameSpot also faulted "loose" targeting and some visual and audio glitches.
IGN, which also identified problems with targeting, speculated that DMM's processor intensiveness limited its use throughout the game, detracting from players' ability to feel immersed.
GameTrailers and IGN were disappointed with the lack of variety within and between levels.
X-Play, pointing to "Default Text" as the bonus objective description in the Xbox 360 version's final mission and other glitches, said it seems the developers one day "just stopped working on the game".
GameSpot cited the port's lack of visual options and poor framerate as evidence the PC edition had been rushed.
IGN described the Jedi Academy expansion as "pretty decent".
GameSpot said LucasArts seems to have acknowledged some of the game's criticisms in developing the Tatooine expansion, but IGN called the  level's boss fights "a joke" in light of the player's high Force powers.
IGN found the level design in The Ultimate Sith Edition's Hoth scenario uninteresting, and called the boss fight against Luke Skywalker tough but "not nearly as fun" as it could have been.
The demo was the fourth most-played Xbox Live game during the week of August 25, trailing Grand Theft Auto IV, Halo 3, and Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare; it was the ninth most-played Xbox Live title throughout all of 2008.
The week it was released, The Force Unleashed was the sixth most-played game on Xbox Live, and it rose to fifth the following week.
In its first week on sale in Australia, the PS3 and Xbox
360 versions of The Force Unleashed were the top and second-best sellers, respectively.
In the United States, the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 version sold 325,000 and 610,000 copies, respectively, in September 2008; that month, the Xbox 360 version was the best-selling game and the PlayStation 3 version was the fifth best-selling game for their respective consoles.

===
Other platforms ===
Nintendo Power praised the story and the number of lightsaber combos but criticized the game's easiness and hack-and-slash gameplay.
It also praised the Wii version for its story and Force powers, but criticized the game's lightsaber controls and linear gameplay.
GameSpot noticed visual glitches and problematic audio compression that detracted from the Wii version's "mature and exciting" story, adding that the reduced number of Force-manipulable objects helps mitigate the targeting problems experienced on other platforms.
Referring to the Wii remote and nunchuck controls, GameSpot also speculated that The Force Unleashed is "possibly the most waggle-heavy" Wii game.
Zero Punctuation criticized the Wii version's graphics and compared lightsaber combat to "trying to follow an aerobics routine with both your arms tied to different windmills".
The ability to upgrade Starkiller's abilities in the PS2 version, according to IGN, is not as "robust" as it should be, and the game's targeting system is sometimes frustrating.
IGN said the PS2's real-time cutscene rendering made Starkiller seem emotionless, and that pre-rendered cutscenes would have been better.
GameSpot found the DS version's plot interesting but the storytelling itself "lackluster".
While the DS version is easy, with Starkiller killing enemies "like a hot knife through butter", GameSpot said the player's sense of power is not matched by a sense of freedom.
GameSpot called the PSP version's camera "unwieldy", but added that smaller and less cluttered environments make the targeting system less frustrating than on other platforms.

The Wii version was a nominee for multiple Wii-specific awards from IGN in its 2008 video game awards, including Best Story and Best Voice Acting.
In the week of its release, the Wii version was the sixth bestselling game in Australia and was second to Wii Fit among games for that platform.
The PS2 version was the eighth bestseller in Australia, and both the PS2 and PSP versions were the top sellers on their respective platforms.
The DS version was eighth most sold among DS games in Australia.
In the United States, the Wii version sold 223,000 copies in September 2008, making it the ninth best-selling game that month.
In the United States, the PlayStation 2 version was the 14th best-selling game in September 2008, selling over 100,000 copies.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed at MobyGames
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed at IMDb
The Planets, Op.
32, is a seven-movement orchestral suite by the English composer Gustav Holst, written between 1914 and 1916.
Each movement of the suite is named after a planet of the solar system and its corresponding astrological character as defined by Holst.

From its premiere to the present day, the suite has been enduringly popular, influential, widely performed and frequently recorded.
The work was not heard in a complete public performance, however, until some years after it was completed.
Although there were four performances between September 1918 and October 1920, they were all either private (the first performance, in London) or incomplete (two others in London and one in Birmingham).
The premiere was at the Queen's Hall on 29 September 1918, conducted by Holst's friend Adrian Boult before an invited audience of about 250 people.
The first complete public performance was finally given in London by Albert Coates conducting the London Symphony Orchestra on 15 November 1920.
==
Background ==
The concept of the work is astrological rather than astronomical (which is why Earth is not included, although Sun and Moon are also not included while including the non-traditional Uranus and Neptune): each movement is intended to convey ideas and emotions associated with the influence of the planets on the psyche, not the Roman deities.
The idea of the work was suggested to Holst by Clifford Bax, who introduced him to astrology when the two were part of a small group of English artists holidaying in Majorca in the spring of 1913; Holst became quite a devotee of the subject, and would cast his friends' horoscopes for fun.
Holst also used Alan Leo's book What is a Horoscope?
as a springboard for his own ideas, as well as for the subtitles (e.g., "The Bringer of...") for the movements.

On 17 January 1914
Holst attended a performance of Arnold Schoenberg's Five Pieces for Orchestra, at the Queen's Hall, conducted by Schoenberg's pupil Edward Clark.
Holst quickly acquired a copy of the score, the only Schoenberg score he ever owned.
This influenced Holst at least to the degree that the working title of his own composition was Seven Pieces for Large Orchestra.
When composing The Planets Holst initially scored the work for four hands, two pianos, except for Neptune, which was scored for a single organ, as Holst believed that the sound of the piano was too percussive for a world as mysterious and distant as Neptune.
Holst then scored the suite for a large orchestra, in which form it became enormously popular.
Holst's use of orchestration was very imaginative and colourful, showing the influence of such contemporary composers as Igor Stravinsky and Arnold Schoenberg, as well as such late Russian romantics as Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov and Alexander Glazunov.
Its novel sonorities helped make the work an immediate success with audiences at home and abroad.
Although The Planets remains Holst's most popular work, the composer himself did not count it among his best creations and later in life complained that its popularity had completely surpassed his other works.
He was, however, partial to his own favourite movement, Saturn.

==
Premieres ==
The orchestral premiere of The Planets suite, conducted at Holst's request by Adrian Boult, was held at short notice on 29 September 1918, during the last weeks of World War I, in the Queen's Hall with the financial support of Holst's friend and fellow composer H. Balfour Gardiner.
It was hastily rehearsed; the musicians of the Queen's Hall Orchestra first saw the complicated music only two hours before the performance, and the choir for Neptune was recruited from pupils from Morley College and St Paul's Girls' School (where Holst taught).
It was a comparatively intimate affair, attended by around 250 invited associates, but Holst regarded it as the public premiere, inscribing Boult's copy of the score, "This copy is the property of Adrian Boult who first caused the Planets to shine in public and thereby earned the gratitude of Gustav Holst."

A public concert was given in London under the auspices of the Royal Philharmonic Society on 27 February 1919, conducted by Boult.
Five of the seven movements were played in the order Mars, Mercury, Saturn, Uranus, and Jupiter.
It was Boult's decision not to play all seven movements at this concert.
He felt that when the public were being given a totally new language like that, "half an hour of it was as much as they could take in".
The anonymous critic in Hazell's Annual called it "an extraordinarily complex and clever suite".
At a Queen's Hall symphony concert on 22 November of that year, Holst conducted Venus, Mercury and Jupiter (this was the first public performance of Venus).
There was another incomplete public performance, in Birmingham, on 10 October 1920, with five movements (Mars, Venus, Mercury, Saturn and Jupiter).
It is not clear whether this performance was conducted by Appleby Matthews or the composer.
His daughter Imogen recalled, "He hated incomplete performances of The Planets, though on several occasions he had to agree to conduct three or four movements at Queen's Hall concerts.
He particularly disliked having to finish with Jupiter, to make a 'happy ending', for, as he himself said, 'in the real world the end is not happy at all'".
The first complete performance of the suite at a public concert did not occur until 15 November 1920; the London Symphony Orchestra (LSO) was conducted by Albert Coates.
This was the first time the movement Neptune had been heard in a public performance, all the other movements having been given earlier public airings.
The composer conducted a complete performance for the first time on 13 October 1923, with the Queen's Hall Orchestra at a Promenade Concert.
Holst conducted the LSO in two recorded performances of The Planets: the first was an acoustic recording made in sessions between 1922 and 1924 (now available on Pavilion Records' Pearl label); the second was made in 1926, and utilised the then-new electrical recording process (in 2003, this was released on compact disc by IMP and later on Naxos outside the United States).
Because of the time constraints of the 78rpm format, the tempo is often much faster than is usually the case today.

==
Instrumentation ==
The work is scored for a large orchestra consisting of the following instrumentation.
The movements vary in the combinations of instruments used.

In "Neptune", two three-part women's choruses (each comprising two soprano sections and one alto section) located in an adjoining room which is to be screened from the audience are added.

==
Structure ==
The suite has seven movements, each named after a planet and its corresponding astrological character (see Planets in astrology):
Holst's original title, as seen on the handwritten full score, was "Seven Pieces for Large Orchestra".
Holst almost certainly attended an early performance of Schoenberg's Five Pieces for Orchestra in 1914 (the year he wrote Mars, Venus and Jupiter), and owned a score of it, the only Schoenberg score he ever owned.
Each movement of Holst's work was originally called only by the second part of each title (I "The Bringer of War", II "The Bringer of Peace" and so on); the present titles were added in time for the first (incomplete) public performance in September 1918, though they were never added to the original score.
A typical performance of all seven movements is about fifty minutes long, though Holst's own electric recording from 1926 is just over forty-two and a half minutes.
One explanation for the suite's structure, presented by Holst scholar Raymond Head, is the ruling of astrological signs of the zodiac by the planets: if the signs are listed along with their ruling planets in the traditional order starting with Aries, ignoring duplication and the luminaries (the Sun and Moon), the order of the movements corresponds.
Critic David Hurwitz offers an alternative explanation for the piece's structure: that Jupiter is the centrepoint of the suite and that the movements on either side are in mirror images.
Thus Mars involves motion and Neptune is static; Venus is sublime while Uranus is vulgar, and Mercury is light and scherzando while Saturn is heavy and plodding.
This hypothesis is lent credence by the fact that the two outer movements, Mars and Neptune, are both written in rather unusual quintuple meter.

Holst suffered neuritis in his right arm, which caused him to seek help from Vally Lasker and Nora Day, two amanuenses, in scoring The Planets.
Neptune was one of the first pieces of orchestral music to have a fade-out ending, although several composers (including Joseph Haydn in the finale of his Farewell Symphony) had achieved a similar effect by different means.
Holst stipulates that the women's choruses are "to be placed in an adjoining room, the door of which is to be left open until the last bar of the piece, when it is to be slowly and silently closed", and that the final bar (scored for choruses alone) is "to be repeated until the sound is lost in the distance".
Although commonplace today, the effect bewitched audiences in the era before widespread recorded sound—after the initial 1918 run-through, Holst's daughter Imogen (in addition to watching the charwomen dancing in the aisles during Jupiter) remarked that the ending was "unforgettable, with its hidden chorus of women's voices growing fainter and fainter... until the imagination knew no difference between sound and silence".

== Additions by other composers ==
Several attempts have been made, for a variety of reasons, to append further music to Holst's suite, though by far the most common presentation of the music in the concert hall and on record remains Holst's original seven-movement version.
===
Pluto ===
Pluto was discovered in 1930, four years before Holst's death, and was hailed by astronomers as the ninth planet.
Holst, however, expressed no interest in writing a movement for the new planet.
He had become disillusioned by the popularity of the suite, believing that it took too much attention away from his other works.
In the final broadcast of his Young People's Concerts series in March 1972, the conductor Leonard Bernstein led the New York Philharmonic through a fairly straight interpretation of the suite, though he discarded the Saturn movement because he thought the theme of old age was irrelevant to a concert for children.
The broadcast concluded with an improvised performance he called "Pluto, the Unpredictable".
The performance may be viewed on the Kultur DVD set.

In 2000, the Hallé Orchestra commissioned the English composer Colin Matthews, an authority on Holst, to write a new eighth movement, which he called "Pluto, the Renewer".
Dedicated to the late Imogen Holst, Gustav Holst's daughter, it was first performed in Manchester on 11 May 2000, with Kent Nagano conducting the Hallé Orchestra.
Matthews also changed the ending of Neptune slightly so that movement would lead directly into Pluto.
Matthews himself has speculated that, the dedication notwithstanding, Imogen Holst "would have been both amused and dismayed by the venture."
===
Earth, from The Planets by Trouvère ===
Japanese composer Jun Nagao arranged The Planets for the Trouvère Quartet in 2003, including added movements for Earth and Pluto, since the latter was considered a planet at the time.
The suite was arranged for concert band and premiered in 2014.
The work contains original themes, themes from The Planets, and other popular Holst melodies.

==
Recordings ==


==
Adaptations ==


===
Non-orchestral arrangements ===
Piano duet (four hands) – an engraved copy of Holst's own piano duet arrangement was found by John York.

Two pianos (duo) –
Holst had originally sketched the work for two pianos, due to a need to compensate for the neuritis in his right arm.
His two friends, Nora Day and Vally Lasker, had agreed to play the two-piano arrangement for him as he dictated the details of the orchestral score to them.
This they wrote down themselves on the two-piano score, and used as a guide when it was time to create the full orchestral score.
The two-piano arrangement was published in 1949.
Holst's original manuscripts for it are now in the holdings of the Royal College of Music (Mars, Venus, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune), Royal Academy of Music (Mercury) and British Library (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus).

Pianola – In the early 1990s an arrangement was made for piano rolls by the English pianolist, Rex Lawson, and published on the Perforetur label.

Organ –
American harpsichordist and organist Peter Sykes transcribed The Planets for organ.

Ensemble or Chamber Orchestra – English orchestrator George Morton transcribed The Planets for 15-piece ensemble or chamber orchestra.

Moog – Isao Tomita adapted The Planets for a Moog and other synthesizers and electronic devices.
The original LP release prompted legal action from Holst's estate.
The composer's daughter, Imogen Holst, worked hard to prevent the recording being distributed in the UK.
Patrick Gleeson also recorded an electronic version in 1976 called Beyond the Sun.

Brass instruments –
Hungarian trombonist and arranger Áron Simon transcribed the Mars movement for 6 trombones, euphonium, tuba, timpani and percussion.

Brass band – Stephen Roberts, associate conductor of the English Symphony Orchestra, transcribed the entire suite for brass band.

Marching band – the movements Mars, Venus and Jupiter have all been arranged for marching band by Jay Bocook.
Paul Murtha also arranged the chorale section of Jupiter for marching band.
,
Kevin Shah and Tony Nunez created a work on Jupiter entitled "Bringer of Joy" as well Project Rise Music »
Marching Band
Concert band
– there are numerous transcriptions of the whole Suite for concert band.

Percussion ensemble –
James Ancona arranged Mercury for a percussion ensemble.
It consisted of 2 glockenspiels, 2 xylophones, 2 vibraphones, 2 marimbas, 5 timpani, a small suspended cymbal, and 2 triangles.

Drum corps
– selections from The Planets were performed by The Cavaliers as part of their 1985 repertoire, and as the entirety of their 1995 feature field show, as well as appearing in their 2017 production "Men Are From Mars".
A similar performance was recorded for CD by Star of Indiana as part of their Brass Theater series.

Rock bands
:King Crimson performed a rock arrangement of "Mars" at their live shows in 1969.
The band intended to make a studio recording of "Mars" for their second album, In the Wake of Poseidon, in 1970.

However, this plan was met with resistance from Holst's estate, and the band instead composed a new piece of similar structure, "The Devil's Triangle," for the album.

Emerson, Lake & Powell, whose bassist Greg Lake had been a member of King Crimson during 1969–70, recorded a version of "Mars" for their eponymous studio album in 1986.

Death metal band Aeon recorded a version of "Neptune, the Mystic" for their album Aeons Black.
Though much shorter than the original it was derived from a select few of the main melodies
Death Metal
band Nile recorded "Ramses, Bringer of War" on their 1998 debut album Amongst the Catacombs of Nephren-Ka, which uses the opening theme from "Mars".

British Metal bands: the introduction to Diamond Head's "Am I Evil?",
as well as the main riff from "Black Sabbath" and the bridge from "Children of the Grave" by Black Sabbath, are loosely based on "Mars."
On their 1990 tour promoting the album Tyr parts of "Mars" are used as playback during Cozy Powell's drum solo.
Saxon used parts of "Jupiter" as a taped intro to their gigs in the late 1980s.
Japanese singer Ayaka Hirahara released a pop version of "Jupiter" in December 2003.
It went to No.
2 on the Oricon charts and sold nearly a million copies, making it the third-best-selling single in the Japanese popular music market for 2004.
It remained on the charts for over three years.

In 1985, an album "Beyond the Planets" was released by musicians Jeff Wayne, Rick Wakeman and Kevin Peek; with narration by Patrick Allen.

In 2020, the Jeremy Levy Jazz Orchestra released The Planets: Reimagined, recasting all seven moments into a jazz arrangement.
Levy's arrangement of "Uranus:
The Magician" received a Grammy nomination for 'Best Arrangement, Instrumental or A Cappella' at the 2021 Grammy Awards show.

===
Hymns ===
Holst adapted the melody of the central section of Jupiter in 1921 to fit the metre of a poem beginning "
I Vow to Thee, My Country".
As a hymn tune it has the title Thaxted, after the town in Essex where Holst lived for many years, and it has also been used for other hymns, such as "O God beyond all praising" and "We Praise You and Acknowledge You" with lyrics by Rev. Stephen P. Starke.
"I Vow to Thee, My Country" was written between 1908 and 1918 by Sir Cecil Spring Rice and became known as a response to the human cost of World War I.
The hymn was first performed in 1925 and quickly became a patriotic anthem.
Although Holst had no such patriotic intentions when he originally composed the music, these adaptations have encouraged others to draw upon the score in similar ways throughout the 20th century.
The melody was also adapted and set to lyrics by Charlie Skarbek and titled "World in Union".
The song is used as the theme song for the Rugby World Cup and appears in most television coverage and before matches.

==
In popular culture ==
Mars the Bringer of War is the theme music of the British science fiction franchise Quatermass.

Bell's Brewery claims that the suite served as an inspiration for its "The Planets Series" of beers.

Bill Conti was strongly influenced by Neptune and Jupiter in his soundtrack for the 1983 film The Right Stuff.

King Crimson's song "The Devil’s Triangle" from In the Wake of Poseidon was adapted from Mars.

BoJack Horseman episode "
That’s
Too Much, Man!
"
features an extract from Venus near the end of the episode.

Doctor
Who features a brief excerpt from "The Devil’s Triangle" (itself adapted from Mars) in The Mind of Evil.

The Man Who Fell to Earth features excerpts of Venus and Mars.

The Simpsons episode "'Scuse Me
While I Miss the Sky" features extracts of the beginning of Jupiter due to astronomy being the main subject of the episode.

The Simpsons episode "The Regina Monologues" features an extract from Mars in a flashback scene to World War II.

Mr. Robot features Neptune in the pre-credits sequence of season 2 episode 4.

John Williams used the melodies and instrumentation of Mars as the inspiration for his soundtrack for the Star Wars films (specifically "The Imperial March").

Hans Zimmer closely used the melodies, instrumentation and orchestration of Mars as the inspiration for his soundtrack for the movie Gladiator to the extent that a lawsuit for copyright infringement was filed by the Holst foundation.

Bluey – Animated children's series on ABC TV; Australia – used the Jupiter theme in series two in an episode titled "Sleepytime".

The Venture Bros. Season 2
Episode 2 "
Hate Floats" features Henchmen 21 and 24 comedically singing the opening of Mars as they gear up to prepare to return to their duties as henchmen.

An arrangement of a small excerpt of Jupiter appears in the game Persona 3 Portable under the filename EVE_511, however it was not released as part of the official soundtrack.

===
Other uses ===
The JR East railway company in Japan uses several excerpts from "Jupiter, the Bringer of Jollity" as departure melodies for some train stations in the Greater Kantō region.

== See also ==
Musica universalis
== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
Boult, Adrian (1973).
My Own Trumpet.
London:
Hamish Hamilton.
ISBN 0-241-02445-5.

Greene, Richard (1995).
Holst:
The Planets.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 0-521-45633-9.

Head, Raymond (2014).
Gustav Holst:
The Planets Suite - New Light on a Famous Work.
Sky Dance Press.
ISBN 978-0-9928464-0-4.

Kennedy, Michael (1987).
Adrian Boult.
London:
Hamish Hamilton.
ISBN 0-333-48752-4.

Lebrecht, Norman (2008).
The Life and Death of Classical Music:
Featuring the 100 Best and 20 Worst Recordings Ever Made.
Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.
ISBN 978-0-307-48746-9.

Short, Michael (1990).
Gustav Holst:
The Man and his Music.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
ISBN
0-19-314154-X.


==
External links ==
Links to public domain scores of The Planets:
The Planets:
Scores at the International Music Score Library Project
The Planets: Suite for Large Orchestra (Score in the Public Domain)
Thaxted sheet music (PDF)
IMDB entry for the 1983 Ken Russell documentary The Planets
Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine is an American science fiction television series that debuted in broadcast syndication on January 3, 1993.
The series ran for seven seasons until 1999.
The show was spun off from Star Trek:
The Next Generation which debuted in 1987, with characters inhabiting a shared fictional universe.
Deep Space Nine was developed by executive producers Rick Berman and Michael Piller, who together wrote the series bible.
The show was filmed primarily on the Paramount Studios lot in Los Angeles, California.
Siddig El Fadil, later known as Alexander Siddig was an early front runner for the part of series protagonist Benjamin Sisko.
Ultimately the producers thought he was too young for the role and instead offered him the part of Dr. Julian Amoros, who was subsequently renamed to Julian Bashir; the role of Sisko went to Avery Brooks.
Deep Space Nine was originally intended to have Ro Laren, a character from The Next Generation as a main character.
However, after actress Michelle Forbes declined to sign on for a five- to six-year commitment for the series, the part was re-written to become Major Kira Nerys, with Nana Visitor cast in that role.
For similar reasons, Famke Janssen turned down the role of Jadzia Dax when offered, with Terry Farrell becoming the last main cast member to be cast with filming already underway on "Emissary".
Two actors who considered for main roles went on to be cast as recurring characters: Andrew Robinson was beaten to the role of Odo by René Auberjonois, but was cast as the Cardassian tailor/spy Elim Garak; similarly, Max Grodénchik lost the role of Quark to Armin Shimerman, but was subsequently cast as that character's brother, Rom.
There were several actors who appeared in Deep Space Nine in roles they had previously played in other Star Trek series.
The most prominent of these was Colm Meaney, who played Chief Miles O'Brien.
Meaney had first appeared as an unnamed crewman in the pilot episode, "Encounter at Farpoint", and went on to appear in a total of 52 episodes of The Next Generation.
O'Brien's wife, Keiko O'Brien, has also appeared on The Next Generation and became a recurring character on Deep Space Nine, as played by Rosalind Chao.
Majel Barrett appeared as Lwaxana Troi, having also originally appeared in The Next Generation.
She was intended to be one of the six major recurring characters in the new show, and also continued to voice the Starfleet computers as seen in the earlier series.
The series had several long-running antagonists.
Marc Alaimo portrayed Gul Dukat,  the Cardassian former commander of Deep Space Nine who later led his people into joining the Dominion.
Dukat had been included in the series bible as a recurring character described as someone who "represents the continuing threat to our people".
There were several Dominion characters who appeared from the third season onwards including Salome Jens as the Female Shapeshifter, and Jeffrey Combs as Weyoun.
Combs was unique in Deep Space Nine for simultaneously playing two recurring characters, both Weyoun and the Ferengi Brunt in the same episode, "The Dogs of War".
The fourth season saw a change in direction for the series with the producers asked to "shake up the show" by Paramount, and the addition of a main cast member.
Rick Berman suggested adding a Klingon contingent to the show, which including the return of Michael Dorn to play Lt Cmdr.
Worf.
Dorn previously portrayed Worf across seven seasons of The Next Generation and the feature films.
The changes also brought in J. G. Hertzler as General Martok, although this was initially not expected to be a recurring character.
Hertzler had previously appeared in the pilot of the series as a Vulcan Captain on board the USS Saratoga, and Martok would end the series as the Klingon Chancellor.
One further change to the main cast occurred between the sixth and seventh seasons.
Terry Farrell elected not to renew her contract, and so her character was killed off in the final episode of season six, "Tears of the Prophets".
She was replaced by Nicole de Boer, who was cast as Ezri Dax.

== Cast ==


===
Main cast ===
Avery Brooks as Benjamin Sisko, commanding officer of space station Deep Space Nine until his disappearance in 2375.

René Auberjonois as Odo, chief of security until 2375.

Terry Farrell as Jadzia Dax, chief science officer until her death in 2374.

Cirroc Lofton as Jake Sisko, son of Benjamin Sisko.

Colm Meaney as Miles O'Brien, chief operations officer and later Starfleet Academy professor.

Armin Shimerman as Quark, bar owner.

Alexander Siddig as Julian Bashir, chief medical officer.

Nana Visitor as Kira Nerys, first officer of Deep Space Nine.

Michael Dorn as Worf, strategic operations officer and later Federation Ambassador to the Klingon Empire.

Nicole de Boer as Ezri Dax, station's counselor.

===
Recurring cast ===
Cecily Adams as Ishka, mother to Quark & Rom and a Ferengi entrepreneur.

Marc Alaimo as Dukat, Cardassian officer, leader of the Cardassian Union, a leader of the Dominion, and later a Bajoran religious leader.

Philip Anglim as Bareil Antos, Bajoran religious leader until his death in 2371.

Adrienne Barbeau as Kimara Cretak, Romulan liaison to Deep Space Nine.

Majel Barrett as Lwaxana Troi, Federation Ambassador.

Felecia M. Bell as Jennifer Sisko, Benjamin Sisko's deceased wife and mother of Jake Sisko.

Casey Biggs as Damar, Cardassian officer, a leader of the Dominion, and later the leader of the Cardassian resistance until his death in 2375.

Rosalind Chao as Keiko O'Brien, botanist, teacher, and wife of Miles O'Brien.

Jeffrey Combs as Weyoun, a Dominion leader, and Brunt, liquidator with the Ferengi Commerce Authority.

John Colicos as Kor, Klingon warrior and friend of Jadzia Dax.

James Darren as Vic Fontaine, a holographic entertainer.

Paul Dooley as Enabran Tain, former head of the Obsidian Order.

Aron Eisenberg as Nog, Quark's nephew, student, Starfleet cadet, and later operations officer.

Louise Fletcher as Winn Adami, Bajoran religious leader and later Kai of Bajor.

Max Grodénchik as Rom, Quark's brother, bar employee, and later a maintenance engineer until he was appointed Grand Nagus in 2375.

Hana Hatae as Molly O'Brien, daughter of Miles O'Brien and Keiko O'Brien.

J. G. Hertzler as Martok, Klingon liaison to Deep Space Nine, and later leader of the Klingon Empire.

Barry Jenner as William Ross, Field Commander of Starfleet forces during the Dominion War.

Salome Jens as the Female Changeling, leader of the Dominion until her incarceration in 2375.

Penny Johnson Jerald as Kasidy Yates, freighter captain and wife of Benjamin Sisko.

Deborah Lacey as Sarah Sisko, mother of Benjamin Sisko.

Kenneth Marshall as Michael Eddington, security officer and later Maquis rebel until his death in 2373.

Chase Masterson as Leeta, a Dabo girl and Rom's wife.

Julianna McCarthy as Mila, housekeeper to Enabran Tain.

Natalia Nogulich as Alynna Nechayev, flag officer in charge of Cardassian affairs.

Robert O'Reilly as Gowron, leader of the Klingon Empire until his death in 2375.

Brock Peters as Joseph Sisko, restaurant owner and father of Benjamin Sisko.

Duncan Regehr as Shakaar Edon, resistance leader, farmer, and later First Minister of Bajor.

Andrew Robinson as Elim Garak, tailor and former member of the Obsidian Order.

William Sadler as Luther Sloan, an operative of Section 31.

Camille Saviola as Opaka Sulan, Kai of Bajor until her death, resurrection and marooning on a penal colony.

Wallace Shawn as Zek, Grand Nagus until his retirement in 2375.

Mark Allen Shepherd as Morn, freighter captain and bar patron.

James Sloyan as Mora Pol, a Bajoran scientist who studied Odo.

Melanie Smith as Tora Ziyal, daughter of Dukat, and an artist until her death in 2374.

Tiny Ron Taylor as Maihar'du, attendant to Grand Nagus Zek.

Marc Worden as Alexander Rozhenko, a Klingon officer and Worf's son.

==
Appearances ==
=
Main cast (credited) 
  =
Recurring cast (4+)
  =
Guest cast (1-3)


==
See also ==
List of Star Trek:
The Original Series cast members
List of Star Trek:
The Next Generation cast members
List of Star Trek: Voyager cast members
List of Star Trek:
Enterprise cast members
List of Star Trek:
Discovery cast members
== Notes ==


==
Footnotes ==


==
References ==
The Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic series consists of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords, with the first game being released in 2003 and set 4,000 years before the Star Wars films.
The series also encompasses a 2006 comic book series, and a massively multiplayer online role-playing game called Star Wars: The Old Republic.

The main and player character of the first game is Revan, and the main and player character of the second game is the Jedi Exile.
In both games, the main character can either be a human male or a human female, with other characters joining the player's party and becoming controllable.
The player can control three characters at one time in both games.
HK-47, Canderous Ordo and T3-M4 appear in both of the video games as playable character, while the first game's playable characters also includes Carth Onasi, Mission Vao, Zaalbar, Bastila Shan, Juhani and Jolee Bindo.
The second game's playable characters also include Atton Rand, Bao-Dur, Mical, Mira, Hanharr, Brianna, Kreia, Visas Marr and G0-T0.

The characters have overall been well-received, with the first Knights of the Old Republic winning the Academy of Interactive Art's "Outstanding Achievement in Character and Story Development", and both Kreia and HK-47 receiving other awards.

==
Concept and creation ==
Chris Avellone, the lead designer of The Sith Lords, has said that "a core part of what made KOTOR I so great was the story and your companions, and that was our intention in the sequel as well", and has also said that he thought that the characters and voice-acting were some of the key strengths of The Sith Lords, and said that they got a lot of help and support from LucasArts in the voice-acting and sound department.
Avellone stated that in some cases, the characters turned out "better than we thought they would be".
According to Avellone, while "there was some stuff we wanted to add", overall they "got almost everything we wanted in there".
Avellone has said he has been surprised by the positive feedback of some of the characters.

==
Player characters ==


===
Revan ===
The main protagonist and player character of the first game is Revan, an amnesiac Sith Lord who is reassigned a new identity as a member of the Republic army.
Revan's true identity is not revealed until a predetermined point in the narrative where the player is confronted by the game's central antagonist Darth Malak for the first time.

According to continuity established by supplementary material, as well as the massively multiplayer online role-playing game Star Wars:
The Old Republic, Revan is male and follows the light-side path, but the player may choose Revan's alias or gender as female during character creation, and/or follow the dark-side path.

===
Jedi Exile ===
The Jedi Exile, also known simply as the Exile, is the main protagonist and player character of the second game.
The player may choose the gender and decide what path to take.

According to continuity established by Star Wars: The Old Republic and its associated supplementary material, the Jedi Exile is named Meetra Surik, who is female and aligned to the light-side of the Force.

==
Other playable characters ==


===
Recurring characters ===


====
Canderous Ordo ====
Canderous Ordo, voiced by John Cygan, is a Mandalorian who appears in both the first game and in The Sith Lords.
Ordo is a veteran Mandalorian warrior who joins the player's party in Knights of the Old Republic.
After the game's conclusion, he becomes "Mandalore the Preserver", leader of the Mandalorians.
Mandalore pledges himself and his warriors to the service of the Jedi Exile in The Sith Lords.

UGO Networks ranked Ordo among their list of top fifty Expanded Universe characters.

====
T3-M4 ====
T3-M4 is an astromech droid who appears in both games.
It was constructed by a Twi'lek named Janice Nall of Taris for local crime lord, Davik Kang.
The droid features code-breaking and computer "slicing" skills in addition to being able to mount armor and weapon upgrades.
If the player attempts to talk to T3 it will simply communicate in a series of bleeps, similar to other astromech droids like R2-D2.
==== HK-47 ====
HK-47, voiced by Kristoffer Tabori, is an assassin droid owned by Revan, who appears in both of the games.
In 2003 HK-47 won Computer Gaming World's "NPC of the Year" award, and later won the category of "Original Game Character of the Year" in the 2004 Game Developers Choice Awards.
===
Knights of the Old Republic characters ===


====
Carth Onasi ====
Carth Onasi, voiced by Raphael Sbarge, is a Republic soldier and pilot.
During the Mandalorian wars, Carth served under Admiral Saul Karath, who would become his mentor and, later, object of revenge.
He met Revan while the two were fleeing the Endar Spire, following a Sith attack on the ship.
He is the second character to become a party member in the first game, after Trask Ulgo sacrifices himself to fend off the Sith apprentice Darth Bandon.
It is later revealed that Carth had a family on Telos who were killed by the Sith: his son Dustil later turns up as a Sith convert and the player has the option of killing him or opening his eyes.
He is a romance option for a female Revan.

====
Mission Vao ====
Mission Vao, voiced by Catherine Taber, appears in Knights of the Old Republic.
She is a fourteen-year-old Twi'lek and the best friend of Zaalbar.
Mission joins the player's party after encountering her in the Undercity on Taris.

====
Zaalbar ====
Zaalbar is a character from Knights of the Old Republic.
He is a Wookiee who is friends with Mission Vao and joins the player's party, swearing a life-debt to the player for helping Mission rescue him from a group of Gammorrean slavers in the Undercity of Taris.
Zaalbar is the brother to Chuundar, the leader of a tribe on their home planet Kashyyyk.
When the player's party first lands on Kashyyyk, Zaalbar is referred to as "mad-claw".
Through Zaalbar's and Chuundar's father, Freyyr, Revan learns why Zaalbar was banished from the tribe:
Zaalbar learned that Chuundar was selling Wookiee slaves to Czerka Corporation, and in a fit of rage attacked him with his bare claws, breaking a major Wookiee taboo; this led Freyyr to side with Chuundar and thus Zaalbar was exiled.
When Revan and Freyyr confront Chuundar, Zaalbar sides with Freyyr and Revan and in turn kills Chuundar, freeing the Wookiees and driving Czerka off the planet.
A dark-side alternative has Revan kill Freyyr, allowing Czerka's slave trade on Kashyyyk to continue: a dark-sided Revan can also order Zaalbar to kill Mission in order to fulfill his life-debt - this may cause Zaalbar to turn against Revan as well.

====
Bastila Shan ====
Bastila Shan, voiced by Jennifer Hale, is a Jedi who defeated Revan prior to the beginning of Knights of the Old Republic.
The first part of the game is spent searching for her after the Endar Spire is destroyed, and she joins the party upon her rescue.
Darth Malak later captures her and seduces her to the dark side.
Revan later confronts Bastila in a lightsaber duel and has the option of killing her or allowing her to live: a dark-side character makes her their apprentice, while a light-side character helps her redeem herself by helping the Republic fleet.
Bastila is a romance option for a light-sided male player character.

====
Juhani ====
Juhani, voiced by Courtenay Taylor, is a Cathar padawan who incorrectly believed she killed her master.
She turned to the dark side and tainted the grove on Dantooine where she lived.
Depending on which path the conversation is steered in by the player, Revan may either fight (and kill) her, or redeem her, where she joins the party to discover the location of the Star Forge and returns to the Order as a Jedi Knight.
Juhani is the first explicitly LGBTQ character in Star Wars media.

====
Jolee Bindo ====
Jolee Bindo, voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson, is a character in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
Jolee is an old hermit living in the Shadowlands on the forest floor of Kashyyyk and a former Jedi Padawan.
Bindo helps Revan bypass shield generators that lead deeper into the Shadowlands to find the Star Map and remains with Revan's party.
After the main character gains experience, Jolee tells the tale of how he was once a smuggler, and through this met his wife.
Against the wishes of the Jedi Council, he trained her in the way of the Force.
She was then seduced to the dark side by Exar Kun, upon failing to convince Jolee to join Exar Kun as well
, she drew her lightsaber on him.
Jolee won the fight, but he was unable to bring himself to kill her.
She escaped and went on to kill many Jedi.
Jolee expected to be punished harshly for his mistakes, but the Council said he had learned his lesson the hard way, and even considered promoting him to knighthood.
Disappointed with the Jedi’s decision, Jolee left the Order and started wandering the galaxy before crash landing on Kashyyyk, where he lived for 20 years until he met Revan.

Kimberley Wallace of Game Informer included Jolee Bindo in her list of best BioWare characters; she called him a "cranky old man who hacks the hell out of enemies is hard to top".
According to Wallace, "he almost beats HK-47 for his power with sarcasm, as Jolee Bindo's self-ridicule is part of his charm", and claims that he will perhaps never live down his infamous line, "I did it all for the Wookiees!"
===
The Sith Lords characters ===
====
Atton Rand ====
Atton Rand, voiced by Nicky Katt, is a character in The Sith Lords.
Atton is a human pilot that the Exile meets on the asteroid mining station Peragus II, and is patterned after the iconic Star Wars character Han Solo.
Atton can become a Jedi Sentinel once the player character accrues enough influence with him.

====
Bao-Dur ====
Bao-Dur, voiced by Roger G. Smith, is a character in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords.
He is a Zabrak engineer from Iridonia, who fought under the command of the Jedi Exile during the Mandalorian Wars.
Bao-Dur is the inventor of the Mass Shadow Generator that ended the battle on Malachor V by completely obliterating the Mandalorian Armada and inadvertently killing many Republic soldiers on his own side of the battle, leading to a great deal of guilt later in his life.
The Exile, who did not know Bao-Dur on a personal level at the time, gave the command, which sent massive echoes in the Force throughout the galaxy.
Bao-Dur is trainable as a Jedi Guardian.

====
Visas
Marr ====
Visas Marr, voiced by Kelly Hu, appears in The Sith Lords as an apprentice of Darth Nihilus.
She eventually joins the player's character's party after her defeat.
Visas Marr is a Miraluka from the planet of Katarr, which was destroyed by Darth Nihilus when she was a child.
While she is considered blind, she is able to see through the Force which allowed her to find the Jedi Exile.
When she confronts the Exile, she loses and in turn becomes part of the Exile's party.
Eventually the player confronts Nihilus with Visas, and fights him.
The player may choose to have Visas sacrifice herself to weaken Nihilus.

Brian Menze designed the character, and drew on ninjas, the look of previous Sith Lords, and G.I. Joe character the Baroness in creating her concept art.
As the character was mostly covered – only the lower half of her face is visible – Menze decided to make what was shown "as sexy as possible".
Menze deviated from the usual black Sith Lords dressed in and instead added some color to soften her, based on the written description of the character.
Menze noted that the character has since become a fan favorite and a popular choice for cosplay activities at fan conventions.
Voice directors Will Beckman and Darragh O'Farrell wanted someone "special" and "maybe a little sexy" to voice the part.
It was Hu's first role as a voice-actress, and she has said she enjoyed the role.

====
Brianna ====
Brianna, voiced by Grey DeLisle, is the "Last Handmaiden" on a Jedi Academy located on Telos IV in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords.
She initially does not reveal her name to the Exile; until she mentions her name late in the game, she is referred to as the Handmaiden.
Brianna joins the party after leaving Telos on the Ebon Hawk if the player's character is male.
Her training before joining the Exile's party makes her a skilled close quarter combatant and, after fulfilling certain combat and conversation requirements, she can be trained to become a Jedi Guardian or a Dark Jedi Guardian.
It is revealed by Kreia that Brianna takes up Atris' role as the historian of the jedi.

====
Mical ====
Mical, also known as the Disciple, is a character in The Sith Lords voiced by Greg Ellis.
He is a soldier and force-adept that was refused for training because of the Mandalorian Wars.
He eventually tells the player character that he wishes the player to be his master.
He is a playable character that joins the player's party on Dantooine if your character is female.
The Disciple can be influenced by light side acts and can be trained as a Jedi Consular.

====
Mira ====
Mira, voiced by Emily Berry, appears in The Sith Lords.
Mira lost her family during the Mandalorian Wars.
By the end of the wars, the Galactic Republic was flooding with refugees, and many of them, including Mira, ended up in the refugee sector of Nar Shaddaa.
To survive in the hostile environment, she became a bounty hunter with the sole purpose of earning credits.
A rival bounty hunter, the Wookiee Hanharr, was employed to hunt her by an unknown person.
Mira will join player characters who are oriented towards light-sided or neutral alignments, and can become a Jedi Sentinel.

Menze had a "shaggy-like character from the Hanna-Barbera cartoon Speed Buggy" as a reference for Mira.
Her visual design was based on the appearances of women Menze described as the "gothic girl gamer" who attend shows or fan conventions in the early 2000’s, and whose stylistic choices included dyed hair, strapped platform leather boots and Hello Kitty backpacks, as he had hoped to tap into a likeness that these fans would respond to.
====
Hanharr ====
Hanharr is a Wookiee bounty hunter in The Sith Lords, and can play different roles within the game, depending on the alignment of the player character.
Hanharr is encountered on the planet Nar Shaddaa, as is Mira, another bounty hunter.
One of these will join the party of the Jedi Exile, as is determined by the personality of the player character.
Light-side and neutral players are joined by Mira, dark-side players are joined by Hanharr.

====
G0-T0 ====
G0-T0, voiced by Daran Norris, is a droid who appears in The Sith Lords.
Built to oversee and aid in the planetary reconstruction of the planet Telos, its programming included two directives: produce options to rebuild the Republic and follow all the laws of the Republic.
Sadly, all options G0-T0 could think of to assist the Republic would involve breaking a Republic law.
Following this, the droid 'broke'; it overrode the second directive, and set up The Exchange, the greatest smuggling organization in the galaxy.
Eventually the droid would be destroyed, but not before the organization had helped countless systems achieve prosperity.

==
Major antagonists ==


===
Darth Malak ===
Darth Malak, voiced by Rafael Ferrer, is the old Sith apprentice of Revan and is the main antagonist of the first game.
Malak and Revan disobeyed the Jedi Council and helped the Republic defend against the Mandalorians.
They fell to the dark side in pursuing the Mandalorians.
Malak then betrays his master and usurps the title of Dark Lord of the Sith.
However, Revan survives the attack, at the cost of his memory.
Revan regains his power in the search for the Star Forge, and defeats Malak in the game's final battle.
GamePro's Hugh Sterbakov ranked Darth Malak as 22nd most diabolical videogame villain of all time, saying he was "one of, if not the coolest expanded universe Star Wars character yet".
UGO Networks put the character as their 19th top Star Wars Expanded Universe character.
On GameSpot's "All-Time Greatest Villain" competition in 2011, Darth Malak managed to get into the top sixteen.
GameDaily's Robert Workman put Darth Malak as their 16th top evil mastermind of all time.
Workman also listed Malak as one of his favourite Star Wars video game characters.

===
Kreia / Darth Traya ===
Kreia, voiced by Sara Kestelman, is the teacher and mentor to the Jedi Exile in The Sith Lords.
Near the end of the game, she is revealed to have been Darth Traya, the Lord of Betrayal, all along.
Her character received mixed reception since the game's publication, but is generally thought to be one of the most well developed backgrounds and characterizations in retrospective reviews.

===
Darth Sion ===
Darth Sion, voiced by Louis Mellis, is an antagonist in The Sith Lords.
Darth Traya trained both Sion and Nihilus, who in turn betray her.
He holds his ravaged body together with the dark-side of the Force.
The player's character eventually defeats Sion, and upon doing so, can return him to the light before he dies.

Chris Avellone, lead designer of The Sith Lords, was inspired to create Sion by Tessai's death scene in Ninja Scroll.
In contrast to other characters, Sion's design took much longer to hone down.
Brian Menze, creator of the concept art and in-game model, had difficulty finding a design that Avellone was satisfied with, and the two had many conversations on how he should appear.
It was planned that Sion would have small parts of him orbiting around him.
Engine troubles, however, made that difficult, ultimately resulting in a character looking far more "human".
Voice directors Will Beckman and Darragh O'Farrell originally sought to hire someone with an English accent, rather than the Scottish one found in the game.
Problems arose due to most English actors lacking deep voices, though afterwards they wished to avoid making Sion "too Scottish", wishing to avoid creating a caricature to American ears.
They called Sion's voice one of their favorites in The Sith Lords.

===
Darth Nihilus ===
Darth Nihilus appears in Knights of the Old Republic II - The Sith Lords as one of the titular Sith Lords.
He is known as the Lord of Hunger, capable of draining the life force out of any living thing, and intends to consume as much life in the galaxy as possible.
He is depicted as a wraith-like being who speaks in unintelligible rasps and feasts on the Force like a parasite.
Nihilus bound his consciousness into his robes and mask in order to preserve his physical form.
Prior to the game's events, Darth Sion, Darth Nihilus and Darth Traya formed a short-lived Triumvirate as leaders of the resurgent Sith based on Malachor V, though Traya was later cast out and driven into exile.
Nihilus then uses the might of the Sith Armada not to conquer planets, but to contain them so that he could "feed" off the Force energy of each planet's lifeforms, wiping planets of life.
Nihilus is defeated in the game after being drawn out and tricked into launching an attack on Telos, believing it to harbour the last of the Jedi.
The Exile, together with Canderous Ordo and Nihilus' former associate Visas Marr confront the Sith Lord on his ship, and Nihilus is slain either after Visas sacrifices herself due to their shared link in the Force, or after his attempt to feast on the Exile's connection to the Force backfires and weakens him.

Nihilus went on to appear in the "Unseen, Unheard" story in the final issue of Star Wars Tales, which recounts Nihilus using his power to decimate all life on the Miraluka colony world of Katarr, including the vast majority of the Jedi Order's leadership.
Visas Marr is shown as the sole survivor of the catastrophic event, which impressed Nihilus and moved him to claim her as his apprentice and slave.
Nihilus is mentioned in a few other stories in the original Star Wars Expanded Universe, and makes a short appearance in Star Wars: Legacy.
The character's distinctive mask is also made available as a loot item for Star Wars:
The Old Republic
if the Crime Lord's Cartel Pack DLC is installed.
Nihilus is introduced to the Galaxy of Heroes mobile game as a playable character in a 2017 update.
As the “face” of the marketing for The Sith Lords, the character has been featured prominently in promotional material and subject to merchandise, including several action figures.
Nihilus was written so players would identify him less as a "human" and more a "force of nature".
Avellone described him as without personality beyond "just a feeling of hunger" due to having succumbed so far to the dark side.
Avellone felt beating such a force seemed "more heroic" or "far more epic" than taking on an individual person.
The character's visual was quick to define; Eurogamer describes him as "a concept created and greenlit in all of 15 minutes".
Character modeller and lead concept artist Brian Menze was asked to create a Sith Lord with No-Face from Hayao Miyazaki's Spirited Away (2001) as a reference; Avellone felt that the final design, which employs a lot of voluminous black, was closer to the Studio Ghibli character than was intended.
One idea behind Nihilus's design was that there should be nothing behind the mask – representative of him being a void.
A "pet peeve" of Avellone's is promotional art of Nihilus with a visible nose, which contradicted his concept of a character who lack facial features; Menze had drawn a nosed Nihilus for a magazine cover which had become widely circulated and
Avellone had "let it go", to Menze's now regret.

Nihilus is considered to be one of the best remembered aspects of The Sith Lords's story.
IGN's Jesse Schedeen singled out his obliteration of Visas' homeworld as the Sith Lord's "defining moment of villainy".
Chris Freiberg from Den of Geek ranked the introduction of Darth Nihilus as one of the most memorable moments in Star Wars video game history.
Glixel listed him as one of twenty "awesome" Star Wars characters originating in video games, and considered him "terrifying" and "more of a malevolent ghost than a typical self-serving Sith".
Nihilus' visual design proved to be very popular with Star Wars fandom.
Revan aside, Eurogamer's Robert Purchese described The Sith Lords' villains as "far more memorable" than those of the first game, and described Nihilus as the most recognisable of the trio.
Schedeen remarked that "Nihilus probably wins the award for coolest-looking Star Wars villain ever".
The Citizen's Lake Life editor David Wilcox opined that Darth Nihilus is the best designed character outside of the Star Wars saga's "main players".
The character has been frequently referenced in fan art, cosplay and other derivative works since his appearance in The Sith Lords.
The character was also featured on the The Howard Stern Show for several weeks.
Nihilus' popularity has led to rumors of supposed references to the character in canon Star Wars works, such as the identity of a particular ancient Sith statue in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker, as well as the origins of the Nihil, who are set to be the overarching villains of the upcoming Star Wars: The High Republic subseries.
Obsidian Entertainment acknowledged their creation of Darth Nihilus and the character's popularity as a notable contribution to the Star Wars license.
Menze noted in retrospect that co-creating Darth Nihilus with Avellone is a career highlight for him, and acknowledged that the character "has gone on to be bigger than the game we created".
===
Atris ===
Atris, voiced by Elizabeth Rider, is a former member of the Jedi Council and one of the Jedi largely responsible for banishing the Jedi Exile from the Jedi Order.
Prior to the events of The Sith Lords, Atris had an idealistic view of the Jedi that bordered on fanaticism, believing that they were the perfect guardians of the galaxy and, as a result, did not tolerate any criticism directed towards them.
However, Atris' beliefs were challenged during the events of the Mandalorian War and the war against Darth Malak in the first game.
This drove her to betraying the Jedi by alerting the location of a hidden conclave to Darth Nihilus, resulting in the Jedi being driven to near-extinction.
Atris then planned to rebuild the Jedi Order under her own dogmatic doctrine, and started an unethical campaign against the Sith.
This included leaking information of the Jedi Exile's return to the rest of the galaxy, setting off the events of The Sith Lords.

==
Other characters ==
Trask Ulgo was a Republic soldier who appears in the first game aboard the Republic battleship Endar Spire before it is shot down over Taris by Malak's forces at the beginning of the game.
He serves as a "tutorial" companion and is killed holding off Darth Bandon-
allowing the player to escape.
Once the player meets Darth Bandon again, they may choose a dialogue option to avenge Ulgo.

Vrook Lamar was a Jedi Master who was on the Jedi Council that decided to exile the Jedi Exile.
Vrook is one of the masters that helps retrain Revan in the first game.
In the second, the Exile finds Vrook on Dantooine, where he is later killed by Kreia.

Kavar was a Jedi Master who was on the Jedi Council that decided to exile the Jedi Exile.
In the second game, he is in exile on Onderon.
He goes to meet with the other Jedi Masters on Dantooine, where he is killed by Kreia.

Zez-Kai Ell was a Jedi Master who was on the Jedi Council that decided to exile the Jedi Exile.
In the second game, he is in exile on Nar Shadaa.
He goes to meet with the other Jedi Masters on Dantooine, where he is killed by Kreia.

Darth Bandon was a Sith apprentice of Malak who attacked the player, and was defeated.
He appears in the first game after Calo Nord fails to slay Revan.

Calo Nord was a bounty hunter in the first game.
Nord was originally a slave, until he murdered his captors and escaped when he was sixteen years old.
He is a notorious bounty hunter with a legendary fast draw who bears a grudge against Revan for escaping him, and can be fought on any of the Star Map worlds in the first game.

Zax
the Hutt was a Hutt found on Taris in the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
Players go to him to obtain bounties.

Ajuur the Hutt was a Hutt who worked in the Upper City cantina who ran the duelling ring in KOTOR I.
He can arrange the player's character to fight the Mandalorian death-match champion Bendak Starkiller, which can be redeemed for a bounty to Zax.

Davik Kang was the Exchange leader of Taris, and used elite mercenaries such as Canderous Ordo and Calo Nord to carry out his dirty work.
He was killed in the orbital bombardment of Taris, from which point the player has to make their escape from the planet in his ship, the Ebon Hawk.
He appeared in the first game.

Saul Karath was Carth Onasi's old mentor who betrayed him to join the Sith.
He appeared in the first game where he was killed by Revan onboard the Leviathan.
He was voiced by Robin Sachs.

Queen Talia is a descendant of the ancient Sith Lord Freedon Nadd and the ruler of Onderon who is at odds with her cousin Vaklu when the Exile comes to the planet.
She appeared in the second game.

Azkul is a battle-scarred mercenary who served under Malak and later settled on Dantooine, attempting to destroy the local community of Khoonda but was thwarted by the Jedi Exile.
He appeared in the second game.

General Vaklu is the power-crazed cousin of Queen Talia who seeks to overthrow his young cousin and take the royal throne.

Chuundar is a Wookiee character in Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic.
Zaalbar was exiled for attacking Chuundar, his brother, with his claws after discovering his brother was selling fellow Wookiees into slavery.
Chuundar then later took over his tribe and exiled his own father, the former Wookiee chieftain, Freyrr.
Once the player comes with Zaalbar to Kashyyyk in search of a Star Map, Chuundar imprisons Zaalbar and tells Revan that he must kill their father, Freyrr, in the Shadowlands to free the Wookiee.
If Revan chooses to kill Freyrr, the player leaves with the gratitude of Chuundar.
Chuundar continues to enslave Wookiees and the player can no longer return to the Wookiee village.
If Revan spares Freyyr, he kills Chuundar and the slavers, frees the Wookiees, frees Zaalbar, and leaves with the gratitude of Freyrr, able to return to the village on Kashyyyk at any time, although the player is unable to trade on Kashyyk any longer after Freyyr leads a Wookiee rebellion that expels the slavers from the planet.

B4-D4:
An administrative protocol droid that works for Czerka on Telos in the Outer Rim.
It is possible for the player to assume control of B4-D4 if the Exile helps the Ithorians with their restoration project.

Bendak Starkiller is a Mandalorian Neo-Crusader who was famous for his proficiency in the Taris duelling ring.
Refusing to leave an opponent alive, Bendak retired from the ring after the Tarisian government outlawed death matches some ten years earlier.
During the Jedi Civil War, he remained on Taris, watching matches in the cantina and hoping for the day he could return to the arena for another death match with a worthy opponent.
In a dark side option, the player can duel Bendak in a death match after defeating the reigning Taris duelling champion, Twitch.
The player will receive credits from Ajuur for winning the illegal death match and receive Bendak's blaster pistol, and will receive the bounty fee from Zax as well.
== Reception ==
The characters of the Knights Of The Old Republic series have remained highly popular, often being cited as some of the best characters in both the Star Wars franchise and video games in general by both critics and fans.
IGN ranked several characters from the series in their list of Top 100 Star Wars Characters: Darth Revan, Darth Malak, HK-47, Canderous Ordo, Darth Nihilus, Bastila Shan, Darth Sion, and Darth Traya placed 12th, 28th, 33rd, 52nd, 56th, 62nd, 73rd and 81st respectively.
Darth Revan and Darth Malak jointly ranked fifth place in a Top 15 list of Star Wars villains by IGN's Jesse Schedeen, who remarked that "[v]isually, both Jedi are immediately memorable".
The members of the Sith Triumvirate, Darth Nihilus, Darth Sion and Darth Traya, came second place in a modified supplementary list of the best Star Wars villains based on reader requests for characters left out of the original Top 15 list published by IGN.
In a 2020 fan poll organized by IGN for best Star Wars characters of all time, Revan, Darth Malak and Bastila Shan placed 30th, 34th and 69th place out of 200 characters.
Several characters from the series dominated Gamespot's 2019 list of "15 Great Star Wars Characters Who Came From Video Games".
==
References ==
Star Wars:
Battlefront is a series of first- and third-person shooter video games based on the Star Wars films.
Players take the role of soldiers in either of two opposing armies in different time periods of the Star Wars universe.

The series was launched in 2004 by LucasArts with Star Wars: Battlefront, developed by Pandemic Studios for LucasArts.
The game received positive reviews and sold well.
In 2005 Pandemic developed a sequel, Star Wars: Battlefront II, which was also critically and commercially successful.
The games were followed by Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007) and Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron (2009) for handheld consoles and Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons for mobile devices.
LucasArts made several attempts to develop a third major Battlefront game but no projects were released before The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of LucasArts.
Subsequently, EA DICE acquired a license to develop a new game, titled Star Wars Battlefront which was released on November 17, 2015.
A sequel, Star Wars Battlefront II, was released on November 17, 2017, and was developed by EA DICE, Criterion Games, and Motive Studios.

==
Gameplay ==
Games in the Battlefront series normally revolve around two armies – the Galactic Republic versus the Confederacy of Independent Systems or the Galactic Empire versus the Rebel Alliance or First Order versus the Resistance – fighting each other on various maps.
Maps take place in the Star Wars galaxy, with battlezones varying in theme and size.
Across the battlefield are multiple "command posts" (objectives) that act as spawn points, and can be controlled by either the player or the computer.

Units can spawn from any friendly command post, and vehicles regularly spawn at their respective command posts when destroyed.
Units can capture neutral or hostile command posts by approaching them and standing within the immediate vicinity for about 30 seconds.
The time to capture quickens with more friendly units within the capture zone.
Some vehicles act as mobile command posts, and must be destroyed as they can not be captured.
On some maps (such as Hoth or Endor), certain structures also act as command posts that can not be captured.
Command post capturing works differently on certain campaign missions as well.

Playable heroes and villains play a significant role in changing the course of battles.

The objective of most matches is to eliminate all of the opponents' reinforcement tickets or to capture the command points, to slowly chip away at their tickets.
Reinforcement tickets are used whenever a unit is killed, or when one faction controls a majority of the command posts on the map (usually when the losing faction only has 2-3).
Only one objective needs to be completed.
When all command posts are captured, the team with no command posts has twenty seconds to recapture or neutralize an enemy command post.
If the team cannot take over a post in this time, the match is over.
Certain campaign levels and multiplayer have requirements that differ from the general game play, however the general structure remains the same.
The game's "Conquest" mode is vaguely based on the Battlefield game mode of the same name.

===
Playable characters ===
Numerous characters from the movies, TV series and other games have been available to play as, which include:


==
Development ==
The first console games of the series were developed by Pandemic Studios, and since 2015, a second series of console Battlefront games has been developed by EA DICE.
Battlefront II (2017) is the first in the series to accurately follow the canon of the films, while the games developed by Pandemic Studios were relegated to Star Wars Legends non-canonical status, along with all of the games in the series released before November 2015.

==
Star Wars: Battlefront (Pandemic Studios) ==


===
Star Wars: Battlefront ===
Star Wars:
Battlefront is the first installment in the Battlefront series.
It was released on September 21, 2004, with a Mac port by Aspyr released in July 2005.
The game is available on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Mac OS, and mobile phones.
Jedi are not playable in this game without the help of modified files unsupported by LucasArts.
Other NPCs made playable by similar files include, but are not limited to, Tusken Raiders in the Dune Sea of Tatooine, Ewoks of Endor and Gungans on the Naboo plains.

===
Star Wars: Battlefront II ===
Star Wars:
Battlefront II is the second installment in the Battlefront series, released in Europe on October 31, 2005 – for the PlayStation 2, PSP, Xbox, and Windows – and in North America one day later.
There are some significant differences between Battlefront and Battlefront II.
Battlefront II includes playable Jedi characters, space battles, and story campaigns, as well as Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith-related content.
The release date of Battlefront II coincided with the release of Revenge of the Sith on DVD.

The game is now an Xbox Platinum Hits game, a Sony Greatest Hits game in North America, and an Xbox Classics and PlayStation Platinum game in Europe.

Battlefront II expands upon the original game's single-player experience with mission-based objectives drawn from the first six Star Wars films.
It has a story-based campaign which revolves around the 501st Legion (AKA "Vader's Fist") and its evolution from a legion of clone troopers serving the Republic during the Clone Wars to Imperial stormtroopers.
Many maps from Star Wars Battlefront make a second appearance, and the game adds new locales such as Coruscant and Utapau.
The game also introduces "heroes" – playable characters based on iconic characters from the Star Wars films who are much more powerful than regular soldier (and were also present in the original Battlefront, but only as NPCs that spawned randomly on the battlefield); the hero roster includes Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Leia Organa, Chewbacca, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Yoda, Mace Windu, Ki-Adi Mundi and Aayla Secura (as well as Kit Fisto, available only on the Xbox version of the game via the Xbox Live patch), whereas the villain roster includes Darth Vader, Darth Sidious, Boba Fett, Count Dooku, General Grievous, Darth Maul, Jango Fett, and Anakin Skywalker (as well as Asajj Ventress, also available only via the Xbox Live patch).
There are more modes in this game, such as Conquest, Hunt (where players fight as natives on planets against other natives or certain troopers in an army, such as Wampas vs. Rebels on Hoth or Tusken Raiders vs. Jawas on Tatooine, to earn 50 points first), Capture the Flag (both with 1 and 2 flags), Assault (which, on Tatooine only, is also available as Heroes vs Villains, where one team plays as the heroes and the other one as the villains in a race to rack up points by defeating enemies) and space battles.

=== Canceled sequels ===


====
Star Wars: Battlefront III ====
On September 29, 2006, Computer and Video Games made an unconfirmed claim that Free Radical Design was developing the third game in the Star Wars: Battlefront series, titled Star Wars: Battlefront III.
In June 2008, Kotaku allegedly received information from a former LucasArts employee that Star Wars:
Battlefront III was in the creation process.
On October 2,  Activision Blizzard filed a classification with the Australian Office of Film and Literature Classification listing Star Wars: Battlefront III for the Nintendo DS with a PG rating (E10+ equivalent) for mild animated violence.
However, that same month, Free Radical Design announced that they lost the rights to develop Star Wars: Battlefront III; the game at that point had been in development for two years.
Several years later, Free Radical Design co-founder Steve Ellis said Battlefront III was "pretty much done" in 2008, but that it was effectively canned when LucasArts could not commit to "spend big" on marketing it.
However, GameSpot quoted an unnamed LucasArts employee involved with the project who said Free Radical could not devote sufficient resources to the game and regularly missed deadlines.
A former Free Radical Design employee said some of the technology Free Radical developed for the game, specifically the contiguous game environment from planet surface into space, "is dying with us".
During and after the game's development, screenshots, and gameplay footage became accessible to the public.
In December 2008, Star Wars character renders bearing a Battlefront III watermark surfaced from a laid-off Free Radical employee.
The following month, gameplay footage was leaked from a November 2008 Free Radical in-house showing of Battlefront III footage.
The footage was pulled from IGN after LucasArts demanded its removal.
On April 1, 2012, a user on the game journalist website Betagames discovered Star Wars models and textures buried in Resident Evil:
Operation Raccoon City's archives; PC Gamer's Tom Senior speculated that these could have been from Battlefront III.
Also in April 2012, Past to Present revealed pre-alpha footage of Free Radical Design's Battlefront III.
YouTube videos showing the game's rough state received media attention from outlets such as Joystiq, Kotaku, and Shacknews.
On January 20, 2016, a leaked build of the game surfaced on Reddit.
It is currently playable using an Xbox 360 Development Kits and modified Xbox 360 consoles via a program called "RGLoader".
====
Star Wars:
Battlefront
Online ====
Star Wars:
Battlefront Online was rumored to be the next installment in the series.
On January 28, 2010, Kotaku reported that SOCOM developer Slant Six Games was working with LucasArts to develop an online-only Battlefront title due in 2011.
The game was said to be released for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3.
It was also stated that this game may have been the source of the Star Wars: Battlefront 3 concept art renders.
However, the game has been canceled after the studio was unable to meet its 2010 release deadline.

====
Star Wars:
First Assault and Version Two ====
Star Wars:
First Assault was to be a downloadable multiplayer shooter for Xbox Live Arcade.
Digital Trends speculated that Star Wars: First Assault might help LucasArts recover some of their previous investment in Battlefront III and other projects in the franchise.

Speaking to Kotaku an anonymous insider noted that the game was to be "step zero" towards a third Battlefront game.

When footage of the game was leaked onto YouTube Tech site TechnoBuffalo noted that the gameplay very closely resembled that of the Call of Duty franchise.
Alongside First Assault, LucasArts was also working on a separate game titled "Version 2", which was, reportedly, a code name for Battlefront 3.
====
Star Wars Battlefront IV ====
In 2018, concept art surfaced of a canceled Battlefront IV, rather than attempting to fit within the previous games and films' continuity, concept art showed the game was meant to focus on an alternate reality where Obi-Wan Kenobi and Luke Skywalker fell to the dark side, instead of Anakin Skywalker.

=== Handheld and mobile only games ===


====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron is a handheld game released in North America on October 9, 2007 and in Europe three days later.
The game was released only for the PlayStation Portable.
Renegade Squadron is also available in a bundle pack with the then-new white PSP redesign featuring Darth Vader on the back.

Aside from new heroes and vehicles, such as the Millennium Falcon, a new feature is the ability to create a character, allowing the player to adjust the character's features such as weapon, appearance, and speed.
However, the character will be vulnerable due to the lacking of certain aspects that will be replaced by others.
For example, the character may be fast but weak or have good weapons but no stamina and speed.
Before the game's release, LucasArts had stated that over one million different customizable options would be present.
Another new feature allows players to enter asteroid bases on some space maps.

Commander Col Serra describes the forming of Renegade Squadron in the beginning cutscene of campaign.
Then the player starts a series of missions ranging in objectives while including cut scenes between each mission.
The final mission includes the Battle of Endor, in which the objectives are similar to the footage of Return of the Jedi.

====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron was released on November 3, 2009 for the PlayStation Portable and the Nintendo DS.
This marks the third Battlefront game on the PlayStation Portable and the first on a Nintendo console.
The game was originally discovered through its ESRB rating on the official ESRB website which has since been taken down.
It follows in the same vein as its predecessors with space, land and new air battles.
Elite Squadron is most notable for featuring simultaneous space and ground battles in Instant Action, and is the only game in the series with this feature.
Players usually play in a third person perspective, but in the PSP version, they can also switch to a strategy based mode where they may build troops and upgrade armies.
====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Mobile Squadrons ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Mobile Squadrons is a mobile game developed by THQ Wireless.
It was released on April 2, 2009.
The game features a persistent online community, and has three character classes.
The gameplay is a first person perspective shooter that can use the touch features of a phone, although the player has no control over movement.

==
Star Wars Battlefront (EA DICE) ==


===
Star Wars Battlefront (2015) ===
At an Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) press conference on June 10, 2013, EA DICE (whose parent company, Electronic Arts, had recently acquired a multi-year license to produce Star Wars video games), unveiled a teaser trailer for a new Star Wars: Battlefront game, built on the Frostbite 3 engine.
The teaser showed a first-person view of the Battle of Hoth, including a crashing Snowspeeder and the foot of an AT-AT.
DICE showed additional development footage at the 2014 E3 conference.
The game's title was eventually announced as Star Wars Battlefront.
In April 2015, EA announced a release date of November 17, 2015  at Star Wars Celebration.
The game is a reboot of the series, focusing on capturing the look of the films.
At launch, four planets were confirmed - Hoth, Tatooine, Endor, and Sullust.
Unlike its predecessors, Star Wars Battlefront does not feature the Clone Wars era found in the prequel films, nor does it feature content from The Force Awakens; as a result, the hero and villain roster is also limited, at launch including only Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Leia Organa, Darth Vader, Emperor Palpatine, and Boba Fett.
Free downloadable content (DLC) for the game was released in December 2015, featuring the planet of Jakku with two new maps and a new multiplayer game mode.
The game also features both first and third-person gameplay perspectives, similar to its predecessors.
A gameplay trailer involving the Hoth battle debuted at E3 on June 15, 2015.
The game features a pseudo-campaign — a cooperative experience allowing the player to experience gameplay with one or two players and computer-controlled allies and opponents.

"Outer Rim" is the first DLC pack for the game and was released on March 22, 2016.
It adds new heroes Nien Nunb and Greedo to the game, four new maps set in Jabba the Hutt's Palace (Palace Garage and Jabba's Palace) on Tatooine and a factory area on Sullust (Sorosuub Refinery and Sorosuub Pipelines), and a new mode called "Extraction".
The DLC is available for free to all players who have purchased the game's Season Pass, otherwise costing $10.
The second expansion pack is titled "Bespin" and allows players to fight in the setting of Cloud City, released in September 2016.
The expansion added more maps along with an additional game mode titled sabotage and new heroes Lando Calrissian and Dengar.
The third expansion pack, titled "Death Star", was released in September 2016 as well and added the long-awaited Death Star to the game, along with new heroes Chewbacca and Bossk.

The fourth and final DLC pack was released on December 6, 2016.
It is based on characters and locations from the film Rogue One, and includes Jyn Erso and Orson Krennic as new playable heroes, and a new game mode set both above and on the planet Scarif.
===
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) ===
Blake Jorgensen of Electronic Arts mentioned a sequel in November 2016, and Star Wars Battlefront II was announced in March 2017.
The game was released on November 17, 2017.
Since the restructuring of the Star Wars canon, Battlefront is the first game with a storyline that is considered canonical to the film series.

Star Wars Battlefront II features both single-player and multiplayer game modes, a customizable character class system, and content based on all Star Wars movies up to Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (with content for the other movies, as well as television series being added later on via free DLC).
A Celebration Edition was released in December 2019.
DICE announced that Scarif from Rogue One would be the last content update released for the game.

=== Canceled spin-off ===
In 2019, EA was in the process of developing a game code-named Viking, designed as a spin-off of the Battlefront series with open-world elements.
The game was originally planned for release in fall 2020, coinciding with the next generation of video game consoles, but was canceled in late 2019.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Fan-made sequel games ===


====
Galaxy in Turmoil ====
On January 25, 2016, Frontwire Studios began an attempt to produce an unofficial Battlefront installment called Galaxy in Turmoil.
The fan made game was in production using Unreal Engine 4 and was based on the canceled Star Wars: Battlefront III by Free Radical Design.
Although early versions of the game contained assets from  Free Radical Design, they soon became "place holders" as the full game planned to be released using assets and music made from the ground up.
On June 4, 2016, Galaxy in Turmoil gained a distribution deal through Valve and was planned to be released for free on Steam which generated a fair amount of attention.
On June 22, 2016, Lucasfilm requested the production of Galaxy in Turmoil be halted.

On July 31, 2016, Frontwire Studios announced the cancellation of the game was due to the "possibility of Galaxy in Turmoil taking away attention from Electronic Arts's Battlefront franchise".
Proposals of Galaxy in Turmoil falling under the paywall of Electronic Arts, and ideas of Lucasfilm giving Frontwire Studios a Star Wars license were both rejected due to an agreement between Electronic Arts and Lucasfilm.
Although Frontwire Studios may have fallen within Fair Use laws, legal conflict was avoided and the project was canceled.
There is a playable alpha that contains assets from Free Radical Design that was released to the public then removed early within Galaxy in Turmoil's lifetime.
Galaxy in Turmoil is now planned to be redeveloped as a brand new cyberpunk-themed IP without any Star Wars references, but still with Battlefront III-inspired mechanics including space-to-ground battles.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars video games


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Captain Phasma is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed by English actress Gwendoline Christie.
Introduced in Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015), the first film in the Star Wars sequel trilogy
, Phasma is the commander of the First Order's force of stormtroopers.
Christie returned to the role in the next of the trilogy's films, Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017), and in the animated television series Star Wars Resistance (2018) and several video games.
The character also made an additional appearance in Before the Awakening, an anthology book set before the events of The Force Awakens.

J. J. Abrams created Phasma from an armor design originally developed for Kylo Ren and named her after the 1979 horror film Phantasm.
The character was originally conceived as male.
Phasma appeared prominently in promotion and marketing for The Force Awakens, but the character's ultimately minor role in the film was the subject of criticism, a complaint repeated for her appearance in The Last Jedi.
Nonetheless, merchandise featuring the character found success, and her figure was the best-selling of all The Force
Awakens action figures on Amazon.co.uk.
==
Concept and creation ==
The character's creation was inspired by a rejected design for Kylo Ren.
Costume designer Michael Kaplan came up with the concept of Kylo being "the Lord of the Stormtroopers, in bright shining silver armor".
Kaplan had a strong image in his head of what this concept should look like, which concept
artist Dermot Power turned into an illustration.
This image, however, was immediately rejected by director J. J. Abrams.
Later, producer Kathleen Kennedy found the design, reacting positively and calling it "fantastic".
Abrams then used the design to create a new character, Phasma.
He named Phasma after the 1979 horror film Phantasm because her armor reminded him of the film's spheres.
Kaplan intended for the visuals of the First Order to contrast with that of the Resistance, appearing in colors like "black, teal blue, and steel gray", with stormtroopers being updated to be more simplified and modernized.
Kaplan designed the character believing it would be "extremely cool" to have a silver armored character in the film.
The character was not originally conceived as a woman, but rather was changed from male to female during casting, less than three weeks before principal shooting began.
Phasma thereby became the second on-screen female Star Wars villain, after Zam Wesell.
With Captain Phasma, the filmmakers wished to "push the boundaries" of traditional roles for female characters.
Actress Gwendoline Christie, who had previously played Brienne of Tarth in Game of Thrones, was first officially confirmed as Captain Phasma in a Vanity Fair spread released May 4, 2015, following its leak.
Christie fought heavily to appear in the film, continually insisting her agent get her a part in it.
Christie was not aware that the character was originally a man.
Christie took inspiration from her armor—"it's very high-functioning, it's very imposing
and it's not malleable at all"—in how to play the character.
In playing Phasma, Christie felt encouraged to experiment more with the gesture of a character.
Her initial costume, used in The Force Awakens, had to be created over a period of "four or five days"; co-costume designer Dave Crossman described its physical creation as "a complete panic".
It took Christie roughly forty-five minutes to put on.
A new suit was created for The Last Jedi, with various tweaks.
Its helmet was re-chromed, the fit was altered, and the armor was made "much cleaner and shinier."
==
Character ==
The commander of the First Order's stormtroopers, Captain Phasma is described as a "tough veteran commander" and one of a "commanding triumvirate" of the First Order alongside Kylo Ren and General Hux.
Christie compared Phasma to Boba Fett in the sense of being a character who, while not "at the forefront of the action all the time", still has "a lot of impact".
The actress called the character "a malevolent force" who takes pleasure in her cruelty, something she attributed to a perceived difficult journey to becoming the only female stormtrooper of rank.
To contrast with other stormtroopers in the franchise, Christie portrayed Phasma with both some femininity and sassiness.
Glen Robert Gill, writing for Bright Lights Film Journal, saw Phasma as "the demonic or negative emanation of the maidenly anima".
Phasma is depicted wearing salvaged chromium armor, which in The Force Awakens' visual dictionary is established as coming from a Naboo yacht once owned by Palpatine.
It is said to serve "primarily as a symbol of past power".
Christie recognised the character's helmet as both being futuristic and having medieval elements.
Chris Laverty, creator of costume analysis site Clothes on Film, called her armor "probably the most regal costume" in The Force Awakens, and noted it as a reflection of her status.
He also felt her cloak, "elegantly slung over one shoulder", was a method of humanizing the character.
In-universe, the cloak is the "traditional cape of First Order command".
Gill felt her armor called to mind mirrors, symbols of "self-reflection and self-examination", the feelings she brings in Finn when she inadvertently helps inspire him to defect.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
The second trailer for the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens introduced the character.
In the film, Phasma begins engaged in an attack at Tuanul, a settlement village on the desert planet Jakku, in search of a galaxy map that leads to the last Jedi, Luke Skywalker.
After the battle is won, Phasma and the other stormtroopers execute the remaining villagers.
Back on the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Finalizer, she meets with stormtrooper FN-2187, and reprimands him for having removed his helmet without permission.
FN-2187
later flees and frees Poe Dameron (who renames him Finn).
Phasma is present when Finn's defection is discovered; she mentions that Finn had never committed any infractions in the past.
Finally, when Finn, Han Solo, and Chewbacca infiltrate Starkiller Base, they take Phasma hostage and pressure her to deactivate the base's shields, intending to drop her in the trash compactor.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Phasma appears in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi when Finn, mechanic Rose Tico, and computer hacker DJ infiltrate the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy, a 37.5 miles (60.4 km)-wide flagship, in an attempt to disable the ship's tracking device.
They are captured and brought before Phasma and her stormtroopers.
Phasma taunts Finn, and orders his execution with Rose in a "slow and painful" way.
Before this can occur, Vice Admiral Holdo plummets the MC85 Star Cruiser Raddus, her two-mile-long cruiser, into the First Order fleet at lightspeed.
In the ensuing chaos, Phasma and Finn fight.
At first, Phasma gets the upper hand, knocking Finn into a pit.
Finn emerges unharmed from the pit, riding its elevator; he knocks Phasma down, breaking the visor of her helmet, and exposing part of her face around the left eye.
The turf crumbles beneath Phasma, and she falls into the flames.

In a deleted scene, the battle with Phasma and her fate are significantly different: She and four stormtroopers manage to surround Finn, who taunts Phasma about her compliance to his demands in The Force Awakens.
Before the stormtroopers can turn on her, Phasma kills all of them and then prepares to attack Finn, but he manages to cut her hand off and blasts her into the ship's wreckage.

The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson said that Phasma's limited supporting role in the film was due to time constraints and an already large cast of characters, and indicated that there were no other plans for Phasma in the films.
Though Phasma's fate was left unknown and the possibility of her returning in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker was hinted, John Boyega confirmed at the Episode IX panel during Celebration Chicago that Phasma indeed died in The Last Jedi, officially confirming her death.

===
Television ===
Phasma appears in the 2018 animated series Star Wars Resistance, voiced by Gwendoline Christie.

===
Literature ===
Before the Awakening, a prequel anthology, features the character in a short story centered around Finn.
In it, she monitors Finn's performance in combat simulation and, although praising his skill, she criticizes his rescuing of a weaker soldier.
Additionally, Phasma is featured in both the adult and junior novelizations of The Force Awakens.

In the lead-up to The Last Jedi's release, Phasma's backstory was explored in Star Wars: Phasma, a novel by Delilah S. Dawson.
Though Phasma's origins and character are discussed, the novel is not told from Phasma's perspective.

====
Comics ====
A four-part comic miniseries, Star Wars: Captain Phasma, was announced in April 2017 as part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Last Jedi initiative.
The series was written by Kelly Thompson with art by Marco Checchetto, and published by Marvel Comics between September 6 and October 18, 2017.
It explains Phasma's escape from Starkiller Base during the climax of The Force Awakens, and subsequent events.
She pursues loose ends while framing Lieutenant Sol Rivas for lowering the shields to the First Order's superweapon.
Her pursuit takes her to the planet Luprora after she requisitions a TIE fighter, its pilot, and an astromech droid.
In a flashback in issue #3, Phasma mentions Siv, a character from the 2017 novel Phasma.
Reviewing for IGN, Jesse Schedeen wrote that Thompson's "efficient approach to storytelling, coupled with the gorgeous tag-team combo that is Marco Checchetto and Andres Mossa, makes this a Star Wars comic every Phasma fan should read."
===
Other media ===
The Lego Star Wars version of Phasma also appears in the 2016 short form animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises.
She is also a playable character and boss in the Lego video game adaptation of The Force Awakens.

===
Merchandise ===
As part of the lead-up to the film, Disney released a wave of Star Wars toys on 2015's "Force Friday".
One such toy was a Phasma voice-changing mask, which contained the first dialogue heard by the public.
Other items included a costume for children as well as action figures.

== Reception ==
Phasma received attention before release.
Before her name was confirmed, Phasma had been dubbed "the Chrometrooper" by fans.
The trademarking of "Captain Phasma" led to speculation that it was the name of Christie's rumored character, said to be an Imperial officer pursuing Finn.
Phasma had been the name of a character in one Star Wars fanfic, Tarkin's Fist, leading to MovieWeb
wondering if it was an intentional homage.
IGN's "Keepin' It Reel" podcast discussed the possibility of Phasma being "the next breakout baddie" in the vein of Boba Fett and Darth Maul.
They responded positively to the character's name, despite some initial misgivings, for fitting in with the franchise's Flash Gordon roots.
They also praised her armor design, stating that character design had been important in the success of Fett and Maul.
They similarly had high hopes for Christie's acting.
During the lead-up to the film, Phasma became a fan favorite.
Polygon's Susana Polo considered The Force Awakens a great achievement for Hollywood for its diversity regardless of its quality, though she used Phasma as an example of how the film was not perfect, noting rumors of Phasma's minor role despite her being the first on-screen female stormtrooper.
Upon The Force Awakens' release, criticism fell on the character's minimal role in the film.
The Telegraph's Jonathan McAloon called his "one criticism" of The Force Awakens the underuse of Phasma, and wondered if her face would ever be revealed in the films.
Jason Guerrasio of Business Insider echoed the sentiment, noting her lack of screen time despite her great potential.
Scott Meslow, writing for The Week, criticized the film's lack of nuance in its villains, calling her "a total cipher" in the film despite her heavy appearance in its promotion.
He pointed to her appearance in Before the Awakening as a way to expand her character, noting her cold yet logical pragmatism in it.
Jesse Schedeen of IGN called Phasma "something of a disappointment in The Force Awakens", negatively contrasting her against Fett in that "even Fett had the distinction of outsmarting Han Solo before meeting an ignominious end".
Schedeen hoped Phasma would be revisited in Marvel's Star Wars comics, to help flesh out her character and build her into a better villain.
Max Nicholson, writing for Collider, noted the amount of hype for the character, as well as her minimal role in the story.
Nicholson suggested that Hux and Phasma should have been merged into one character, as they were too similar, or Phasma should have been given the melee fight scene given to a trooper nicknamed "TR-8R" by fans.
Bill Keveney of USA Today negatively compared Phasma's skill as a warrior to Christie's character Brienne of Tarth from Game of Thrones.
He further criticized Phasma's role in The Force Awakens by attributing the First Order's defeat to being largely her fault, as well as her "recycled" appearance in The Last Jedi.
Merchandise featuring the character proved popular.
David Betancourt of The Washington Post called Phasma's role in the film "little more than a shiny new prop", viewing her as a victim of the film's need to introduce all its new characters, yet noted the popularity and rarity of the merchandise surrounding the character.
Captain Phasma's figure was the bestselling of The Force Awakens' action figures on Amazon.co.uk.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Captain Phasma in the StarWars.com Databank
Phasma on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Captain Phasma on IMDb
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens is the novelization of the 2015 film of the same name.
The author, Alan Dean Foster, also wrote Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker, the 1976 novelization of the first Star Wars film.

==
Development ==
Asked to write the novelization by Shelly Shapiro of Del Rey Books,
Foster was given access to the screenplay of the film, along with stills from the film of characters and sets.
Foster wanted to develop a romance between Rey and Finn, which he thought was implied in the film.
He later stated, "I expected to see that developed further in Episode VIII."
He also expressed his dissatisfaction with the latter film, saying that it prompted him to write a treatment for Episode IX, "attempting in that storyline to explain a lot of the really silly things that happened in Episode VIII.
"
However, he admitted that he "never expected Disney to do anything with [it].
"

==
Differences between the novel and the film ==
The novelization includes additional scenes and dialogue.
These include:

A prologue featuring an excerpt from the "Journal of the Whills", a fictional journal first mentioned in Foster's first Star Wars novelization.

Early in the novel, a sequence with Leia reveals the origin of main factions in the film: the Resistance, the New Republic and the First Order.

A section revealing how Poe Dameron escapes from the crashed TIE fighter and leaves Jakku.

A sequence where Rey and Chewbacca encounter Unkar Plutt on Takodana.
==
Publication history ==
To avoid spoilers caused by the book being released before the movie, the hardcover release was delayed until January 5, 2016.
The e-book was released on December 18, 2015.
The book was a #1 New York Times best seller.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations
This is an incomplete list of characters from the Star Wars expanded universe, now rebranded Star Wars Legends.
The accompanying works were declared non-canon to the Star Wars franchise by Lucasfilm in 2014.This list applies only to characters who completely appear in Legends media, and who therefore do not exist in the canon continuity.
For characters belonging to the canon continuity, see List of Star Wars characters.

== # ==
8t88
A droid working with Jerec in Star Wars Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II.
==
A ==
AbelothA dark side entity
, Abeloth began as a mortal woman who came across the immortal Force entities, the Ones, on their mysterious home world.
Taking on the mantle of the Mother, Abeloth helped The Father keep the peace between her warring Son and Daughter for many years.
However, fearing her own mortality, the Mother bathed in the Pool of Knowledge and drank from the Font of Power, in hopes of remaining with her immortal family.
The result was that she became the dark side entity Abeloth.
Working with the insectoid Killik race, the Ones worked together to construct Centerpoint Station, which they used to imprison Abeloth on their planet, surrounding it with a cluster of black holes, later known as the Maw.
Following this Abeloth's family relocated to the mysterious planet Mortis, leaving her to her lonely prison.
Millennia later, following the actions of the Sith Lord Darth Caedus, the Jedi (led by Jedi Grand Master Luke Skywalker) launched an attack on Centerpoint and destroyed the ancient space station.
This resulted in the eventual destruction of Sinkhole Station, allowing Abeloth to finally leave her prison.
Using her dark side powers, Abeloth possessed the charismatic Senator Rokari Kem, whom she used to assume control of the Galactic Federation of Free Alliances, as well as the Lost Tribe of the Sith (after her murder of Sith Grand Lord Darish Vol).
She was eventually destroyed by the combined efforts of Skywalker and his Sith counterpart, Darth Krayt, leader of the One Sith.

King Adas
King of Korriban during the time of the First Sith Empire.
His reign lasted nearly three hundred years, and he wielded two massive axes.

Darth Andeddu
The self-styled "Immortal God-King of Prakith" who reigned as Dark Lord of the Sith during the Hundred-Year Darkness.
He left behind a holocron that supposedly held the secret to immortality.
He did appear in Star Wars canon but it was a very brief mention.
One of the legions of Sith Troopers in the canon film Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker was named after him.
Nom Anor
A Yuuzhan Vong character prominent throughout The New Jedi Order series of novels, published from 1999 to 2003.
He was responsible for half of the Yuuzhan Vong invasion in the Star Wars galaxy.
In the latter half of The New Jedi Order, he became an antihero as he led a heretical movement among his people to take down their ruler, Supreme Overlord Shimrra.
By the series's end, having seen to the deaths of Shimrra and his puppet master Onimi, Nom Anor chose death over living in the postwar galaxy.

Bail Antilles
An Alderaanian senator; as he is the father of Breha Antilles, wife to Bail Organa, Antilles is the adoptive grandfather of Princess Leia Organa.

Arcann
The son of Valkorion, brother to Thexan and Vaylin, and temporary ruler of the Eternal Throne in the Star Wars: The Old Republic video game.

Seti Ashgad
A hyperdrive engineer working for the Incom Corporation who also served in the Galactic Senate during the days of the Clone Wars.
He was known as "The Golden Tempter", and was also known for his extreme ambition and wanted to replace Palpatine as Supreme Chancellor.

Atris — voiced by Elizabeth Rider
A Jedi Council member who along with her colleagues exiled Meetra Surik, supposedly because she followed Revan to war.
She established a Jedi Academy on Telos and is served by a retinue of Echani Handmaiden warriors in Knights of the Old Republic II – The Sith Lords.

Tavion Axmis
Antagonist in Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy.

Azrakel
Apprentice of Kadann who served the Secret Order of the Empire.
Azrakel was known for his disturbing and sadistic penchant for killing.
Following the death of Emperor Palpatine, he becomes a mercenary operating in the Outer Rim.

Azzameen family
Protagonists in the video game
Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance, including player character Ace and his father and the family patriarch Tomaas.

==
B ==
B4-D4
The administrative droid that works for Czerka on Telos in the Outer Rim.
It is possible to control B4-D4 in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords while helping the Ithorians with their restoration project.

Darth Bandon
Apprentice of Darth Malak.
Killed by Revan during the events of Knights of the Old Republic.

Bao-Dur — voiced by Roger G. Smith
A Zabrak technician from Iridonia who served under Meetra Surik during the Mandalorian Wars.
He was the inventor of the Mass Shadow Generator which caused the cataclysmic events in Malachor V, and later reunites with Surik as a playable companion in Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.

Garm Bel Iblis
A Republic senator and initial member of the Rebel Alliance.

Jolee Bindo
A former member of the Jedi Order and playable character in both Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
A known companion of Revan who aided him in his quest to find and destroy the Star Forge.

Deliah Blue
A companion of Cade Skywalker and Jariah Syn during the Sith-Imperial War in the Legacy comic series.

Blue Max
Droid that is part of Han Solo's crew in The Han Solo Adventures by Brian Daley.

Bollux
Droid that is part of Han Solo's crew in The Han Solo Adventures by Brian Daley.
Renamed to Zollux for UK imprints.

Empatojayos Brand
Ancient Jedi, introduced in the Star Wars Dark Empire comic series, who sacrifices himself to help destroy the soul of the resurrected Emperor Palpatine.

Malcor Brashin — voiced by David Warner
Grand General in the Imperial Army who was heavily involved in the Battles of Tatooine and Yavin 4.
He was prominently featured in Star Wars: Force Commander.

Senator Bana Breemu — portrayed by Bai Ling
Representative of the Humbarine sector in the Galactic Senate during the Galactic Republic.

Shira Brie
An Imperial Intelligence operative who infiltrated the Rebel Alliance.
After nearly being killed, Brie underwent extensive cybernetic implants to become Lumiya.

Noa Briqualon — portrayed by Wilford Brimley
Marooned on Endor in Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor.

Maris Brood — portrayed by Adrienne Wilkinson
Jedi in The Force Unleashed who later turns to the dark side.
Starkiller spares her life on Felucia.

==
C ==
C-3PX
Initially a normal 3PX-series protocol droid, he became, in 33 BBY, Darth Maul's reprogrammed assassin droid, but, with Darth Maul's apparent death in 32 BBY, along with the Sith shuttle Scimitar, he was confiscated by Supreme Chancellor Palpatine.

Darth Caedus
Sith Lord born as "Jacen Solo", the oldest son of Han Solo and Leia Organa Solo and Jaina Solo's twin brother.
Jacen was a hero of the Yuuzhan Vong War, having personally ended it by killing their true Supreme Overlord Onimi, but years later became the evil Sith Lord Caedus.
His actions as a Sith during the Second Galactic Civil War forced his sister, Jaina, to kill him.

Yomin Carr
A Yuuzhan Vong character who served as one of the antagonists in the first novel of The New Jedi Order series, Vector Prime.
He was killed in combat by Mara Jade Skywalker.

CB-99
Protocol droid Jabba the Hutt used to keep his will.
After his death shortly before the Battle of Endor, Zorba the Hutt, Jabba's father, reclaimed Jabba's will and everything he owned through the droid.
He was first featured in the novel Zorba the Hutt's Revenge.

Jorus
C'baoth
Jedi Master of the Galactic Republic who masterminded and led Project Outbound Flight, an effort to explore beyond the galaxy.
The massive vessel used for this attempt was attacked by future Imperial Grand Admiral Thrawn, whom C'baoth attempted to murder after insanity drove him to the dark side.
He was stopped and killed by a Jedi Padawan aboard the doomed vessel; Emperor Palpatine subsequently had him cloned.

Joruus C'baoth
Insane clone of Jedi Master Jorus C'baoth and in Timothy Zahn's Thrawn trilogy.

Tycho Celchu — voiced by Timothy Omundson (Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike) and Jess Harnell (Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast)
TIE fighter pilot who defected to the Rebel Alliance and became a member of Rogue Squadron, and later became a general of the New Republic.
He is a central character in Michael A. Stackpole's X-wing series of books.

Charal
Force-wielding nightsister antagonist in Battle for Endor.

Nas Choka
Yuuzhan Vong warmaster who succeeded Tsavong Lah.
Surrendered on behalf of the Yuuzhan Vong after Shimrra and Onimi's deaths, ending the conflict.

Shok Choka
A Yuuzhan Vong warrior who appeared in Edge of Victory II:
Rebirth, a novel in The New Jedi Order; killed in a duel to the death by Anakin Solo.

Cilghal
Mon Calamari Jedi Master and member of the Jedi Council who originally appeared as a Senator of Dac in the Jedi Academy Trilogy with an aptitude for science and healing; niece of Gial Ackbar.

Darth Cognus
Sith Lord trained by Darth Bane and Darth Zannah.
She would later train Darth Millennial.

General Airen Cracken
Rebel and New Republic intelligence officer.
West End Games Star Wars roleplaying supplements sometimes were published as "Cracken's" guides to their topic.

Cradossk
The father of Bossk who leads the Bounty Hunters' Guild.
His death at the hands of Bossk, as depicted in the novel The Mandalorian Armor, splits the Bounty Hunters' Guild into the Guild Reform Committee and the True Guild.

== D ==
Admiral Natasi Daala
Antagonist introduced in the Jedi Academy trilogy, returning in Darksaber, Planet of Twilight, and Death Star.
In the Legacy of the Force series, Daala becomes the chief of state of the Galactic Federation of Free Alliances.

Da'Gara
A Yuuzhan Vong character who served as one of the antagonists in the first of The New Jedi Order novels, Vector Prime.
He was killed when the world of Helska IV, which he was on, exploded because of the actions of the New Republic.

Joclad Danva
Human Jedi Knight from Attack of the Clones.
Uses a green lightsaber in the Battle of Geonosis, where he is killed.

General Oro Dassyne — voiced by Terrence Carson
A Separatist General and an agent of the Corporate Alliance who commanded the CIS' forces on Bomis Koori IV.

Gizor Delso
A Geonosian separatist who survived Darth Vader's slaughter of the remaining separatist leaders and created his own droid army.
He had plans to make a new Battle Droid until Imperial Stormtroopers of the 501st
Legion raided his factory on Mustafar and destroyed his plans.
Gizor never made it off the planet.

Desann — voiced by Mark Klastorin
Dark Jedi antagonist in Star Wars Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast.

Darth Desolous
A male Pau'an Dark Lord of the Sith.
Once a revered Jedi Master, he loses his proper identity after falling to the dark side of the Force.
Appears in the video game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.

Dewlanna
Female Wookiee who served on Garris Shrike's crew, and later became a surrogate mother to Han Solo.

D'harhan
Niordi bounty hunter who underwent cybernetic enhancement to have his head turned into a laser cannon.
Longtime associate and ally of Boba Fett.

Orgus Din - voiced by Robert Pine
Jedi who served as the master of the Hero of Tython during the Jedi prologue in Star Wars: The Old Republic.
He was also the former master of Bengel Morr, the leader of the Flesh Raiders.

Grand Moff Vilim Disra
Imperial antagonist in the Hand of Thrawn duology and in the novel Allegiance.

Teneniel Djo
Witch of Dathomir appearing in The Courtship of Princess Leia.
Married to Isolder, mother of Tenel Ka.

Hiram Drayson
Chandrilan military officer who lead the Chandrila Defense Fleet.
He later became a senior officer in the New Republic Navy as commander of the Home Guard Fleet.
:
Antares Draco — Portrayal by Dan Rodriguez
Antares Draco was a Human male who led the Imperial Knights during the Second Imperial Civil War.
A skilled pilot and lightsaber duelist, Draco was fiercely loyal to and willing to die for Roan Fel, Emperor of the Galactic Empire and later the Empire-in-exile.
Antares Draco appeared in the Dark Horse comic book series Star Wars Legacy.

Grand Moff Dunhausen
A high-ranking Imperial officer and member of the Central Committee of Grand Moffs.
Dunhausen is predominantly known for two things: his scheming nature and for always wearing a pair of blaster-shaped earrings.
He owns the droid 3B6-RA-7.
He is first featured in the novel
The Glove of Darth Vader.

Captain Dunwell
Assists Trioculus in his search for Darth Vader's glove.
Killed after his submarine explodes.
First featured in the novel The Glove of Darth Vader.

Durge — voiced by Daran Norris
A
Gen'Dai bounty hunter, Durge is one of the few violent members of his kind.
As depicted in the Clone Wars mini series, Durge confronted Obi-Wan Kenobi on Muunilinst before being defeated by the Jedi.
Perished in comics due to being in an escape pod that was jettisoned into a star.

Kyp Durron
Jedi Master who first appears in Kevin J. Anderson's Jedi Academy Trilogy as one of Luke's pupils.
Briefly turned to the dark side under the influence of the spirit of Sith Lord Exar Kun, but later became a leading-if troublesome-member of the New Jedi Order.

== E ==
Captain Juno Eclipse — voiced by Nathalie Cox
Female Imperial pilot and Galen Marek's love interest in The Force Unleashed.

Bant Eerin
Female Mon Calamari childhood friend of Obi-Wan Kenobi; originally apprenticed to Jedi Master Tahl, later apprenticed to Kit Fisto following Tahl's death.

Elan
A Yuuzhan Vong in the novel Agents of Chaos
I: Hero's Trial.
She was sent by her superiors to infiltrate the Jedi Order and kill as many of them as possible with a deadly virus.
Her efforts were foiled by Han Solo and she died as a result.

Emtrey
An M-3PO series droid that serves Rogue Squadron in the X-Wing book series.

== F ==
Keyan Farlander
Rebel Alliance starfighter pilot and Jedi.
The Farlander Papers enclosed with some copies of the Star Wars: X-Wing provided backstory to the game's unnamed protagonist.

Jagged Fel
Starfighter pilot and Baron Soontir Fel's son, appearing in the New Jedi Order and Legacy of the Force series.
Engaged then married to Jaina Solo in the Fate of the Jedi series.

Roan Fel
Deposed Galactic Emperor in the Star Wars:
Legacy series.

Baron Soontir Fel
Elite Imperial starfighter pilot in Dark Horse Comics and the New Jedi Order series.
Brother-in-law to Commander Wedge Antilles.
Father of Jagged Fel.

Davin Felth
Imperial stormtrooper 1023 who discovered that the escape pod that the Empire is looking for contained droids.
He kills his superior officer Mod Terrik in Docking Bay 94 after becoming disgusted with the Empire's tyranny, giving the Millennium Falcon the time needed to escape from Tatooine
Borsk Fey'lya
Bothan politician, introduced in Timothy Zahn's Thrawn trilogy, who rises to become chief of state of the New Republic.
He sacrifices his life during the Yuuzhan Vong capture of Coruscant, thereby earning himself a place among the Bothan Martyrs.

Flim
Con artist employed by Moff Disra in the Hand of Thrawn duology to impersonate the deceased Grand Admiral Thrawn.

==
G ==
Mirta Gev
Boba Fett's granddaughter, who first appears in Bloodlines.

G0-T0 — voiced by Daran Norris
A droid who established a successful smuggling organization following the events of Knights of the Old Republic to help rebuild the Republic, and later joins Meetra Surik in Knights of the Old Republic II – The Sith Lords.

Janus Greejatus
Longtime friend and associate of Palpatine; served as Palpatine's aide during his time as Senator of Naboo and the Chommell Sector, and replaced him in the position after Palpatine was elected Supreme Chancellor.
After being expelled from the Galactic Senate due to questionable practices, Greejatus became Palpatine's advisor.
He continued to served in this capacity when the Galactic Empire came to power and Palpatine declared himself Emperor.
He served in this capacity well into the Galactic Civil War, and was killed when the second Death Star was destroyed during the Battle of Endor.

Falon Grey
Padawan to Master Rahm Kota;
two Force-sensitive clones, X1 and X2, were created from his DNA on Kamino.

== H ==
Hanharr
A Wookie bounty hunter and a playable character in Knights of the Old Republic II – The Sith Lords.

Harrar
A recurring Yuuzhan Vong character in The New Jedi Order.
By the series' end, he betrayed his species's destructive empire and sided with the Galactic Alliance to end their reign of terror.

A'Sharad Hett
A Jedi Master whose father was Sharad Hett another famous Jedi Master.
After A'Sharad's father died with his native people (Sand People) he inherited his father's lightsaber and now uses both his and his fathers.
Hundreds of years later, he becomes Darth Krayt and institutes "the One Sith," abolishing the Rule of Two.

Grand Moff Bertroff Hissa
Leading figure in an attempt to overthrow Ysanne Isard as the head of the Galactic Empire.
Hissa founded the Central Committee of Grand Moffs, who installed Trioculus as their figurehead.
First appears in the novel
The Glove of Darth Vader.

HK-47 — voiced by Kristoffer Tabori
Revan's loyal assassin droid companion and a playable character in both Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.

Corran Horn
X-wing pilot and Jedi Master.
I, Jedi is narrated from his first-person perspective.
Michael Stackpole, who created the character for the X-Wing series, depicts Horn in the Star Wars Customizable Card Game.
Married to Mirax Terrik.
He appears in several novels in the Yuuzhan Vong War and the Second Galactic War, the latter of which he serves on the Jedi Council.

Hero of Tython
Was a Jedi knight who saved Tython from Darth Angral who had a super weapon.
He gets brainwashed by lord vitiate and turns to the dark side briefly.
He kills the voice of the emperor and kills Emperor Valkorian once and for all.

==
I ==
Ikrit
A furry white Jedi Master.
He was trained by Yoda, and later saved his planet.
He slept several centuries to be awakened by Anakin Solo.
Ikrit bears resemblance to a rabbit and red panda.
He appears in Junior Jedi Knights and Edge of Victory: Conquest.

Armand Isard
Father of Ysanne Isard.
Member of Palpatine's Inner Circle since the Clone Wars, and served as Director of Republic Intelligence.
Became Director of Imperial Intelligence after the Empire replaced the Republic.
He was later betrayed and executed by either his daughter or Emperor Palpatine — most likely the former.

Ysanne Isard
Former head of Imperial Intelligence and leader of the Empire in the X-Wing book series.
She betrayed and executed her own father, Armand.
Isard and her clone are killed in Isard's Revenge.

Irek Ismaren
Antagonist in Children of the Jedi and the New Jedi Order's Enemy Lines duology.

Prince Isolder
Character who courts Princess Leia in The Courtship of Princess Leia.
Killed by Darth Caedus in Invincible.
Married to Teneniel Djo, father of Tenel Ka.

==
J ==
Mara Jade Skywalker — portrayed by Shannon McRandle
"Emperor's Hand" to Palpatine during his reign; Luke Skywalker's wife.

Shimrra Jamaane
The Supreme Overlord of the Yuuzhan Vong Empire who turned out to be nothing more than a puppet by the Force-sensitive Vong Shamed One Onimi.
By the end of The New Jedi Order, he was killed in combat by Luke Skywalker.

Wes Janson
A fighter pilot and founding member of the elite Rogue Squadron, who was featured during one scene in The Empire Strikes Back as the gunner for Wedge Antilles's T-47 Snowspeeder.
He is also heavily featured in the X-wing Series and is mentioned frequently for his light-hearted, almost childlike demeanor.

Jarael
A young female Arkanian in the comic book series
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

Carnor Jax
Member of the Emperor's Royal Guard who bribed the Emperor's physician to poison Palpatine's clones.
Antagonist of the Crimson Empire series.

Jedgar
Apprentice of Kadann who became the leader of the Prophets of the Dark Side after the death of Kadann.

Jek-14
Sith Clone created by Count Dooku; exclusive to the Lego Star Wars shorts, beginning in The Yoda Chronicles.

Jerec — portrayed by Christopher Neame
Dark Jedi and main antagonist in Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II.

Jubnuk
One of Jabba the Hutt's Gamorrean guards.
He was eaten alive by the Rancor.

Juhani
A Cathar Jedi knight and playable character in both Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

Bardan Jusik
Jedi Knight who fought in the Clone Wars, later left the Jedi Order to become a medic, and eventually joined the Mandalorians.

==
K ==
K-3PX
Blue and black 3PX-series protocol droid and assassin who is Darth Vader's henchman in his search for Luke Skywalker in the 1970s/1980s Marvel Comics Star Wars series, issues #74-76 and #80 (1983).

Tenel Ka
Daughter of Isolder and Teneniel Djo
, Tenel Ka was a childhood friend of Jacen and Jaina Solo at the Jedi Academy.
After losing an arm during her Jedi training, Tenel Ka would serve the Jedi Order as a Knight throughout the Yuuzhan Vong War before resigning due to her commitment as the Hapan Queen Mother of the Hapes Consortium.
She later became a mother with the birth of Allana, who Jacen Solo fathered.
The two had a secret love, due to the Hapan population's hatred for Jedi, and after Jacen turned to the Dark Side and became Darth Caedus, Tenel Ka withdrew Hapes from the Galactic Alliance.
After Caedus's defeat, Tenel Ka sent Allana to live with her grandparents, Han and Leia Solo, for her own safety.

Kadann
Dark Jedi who lead the Prophets of the Dark Side during the reign of the Galactic Empire and served as Palpatine's Supreme Prophet.
Briefly cooperated with Trioculus before launching his own plan involving the grandson of the Emperor.

Captain Kael — voiced by Bruce Robertson
Captain in the Naboo Royal Security Forces during the invasion of Naboo.
Featured in Star Wars:
Episode
I: Battle for Naboo.

Kir Kanos
Anti-hero of the Crimson Empire series.
He also uses the bounty hunter pseudonym Kenix Kil.

Admiral Saul Karath
Admiral of the Sith Navy during the Jedi Civil War.
Karath formerly served the Republic during the Mandalorian Wars.

Nomen Karr — voiced by Michael Gregory
Jedi who served as Jaesa Willsaam's Jedi Master.
He was Darth Baras' personal nemesis and was one of the Jedi Order's most seasoned veterans during the Cold War.
He was known to touch the dark side of the Force while within the lines of the Sith Empire, yet remained true to the Jedi Code.

Talon Karrde
Smuggler introduced in Timothy Zahn's Thrawn trilogy.

Jodo Kast
A bounty hunter who wears Mandalorian armor.
Is mistaken for, and later killed by, Boba Fett.
Adam Rosenburg, from UGO Networks, listed Kast as the 9th worst Star Wars Expanded Universe character, calling him a "Boba Fett wannabee".

Kyle Katarn — portrayed by Jason Court
(Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II)
The player's character in the first three Jedi Knight and Dark Forces video games.

Owen Kenobi
Obi-Wan's brother, originally intended to be Owen Lars but later retconned into a separate character after the release of Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones.

Gavar Khai
Sith Saber in the Fate of the Jedi series; Vestara Khai's father.

Vestara Khai
Sith apprentice in the Fate of the Jedi series; love interest of Ben Skywalker.

Kleef — voiced by Kristoffer Tabori
Gungan mercenary operating as a member of Chop'aa Notimo's mercenary gang
; kidnapped Senator Garm Bel Iblis on Notimo's orders.
He was killed by Starkiller in Cloud City.

Ken
The son of Triclops and grandson of Palpatine.
Born on Kessel and taken to live in the Lost City of the Jedi underneath Yavin 4.
He was found by Luke Skywalker, who then inducted him into the Rebel Alliance.
First appears in The Lost City of the Jedi.

Jaden Korr — voiced by Phillip Tanzini
Apprentice of Kyle Katarn.
Main protagonist of Star Wars: Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy.

General Rahm Kota — voiced by Cully Frederickson
Jedi Master who served as a General during the Clone Wars
; managed to survive Order 66 and escape to Nar Shaddaa.
In The Force Unleashed, he attacks an Imperial TIE fighter facility with a band of militia.
Originally an enemy to Darth Vader's apprentice, Starkiller, but later becomes his mentor.
Is also considered a founding member of the Rebel Alliance.

Krayn
Slave-trader who often conducted raids on Tatooine.
Killed by Anakin Skywalker on a mission to Nar Shaddaa.

Darth Krayt
The main antagonist of the Star Wars: Legacy comic series.
Formerly known as A'Sharad Hett, he served during the Clone Wars.
He managed to survive the early stages of the Great Jedi Purge and exiled himself to Tatooine, but fled Tatooine after encountering Obi-Wan Kenobi.
He fled to Korriban, where he was trained as a Sith Lord.
After several hundred years in an extended periods of stasis, Krayt formed the One Sith and overthrew the Galactic Federation of Free Alliances, forming a new Sith Empire in its place.

Ludo Kressh
Sith Lord who lived during the Great Hyperspace War.
He was Naga Sadow's greatest rival, and fought him for the title of Dark Lord of the Sith following the death of Marka Ragnos.

Ganner Krieg
—Portrayal by Thomas Spanos(Legacy)
Ganner Krieg was a Human male Master of the Imperial Knights who served Emperor Roan Fel's Empire-in-exile during the Second Imperial Civil War.
Noted for his calm and serious demeanor, Krieg was a trusted friend of fellow Knight Antares Draco and was often paired with him on missions during the war.
Ganner Krieg appeared in the Dark Horse comic book series Star Wars Legacy.

K'Kruhk — voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson
Whipid Jedi Master who fought during the Clone Wars and survived the Great Jedi Purge.
He lived from around the end of the Galactic Republic to the time of the One Sith and the Second Imperial Civil War.

Exar Kun
Fallen Jedi who led the Brotherhood of the Sith against the Jedi and the Galactic Republic during the Great Sith War, later establishes a dark side presence on Yavin 4.

An'ya Kuro
Also known as "the Dark Woman", Kuro was a Jedi Master who fought in the Clone Wars.
She was Aurra Sing's Master before Sing left the Jedi to become a bounty hunter, and was also A'Sharad Hett's second Jedi Master.
She has the distinction of being the final Jedi killed during the Great Jedi Purge.
Kira CarsenKira Carsen lived in the old republic era.
She was the Padawan to the Hero of Tython.
She was also a child of the emperor who escaped Korriban and was found by the Jedi Order.
When The Hero of Tython finds out he tells the council and The Hero of Tython recommends the council to promote her as knight.
She is promoted.
When The Hero of Tython is trying to stop a super weapon the emperor takes control of Kira.
The Hero of Tython stops her.
She then resists and breaks free of the emperor’s control.

==
L ==
Warmaster Tsavong Lah
The first Warmaster during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion.
Following his demise in the novel Destiny's Way, he was replaced by Nas Choka.

Bevel Lemelisk
Noted engineer and architect who was known particularly for his creation of superweapons; he designed six, five of them for the Galactic Empire, including both the first and the second Death Stars.

Xamuel Lennox — portrayed by John Dicks
Imperial navy captain who served in Darth Vader's Death Squadron as captain of the Star Destroyer Tyrant.

Lowbacca
Wookiee Jedi Knight and Chewbacca's nephew.
UGO Networks listed the character as the 11th worst Expanded Universe character, saying that while they did not have any problems with the character as a whole, his name "has got to go".

Lumiya
Introduced in Marvel's Star Wars comics as an Imperial Intelligence operative called "Shira Brie" who serves a foil for Luke Skywalker after the fall of the Empire.
She returns in the Legacy of the Force series, where she trains Jacen Solo in the ways of the Sith and turns him to the dark side of the Force.

==
M ==
Mako
The first (romanceable) companion in the Bounty Hunter storyline of the MMORPG Star Wars: The Old Republic.

Darth Malak — voiced by Rafael Ferrer
Darth Revan's apprentice; the main antagonist of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

Darth Malgus — voiced by
Jamie Glover
A Sith Lord and central character featured in Star Wars The Old Republic.

Kento Marek — voiced by Tom Kane
Jedi knight and the father of Starkiller.
Darth Vader discovers him hiding on Kashyyyk and kills him at the beginning of Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, then takes his young son as his secret apprentice.

Mallie Marek
Jedi knight and wife of Kento Marek.
She is killed by Trandoshan slavers shortly after the birth of her son.

Darth Marr
A Human male Dark Lord of the Sith who served on the Dark Council of the resurgent Sith Empire during the Great Galactic War, the Cold War, and the Galactic War.
He headed the Sphere of Defense of the Empire.

Visas Marr — voiced by Kelly Hu
A Miraluka Dark Jedi and the former apprentice of Darth Nihilus.
She later defected and becomes a playable companion of Meetra Surik in Knights of the Old Republic II – The Sith Lords.

Darth Maul's dopplegänger
A dopplegänger of Darth Maul created through Sith alchemy dueling Darth Vader on Kalakar Six in the comic strip
"Resurrection" in Star Wars Tales #9.

Mira — voiced by Emily Berry
A bounty hunter and a playable character in Knights of the Old Republic II – The Sith Lords.

MD-5
A medical droid serving Trioculus that first appears in The Glove of Darth Vader.

Darth Millennial
A three-eyed mutant Sith Lord who could see into the future.
He believed that he was a prophet chosen by the will of the Force and would become the founder of the Prophets of the Dark Side.

Callista Ming
A Jedi spirit Luke encounters in Children of the Jedi; she is revived and becomes Luke's lover.
Prequel era books establish that her surname was originally Masana, and she fought in the Clone Wars.

General Rom Mohc — voiced by Jack Angel
Creator of the Dark Trooper program in Dark Forces and the game's final boss.

Kasan Moor — voiced by Olivia Hussey
Former commander of the 128th TIE Interceptor Squadron, member of Rogue Squadron.
Featured in the video game
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron.

Bengel Morr — voiced by Victor Slezak
Nautolan Dark Jedi who was originally Orgus Din's Padawan.
He was initially thought to have been killed during the Sacking of Coruscant, but instead was left insane.
He later becomes the leader of the Flesh Raiders on Tython, and plans to rebuild the Jedi Order into a weapon to destroy the Sith.
He serves as the main antagonist of the Hero of Tython's prologue in Star Wars: The Old Republic.
He is later cured of his insanity.

Kud'ar Mub'at
The only known fully developed member of the Assembler species.
He served as a go-between and middleman for many of the less legal activities of the galaxy.
Prominent character in The Bounty Hunter Wars series.

Karness Muur
One of the first Sith Lords, a former Jedi who turned to the Dark Side during the Hundred-Year Darkness.
He served as the main antagonist of the comic series Vector, which spanned Knights of the Old Republic, Dark Times, Rebellion and Legacy.
He was the inventor of the Rakghoul Plague.

Grand Moff Muzzer
an Imperial Grand Moff featured in the novel The Glove of Darth Vader.
He is shot in the leg by Tibor, Zorba the Hutt's personal bounty hunter, when the Moffship pulls the Zorba Express into the moffship, but survives.

==
N ==
Darred Janred Naberrie
Husband of Sola Naberrie and father of Ryoo Naberrie & Pooja Naberrie.
He is also the uncle of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa.

Freedon Nadd
A Jedi turned Sith in the Tales of the Jedi series.
He was the main instigator in Exar Kun's fall to the dark side.

Darth Nihl
Nagai warlord who became a member of Darth Krayt's One Sith, and later became his chief enforcer.
Following Krayt's death and the dissolution of his empire, Nihl assumed leadership of the surviving members of the One Sith.

Darth Nihilus
One of the antagonists of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords, and a member of the Sith Triumvirate.
The sole survivor of his planet's destruction, Nihilus became singularly focused on draining the Force from all living beings to satisfy his eternal hunger for the Force.

Ona Nobis
Sorrusian bounty hunter who primarily captured test subjects for Jenna Zan Arbor
so Zan Arbor could conduct her experiments on the Force.
She used the alias
"Reesa On".

Chop'aa Notimo — voiced by Billy Brown
Mandalorian mercenary and crime lord who orchestrated the kidnapping of Senator Garm Bel Iblis.
He was killed by Starkiller in Cloud City.

==
O ==
Astri Oddo
Friend of Obi-Wan Kenobi and ally of the Jedi Order.
She is a prominent character in all of the Star Wars book series written by Jude Watson
Ferus Olin
Former Jedi Padawan who joined Obi-Wan Kenobi in searching for any Jedi who survived Order 66 and the subsequent Great Jedi Purge.
Main protagonist of Jude Watson's The Last of the Jedi series and former rival of Anakin Skywalker.

Cal Omas
Politician and leader of the Galactic Federation of Free Alliances in the New Jedi Order and Legacy of the Force series.

Omega Squad
A four-man Republic Commando unit featured in the books Star Wars Republic Commando:
Hard Contact, Star Wars Republic Commando:
Triple Zero, Star Wars Republic Commando: True Colors, and Star Wars Imperial Commando: 501st .

Granta Omega
The son of the Dark Jedi Xanatos who wanted revenge on the Jedi Order, blaming them for the death of his father.
He became enemies with Obi-Wan Kenobi in particular, battling him multiple times.
He is one of the central antagonists of the Jedi Quest book series.

Carth Onasi — voiced by Raphael Sbarge
Companion of Revan who aided him in his quest to find and destroy the Star Forge.
He is the pilot of the Ebon Hawk and a playable character in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

Onimi
Depicted throughout most of the New Jedi Order series as a "shamed one", The Unifying Force reveals that Onimi in fact controls Overload Shimrra.
Jacen Solo kills Onimi in the series' final book.

Canderous Ordo
Voiced by John Cygan: A Mandalorian warrior who fought in the Mandalorian Wars, and later becomes ruler of Mandalore under the name
"Mandalore the Preserver".
He is a playable character in both Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and Knights of the Old Republic II – The Sith Lords.

Orrin
a male Neimoidian ally of the CIS during the Clone Wars.

Jan Ors
Voiced and played by Angela Harry (Jedi Knight), Julie Eccles (voice, Dark Forces), Vanessa Marshall (voice, Jedi Outcast): Kyle Katarn's pilot and love interest.

General Otto
Voiced by Tom Kane:
Imperial officer who deserted the Empire.
First appears in the game
Star Wars:
Demolition and appears later in Star Wars Galaxies.

Outlander
The outlander was a character from Star Wars: The Old Republic.
The outlander defeated Valkorian the immortal emperor and killed the emperor once and for all.
It has been proven that the outlander is the Hero of Tython due to a prophecy in the Revan books.

==
P ==
Ajunta Pall
Leader of the Dark Jedi of the Hundred Year Darkness and the very first Dark Lord of the Sith.
In Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, his spirit continues to haunt his tomb on Korriban before being redeemed by Revan.

Kazdan Paratus — voiced by Larry Drake
Aleena Jedi Master and survivor of the Great Jedi Purge living in exile on the junk world Raxus Prime.
He descended into insanity after Order 66 was carried out, and was killed by Starkiller on Darth Vader's orders.

Jax Pavan
Male human survivor of Order 66 and protagonist in the Coruscant Nights series.

Gilad Pellaeon
Imperial officer introduced in Timothy Zahn's Thrawn trilogy who rises to lead the Imperial Remnant.
He also appears in the Clone Wars novel
No Prisoners as a captain for the Republic.

Rosh Penin
The student of Kyle Katarn in the Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy game.

Sate Pestage
Longtime advisor and right-hand of Palpatine, serving as his advisor during his days as a Senator and Supreme Chancellor and later as the Grand Vizier of the Galactic Empire.
Following Palpatine's death at the Battle of Endor, Pestage took his place as Emperor, but was later betrayed by the other Imperial Advisors when he agreed to turn Coruscant over to the New Republic.
He was executed by Ysanne Isard's agents.

PROXY — voiced by David W. Collins
Starkiller's personal holodroid; Starkiller used PROXY for training and for sending and receiving messages.
Despite PROXY and Starkiller's friendship, PROXY would routinely attempt to kill Starkiller on a regular basis, as it was his primary directive.

Pugwis
He is the grandson of legendary podracing champion Sebulba.

== Q ==
Ulic Qel-Droma
Jedi/Sith in the Tales of the Jedi series.

Ooryl Qrygg
A Gand member of Rogue Squadron in Michael A. Stackpole's X-Wing series.

Danni Quee
New Jedi Order scientist whose research helps in the fight against the Yuuzhan Vong in the New Jedi Order series.

Sarcev Quest
Former Jedi initiate who later became Supreme Chancellor Palpatine's personal spy, and later, one of the very first Emperor's Hands following the rise of the Galactic Empire.

Malavai Quinn — voiced by Richard Teverson
The second companion that the Sith Warrior gains in the MMORPG Star Wars
The Old Republic
This character is also romance-able.

== R ==
Vuffi Raa
Lando Calrissian's droid companion in The Adventures of Lando Calrissian.

Ahri Raas
A Keshiri male.
Childhood friend of Vestara Khai.

Marka Ragnos
Dark Lord of the Sith who lived during the time of the first Sith Empire.
Following his death, he lived on as a force ghost and decreed that only the most worthy could succeed him as Dark Lord of the Sith.

Qu Rahn — portrayed by Bennett Gilroy
Jedi Master killed by Jerec in Star Wars:
Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II; his ghost appears to and guides Kyle Katarn later in the game, offering guidance.

Atton Rand — voiced by Nicky Katt
A companion of Meetra Surik who once fought in the Mandalorian Wars and Jedi Civil War.
He is the pilot of the Ebon Hawk and a playable character in Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.

Alema Rar
A female Twi'lek Jedi who falls under the control of the insectoid Killiks during the Dark Nest trilogy.
She betrays the Jedi and is nearly defeated by Leia Organa.
An increasing unstable and vengeful Alema hunts Leia throughout the rest of the Dark Nest novels and much of the Legacy of the Force series.

Kybo Ren (Gir Kybo Ren-Cha) — voiced by Don Francks
A Ropagu space pirate from Tarnoonga and main antagonist in some episodes of Star Wars: Droids.

Dash Rendar — voiced by John Cygan
A smuggler developed for the Shadows of the Empire multimedia project, prominently appearing as the protagonist of the Shadows of the Empire video game.

Gault Rennow
The second companion that the Bounty Hunter in SWTOR gains.

Revan — voiced by Rino Romano
A Jedi Knight turned Sith Lord who was betrayed by his own apprentice, Darth Malak.
He later returns to the Jedi Order and seeks out and destroys the Star Forge.
He is the main protagonist of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

Rookie One — portrayed by Jamison Jones (Rebel Assault II)
The player's character in Rebel Assault and Rebel Assault II.

Darth Ruin
Umbaran Sith Lord during the New Sith Wars.

==
S ==
Naga Sadow
Dark side magician and Dark Lord of the Sith during the first Sith Empire.
He attempted to conquer the Republic, but ultimately failed after he was betrayed by Gav Daragon.
He entered stasis on Yavin 4, and was reawakened 600 years later by Freedon Nadd, who killed him after his training was finished.
The junior novelization of The Rise of Skywalker references Sadow.

Sage-Boneria
Young female briefly mentioned in the books as the first Twi'lek Jedi.

Sarkli — voiced by Robin Atkin Downes
Former Rebel pilot who defected to the Empire, where he served on the second Death Star and participated in the Battle of Endor.
He is Admiral Piett's nephew.

Admiral Sarn — voiced by Gary Martinez
Leader of the Phantom TIE program in Star Wars: Rebel Assault II: The Hidden Empire.

Saba Sebatyne
A female Barabel who joined Luke Skywalker's reformed Jedi Order, as a Jedi Knight she served in the Yuuzhan Vong War, fighting in several important campaigns against the Yuuzhan Vong invaders.
After the war she was promoted to the rank of Jedi Master.
During the Dark Nest Crisis about 10 years after the Yuuzhan Vong War she took Leia Organa Solo as her apprentice.
After the Second Galactic Civil War Natasi Daala became Chief of State of the Galactic Alliance, Daala, a former admiral of the Imperial Navy, fostered widespread Anti-Jedi sentiment, and had Grand Master Luke Skywalker exiled from the Jedi Order and made Kenth Hamner Grand Master in his stead.

Moff Kohl Seerdon — voiced by Neil Ross
The main antagonist in Star Wars: Rogue Squadron.

Shedao Shai
A supreme commander and the advance leader for the Yuuzhan Vong invasion of the Star Wars galaxy at the beginning of The New Jedi Order series.
Corran Horn defeats Shai in a duel.

Bastila Shan — voiced by Jennifer Hale
Love interest of Revan and a playable character in Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic.
;
she rescues him after Darth Malak destroys his ship.
She is the ancestor of future Jedi Grand Master Satele Shan.

Satele Shan — voiced by Jennifer Hale
Grand Master of the Jedi Order in Star Wars
The Old Republic, a newly released video game.

Echuu Shen-Jon
Former Padawan to Mace Windu who served as a Jedi General during the Clone Wars.
Went into hiding after Order 66 was given, and re-emerged during the Galactic Civil War to fight for the Rebel Alliance.

Garris Shrike
Corellian criminal and former bounty hunter who raised Han Solo, introduced in Ann C. Crispin's 1997 novel The Paradise Snare.

Darth Sion — voiced by Louis Mellis
One of the three concurrent Dark Lords of the Sith in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.

Kal Skirata
Mandalorian mercenary hired to train clone commandos on Kamino, featured in the Republic Commando novels.

Fenn Shysa
Mandalorian mercenary who fought for the Separatists in the Clone Wars and later led a resistance against the Imperial occupation of Mandalore.
Appears in Star Wars comics and Star Wars Republic Commando (series).

Ben Skywalker
Luke Skywalker's and Mara Jade Skywalker's son.
Jedi Knight.
Former student of Jacen Solo, his cousin.
Former GAG (Galactic Alliance Guard) member.
In Fate of the Jedi: Outcast, he voluntarily accompanies his father into exile.
He proves himself as both a fighter and as an investigator.
His love interest is Vestara Khai [Sith Apprentice in Abyss-Conviction]
[Jedi Apprentice Ascension]
[Sith Lady Apocalypse].

Cade Skywalker
Descendant of Luke and Mara Jade Skywalker and protagonist of the Star Wars: Legacy comic series.
Allegedly had the power to bring back the dead (Suspicion of Darth Krayt).

Kol Skywalker
Father of Cade Skywalker.
Member of the Jedi Council during the Star Wars: Legacy comic series.

Luuke Skywalker
A clone of Luke Skywalker, created by Joruus C'baoth in the Thrawn Trilogy.
Luuke was chosen by UGO Network's Adam Rosenburg as the worst Star Wars Expanded Universe character, heavily criticising his name and calling him a "stupid clone".

Anakin Solo
Youngest son of Han and Leia Organa Solo.

Allana Solo
Jacen Solo's and Tenel Ka's daughter in the Legacy of the Force series.
Adopted by Han Solo and Leia Organa Solo at the end of Invincible and given the name Amelia in public to keep her true parentage a secret.

Jaina Solo
The daughter of Han Solo and Leia Organa Solo, and Jacen Solo's twin sister.
Jedi Knight.

Thrackan Sal-Solo
Han Solo's cousin and an antagonist in the Corellian trilogy.
His parents are Randil Sal and Tiion Gama Sal-Solo.

Kam Solusar
former Dark Jedi apprentice of Darth Vader, one of Luke Skywalker's first apprentices, and later a Jedi Master of the New Jedi Order.
He is married to Tionne, with whom he serves as one of the instructors at the Jedi academies on Yavin 4 and Ossus.

Tionne Solusar
Chief librarian of the New Jedi Order, the wife of Kam Solusar, and one of the instructors at the Jedi academies on Yavin 4 and Ossus
Uta S'orn
Senator who represented the planet Belasco in the Galactic Senate.
In the novel Jedi Apprentice: The Dangerous Rescue, she secretly worked with her friend Jenna Zan Arbor to poison Belasco's water supply; the Jedi Order foils this plot and she is sent to a prison planet.

Starkiller / Galen Marek
The former apprentice of Darth Vader in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.
Also the name of Marek's clone, who serves as the main playable character in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II.

Maarek Stele
An Imperial starfighter ace.

Captain Ozzik Sturn — voiced by Tom Kane
Commander of the Imperial forces on Kashyyyk in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.
Kidnaps Princess Leia Organa in an attempt to prevent her father from causing rebellion against the Empire.

Nomi Sunrider
A Jedi in several Dark Horse Comics Old Republic-era series.

Meetra Surik
A Jedi that followed Revan into the Mandalorian Wars, becoming a Jedi Crusader and General in Revan's army.
She ended the War by activating the Mass Shadow Generator on Malachor V, nearly destroying the planet and killing most combatants on both sides.
Her quest for redemption, regaining her connection to the Force, defeating the Sith Triumvirate and restoring the Jedi Order is told in the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords.

==
T ==
T3-M4
A loyal astromech droid companion and playable character in both Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.

Siri Tachi — voiced by Corie Henninger (in Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter)
Jedi Knight who served as Padawan to Adi Gallia and later became Master to Ferus Olin.
She was also a love interest of Obi-Wan Kenobi, the two having known each other as Padawans, but they chose to break off their relationship.
She was also a very talented pilot, but died during the Clone Wars.

Tagge family
The powerful family of Imperial general Cassio Tagge, known as the House of Tagge.
Cassio's brothers Orman, Silas, and Ulric are active in the Empire, particularly the family baron Orman, who wishes to take revenge against Darth Vader for taking his vision (for which he now has a cybernetic device), and wants to gain the emperor's favor by slaying Luke and his rebel friends.
Orman, practiced with a lightsaber, is killed by Luke when Vader casts an illusion making it appear that Orman is him.
Silas, a scientist, took over for Orman while he was temporarily incapacitated; Silas was later kept in an unconscious state by Vader.
Ulric, the youngest brother, is an Imperial general and becomes the family baron after Orman's death.
The youngest sibling, Domina, is the member of a nature cult, before being temporarily named its high priestess and trying to murder both Luke and Vader.

Tahl
First Jedi Master of Bant Eerin and a librarian of the Jedi Archives.
Love interest of Qui-Gon Jinn who later died before he could come to her rescue.

Darth Talon
Twi'lek Sith Lord who served Darth Krayt as one of his two Hands, or enforcers.
She also briefly served as Cade Skywalker's Sith Master before Cade renounced the One Sith.

Sev'rance
Tann
A female Chiss and Dark Jedi; one of Count Dooku's dark acolytes who also became a general in the Separatist Droid Army.
Was killed only a month after the beginning of the war.

Baron Merillion Tarko — voiced by Dee Bradley Baker
Imperial Moff who controls the Empire's operations on the planet Cato Neimoidia in Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II.

Darth Tenebrous
A Sith Lord and the mentor of Darth Plagueis, who was overthrown by his apprentice.

Booster Terrik
Smuggler who becomes Corran Horn's father-in-law in the X-Wing series and helps protect Jedi children in the New Jedi Order series.

Mirax Terrik
Smuggler who becomes Corran Horn's wife in the X-Wing series.

Mod Terrik
Imperial stormtrooper captain who was shot in the back by subordinate fellow stormtrooper Davin Felth while attempting to kill or capture Han Solo and his human and droid cargo.

Bria Tharen
Woman whom Han Solo rescues from slavery in The Han Solo Trilogy.
Later joins the Rebel Alliance and helps the Rebels secure the plans to the first Death Star.
After being captured by the Empire, Tharen commits suicide rather than risk betraying the Rebellion during interrogation.

Grand Moff Thistleborn
He was a loyal member of the Central Committee of Grand Moffs.
He was first featured in the novel
The Glove of Darth Vader.

Raynar Thul
Jedi whose personality is altered by joining with the Kiliks in the Dark Nest Crisis series.

Tibor
A Barabel bounty hunter who assists Zorba the Hutt.
First appears in Zorba the Hutt's Revenge.

Major Grodin Tierce
In Timothy Zahn's The Hand of Thrawn series, Tierce is the clone of a stormtrooper of the same name.
Thrawn, who created the clone as part of an experiment, added some of his own DNA in an effort to create a brilliant tactician; the project was abandoned as Tierce possessed tactical intellect with a stormtrooper's brutish approach.

Rufaan Tigellinus
Imperial Grand Admiral and Grand Moff known for his political savvy and charisma.
Following Palpatine's death at the Battle of Endor, he attempted to join the Central Committee of Grand Moffs, but changed his mind and was executed under charges of treason.

Tikkes
Separatist Council member and Senator of the CIS-allied Quarren Isolation League on Mon Calamari.
Led one of the Separatist assaults on Mon Calamari; killed by Darth Vader on Mustafar.

Sergeant Derek Torent
Senior watch trooper aboard the first Death Star.
Recognizable by their wide black helmets, a Death Star Trooper was created from Kenner's first 12 action figures in 1977; Torent was depicted on the figure's packaging, although the actual figure was dubbed Death Squad Commander and later Star Destroyer Commander.

Darth Traya — voiced by Sara Kestelman
One of the three concurrent Dark Lords of the Sith in Knights of the Old Republic.
She was formerly known as Kreia and was once a Jedi Master.

Si Treemba
One of Obi-Wan's Arconan friends.

Antinnis Tremayne
Dark Jedi Apprentice of Darth Vader; prominent member of the Inquisitorius.

Triclops
Created from extracting the DNA from Palpatine and inserted into a woman named Niobi.
He was born mutated with a third eye in the back of his head.
Thought to be more powerful than his father, he was sent into exile.
Has a son named Ken.
Later found by Luke Skywalker and joined the Alliance.
First appears in Mission from Mount Yoda.

Trioculus
The self-proclaimed son of Palpatine and the ruler of half of the Empire.
First appears in The Glove of Darth Vader.

Longo Two-Guns — voiced by Tom Kane
Crime lord who was a rival to Jabba the Hutt.
He was recognized as the "fastest blaster on Tatooine".

==
U ==
Odan-Urr
Draethos male Jedi Librarian who commissioned The Great Library of Ossus following the Great Hyperspace War, a massive library and training ground erected by the Jedi Order on the planet Ossus.
Apprentice to the Celegian Jedi Master Ooroo,
Odan-Urr studied history, ancient Jedi techniques, and the lore of the Jedi Order.
Odan-Urr was particularly interested in the history of the Sith.
Master Ooroo permitted him to study the lore of the Sith because he believed Odan-Urr would never stray from the Light Side of The Force.
Odan-Urr became a Jedi Master
four centuries after Ooroo's death and served the Jedi for another six centuries.
During this time, Odan-Urr studied the Jedi Code in depth.
He believed that the only way to truly master The Force was to first fully understand the Jedi Code.
As such, he revised the Jedi Code so that it may serve as the avenue for true mastery of The Force.

==
V ==
Mission Vao — voiced by Catherine Taber
Twi'lek companion of Revan who aided him in his quest to find and destroy the Star Forge.
She is the best friend of Zaalbar, and a playable character in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

Shado Vao
Padawan of Jedi Council member Kol Skywalker at the time of the Sith's massacre of the Jedi on Ossus in the Star Wars: Legacy comics.

Walon Vau
Mandalorian mercenary who was hired to train clone commandos on Kamino.
He was violent with his commandos.
Delta Squad is one of Vau's squads.
Featured prominently in the Republic Commando book series.

Morlish
Veed
Grand Moff and Grand Admiral who acted as Lord Regent of Darth Krayt's Sith Empire.
He served as Krayt's military commander and one of his best servants.

Tahiri Veila
Anakin Solo's best friend, love interest, a victim of Yuuzhan Vong brainwashing, and briefly Darth Caedus' apprentice.
Brought back to the light by Ben Skywalker.
She was raised by Tusken Raiders, after they killed her parents, and trained as a Jedi after being discovered by Luke Skywalker.

Ailyn Vel
Boba Fett's daughter, appears in Bloodlines.
Designs to kill her father, Boba Fett, as she believes he abandoned both her mother and she when she is captured by Jacen Solo's Galactic Army Guard.
She dies under interrogation by Jacen, further pushing him towards the Dark Side of the Force and his ultimate rebirth as Darth Caedus.

Sintas Vel
Boba Fett's wife, mentioned in Bloodlines.
Appears in Revelation.

Vergere
Jedi who lives among the Yuuzhan Vong and offers Jacen Solo insight into their culture and connection to the Force.
She is later revealed by Lumiya to have been a Sith Acolyte.

Vette — voiced by Catherine Taber
The first (romanceable) companion of the Sith Warrior class in the MMORPG video game
Star Wars:
The Old Republic (abbreviated as SWTOR or TOR by fans).

Vima-Da-Boda
Fallen Old Republic Jedi introduced in Dark Empire.
Regains her connection to the Force after aiding Leia Organa Solo in Dark Empire II and Empire's End./ V /
Lord Vitiate
Sith Lord who reconstituted the Sith Empire after its destruction in the Great Hyperspace War and went on to rule it for over 1300 years.
He is more commonly known simply as the Sith Emperor.
To the people of the Eternal Empire he is known as Valkorion.
He is the central underlying antagonist of the massively multiplayer online role-playing game Star Wars: The Old Republic.
He gets defeated by the outlander who has been proven to be the Hero of Tython.

Komari Vosa — voiced by Tamara Phillips
Dark Jedi and leader of the Bando Gora cult.
She is the main antagonist of Star Wars: Bounty Hunter.
After Jango Fett kills her, Count Dooku keeps her lightsabers and later gives them to Asajj Ventress.

==
W ==
Iella Wessiri Antilles
Corran Horn's Corellian Security Force partner who later joins the Rebellion and becomes an agent for the New Republic Intelligence Service.
She eventually marries Wedge Antilles, with whom she has two daughters, Syal and Myri.

Jaesa Willsaam — voiced by Rachael Leigh Cook
Jedi Padawan who was later turned to the dark side and became the apprentice of the Sith Warrior in Star Wars: The Old Republic.
She had a very rare and unique power, similar to Force sight, that allowed her to see the alignment and personality traits of other people.

Winter
A Rebel agent known as "Targeter" who goes on to be an aide to Leia Organa Solo and Admiral Ackbar.
In the expanded universe she marries Tycho Celchu.
She cares for Admiral Ackbar as he gets old and is with him when he dies.
She also, in the Fate of the Jedi Series, aids Jaina Solo and the Darkmeld in their missions.
She also took care of Jacen, Jaina and Anakin Solo when they were little.
They originally considered her their mother, not Leia, because she had taken care of them.

Darth Wyyrlok
Chagrian Sith Lord who served as Darth Krayt's second-in-command.
Briefly replaced Krayt as Emperor after Krayt's apparent death, but was killed by Krayt after he was resurrected.
He was the third generation of his family to take the name "Darth Wyyrlok".

==
X ==
X1
Force-sensitive clone trooper and antagonist in Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron.

X2
Force-sensitive clone trooper and protagonist in Elite Squadron.

Xanatos
In Jude Watson's Jedi Apprentice series, Xanatos is the former padawan of Qui-Gon Jinn who turned to the dark side of the Force.
Taken in for Jedi training at a higher age than most prospective Jedi, he remembered his wealthy father Crion and later became obsessed with the power of wealth and prestige.
During his final mission as a Padawan, he was reunited with his father and sided with him during a war to take control of their planet, only for his father to be killed during the final battle of the war by Qui-Gon-who had sided with the people.
Xanatos became obsessed with revenge, founding the Offworld Corporation and amassing a vast fortune and power.
He engaged Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan on numerous occasions before committing suicide in favor of being taken captive by them.
He was later revealed to have a son, Granta Omega, who disappointed Xanatos due to not being Force-sensitive.

Xasha
A character in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II
(graphic novel)
Also, nicknamed "X".
She was a female bounty hunter who, in 1 BBY, lived with Boba Fett on Nar Shaddaa and wore a customized armored-suit composed of pieces from both Mandalorian and Clone trooper armor.
As Fett's occasional partner, she followed him to Cato Neimoidia, shortly after Fett received a mission from Darth Vader to apprehend a renegade clone of the late Galen Marek
Prince Xizor
A character in Shadows of the Empire.
Little is known about his past.
He is a Falleen and head of the Black Sun criminal syndicate, depicted "like the Godfather with a reptilian overlay".
He puts a hit on Luke Skywalker, so that Darth Vader will suffer the emperor's wrath and he will become his apprentice and his grip on the galaxy will be supreme.
He has the ability to secrete pheromones, which he can use to attract women.
He tried this with only partial success on Leia.
According to Forces of Corruption, Xizor is apparently killed after the game's protagonist frames him.
The character's name was inspired by a Portuguese name, Xico.
==
Z ==
Zaalbar
Wookiee companion of Revan who aided him in his quest to find and destroy the Star Forge.
He is the best friend of Mission Vao, and a playable character in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

Demetrius Zaarin
Imperial Grand Admiral who served as the Imperial Navy's head of starfighter research and development.
He later becomes dissastified with Palpatine's rule as Emperor and attempts to overthrow him, but is stopped by Darth Vader and Grand Admiral Thrawn.

Jenna Zan Arbor
Megalomaniacal scientist who wanted to learn the secrets of the Force.
To do this, she kidnapped and tortured Jedi, and later drained their bodies of their blood.
During the Clone Wars she worked with the CIS.

Tyber Zann
Leader of the Zann Consortium, a criminal organization in the video game Empire
At War: Forces of Corruption.

Darth Zannah
First featured in Darth Bane: Path of Destruction as a 10-year-old girl, in Darth Bane:
Rule of Two she is apprenticed to Darth Bane, Finally in Darth Bane: Dynasty of Evil
she takes the mantle of Dark Lord of the Sith from her Master.

Fang Zar — portrayed by Warren Owens
Senator who represented the Sern sector during the last years of the Galactic Republic.
He was one of the senators on the Delegation of 2000.
In Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader, he went into hiding on the planet Alderaan, but was found and executed by Darth Vader.

Zekk
Jedi friend of Jacen and Jaina Solo, appearing in Young Jedi Knights,
The New Jedi Order, Legacy of the Force and Fate of the Jedi series.
He was discovered to be Force sensitive in the first series and was trained by the Shadow Academy as a Dark Jedi, but later joined the New Jedi Order.
In Fate of the Jedi, he marries Taryn Zel, despite previously expressing romantic interest in Jaina.

Zorba
the Hutt
Jabba the Hutt's father and baron of Cloud City after Lando Calrissian.
First appears in Zorba the Hutt's Revenge.

Warlord Zsinj
An Imperial general who commands a splinter faction of the former Empire in The Courtship of Princess Leia.

Commodore Zuggs
An officer in the Imperial Starfleet and also later serves under Trioculus.
First featured in The Lost City of the Jedi and later returns in Star Wars: Rebellion.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters
List of Star Wars books


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
Sansweet, Stephen J. (1998).
Star Wars Encyclopedia (1st ed.).
New York:
Ballantine.
ISBN 0-345-40227-8.
OCLC 36960986.

==
External links ==
Star Wars Characters in the Starwars.com Encyclopedia
The Star Wars series has spawned multiple live-action and animated films.
The series started with a film trilogy set in medias res—beginning in the middle of the story—which was later expanded to a trilogy of trilogies, better known as the "Skywalker saga".
The original trilogy was released between 1977 and 1983, the prequel trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a sequel trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
The original eponymous film, later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope, was followed by the sequels Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983), forming what is collectively referred to as the original trilogy.

Years later, a prequel trilogy was released, consisting of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
After Lucasfilm was sold to Disney, a sequel trilogy began with Episode VII – The Force Awakens (2015), continued with Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi (2017), and concluded with Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
In between the sequel films, two anthology films were released, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016) and Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018), both set between the prequel and original trilogies.
The combined box office revenue of the films equates to over US$10 billion, and it is currently the second-highest-grossing film franchise.
All the major theatrical live-action films were nominated for Academy Awards.
The original film was nominated for most of the major categories, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, while all sequels have been nominated for technical categories.

The first spin-off film produced was the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
In 1984 and 1985, two live-action films featuring the Ewoks were televised in the United States and released theatrically in Europe.
Several Star Wars television series have also been released.

==
Skywalker saga ==
The main Star Wars film series is a trilogy of trilogies; as it neared completion, it began to be referred to as the "Skywalker saga".
It was released beginning with the original trilogy (Episodes IV, V and VI, 1977–1983), followed by the prequel trilogy (Episodes I, II and III, 1999–2005) and the sequel trilogy (Episodes VII, VIII and IX, 2015–2019).
The first film released, Star Wars (1977), is the fourth film chronologically and was later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope.
The saga begins with Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999) and concludes with Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

The story follows each generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family and their struggle against the evil Sith lord Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
The prequel trilogy focuses on Anakin Skywalker, his training as a Jedi, and eventual fall to the dark side as Darth Vader.
The original trilogy follows his children, Luke and Leia, as they join the Rebel Alliance and battle Vader, Palpatine and his Galactic Empire.
The sequel trilogy features Ben Solo a.k.a Kylo Ren—the son of Leia and Han Solo, nephew of Luke, and grandson of Anakin—who seeks to rule the galaxy with Rey, the granddaughter of Palpatine and the last Jedi apprentice of Luke and Leia.

Each episodic film begins with an opening crawl, accompanied by the main Star Wars theme by John Williams, who composes the scores for each film.
The first six films—most notably the original trilogy—have had retroactive changes made after their initial theatrical releases.

==
Standalone films ==
As Lucas was outlining a trilogy of trilogies, he also imagined making additional movies unrelated to the Skywalker saga.
The first theatrical films set outside the main episodic series were the Ewok spin-off films Caravan of Courage: An Ewok Adventure (1984) and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985), the first of which was screened internationally after being produced for television.
After the conclusion of his then six-episode saga in 2005, Lucas returned to spin-offs in the form of television series.

An animated film, The Clone Wars (2008), was released as a pilot to a TV series of the same name.
An anthology series set between the main episodes entered development in parallel to the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney CFO Jay Rasulo as origin stories.
The first entry, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016), tells the story of the rebels who steal the Death Star plans directly before Episode IV.
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) focuses on Han's backstory, also featuring Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian.

===
Animated film ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Preceding the airing of the animated TV series in late 2008, the theatrical feature Star Wars: The Clone Wars was compiled from episodes "almost [as] an afterthought.
"
It reveals that Anakin trained an apprentice between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith; the series explains Padawan Ahsoka Tano's absence from the latter film.
The character was originally criticized by fans, but by the end of the series the character had become a fan favorite.
The film and series exist in the same level of canon as the episodic and anthology films.

===
Anthology films ===
Before selling Lucasfilm to Disney in 2012, and parallel to his development of a sequel trilogy, George Lucas and original trilogy co-screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan started development on a standalone film about a young Han Solo.
In February 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger made public the development of a Kasdan film and Entertainment Weekly reported that it would focus on Han Solo.
Disney CFO Jay Rasulo has described the standalone films as origin stories.
Kathleen Kennedy confirmed that there was "no attempt being made to carry characters (from the standalone films) in and out of the saga episodes.
"
The standalone films released so far are subtitled "A Star Wars Story".
====
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016) ====
Rogue One is set directly before Episode IV: A New Hope and focuses on the eponymous group of rebels who obtain the plans to the Death Star.
Its laser was developed by scientist Galen Erso (played by Mads Mikkelsen) after the Empire forcibly abducted him, separating him from his daughter Jyn.
Galen secretly sends a defecting Imperial pilot, Bodhi Rook, to deliver a message warning of the weapon's existence and revealing its weakness to his rebel friend Saw Gerrera.
Under the false promise of her father's liberation, Jyn agrees to help Rebel Alliance intelligence officer Cassian Andor and his droid K-2SO retrieve the message from Saw, now the paranoid leader of an extremist cell of rebels.

The idea for the movie came from John Knoll, the chief creative officer of Industrial Light & Magic.
In May 2014, Lucasfilm announced Gareth Edwards as the director of an anthology film, with Gary Whitta writing the first draft for a release on December 16, 2016.
The film's title was revealed to be Rogue One, with Chris Weitz rewriting the script, and Felicity Jones in the starring role.
Ben Mendelsohn and Diego Luna also play new characters, with James Earl Jones returning to voice Darth Vader.
Edwards stated, "It comes down to a group of individuals who don't have magical powers that have to somehow bring hope to the galaxy."
The film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated Star Wars TV series, namely The Clone Wars' Saw Gerrera, portrayed by Forest Whitaker in the film.
The movie received generally positive reviews, with its performances, action sequences, soundtrack, visual effects and darker tone being praised.
The film grossed over US$500 million worldwide within a week of its release.

====
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) ====
Solo, the second anthology film, focuses on Han Solo about 10 years before A New Hope.
After an escape attempt from his Imperial-occupied home planet of Corellia goes wrong, a young Han vows to return to rescue his girlfriend Qi'ra.
Han "Solo" joins the Imperial Academy; however, he is expelled for his reckless behavior.
Han and his newfound Wookiee friend Chewbacca resort to a criminal life, mentored by veteran smuggler Beckett.
After angering gangster Dryden Vos, Han and his company's lives depend on pulling a heist for him.
Without a ship to travel, they hire Lando Calrissian, the captain and owner of the Millennium Falcon.

Before selling Lucasfilm to Disney, George Lucas had hired Star Wars original trilogy veteran Lawrence Kasdan to write a film about a young Han Solo.
The film stars Alden Ehrenreich as a young Han Solo, Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca (after serving as a double for the character in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi), Donald Glover as Lando Calrissian, Emilia Clarke as Qi'ra, and Woody Harrelson as Beckett.
Lucasfilm originally hired Phil Lord and Christopher Miller to direct, but they were fired during principal photography, and replaced by Ron Howard.
A twist ending acknowledges one of the major story arcs of The Clone Wars and Rebels animated series, while leaving the story open ended for sequels.
====
Rogue Squadron (2023) ====
During Disney Investor Day 2020, it was announced that Patty Jenkins would direct a film titled Rogue Squadron, set to be released on December 22, 2023.
The film will be the first film in the franchise directed by a woman, and according to StarWars.com, "will introduce a new generation of starfighter pilots as they earn their wings and risk their lives in a boundary-pushing, high-speed thrill-ride, and move the saga into the future era of the galaxy."
According to Jenkins, the film will be "something original with great influence from the games and the books.
There's a lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the greatness of all of those things, but yes, it's an original story
and I'm so psyched to do it.
"
When asked who was writing the Script for Rogue Squadron, Patty Jenkins said, "I want him to have his own proper announcement, so I'm going to wait until that comes out."
==
Unspecified future films ==
Rian Johnson, the writer/director of The Last Jedi, is confirmed to write and direct the first film of a new trilogy he was outlining as of early 2019.
Though the project is still active as of February 2021, no release date has been set due to Johnson's involvement with other projects.
The trilogy will differ from the Skywalker-focused films in favor of focusing on new characters and possibly a different era than the main film franchise.
The status of the Johnson trilogy remains uncertain.

In mid-2018, Lucasfilm confirmed that multiple anthology films were in development, with their release following a hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker.
In addition to Rogue Squadron (2023), two untitled films are scheduled for mid-December 2025, and 2027.On May 7, 2019, Disney released its 2020–2027 theatrical release schedule, which revealed that Star Wars films are scheduled to hit theaters in 2023, 2025, and 2027.On September 25, 2019, it was announced that Marvel Cinematic Universe producer Kevin Feige was developing a Star Wars film with Kathleen Kennedy, with Michael Waldron set to write the screenplay.
On February 21, 2020, Variety reported that a Star Wars film from Sleight director J. D. Dillard and Luke Cage writer Matt Owens was in the early stages of development.
On May 4, it was officially announced that Taika Waititi (who directed the first-season finale of The Mandalorian) will direct a Star Wars film from a screenplay he is co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.

== Produced for television ==
The first spin-off film (also the first sequel to be released) was a holiday TV special aired in 1978.
Two live-action TV films created in the mid-1980s feature the Ewoks.

===
Star Wars Holiday Special (1978) ===
Produced for CBS in 1978, the Star Wars Holiday Special was a two-hour television special, in the format of a variety show.
Stars of the original film and archive footage from the original Star Wars film appeared alongside celebrity guest stars in plot-related skits, musical numbers, and an animated segment, all loosely tied together by the premise of Chewbacca's family waiting for his arrival for the "Life Day" celebration on his home planet, Kashyyyk.
The special was aired only once and had a widely negative reception.
The 11-minute animated sequence, which features the debut of bounty hunter Boba Fett, was positively received.
===
Ewok films ===
The Ewoks from Return of the Jedi were featured in two spin-off television films, The Ewok Adventure and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor.
Both aired on ABC on the Thanksgiving weekends of 1984 and 1985, respectively, with at least the first also being given a limited international theatrical release.
Warwick Davis reprised his debut role as the main Ewok, Wicket, in both.
They are set between the events of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Both films were released on VHS, Laser Disc, and on a double-feature DVD.
Although based on story ideas from Lucas, they do not bear Star Wars in their titles, and were considered to exist in a lower level of canon than the episodic films.
Following Disney's acquisition of the franchise, they were excluded from the canon.
The Battle for Endor would be the last live-action Star Wars television project produced by Lucasfilm until 2019's The Mandalorian.

====
The Ewok Adventure (1984) ====
In a story by Lucas and a screenplay by Bob Carrau, the Towani family spaceship shipwrecks on the forest moon of Endor.
While trying to repair their ship, the castaway family is split, when a giant creature known as the Gorax kidnaps the parents.
Taking pity on the kids, a group of native Ewoks led by Wicket decides to help little Cindel Towani and her older brother Mace, rescue their parents.
Among other stylistic choices making the film unique from the Star Wars episodes is the inclusion of a narrator.

====
Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985) ====
The sequel focuses on the Ewoks protecting their village from marauders led by the evil Lord Terak, who killed all the members of the Towani family except for Cindel, in search of a power battery.

===
A Droid Story ===
In December 2020, A Droid Story, an animated adventure film for Disney+ was announced.
According to the official Star Wars Twitter, the "epic journey will introduce us to a new hero guided by R2-D2 and C-3PO.
"

== Reception ==


===
Box office performance ===
The Star Wars films are the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time worldwide, behind the Marvel Cinematic Universe, having grossed over $10 billion at the global box office.

===
Critical response ===


===
Accolades ===


====
Academy Awards ====
The eleven live-action films together have been nominated for 37 Academy Awards, of which they have won seven.
The films were also awarded a total of three Special Achievement Awards.
The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
received Special Achievement Awards for their visual effects, and Star Wars received a Special Achievement Award for its alien, creature and robot voices.
====
Grammy Awards ====
The franchise has received a total of fifteen Grammy Award nominations, winning six.

Notes
==== Library of Congress ====
In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.
By 2015, Star Wars had been transferred to a 2K scan which can be viewed by appointment.

====
Emmy Awards ====
Caravan of Courage:
An Ewok Adventure was one of four films to be juried-awarded Emmys for Outstanding Special Visual Effects at the 37th Primetime Emmy Awards.
The film was additionally nominated for Outstanding Children's Program but lost in this category to an episode of American Playhouse.
At the 38th Primetime Emmy Awards, Ewoks: The Battle for Endor and the CBS documentary Dinosaur!
were both juried-awarded Emmys for Outstanding Special Visual Effects.
The film additionally received two nominations for Outstanding Children's Program and Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Miniseries or a Special.

==
Unproduced and rumored films ==
In early 2013, Bob Iger announced the development of a spin-off film written by Simon Kinberg, reported by Entertainment Weekly to focus on bounty hunter Boba Fett during the original trilogy.
In mid-2014, Josh Trank was officially announced as the director of an undisclosed spin-off film, but had left the project a year later due to creative differences, causing a teaser for the film to be scrapped from Star Wars Celebration.
In May 2018, it was reported that James Mangold had signed on to write and direct a Fett film, with Kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
By October, the Fett film was reportedly no longer in production, with the studio instead focusing on The Mandalorian, which utilizes a similar character design.
In August 2017, it was rumored that films focused on Jabba the Hutt, and Jedi Masters Obi-Wan and Yoda were being considered or were in development.
Stephen Daldry was reportedly in early negotiations to co-write and direct the Obi-Wan movie.
At D23 Expo in August 2019, it was announced that a streaming series about the character would be produced instead.
Felicity Jones, who played Jyn Erso in Rogue One, has the option of another Star Wars film in her contract; notwithstanding her character's fate in Rogue One, it has been speculated that she could return in other anthology films.
In 2018, critics noted that Solo was intentionally left open for sequels.
Alden Ehrenreich and Emilia Clarke confirmed that their contracts to play Han Solo and Q'ira extended for additional films, if required.
An unannounced film centered around the Mos Eisley Spaceport was reportedly put on hold or cancelled in mid-2018, leading to rumors of the cancellation or postponement of the anthology series.
Lucasfilm swiftly denied the rumors as "inaccurate", confirming that multiple unannounced films were in development.
Game of Thrones creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss were to write and produce a trilogy of Star Wars films scheduled to be released in December 2022, 2024, and 2026, which were first announced to be in development in February 2018.
However, citing their commitment to a Netflix deal, the duo stepped away from the project in October 2019.
Kennedy stated her openness to their returning when their schedules allow.
Additionally, though unconfirmed by Lucasfilm, BuzzFeed reported in May 2019 that Laeta Kalogridis was writing the script for the first film in a potential Knights of the Old Republic trilogy.
In January 2020, a film set in the era of The High Republic was rumored to be in development.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars television series


===
Parodies ===
Hardware Wars
Spaceballs
Thumb Wars
Robot Chicken Star Wars
Laugh
It Up
, Fuzzball:
The Family Guy Trilogy
Ice Pirates


==
Footnotes ==


==
References ==
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars (retroactively titled Star Wars:
Episode IV  –
A New Hope) is a 1977 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas, produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century Fox.
It stars Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Peter Cushing, Alec Guinness, David Prowse, James Earl Jones, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker and Peter Mayhew.
It is the first installment of the original Star Wars trilogy, the first of the franchise to be produced, and the fourth episode of the "Skywalker saga".

Lucas had the idea for a science-fiction film in the vein of Flash Gordon around the time he completed his first film, THX 1138 (1971) and began working on a treatment after the release of American Graffiti (1973).
Star Wars focuses on the journey of Luke Skywalker (Hamill), who along with the wizened Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi (Guinness), smuggler Han Solo (Ford), and his Wookiee companion Chewbacca (Mayhew), attempts to free Princess Leia (Fisher) from the clutches of the tyrannical Galactic Empire.
At the same time, the heroes try to deliver the plans for the Empire's planet-destroying space station, the Death Star, which are carried by the droids R2-D2 (Baker) and C-3PO (Daniels), to the Rebel Alliance, but face opposition from the Sith Lord Darth Vader (Prowse, voiced by Jones).

After a turbulent production, Star Wars was released in a limited number of theaters in the United States on May 25, 1977, and quickly became a blockbuster hit, leading to it being expanded to a much wider release.
The film opened to critical acclaim, most notably for its groundbreaking visual effects.
It grossed a total of $775 million (over $550 million during its initial run), surpassing Jaws (1975) to become the highest-grossing film at the time until the release of E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982).
When adjusted for inflation, Star Wars is the second-highest-grossing film in North America (behind Gone with the Wind) and the fourth-highest-grossing film in the world.
It received ten Oscar nominations (including Best Picture), winning seven.
In 1989, it became one of the first 25 films that was selected by the U.S. Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
At the time, it was the most recent film in the registry and the only one chosen from the 1970s.
In 2004, its soundtrack was added to the U.S. National Recording Registry, and was additionally listed by the American Film Institute as the best movie score of all time a year later.
Today, it is widely regarded by many in the motion picture industry as one of the greatest and most important films in film history.

The film has been reissued multiple times with Lucas's support—most significantly with its 20th-anniversary theatrical "Special Edition"—incorporating many changes including modified computer-generated effects, altered dialogue, re-edited shots, remixed soundtracks and added scenes.
The film became a pop-cultural phenomenon and launched an industry of tie-in products, including novels, comics, video games, amusement park attractions, and merchandise including toys, games, clothing and many other spin-off works.

The film's success led to two critically and commercially successful sequels, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983), and later to a prequel trilogy, a sequel trilogy, two anthology films and various spin-off TV series.

==
Plot ==
Amid a galactic civil war, Rebel Alliance spies have stolen plans  to the Galactic Empire's Death Star, a massive space station capable of destroying an entire planet.
Imperial Senator Princess Leia of Alderaan, secretly one of the Rebellion's leaders, has obtained its schematics, but her starship is intercepted by an Imperial Star Destroyer under the command of the ruthless Darth Vader.
Before she is captured, Leia hides the plans in the memory of astromech droid R2-D2, who flees in an escape pod to the desert planet Tatooine accompanied by protocol droid C-3PO.

The droids are captured by Jawa traders, who sell them to moisture farmers Owen and Beru Lars and their nephew Luke Skywalker.
While Luke is cleaning R2-D2 part of a holographic recording of Leia starts playing, a message for Obi-Wan Kenobi where she requests his help.
Later, after Luke finds R2-D2 missing, he is attacked by scavenging Sand People while searching for him, but is rescued by elderly hermit "Old Ben" Kenobi, an acquaintance of Luke's, who reveals that "Obi-Wan" is his true name.
Obi-Wan tells Luke of his days as one of the Jedi Knights, the former peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who drew mystical abilities from a metaphysical energy field known as "the Force", but were ultimately hunted to near-extinction by the Empire.
Luke learns that his father fought alongside Obi-Wan as a Jedi Knight during the Clone Wars until Vader, Obi-Wan's former pupil, turned to the dark side of the Force and murdered him.
Obi-Wan presents Luke with his father's old lightsaber, the signature weapon of Jedi Knights.

R2-D2 plays Leia's full message, in which she begs Obi-Wan to take the Death Star plans to her home planet of Alderaan and give them to her father, a fellow veteran, for analysis.
Although Luke initially declines Obi-Wan's offer to accompany him to Alderaan and learn the ways of the Force, he is left with no choice after discovering that Imperial stormtroopers have killed his aunt and uncle and destroyed their farm in their search for the droids.
Traveling to a cantina in Mos Eisley to search for transport, Luke and Obi-Wan hire Han Solo, a smuggler with a price on his head due to his debt to local mobster Jabba the Hutt.
Pursued by stormtroopers, Obi-Wan, Luke, R2-D2 and C-3PO flee Tatooine with Han and his Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca on their ship the Millennium Falcon.
As they reach the planet's orbit, two Star Destroyers try to intercept them, but Han is able to jump to hyperspace by reaching lightspeed.

Before the Falcon can reach Alderaan, Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin interrogates Leia about the location of the Rebels's secret base, with the threat of destroying her home planet, and, when she answers that the base is on Dantooine, he orders Alderaan destroyed simply as a show of force.
As the group arrives in the asteroid field that now stands in place of Alderaan, Han spots an Imperial TIE fighter and is taunted into chasing it and shooting it down, allowing the Falcon to be captured by the space station's tractor beam.
Inside the Death Star, Obi-Wan attempts to disable the tractor beam, and Luke persuades Han and Chewbacca to help him rescue Leia after discovering that she is scheduled to be executed.
After disabling the tractor beam, Obi-Wan sacrifices his life in a lightsaber duel with Vader, allowing the rest of the group to escape the Death Star with Leia.
Using a tracking device, the Empire tracks the Falcon to the hidden Rebel base, actually located on Yavin IV.

Leia's schematics reveal a hidden weakness in the Death Star's thermal exhaust port, which could allow the Rebels to trigger a chain reaction in its main reactor with a precise torpedo strike.
While Han abandons the Rebels after collecting his reward for rescuing Leia, Luke joins their starfighter squadron in a desperate attack against the approaching Death Star.
In the ensuing battle, the Rebels suffer heavy losses as Vader leads a squadron of TIE fighters against them, but Han unexpectedly returns to aid them in the Falcon, narrowly managing to save Luke before Vader can shoot him down.
Guided by the disembodied voice of Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke turns off his targeting computer and uses the Force to aim his torpedoes into the exhaust port, destroying the Death Star moments before it fires on the Rebel base.
In a triumphant ceremony at the base, Leia awards Luke and Han medals for their heroism.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker: A young adult raised by his aunt and uncle on Tatooine, who dreams of something more than his current life and learns the way of the Jedi.
Lucas favored casting young actors who lacked long experience.
To play Luke (then known as Luke Starkiller), Lucas sought actors who could project intelligence and integrity.
While reading the script, Hamill found the dialogue to be extremely odd because of its universe-embedded concepts.
He chose to simply read it sincerely, and he was cast instead of William Katt, who was subsequently cast in Brian De Palma's Carrie (Lucas shared a joint casting session with De Palma, a longtime friend).

Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A cynical smuggler hired by Obi-Wan and Luke
to take them to Alderaan in his ship, the Millennium Falcon, co-piloted with Chewbacca.
Lucas initially rejected casting Ford for the role, as he "wanted new faces"; Ford had previously worked with Lucas on American Graffiti.
Instead, Lucas asked Ford to assist in the auditions by reading lines with the other actors and explaining the concepts and history behind the scenes that they were reading.
Lucas was eventually won over by Ford's portrayal and cast him instead of Kurt Russell, Nick Nolte, Sylvester Stallone, Bill Murray, Christopher Walken, Burt Reynolds, Jack Nicholson, Al Pacino, Steve Martin, Chevy Chase, or Perry King (who later played Han Solo in the radio plays).

Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia: A member of the Imperial Senate and one of the many Leaders of the Rebel Alliance.
Many young Hollywood actresses auditioned for the role of Princess Leia, including Amy Irving, Terri Nunn (also a singer), Cindy Williams, Karen Allen, and Jodie Foster.
Foster, for one, turned down the role because she was already under contract with Disney and working on two films at the time.
Fisher was cast under the condition that she lose 10 pounds (4.5 kg) for the role.

Peter Cushing as Grand Moff Tarkin: Commander of the Death Star.
Lucas originally had Cushing in mind for the role of Obi-Wan Kenobi, but Lucas believed that "his lean features" would be better employed in the role of Grand Moff Tarkin instead.
Lucas commended Cushing's performance, saying "[He] is a very good actor.
Adored and idolized by young people and by people who go to see a certain kind of movie.
I feel he will be fondly remembered for the next 350 years at least.
"
Cushing, commenting on his role, joked: "I've often wondered what a 'Grand Moff' was.
It sounds like something that flew out of a cupboard."

Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi:
An aging Jedi Master and former mentor of Darth Vader who introduces Luke to the Force.
Lucas' decision to cast "unknowns" was not taken favorably by his friend Francis Ford Coppola and the studio.
Lucas felt Obi-Wan Kenobi should be played by an established actor.
Producer Gary Kurtz said, "The Alec Guinness role required a certain stability and gravitas as a character... which meant we needed a very, very strong character actor to play that part."
Before Guinness was cast, Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune (who starred in many Akira Kurosawa films) was considered for the role.
According to Mifune's daughter, Mika Kitagawa, her father turned down Lucas' offers for Kenobi and Darth Vader because "he was concerned about how the film would look and that it would cheapen the image of samurai...
At the time, sci-fi movies still looked quite cheap as the effects were not advanced and he had a lot of samurai pride.
"
Guinness was one of the few cast members who believed that the film would be successful; he negotiated a deal for 2.25% of the one-fifth gross royalties paid to Lucas, which made him quite wealthy in later life.
He agreed to take the part of Kenobi on the condition that he would not have to do any publicity to promote the film.
Lucas credited him with inspiring the cast and crew to work harder, saying that Guinness contributed significantly to the completion of the filming.
Harrison Ford said, "It was, for me, fascinating to watch Alec Guinness.
He was always prepared, always professional, always very kind to the other actors.
He had a very clear head about how to serve the story."

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A protocol droid who is "fluent in over six million forms of communication".
Daniels auditioned for and was cast as C-3PO; he has said that he wanted the role after he saw a Ralph McQuarrie drawing of the character and was struck by the vulnerability in the robot's face.
Initially, Lucas did not intend to use Daniels' voice for C-3PO.
Thirty well-established voice actors read for the voice of the droid.
According to Daniels, one of the major voice actors, believed by some sources to be Stan Freberg, recommended Daniels' voice for the role.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2:
An astromech droid who is carrying the Death Star plans and a secret message for Obi-Wan from Princess Leia.
When filming was underway in London, where additional casting took place, Baker, performing a musical comedy act with his acting partner Jack Purvis, learned that the film crew was looking for a small person to fit inside a robot suit and maneuver it.
Baker, who was 3 feet 8 inches (1.12 m) tall, was cast immediately after meeting George Lucas.
He said, "He saw me come in and said 'He'll do' because I was the smallest guy they'd seen up until then."
He initially turned down the role three times, hesitant to appear in a film where his face would not be shown and hoping to continue the success of his comedy act, which had recently started to be televised.
R2-D2's recognizable beeps and squeaks were made by sound designer Ben Burtt imitating "baby noises", recording this voice as it was heard on an intercom, and creating the final mix using a synthesizer.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca "Chewie":
A 200-year-old Wookiee, Han Solo's sidekick, and first mate of the Millennium Falcon.
Mayhew learned of a casting call for Star Wars, which was being shot in London, and decided to audition.
The 7-foot-3-inch (2.21 m)
tall actor was immediately cast as Chewbacca after he stood up to greet Lucas.
He recounted, "I sat down on one of the sofas, waiting for George.
Door opened, and George walked in with Gary behind him.
So, naturally, what did I do?
I'm raised in England.
Soon as someone comes in through the door, I stand up.
George goes 'Hmm [looked up].'
Virtually turned to Gary, and said 'I think we've found him.'
As a result of his height, Mayhew was eligible for either the role of Chewbacca or Darth Vader, ultimately choosing the former because he wanted to play a hero in the story.
Mayhew modeled his performance of Chewbacca after the mannerisms of animals he saw at public zoos.
David Prowse as Darth Vader: A Sith lord of the Galactic Empire who aims to destroy the Rebel Alliance.

James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader.
Lucas originally intended for Orson Welles to voice the character after dismissing Prowse due to his West Country English accent (which led to him being nicknamed, within the cast, as "Darth Farmer").
However, determining that Welles' voice would be too familiar to audiences, Lucas instead cast then-relatively less recognizable Jones.
Other actors include Phil Brown and Shelagh Fraser as Luke's Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru; Jack Purvis, Kenny Baker's partner in his London comedy act, as the Chief Jawa in the film; and Eddie Byrne as Vanden Willard, a Rebel general.
Denis Lawson and Garrick Hagon played rebel pilots Wedge Antilles and Biggs Darklighter (Luke's childhood friend), respectively.
Don Henderson and Leslie Schofield appear as Imperial Generals Cassio Tagge and Moradmin Bast, respectively, and Richard LeParmentier plays Admiral Motti.
Alex McCrindle portrays General Jan Dodonna, Alfie Curtis portrays Dr. Evazan, and Peter Geddis portrays Captain Raymus Antilles.
Michael Leader plays a minor role as a Stormtrooper known for accidentally hitting his helmet against a door.
Heavily synthesised audio recordings of John Wayne from earlier films were used as the voice of the Imperial spy Garindan.
Robert Clarke plays Wulff Yularen, an Imperial officer known more for his appearance in the Clone Wars.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Lucas had the idea for a space-fantasy film in 1971, after he completed directing his first full-length feature, THX 1138.
Originally, Lucas wanted to adapt the Flash Gordon space adventure comics and serials into his own films, having been fascinated by them since he was young.

He later said:

I especially loved the Flash Gordon serials ...
Of course I realize now how crude and badly done they were ...
loving them that much when they were so awful, I began to wonder what would happen if they were done really well.

At the Cannes Film Festival following the completion of THX 1138, Lucas pushed towards buying the Flash Gordon rights, but they were already tied-up with Dino De Laurentiis.
Lucas later recounted:

I wanted to make a Flash Gordon movie, with all the trimmings, but I couldn't obtain the rights to the characters.
So I began researching and went right back and found where Alex Raymond (who had done the original Flash Gordon comic strips in newspapers) had got his idea from.
I discovered that he'd got his inspiration from the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs (author of Tarzan) and especially from his John Carter of Mars series books.
I read through that series, then found that what had sparked Burroughs off was a science fantasy called Gulliver on Mars, written by Edwin Arnold and published in 1905.
That was the first story in this genre that I have been able to trace.
Jules Verne had got pretty close, I suppose, but he never had a hero battling against space creatures or having adventures on another planet.
A whole new genre developed from that idea.

Director Francis Ford Coppola, who accompanied Lucas in trying to buy the Flash Gordon rights, recounted in 1999: "
[George] was very depressed because he had just come back
and they wouldn't sell him Flash Gordon.
And he says, 'Well, I'll just invent my own.'"
He secured a two-film development deal with United Artists; the two films were American Graffiti and a space opera, tentatively titled "The Star Wars" and inspired by Flash Gordon.
Lucas would later claim that he had the idea for an original space opera long before 1971, and that he even tried to film it before American Graffiti.
Believing that the bleak tone of THX 1138 led to its poor reception, Lucas chose to make Star Wars more optimistic; this is what led to its fun and adventurous tone.

Lucas went to United Artists and showed them the script for American Graffiti, but they passed on the film, which was then picked up by Universal Pictures.
United Artists also passed on Lucas' space-opera concept, which he shelved for the time being.
After spending the next two years completing American Graffiti, Lucas turned his attention to his space opera.
He drew inspiration from politics of the era, later saying, “It was really about the Vietnam War, and that was the period where Nixon was trying to run for a [second] term.
"Lucas began writing in January 1973, "eight hours a day, five days a week", by taking small notes, inventing odd names and assigning them possible characterizations.
Lucas would discard many of these by the time the final script was written, but he included several names and places in the final script or its sequels.
He used these initial names and ideas to compile a two-page synopsis titled Journal of the Whills, which told the tale of the training of apprentice CJ Thorpe as a "Jedi-Bendu" space commando by the legendary Mace Windy.
Frustrated that his story was too difficult to understand, Lucas then began writing a 13-page treatment called The Star Wars on April 17, 1973, which had narrative parallels with Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress.
While impressed with the "innocence of the story, plus the sophistication of the world" of the film, United Artists declined to budget the film.
Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz presented the film treatment to Universal Pictures, the studio that financed American Graffiti; while they agreed it could be "a very commercial venture", they had doubts about Mr. Lucas' ability to pull it all off," and said that Lucas should follow American Graffiti with more consequential themes.
Walt Disney Productions also turned down the film.

Lucas said, "I've always been an outsider to Hollywood types.
They think I do weirdo films."
According to Kurtz, Lew Wasserman, the studio's head, "just didn't think much of science fiction at that time, didn't think it had much of a future then, with that particular audience."
He said that "science fiction wasn't popular in the mid-'70s ...
what seems to be the case generally is that the studio executives are looking for what was popular last year, rather than trying to look forward to what might be popular next year."
Kurtz said, "Although Star Wars wasn't like [then-current science fiction] at all, it was just sort of lumped into that same kind of category.
"Lucas explained in 1977 that the film is not "about the future" and that it "is a fantasy much closer to the Brothers Grimm than it is to 2001."
He added: "My main reason for making it was to give young people an honest, wholesome fantasy life, the kind my generation had.
We had Westerns, pirate movies, all kinds of great things.
Now they have The Six Million Dollar Man and Kojak.
Where are the romance, the adventure, and the fun that used to be in practically every movie made?"
Lucas would later recontextualize the discussion around the film, saying it was born out of research into "psychological underpinings of mythology", a claim that had been dismissed by Kurtz as self-aggrandizing: "
The whole idea of Star Wars as a mythological thing, I think came about because of [later Lucas] interviews that tied it to The Hero with a Thousand Faces" and by Steven Hart and Michael Kaminski: "It is here that the true origin of Star Wars comes from -- not from myth and legend, but from the 'schlock' sold on newspapers stands and played in matinees.
"There were also concerns regarding the project's potentially high budget.
Lucas and Kurtz, in pitching the film, said that it would be "low-budget, Roger Corman style, and the budget was never going to be more than—
well, originally we had proposed about 8 million, it ended up being about 10.
Both of those figures are very low budget by Hollywood standards at the time."
After Disney rejected the project, Lucas and Kurtz persisted in securing a studio to support the film because "other people had read it and said, 'Yeah, it could be a good idea.'
"
Lucas pursued Alan Ladd Jr., the head of 20th Century-Fox, and in June 1973 completed a deal to write and direct the film.
Although Ladd did not grasp the technical side of the project, he believed that Lucas was talented.
Lucas later stated that Ladd "invested in me, he did not invest in the movie."
The deal gave Lucas $150,000 to write and direct the film.
American Graffiti's positive reception afforded Lucas the leverage necessary to renegotiate his deal with Ladd and request the sequel rights to the film in August 1973.
For Lucas, this deal protected Star Wars's potential sequels and most of the merchandising profits.

===
Writing ===
Since commencing his writing process in January 1973, Lucas had done "various rewrites in the evenings after the day's work."
He would write four different screenplays for Star Wars, "searching for just the right ingredients, characters and storyline.
It's always been what you might call a good idea in search of a story.
"
By May 1974, he had expanded the treatment for The Star Wars into a rough draft screenplay, adding elements such as the Sith, the Death Star, and a general by the name of Annikin Starkiller.
He changed Starkiller to an adolescent boy, and he shifted the general into a supporting role as a member of a family of dwarfs.
Lucas envisioned the Corellian smuggler, Han Solo, as a large, green-skinned monster with gills.
He based Chewbacca on his Alaskan Malamute dog, Indiana (whom he would later use as eponym for his character Indiana Jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the passenger seat of his car.
Lucas completed a second draft in January 1975 as Adventures of the Starkiller, Episode One: The Star Wars, making heavy simplifications and introducing the young hero on a farm as Luke Starkiller.
Annikin became Luke's father, a wise Jedi knight.
"
The Force" was also introduced as a mystical energy field.
This draft still had some differences from the final version in the characters and relationships.
For example, Luke had several brothers, as well as his father, who appears in a minor role at the end of the film.
The script became more of a fairy tale quest as opposed to the action/adventure of the previous versions.
This version ended with another text crawl, previewing the next story in the series.
This draft was also the first to introduce the concept of a Jedi turning to the dark side: the draft included a historical Jedi who was the first to ever fall to the dark side, and then trained the Sith to use it.
The script would introduce the concept of a Jedi Master and his son, who trains to be a Jedi under his father's friend; this would ultimately form the basis for the film and, later, the trilogy.
However, in this draft, the father is a hero who is still alive at the start of the film.
Han Solo and Chewbacca's identities closely resembled those seen in the finished film.
According to Lucas, the second draft was over 200 pages long, and led him to split up the story into multiple films spanning over multiple trilogies.
Lucas began to rewrite this draft, creating a synopsis for the third draft.
During work on this rewrite, Lucas began researching the science-fiction genre by watching films and reading books (including J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit) and comics.
He also claims to have read scholastic works like Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, James George Frazer's The Golden Bough, and even Bruno Bettelheim's The Uses of Enchantment.
These claims are doubted by Michael Kaminski and Chris Taylor, with Kaminski pointing out that Bettelheim's book would not come out until after Star Wars was filmed and adding that "the original trilogy-Campbell connection is greatly exaggerated and practically non-existent", noting that, in fact, the second draft is "even closer to Campbell's structure" than the third.
According to Lucas, he wrote a rough draft of about 250–300 pages long, which contained the outline for the entire original Star Wars trilogy.
He realized that it was too long for a single film, and decided to subdivide it into a trilogy.
Lucas stated that the story evolved over time and that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now [in 1983] ...
As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ...
I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday."
He later described that, having split the script into three episodes, "the first part didn't really work", so he had to take the ending off of Episode VI and put it in the original Star Wars, which resulted in a Death Star being included in both films.

In 1975 Lucas suggested he could make a trilogy, which "ends with the destruction of the Empire" and a possible prequel "about the backstory of Kenobi as a young man."
After the film's smash success, Lucasfilm announced that Lucas had already written "twelve stories in the Adventures of Luke Skywalker" which, according to Kurtz, were set to be "separate adventures rather than direct sequels.
"During
the writing of the third draft, Lucas hired conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie to create paintings of certain scenes, several of which Lucas included with his screenplay when he delivered it to 20th Century-Fox.
On February 27, the studio granted a budget of $5 million; this was later increased to $8.25 million.
Subsequently, Lucas started writing with a budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the film, and (with Fox having just shut down its special effects department) reducing the number of complex special effects shots called for by the script.

The third draft, dated August 1, 1975, was titled The Star Wars From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller.
This third draft had most of the elements of the final plot, with only some differences in the characters and settings.
The draft characterized Luke as an only child, with his father already dead, replacing him with a substitute named Ben Kenobi.
This script would be re-written for the fourth and final draft, dated January 1, 1976, as The Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I:
The Star Wars.
Lucas worked with his friends Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck to revise the fourth draft into the final pre-production script.
Lucas finished writing his script in March 1976, when the crew started filming.
He said, "What finally emerged through the many drafts of the script has obviously been influenced by science-fiction and action-adventure
I've read and seen.
And I've seen a lot of it.
I'm trying to make a classic sort of genre picture, a classic space fantasy in which all the influences are working together.
There are certain traditional aspects of the genre I wanted to keep and help perpetuate in Star Wars."
During production, he changed Luke's name from Starkiller to Skywalker and altered the title to The Star Wars and later Star Wars.
He would also continue to tweak the script during filming, including adding the death of Obi-Wan after realizing he served no purpose in the ending of the film.
For the film's opening crawl, Lucas originally wrote a composition consisting of six paragraphs with four sentences each.
He said, "The crawl is such a hard thing because you have to be careful that you're not using too many words that people don't understand.
It's like a poem.
"
Lucas showed his draft to his friends.
Director Brian De Palma, who was there, described it: "
The crawl at the beginning looks like it was written on a driveway.
It goes on forever.
It's gibberish."
Lucas recounted what De Palma said the first time he saw it: "George, you're out of your mind!
Let me sit down and write this for you."
De Palma and Jay Cocks helped edit the text into the form used in the film.
===
Design ===
George Lucas recruited many conceptual designers, including Colin Cantwell, who worked on 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), to conceptualize the initial spacecraft models; Alex Tavoularis to create the preliminary conceptual storyboard sketches of early scripts; and Ralph McQuarrie to visualize the characters, costumes, props and scenery.
McQuarrie's pre-production paintings of certain scenes from Lucas's early screenplay drafts helped 20th
Century-Fox visualize the film, which positively influenced their decision to fund the project.
After McQuarrie's drawings for Lucas's colleagues Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins (who were collaborating for a film) caught his interest, Lucas met with McQuarrie to discuss his plans for the untitled space fantasy film he wanted to make.
Two years later, after completing American Graffiti, Lucas approached McQuarrie and asked him if he would be interested "in doing something for Star Wars."
McQuarrie produced a series of artworks from simple sketches; these set a visual tone for the film, and for the rest of the original trilogy.

The film was ambitious as Lucas wanted to create fresh prop prototypes and sets (based on McQuarrie's paintings) that had never been realized before in science fiction films.
He commissioned production designers John Barry and Roger Christian, who were working on the sets of the film Lucky Lady (1975) when Lucas first approached them, to work on the production sets.
Christian recounted in 2014: "George came to the set I was doing, it was an old salt factory design
and he helped me shovel salt, just like two students in plaid shirts and sneakers.
And we spoke and he looked at the set and couldn't believe it wasn't real.
"
They had a conversation with Lucas on what he would like the film to appear like, with them creating the desired sets.
Christian said that Lucas "didn't want anything [in Star Wars] to stand out, he wanted it [to look] all real and used.
And I said, 'Finally somebody's doing it the right way.
'"Lucas described a "used future" concept to the production designers in which all devices, ships, and buildings to do with Tatooine or the Rebels looked aged and dirty, as opposed to the sleeker designs of the Empire.
Lucas also wanted the spaceships to look "cobbled together, as opposed to a sleek monoshape."
Barry said that the director "wants to make it look like it's shot on location on your average everyday
Death Star or Mos Eisley Spaceport or local cantina.
"
Lucas believed that "what is required for true credibility is a used future", opposing the interpretation of "future in most futurist movies" that "always looks new and clean and shiny."
Christian supported Lucas's vision, saying "All science fiction before was very plastic and stupid uniforms and Flash Gordon stuff.
Nothing was new.
George was going right against that.
"The
designers started working with the director before Star Wars was approved by 20th Century-Fox.
For four to five months, in a studio in Kensal Rise, England, they attempted to plan the creation of the props and sets with "no money."
Although Lucas initially provided funds using his earnings from American Graffiti, it was inadequate.
As they could not afford to dress the sets, Christian was forced to use unconventional methods and materials to achieve the desired look.
He suggested that Lucas use scrap in making the dressings, and the director agreed.
Christian said, "I've always had this idea.
I used to do it with models when I was a kid.
I'd stick things on them and we'd make things look old."
Barry, Christian, and their team began designing the props and sets at Elstree Studios.
According to Christian, the Millennium Falcon set was the most difficult to build.
Christian wanted the interior of the Falcon to look like that of a submarine.
He found scrap airplane metal "that no one wanted in those days and bought them."
He began his creation process by breaking down jet engines into scrap pieces, giving him the chance to "stick it in the sets in specific ways.
"
It took him several weeks to finish the chess set (which he described as "the most encrusted set") in the hold of the Falcon.
The garbage compactor set "was also pretty hard, because I knew I had actors in there
and the walls had to come in, and they had to be in dirty water
and I had to get stuff that would be light enough so it wouldn't hurt them but also not bobbing around.
"
A total of 30 sets consisting of planets, starships, caves, control rooms, cantinas, and the Death Star corridors were created; all of the nine sound stages at Elstree were used to accommodate them.
The massive rebel hangar set was housed at a second sound stage at Shepperton Studios; the stage was the largest in Europe at the time.

===
Filming ===
In 1975, Lucas formed his own visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) after discovering that 20th Century-Fox's visual effects department had been disbanded.
ILM began its work on Star Wars in a warehouse in Van Nuys.
Most of the visual effects used pioneering digital motion control photography developed by John Dykstra and his team, which created the illusion of size by employing small models and slowly moving cameras.
George Lucas tried "to get a cohesive reality" for his feature.
However, since the film is a fairy tale, as he had described, "I still wanted it to have an ethereal quality, yet be well composed and, also, have an alien look."
He designed the film to have an "extremely bizarre, Gregg Toland-like surreal look with strange over-exposed colors, a lot of shadows, a lot of hot areas.
"
Lucas wanted Star Wars to embrace the combination of "strange graphics of fantasy" and "the feel of a documentary" to impress a distinct look.
To achieve this, he hired the British cinematographer Gilbert Taylor.
Originally, Lucas's first choice for the position was Geoffrey Unsworth, who also provided the cinematography for Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey.
Unsworth was interested in working with the director, and initially accepted the job when it was offered to him by Lucas and Kurtz.
However, he eventually withdrew to work on the Vincente Minnelli-directed A Matter of Time (1976)
instead, which "really annoy[ed]" Kurtz.
Lucas called up for other cinematographers, and eventually chose Taylor, basing his choice on Taylor's cinematography for Dr. Strangelove and A Hard Day's Night (both 1964).
On his decision, Lucas said: "I thought they were good, eccentrically photographed pictures with a strong documentary flavor.
"Taylor said that Lucas, who was consumed by the details of the complicated production, "avoided all meetings and contact with me from day one, so I read the extra-long script many times and made my own decisions as to how I would shoot the picture."
Taylor also said, "I took it upon myself to experiment with photographing the lightsabers and other things onstage before we moved on to our two weeks of location work in Tunisia.
"
Taylor was aware of the "enormous amount of process work" to follow principal photography and believed "a crisp result would help.
"During production, Lucas and Taylor—whom Kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety"—had disputes over filming.
With a background in independent filmmaking, Lucas was accustomed to creating most of the elements of the film himself.
His lighting suggestions were rejected by Taylor, who believed that Lucas was overstepping his boundaries by giving specific instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself.
Taylor refused to use the soft-focus lenses and gauze Lucas wanted after Fox executives complained about the look.
Kurtz stated that "In a couple of scenes ... rather than saying, 'It looks a bit over lit, can you fix that?', [
Lucas would] say, 'turn off this light, and turn off that light.'
And Gil would say, 'No, I won't do that
, I've lit it the way I think it should be—tell me what's the effect that you want, and I'll make a judgment about what to do with my lights.'"

Originally, Lucas envisioned the planet of Tatooine, where much of the film would take place, as a jungle planet.
Gary Kurtz traveled to the Philippines to scout locations; however, because of the idea of spending months filming in the jungle would make Lucas "itchy", the director refined his vision and made Tatooine a desert planet instead.
Kurtz then researched all American, North African, and Middle Eastern deserts, and found Tunisia, near the Sahara desert, as the ideal location.
Lucas later stated that he had wanted to make it look like outer space.
When principal photography began on March 22, 1976, in the Tunisian desert for the scenes on Tatooine, the project faced several problems.
Lucas fell behind schedule in the first week of shooting due to malfunctioning props and electronic breakdowns.
Moreover, a rare Tunisian rainstorm struck the country, which further disrupted filming.
Taylor said, "you couldn't really see where the land ended and the sky began.
It was all a gray mess, and the robots were just a blur.
"
Given this situation, Lucas requested heavy filtration, which Taylor rejected, who said: "I thought the look of the film should be absolutely clean ...
But George saw it differently, so we tried using nets and other diffusion.
He asked to set up one shot on the robots with a 300mm, and the sand and sky just mushed together.
I told him it wouldn't work, but he said that was the way he wanted to do the entire film, all diffused.
"
This difference was later settled by 20th Century-Fox executives, who backed Taylor's suggestion.
Filming began in Chott el Djerid, while a construction crew in Tozeur took eight weeks to transform the desert into the desired setting.
Other locations included the sand dunes of the Tunisian desert near Nafta, where a scene featuring a giant skeleton of a creature lying in the background as R2-D2 and C-3PO make their way across the sands was filmed.
When actor Anthony Daniels wore the C-3PO outfit for the first time in Tunisia, the left leg piece shattered down through the plastic covering his left foot, stabbing him.
He also could not see through his costume's eyes, which was covered with gold to prevent corrosion.
Abnormal radio signals caused by the Tunisian sands made the radio-controlled R2-D2 models run out of control.
Kenny Baker, who portrayed R2-D2, said: "I was incredibly grateful each time an [R2] would actually work right."
After several scenes were filmed against the volcanic canyons outside Tozeur, production moved to Matmata to film Luke's home on Tatooine.
Lucas chose Hotel Sidi Driss, which is larger than the typical underground dwellings, to shoot the interior of Luke's homestead.
Additional scenes for Tatooine were filmed at Death Valley in North America.

After two-and-a-half weeks of filming in Tunisia, production moved to Elstree Studios, near London, to film interior scenes.
Elstree was chosen as a studio over other options in Hollywood or elsewhere.
Star Wars required the use of nine different sound stages simultaneously, which most studios couldn't accommodate.
Because of stricter working conditions, filming in Britain had to finish by 5:30 pm, unless Lucas was in the middle of a scene.
Despite Lucas's efforts, his crew had little interest in the film.
Most of the crew considered the project a "children's film", rarely took their work seriously, and often found it unintentionally humorous.
Actor Baker later confessed that he thought the film would be a failure.
Harrison Ford found it strange that "there's a princess with weird buns in her hair", and called Chewbacca a "giant in a monkey suit.
"The
Elstree sets designed by John Barry, according to Gilbert Taylor, "were like a coal mine."
He said that "they were all black and gray, with really no opportunities for lighting at all."
To resolve the problem, he worked the lighting into the sets by chopping in its walls, ceiling and floors.
This would result in "a 'cut-out' system of panel lighting", with quartz lamps that could be placed in the holes in the walls, ceiling and floors.
His idea was supported by the Fox studio, which agreed that "we couldn't have this 'black hole of Calcutta.'
"
The lighting approach Taylor devised "allowed George to shoot in almost any direction without extensive relighting, which gave him more freedom."
In total, the filming in Britain took 14-and-a-half weeks.

Lucas commissioned computer programmer Larry Cuba to create the animated Death Star plans shown at the rebel base on Yavin 4.
This was written with the GRASS programming language, exported to a Vector General monitor and filmed on 35 mm to be rear-projected on the set.
It is the only computer animation in the original version of the film.
The Yavin scenes were filmed in the Mayan temples at Tikal, Guatemala.
Lucas selected the location as a potential filming site after seeing a poster of it hanging at a travel agency while he was filming in Britain.
This inspired him to send a film crew to Guatemala in March 1977 to shoot scenes.
While filming in Tikal, the crew paid locals with a six-pack of beer to watch over the camera equipment for several days.
While shooting, Lucas rarely spoke to the actors, who believed that he expected too much of them while providing little direction.
His directions to the actors usually consisted of the words "faster" and "more intense".
Kurtz stated that "it happened a lot where he would just say, 'Let's try it again a little bit faster.'
That was about the only instruction he'd give anybody.
A lot of actors don't mind—
they don't care, they just get on with it.
But some actors really need a lot of pampering and a lot of feedback, and if they don't get it, they get paranoid that they might not be doing a good job."
Kurtz has said that Lucas "wasn't gregarious, he's very much a loner and very shy, so he didn't like large groups of people
, he didn't like working with a large crew, he didn't like working with a lot of actors.
"Ladd offered Lucas some of the only support from the studio; he dealt with scrutiny from board members over the rising budget and complex screenplay drafts.
Initially, Fox approved $8 million for the project; Gary Kurtz said: "we proceeded to pick a production plan and do a more final budget with a British art department and look for locations in North Africa, and kind of pulled together some things.
Then, it was obvious that 8 million wasn't going to do it—they had approved 8 million."
After requests from the team that "it had to be more," the executives "got a bit scared.
"
For two weeks, Lucas and his crew "didn't really do anything except kind of pull together new budget figures.
"
At the same time, after production fell behind schedule, Ladd told Lucas he had to finish production within a week
or he would be forced to shut down production.
Kurtz said that "it came out to be like 9.8 or .9 or something like that, and in the end they just said, 'Yes, that's okay
, we'll go ahead.'
"
The crew split into three units, with those units led by Lucas, Kurtz, and production supervisor Robert Watts.
Under the new system, the project met the studio's deadline.
During production, the cast attempted to make Lucas laugh or smile, as he often appeared depressed.
At one point, the project became so demanding that Lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce his stress level.
Post-production was equally stressful due to increasing pressure from 20th Century-Fox.
Moreover, Mark Hamill's car accident left his face visibly scarred, which restricted re-shoots.

===
Post-production ===
Star Wars was originally slated for release on Christmas 1976; however, its production delays pushed the film's release to mid-1977.
Editor John Jympson began cutting the film together while Lucas was still filming in Tunisia; as Lucas noted, the editor was in an "impossible position" because Lucas had not explained any of the film's material to him.
When Lucas watched Jympson's rough cut for the first time, he disliked what he saw.
J. W. Rinzler wrote that "Jympson's selection of takes was questionable, and he seemed to be having trouble doing match-cuts.
"
Lucas was prepared to give Jympson more time; Jympson disliked Lucas' working style.
As production went on, Lucas still disapproved of Jympson's cut and fired him halfway through the film's production.
He commented: "Unfortunately it didn't work out.
It's very hard when you are hiring people to know if they are going to mesh with you
and if you are going to get what you want.
In the end, I don't think he fully understood the movie and
what I was trying to do.
I shoot in a very peculiar way, in a documentary style, and it takes a lot of hard editing to make it work."
After attempting to persuade Jympson to cut the film his way, Lucas replaced him with Paul Hirsch, Richard Chew and his then-wife, Marcia Lucas, who was also cutting the film New York, New York (1977) with Lucas's friend Martin Scorsese.
Richard Chew considered the film to  have been cut in a slow, by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master shots that flowed into close-up coverage.
He found that the pace was dictated by the actors instead of the cuts.
Hirsch and Chew worked on two reels simultaneously.
Jympson's original assembly contained a large amount of footage which differed from the final cut of the film, including several alternate takes and a number of scenes which were subsequently deleted to improve the narrative pace.
The most significant material cut was a series of scenes from the first part of the film which introduced Luke Skywalker.
These early scenes, set in Anchorhead on the planet Tatooine, presented the audience with Luke's everyday life among his friends as it is affected by the space battle above the planet; they also introduced the character of Biggs Darklighter, Luke's closest friend who departs to join the rebellion.
Chew explained the rationale behind removing these scenes as a narrative decision: "In the first five minutes, we were hitting everybody with more information than they could handle.
There were too many story lines to keep straight: the robots and the Princess, Vader, Luke.
So we simplified it by taking out Luke and Biggs.
"
In an examination of this early cut, which has come to be called the "Lost Cut", David West Reynolds noted the film adopted a "documentary-like" approach that emphasized "clarity, especially in geographic and spatial relationships" over "dramatic or artistic concerns".
As a result, the film was more "leisurely paced".
Reynolds estimated this early cut contained "30-40%" different footage from the final cut, with most of the differences coming from extended cuts or alternate takes rather than deleted scenes.
After viewing a rough cut, Alan Ladd likened the early Anchorhead scenes to "American Graffiti in outer space.
"
Lucas was looking for a way of accelerating the storytelling, and removing Luke's early scenes would distinguish Star Wars from his earlier teenage drama and "get that American Graffiti feel out of it."
Lucas also stated that he wanted to move the narrative focus to C-3PO and R2-D2: "At the time, to have the first half-hour of the film be mainly about robots was a bold idea.
"Meanwhile, Industrial Light & Magic was struggling to achieve unprecedented special effects.
The company had spent half of its budget on four shots that Lucas deemed unacceptable.
With hundreds of uncompleted shots remaining, ILM was forced to finish a year's work in six months.
Lucas inspired ILM by editing together aerial dogfights from old war films, which enhanced the pacing of the scenes.
Sound designer Ben Burtt had created a library of sounds that Lucas referred to as an "organic soundtrack."
Blaster sounds were a modified recording of a steel cable, under tension, being struck.
The lightsaber sound effect was developed by Burtt as a combination of the hum of idling interlock motors in aged movie projectors and interference caused by a television set on a shieldless microphone.
Burtt discovered the latter accidentally as he was looking for a buzzing, sparking sound to add to the projector-motor hum.
For Chewbacca's growls, Burtt recorded and combined sounds made by dogs, bears, lions, tigers, and walruses to create phrases and sentences.
Lucas and Burtt created the robotic voice of R2-D2 by filtering their voices through an electronic synthesizer.
Darth Vader's breathing was achieved by Burtt breathing through the mask of a scuba regulator implanted with a microphone, which began the idea of Vader having been a burn-victim, which was not the case during production.
In February 1977, Lucas screened an early cut of the film for Fox executives, several director friends, along with Roy Thomas and Howard Chaykin of Marvel Comics who were preparing a Star Wars comic book.
The cut had a different crawl from the finished version and used Prowse's voice for Darth Vader.
It also lacked most special effects; hand-drawn arrows took the place of blaster beams, and when the Millennium Falcon fought TIE fighters, the film cut to footage of World War II dogfights.
The reactions of the directors present, such as Brian De Palma, John Milius, and Steven Spielberg, disappointed Lucas.
Spielberg, who said he was the only person in the audience to have enjoyed the film, believed that the lack of enthusiasm was due to the absence of finished special effects.
Lucas later said that the group was honest and seemed bemused by the film.
In contrast, Ladd and the other studio executives loved the film; Gareth Wigan told Lucas: "This is the greatest film I've ever seen" and cried during the screening.
Lucas found the experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any approval from studio executives before.
The delays increased the budget from $8 million to $11 million.
With the project $2 million over budget, Lucas was forced to make numerous artistic compromises to complete Star Wars.
Ladd reluctantly agreed to release an extra $20,000 funding and in early 1977 second unit filming completed a number of sequences including exterior desert shots for Tatooine in Death Valley and China Lake Acres in California, and exterior Yavin jungle shots in Guatemala, along with additional studio footage to complete the Mos Eisley Cantina sequence.

Lucas had to write around a scene featuring a human Jabba the Hutt, which was scrapped due to not being in focus.
Lucas would later claim he wanted to superimpose a stop-motion creature over the actor - which he did in the 1997 Special Edition with a computer-generated version of Jabba.
However, all the script drafts (with the exception of one that Lucas doctored after the fact) describe Jabba as humanoid, the notion of him being an alien not having come up until work on the 1979 re-release, and scrapped until the Special Edition.

==
Soundtrack ==
On the recommendation of his friend Steven Spielberg, George Lucas hired composer John Williams.
Williams had worked with Spielberg on the film Jaws, for which he won an Academy Award.
Lucas originally hired Williams to consult on music editing choices and to compose the source music for the music, telling Williams that he intends to use extant music.
Lucas believed that the film would portray visually foreign worlds, but that the musical score would give the audience an emotional familiarity; he wanted a grand musical sound for Star Wars.
Therefore, Lucas assembled his favorite orchestral pieces for the soundtrack, until Williams convinced him that an original score would be unique and more unified, having viewed Lucas' music choices as a temp track.
However, a few of Williams' eventual pieces were influenced by the temp track: the "Main Title Theme" was inspired by the theme from the 1942 film Kings Row, scored by Erich Wolfgang Korngold; and the track "Dune Sea of Tatooine" drew from the soundtrack of Bicycle Thieves, scored by Alessandro Cicognini.
Lucas would later deny having ever conceived using extant music for the film.
In March 1977, Williams conducted the London Symphony Orchestra to record the Star Wars soundtrack in 12 days.
The original soundtrack was released as a double LP in 1977 by 20th Century Records.
20th Century Records also released The Story of Star Wars that same year, a narrated audio drama adaptation of the film utilizing some of its original music, dialogue, and sound effects.
The American Film Institute's list of best film scores ranks the Star Wars soundtrack at number one.

==
Cinematic and literary allusions ==
According to George Lucas, different concepts of the film were inspired by numerous sources, such as Beowulf and King Arthur for the origins of myth and religion.
Lucas had originally intended to remake the 1930s Flash Gordon film serials, but was unable to obtain the rights; thus, he resorted to drawing from Akira Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress and, allegedly, Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces.
Star Wars features many elements derived from Flash Gordon, such as the conflict between rebels and Imperial Forces, the wipes between scenes, the fusion of futuristic technology and traditional mythology, and the famous opening crawl that begins each film.
The film has also been compared to The Wizard of Oz.
The influence of The Hidden Fortress can be seen in the relationship between C-3PO and R2-D2, which evolved from the two bickering peasants, Tahei and Matashichi, and a Japanese family crest seen in the earlier film is similar to the Imperial Crest.
Star Wars also borrows heavily from another Kurosawa film, Yojimbo (1961).
In both films, several men threaten the hero, bragging about how wanted they are by the authorities, and have an arm being cut off by a blade; Kuwabatake Sanjuro (played by Toshiro Mifune) is offered "twenty-five ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the mission", whereas Han Solo is offered "Two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach Alderaan.
"
Its sequel Sanjuro (1962) also inspired the hiding-under-the-floor trick featured in the film.
Another source of influence was Lawrence of Arabia (1962), which inspired the film's visual approach, including long-lens desert shots.
There are also thematic parallels, including the freedom fight by a rebel army against an empire, and politicians who meddle behind the scenes.
Tatooine is similar to the desert planet of Arrakis from Frank Herbert's Dune series.
Arrakis is the only known source of a longevity spice; Star Wars makes references to spice in "the spice mines of Kessel", and a spice freighter.
Other similarities include those between Princess Leia and Princess Alia, and Jedi mind tricks and "The Voice", a controlling ability used by the Bene Gesserit.
In passing, Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru are "moisture farmers"; in Dune, dew collectors are used by Fremen to "provide a small but reliable source of water."
Frank Herbert reported that "David Lynch, [director of the 1984 film Dune] had trouble with the fact that Star Wars used up so much of Dune.
"
The pair found "sixteen points of identity" and they calculated that "the odds against coincidence produced a number larger than the number of stars in the universe.
"The
Death Star assault scene was modeled after the World War II film The Dam Busters (1955), in which Royal Air Force Lancaster bombers fly along heavily defended reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams, in order to cripple the heavy industry of Germany's Ruhr region.
Some of the dialogue in The Dam Busters is repeated in the Star Wars climax; Gilbert Taylor also filmed the special effects sequences in The Dam Busters.
In addition, the sequence was partially inspired by the climax of the film 633 Squadron (1964), directed by Walter Grauman, in which RAF de Havilland Mosquitos attack a German heavy water plant by flying down a narrow fjord to drop special bombs at a precise point, while avoiding anti-aircraft guns and German fighters.
Clips from both films were included in Lucas's temporary dogfight footage version of the sequence.
There are also similarities in the Death Star trench sequence to the bridge attack scene in The Bridges at Toko-Ri.
The opening shot of Star Wars, in which a detailed spaceship fills the screen overhead, is a reference to the scene introducing the interplanetary spacecraft Discovery One in Stanley Kubrick's seminal 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey.
The earlier big-budget science fiction film influenced the look of Star Wars in many other ways, including the use of EVA pods and hexagonal corridors.
The Death Star has a docking bay reminiscent of the one on the orbiting space station in 2001.
Although golden and male, C-3PO was inspired by the silver female robot Maria, the Maschinenmensch from Fritz Lang's 1927 film Metropolis.

==
Marketing ==
While the film was in production, a logo was commissioned from Dan Perri, a title sequence designer who had worked on the titles for films such as The Exorcist (1973) and Taxi Driver (1976).
Perri devised a foreshortened STAR WARS logotype consisting of block-capital letters filled with stars and skewed towards a vanishing point.
This logo design was originally conceived to follow the same perspective as the film's opening crawl.
In the end, Perri's logo was not used for the film's opening title sequence, although it was used widely on pre-release print advertising and on cinema marquees.
The logotype eventually selected for on-screen use originated in a promotional brochure that was distributed by Fox to cinema owners in 1976.
This brochure was designed by Suzy Rice, a young art director at the Los Angeles advertising agency Seiniger Advertising.
On a visit to ILM in Van Nuys, Rice was instructed by Lucas to produce a logo that would intimidate the viewer, and he reportedly asked for the logo to appear "very fascist" in style.
Rice's response to her brief was to use an outlined, modified Helvetica Black.
After some feedback from Lucas, Rice decided to join the S and T of STAR and the R and S of WARS.
Lucas signed off on the brochure in between takes while filming inserts for the Mos Eisley Cantina scene.
Gary Kurtz was impressed with Rice's logo and selected it over Perri's design for the film's opening titles, after modifying the letter W to flatten the pointed tips originally designed by Rice.
This finalized the design of one of the most recognizable logos in cinema design, although Rice's contribution was not credited in the film.
For the US release in 1977, 20th Century-Fox commissioned a promotional film poster from the advertising agency Smolen, Smith and Connolly.
They used the freelance artist Tom Jung who was given the brief of "good over evil."
His poster, known as Style ‘A’, depicted Luke Skywalker standing in a heroic pose, brandishing a shining lightsaber above his head, with Princess Leia below him, and a large, ghostly image of Darth Vader's helmet looming behind them.
Some Fox executives considered this poster "too dark" and commissioned the Brothers Hildebrandt, a pair of well-known fantasy artists, to rework the poster for the UK release.
When the film opened in British theaters, the Hildebrandts' Style ‘B’ poster was used in cinema billboards.
Fox and Lucasfilm subsequently decided that they wanted to promote the new film with a less stylized and more realistic depiction of the lead characters.
Producer Gary Kurtz turned to the film poster artist Tom Chantrell, who was already well known for his prolific work for Hammer horror films, and commissioned a new version.
Two months after Star Wars opened, the Hildebrandts' poster was replaced by Chantrell's Style ‘C’ poster in UK cinemas.
Charles Lippincott was the marketing director for Star Wars.
As 20th Century-Fox gave little support for marketing beyond licensing T-shirts and posters, Lippincott was forced to look elsewhere.
He secured deals with Marvel Comics for a comic book adaptation, and with Del Rey Books for a novelization.
A fan of science fiction, he used his contacts to promote the film at the San Diego Comic-Con and elsewhere within science-fiction fandom.

==
Release ==
While initially being released only in a limited theatrical run, Star Wars was an unprecedented success for 20th Century-Fox, soon becoming a blockbuster hit and expanding to a much wider release.
It would eventually see many theatrical and home video re-releases.

===
Premiere and initial release ===
Worried that Star Wars would be beaten out by other summer films, such as Smokey and the Bandit, 20th Century-Fox moved the release date to May 25, the Wednesday before Memorial Day.
However, fewer than 40 theaters ordered the film to be shown.
In response, the studio demanded that theaters order Star Wars if they wanted the eagerly anticipated The Other Side of Midnight based on Sidney Sheldon's 1973 novel by the same name.

Star Wars debuted on Wednesday, May 25, 1977, in fewer than 32 theaters, and eight more on Thursday and Friday.
Kurtz said in 2002, "That would be laughable today.
"
It immediately broke box office records, effectively becoming one of the first blockbuster films, and Fox accelerated plans to broaden its release.
Lucas himself was not able to predict how successful Star Wars would be.
After visiting the set of the Steven Spielberg film Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Lucas was sure Close Encounters would outperform the yet-to-be-released Star Wars at the box office.
Spielberg disagreed, and believed Star Wars would be the bigger hit.
Lucas proposed they trade 2.5% of the profit on each other's films; Spielberg took the trade, and still receives 2.5% of the profits from Star Wars.
Amidst Fox pessimism, Lucas elected to forgo his option to an extra $500,000 fee for directing Star Wars, in exchange for releasing ownership of the merchandising and sequel rights for the movie to Fox.
The Other Side of Midnight was supposed to be the studio's big summer hit, while Lucas's movie was considered the "B track" for theater owners nationwide.
While Fox requested Mann's Chinese Theatre, the studio promised that the film needed only two weeks.

Fearing that the film would fail, Lucas had made plans to be in Hawaii with his wife Marcia.
Having forgotten that the film would open that day, he spent most of Wednesday in a sound studio in Los Angeles.
When Lucas went out for lunch with Marcia, they encountered a long line of people along the sidewalks leading to Mann's Chinese Theatre, waiting to see Star Wars.
He was still skeptical of the film's success, even with enthusiastic reports from Ladd and the studio.
While in Hawaii, it was not until he watched Walter Cronkite discuss the gigantic crowds for Star Wars on the CBS Evening News that Lucas realized he had become very wealthy.
Francis Ford Coppola, who needed money to finish Apocalypse Now, sent a telegram to Lucas's hotel asking for funding.
Even technical crew members, such as model makers, were asked for autographs, and cast members became instant household names; when Ford visited a record store to buy an album, enthusiastic fans tore half his shirt off.
The film was a huge success for 20th Century-Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company.
Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price had doubled to a record high.
Prior to 1977, 20th Century-Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.
Although the film's cultural neutrality helped it to gain international success, Ladd became anxious during the premiere in Japan.
After the screening, the audience was silent, leading him to fear that the film would be unsuccessful.
Ladd was reassured by his local contacts that this was a positive reaction considering that in Japan, silence was the greatest honor to a film, and the subsequent strong box office returns confirmed its popularity.
After two weeks William Friedkin's Sorcerer replaced Star Wars at Mann's Chinese Theatre because of contractual obligations; Mann Theatres moved the film to a less-prestigious location after quickly renovating it.
When Star Wars made an unprecedented second opening at Mann's Chinese Theatre on August 3, 1977, after Sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a ceremony in which C-3PO, R2-D2 and Darth Vader placed their footprints in the theater's forecourt.
At that time Star Wars was playing in 1,096 theaters in the United States.
Approximately 60 theaters played the film continuously for over a year; in 1978, Lucasfilm distributed "Birthday Cake" posters to those theaters for special events on May 25, the one-year anniversary of the film's release.
Star Wars premiered in the UK on December 27, 1977.
News reports of the film's popularity in America caused long lines to form at the two London theaters that first offered the film; it became available in 12 large cities in January 1978, and other London theaters in February.

===
Theatrical re-releases ===
Star Wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982, with the subtitle Episode IV – A New Hope being added in 1981.
The film was digitally remastered with some altered scenes in 1997 for a theatrical rerelease, dubbed the "Special Edition."

Since its original release, the film has also been dubbed and subtitled into numerous languages.

In 2010, Lucas announced that all six previously released Star Wars films would be scanned and transferred to 3D for a theatrical release, but only 3D versions of the prequel trilogy were completed before the franchise was sold to Disney in 2012.

In 2013, Star Wars was dubbed into Navajo, making it the first major motion picture translated into a Native American language.
The texts Episode IV and A New Hope were first published on a title page for the film's script in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars, in what Kaminski calls "outright forgery", remarking that "the script itself wasn't even the authentic revised fourth draft, but more like a transcription of the finished film, edited and combined with the real fourth draft.
"
The title was changed when the film entered re-releases.
Official sources state that the change was made at the theatrical re-release of April 10
, 1981.The retronymic inclusion of subtitles brought the film into line with the introduction to its sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, which was reconcieved during rewrites as "Episode V" and eventually released as such in 1980.
Lucas claims this was intended from the beginning, and was only dropped to avoid confusing audiences: "
Star Wars was the fourth story in the saga and was to have been called 'Star Wars, Episode Four:
A New Hope'.
"
In 2014, Kurtz recalled they had toyed with the idea "of calling it Episode III, IV, or V.
" Hamill recalls having asked Lucas "Why are we doing episode four?"
and being answered that Lucas wanted "to give the audience a feeling that they'd missed something and that they were coming into the middle of this story" or that it was "the most commercial section" of the overriding story.
Kaminski, however, points out that all early drafts carry an "Episode One" subtitle, and that even early drafts of the sequel are called "Episode II."
====
Special Edition ====
After ILM used computer-generated effects for Steven Spielberg's 1993 film Jurassic Park, Lucas decided that digital technology had caught up to his "original vision" for Star Wars.
For the film's 20th anniversary in 1997, Star Wars was digitally remastered with some altered scenes and re-released to theaters, along with The Empire
Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
, under the campaign title Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition.
This version of the film runs 124 minutes.

The Special Edition contains visual shots and scenes that were unachievable in the original release due to financial, technological, and time constraints; one such scene involves a meeting between Han Solo and Jabba the Hutt.
The process of creating the new visual effects for Star Wars was featured in the documentary film, Special Effects:
Anything Can Happen, directed by Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt.
Although most changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many fans and critics believe that Lucas degraded the film with the additions.
A particularly controversial change in which a bounty hunter named Greedo shoots first when confronting Han Solo has inspired T-shirts bearing the phrase "Han Shot First.
"Star
Wars required extensive recovery of misplaced footage and restoration of the whole film before Lucas's Special Edition modifications could be attempted.
It was discovered that in addition to the negative motion picture stocks commonly used on feature films, Lucas had also used Color Reversal Internegative (CRI) film, a reversal stock subsequently discontinued by Kodak.
CRI proved to deteriorate faster than negative stocks did, although it theoretically was of higher quality, as it saved two generations (an interpositive followed by an internegative), where employed.
Because of this, the entire composited negative had to be disassembled, and the CRI portions cleaned separately from the negative portions.
Once the cleaning was complete, the film was scanned into the computer for restoration.
In many cases, entire scenes had to be reconstructed from their individual elements.
Digital compositing technology allowed the restorers to correct for problems such as misalignment of mattes and "blue-spill.
"In
1989
, the 1977 theatrical version of Star Wars was selected for preservation by the National Film Registry of the United States Library of Congress.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Edition were initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical release.
By 2015, this copy had been transferred to a 2K scan, now available to be viewed by appointment.

===
Home media ===
In the United States, France, West Germany, Italy and Japan, parts of or the whole film were released on Super 8.
The whole film was released for all these countries (including subtitled silent editions and an American Spanish-language edition), except for Italy, where the film (titled "Guerre stellari") was released by IE International as eight brief scenes: Battaglia spaziale ("Space battle", the Battle of Yavin), Duello col laser ("Duel with the laser", Obi-Wan and Darth Vader's duel), La cattura dell'astronave
("The capture of the spaceship"), La liberazione di Leia ("Leia's liberation", the adventure on the Death Star), Messaggio dallo spazio ("Message from space", Leia giving R2-D2 the plans), SOS nella galassia ("SOS in the galaxy") and Trappola mortale ("Deadly trap", the Falcon being captured by the Death Star).
A full Super 8 version of the film was only made available in Italy as a pirate six-reel set.
Star Wars debuted on Betamax, CED, LaserDisc, Video 2000, and VHS between the 1980s and 1990s by CBS/Fox Video.
The final issue of the original theatrical release (pre-Special Edition) to VHS format occurred in 1995, as part of "Last Chance to Own the Original" campaign, available as part of a trilogy set and as a standalone purchase.
The film was released for the first time on DVD on September 21, 2004, in a box set with The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of supplementary material.
The films were digitally restored and remastered, and more changes were made by Lucas.
The DVD features a commentary track from Lucas, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher.
The bonus disc contains the documentary Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy, three featurettes, teasers, theatrical trailers, TV spots, still galleries, an exclusive preview of Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, a playable Xbox demo of the LucasArts game Star Wars: Battlefront, and a making-of documentary on the Episode III video game.
The set was reissued in December 2005 as part of a three-disc limited edition boxed set without the bonus disc.
The trilogy was re-released on separate two-disc limited edition DVD sets from September 12 to December 31, 2006, and again in a limited edition tin box set on November 4, 2008; the original versions of the films were added as bonus material.
The release was met with criticism as the unaltered versions were from the 1993 non-anamorphic LaserDisc masters and were not re-transferred using modern video standards.
The transfer led to problems with colors and digital image jarring.
All six Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011 in three different editions, with A New Hope available in both a box set of the original trilogy and with all six films on Star Wars:
The Complete Saga, which includes nine discs and over 40 hours of special features.
The original theatrical versions of the films were not included in the box set.
New changes were made to the films, provoking mixed responses.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Fox released A New Hope for digital download on April 10, 2015.
In December 2016, Rogue One director Gareth Edwards revealed that Lucasfilm had recently completed a 4K restoration of Star Wars, but did not elaborate on whether the restored version was based on the 1977 original or a subsequent re-release.
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued the film on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars remains one of the most financially successful films of all time.
The film opened on a Wednesday in 32 theaters expanding to 43 screens on the Friday and earning $2,556,418 in its first six days to the end of the Memorial Day weekend ($10.8 million in 2019 dollars).
Per Variety's weekly box office charts, the film was number one at the US box office for its first three weeks.
It was replaced by The Deep but gradually added screens and returned to number one in its seventh week, building up to $7 million weekends as it entered wide release ($29.5 million in 2019 dollars) and remained number one for the next 15 weeks.
It replaced Jaws as the highest-earning film in North America just six months into release, eventually earning over $220 million during its initial theatrical run ($928 million in 2019 dollars).
Star Wars entered international release towards the end of the year, and in 1978 added the worldwide record to its domestic one, earning $410 million in total.
Its biggest international market was Japan, where it grossed $58.4 million.
On July 21, 1978 while still in current release in 38 theaters in the U.S., the film expanded into a 1,744 theater national saturation windup of release and set a new U.S. weekend record of $10,202,726.
The gross prior to the expansion was $221,280,994.
The expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take its gross to $265,055,905.
Reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought its cumulative gross in the U.S and Canada to $323 million, and extended its global earnings to $530 million.
The film remained the highest-grossing film of all time until E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial broke that record in 1983.The release of the Special Edition in 1997 was the highest-grossing reissue of all-time with a gross of $138.3 million, bringing its total gross in the United States and Canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the all-time number one spot.
Internationally, the reissue grossed $117.2 million, with $26 million from the United Kingdom and $15 million from Japan.
In total, the film has grossed over $775 million worldwide.
Adjusted for inflation, it had earned over $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011 prices, which saw it ranked as the third-highest-grossing film at the time, according to Guinness World Records.
At the North American box office, it ranks second behind Gone with the Wind on the inflation-adjusted list.

===
Critical response ===
The film was met with critical acclaim upon its release.
In his 1977 review, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times called the film "an out-of-body experience," compared its special effects to those of 2001: A Space Odyssey, and opined that the true strength of the film was its "pure narrative."
Vincent Canby of The New York Times called the film "the movie that's going to entertain a lot of contemporary folk who have a soft spot for the virtually ritualized manners of comic-book adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most beautiful movie serial ever made."
A.D. Murphy of Variety described the film as "magnificent" and said George Lucas had succeeded in his attempt to create the "biggest possible adventure fantasy" based on the serials and older action epics from his childhood.
Writing for The Washington Post, Gary Arnold gave the film a positive review, writing that the film "is a new classic in a rousing movie tradition: a space swashbuckler."
However, the film was not without its detractors: Pauline Kael of The New Yorker criticized Star Wars, stating that "there's no breather in the picture, no lyricism", and that it had no "emotional grip."
John Simon of New York magazine also panned the film and wrote, "Strip Star Wars of its often striking images and its highfalutin scientific jargon, and you get a story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming banality."
Stanley Kauffmann, reviewing the film in The New Republic, opined that it "was made for those (particularly males) who carry a portable shrine within them of their adolescence, a chalice of a Self that was Better
Then, before the world's affairs or—in any complex way—sex intruded.
"When
Star Wars opened in the UK, stating that Lucas's earlier films were better, Derek Malcolm of The Guardian concluded that it "plays enough games to satisfy the most sophisticated."
The Daily Telegraph's science correspondent Adrian Berry said that Star Wars "is the best such film since 2001 and in certain respects it is one of the most exciting ever made."
He described the plot as "unpretentious and pleasantly devoid of any 'message.'"

A few critics found fault in the lack of representation of African Americans in the space fantasy, with a writer for New Journal and Guide calling it "one of the most racist movies ever produced", pointing out that "the force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the voice of a black man."
Lucas felt hurt at the accusations.
The film continues to receive critical acclaim from modern critics.
The film review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes indicates a 92% approval rating based on 125 reviews with an overall rating of 8.81/10.
Its consensus states in summary, "A legendarily expansive and ambitious start to the sci-fi saga
, George Lucas opened our eyes to the possibilities of blockbuster filmmaking and things have never been the same."
Metacritic reports a weighted average score of 90 out of 100 based on 24 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim.
"
In his 1997 review of the film's 20th anniversary release, Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune gave the film four out of four stars, saying, "A grandiose and violent epic with a simple and whimsical heart."
A San Francisco Chronicle staff member described the film as "a thrilling experience."

In 2001 Matt Ford of the BBC awarded the film five out of five stars and wrote, "Star Wars isn't the best film ever made, but it is universally loved."
CinemaScore reported that audiences for Star Wars's 1999 re-release gave the film a "A+" grade.
Gene Siskel, writing for the Chicago Tribune in 1999, said, "What places it a sizable cut above the routine is its spectacular visual effects, the best since Stanley Kubrick's 2001."
Andrew Collins of Empire magazine awarded the film five out of five and said, "Star Wars' timeless appeal lies in its easily identified, universal archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the 70s by the special effects, so be it."
In his 2009 review, Robert Hatch of The Nation called the film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned.
I doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the imitations must already be on the drawing boards.
"
In a more critical review, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader stated, "None of these characters has any depth, and they're all treated like the fanciful props and settings."
Peter Keough of the Boston Phoenix said, "Star Wars is a junkyard of cinematic gimcracks not unlike the Jawas' heap of purloined, discarded, barely functioning droids."
===
Accolades ===
The film garnered numerous accolades after its release.
Star Wars won six competitive Academy Awards at the 50th Academy Awards: Best Art Direction, Best Costume Design, Best Film Editing, Best Original Score, Best Sound and Best Visual Effects.
A Special Achievement for Sound Effects Editing went to sound designer Ben Burtt and a Scientific and Engineering Award went to John Dykstra for the development of the Dykstraflex Camera (shared with Alvah J. Miller and Jerry Jeffress, who were both granted for the engineering of the Electronic Motion Control System).
Additional nominations included Alec Guinness for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, which went to Jason Robards for Julia and George Lucas for Best Original Screenplay, Best Director, and Best Picture, which were instead awarded to Woody Allen's Annie Hall.
At the 35th Golden Globe Awards, the film was nominated for Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor (Alec Guinness), and it won the award for Best Score.
It received six British Academy Film Awards nominations: Best Film, Best Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Production/Art Design, Best Sound, and Best Score; the film won in the latter two categories.
John Williams's soundtrack album won the Grammy Award for Best Album of Original Score for a Motion Picture or Television Program, and the film attained the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.
The film also received twelve nominations at the Saturn Awards, winning nine:
Best Science Fiction Film, Best Direction and Best Writing for George Lucas, Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, Best Music for John Williams, Best Costume for John Mollo, Best Make-up for Rick Baker and Stuart Freeborn, Best Special Effects for John Dykstra and John Stears, and Outstanding Editing for Paul Hirsch, Marcia Lucas and Richard Chew.
==
Legacy ==
Star Wars launched the careers of many of the film's actors: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia), Peter Mayhew (Chewbacca), Anthony Daniels (C-3PO), and James Earl Jones (voice of Darth Vader).
Ford, who subsequently starred in the Indiana Jones series (1981–present), Blade Runner (1982), and Witness (1985) after working on the film, told the Daily Mirror that Star Wars "boosted my career", and said, "I think the great luck of my career is that I've made these family movies which are introduced to succeeding generations of kids by their families at the time it seems appropriate.
"The
film has spawned a series of films consisting of three trilogies (including the original film), anthology films and an extensive media franchise called the Star Wars expanded universe including books, television series, computer and video games, and comic books.
The original Star Wars trilogy is considered one of the best film trilogies in history.
All of the main films have been box office successes, with the overall box office revenue generated by the Star Wars films (including the animated The Clone Wars) totaling over $10.1 billion, making it the second highest-grossing film series as of 2019.The film also spawned the Star Wars Holiday Special, which debuted on CBS on November 17, 1978 and is often considered a failure; Lucas himself disowned it.
The special has never been aired after its original broadcast, and it has never been officially released on home video.
However, many bootleg copies exist, and the special has consequently become something of an underground legend.
A radio drama adaptation of the film was broadcast on the American National Public Radio network in 1981.
The adaptation was written by Brian Daley and directed by John Madden, and was produced with cooperation from George Lucas, who donated the rights to NPR.
John Williams's music and Ben Burtt's sound design were retained for the show, and Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker) and Anthony Daniels (C-3PO) reprised their roles.
The radio drama narrative began with a version of the backstory to the film which relates Princess Leia's acquisition of the secret Death Star plans.
It also featured scenes not seen in the final cut of the film, such as Luke Skywalker's observation of the space battle above Tatooine through binoculars, a skyhopper race, and Darth Vader's interrogation of Princess Leia.
The radio version was originally considered to be part of the official Star Wars canon, but has since been supplanted by revised canonical narratives.

===
In popular culture ===
Star Wars and its ensuing film installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a wide range of media.
Hardware Wars, released in 1978, was one of the first fan films to parody Star Wars.
It received positive critical reaction, went to earn over $1 million, and is one of Lucas's favorite Star Wars spoofs.
Writing for The New York Times, Frank DeCaro said, "Star Wars littered pop culture of the late 1970s with a galaxy of space junk."
He cited Quark (a short-lived 1977 sitcom that parodies the science fiction genre) and Donny & Marie (a 1970s variety show that produced a 10-minute musical adaptation of Star Wars guest starring Daniels and Mayhew) as "television's two most infamous examples."
Mel Brooks's Spaceballs, a satirical comic science fiction parody, was released in 1987 to mixed reviews.
Lucas permitted Brooks to make a spoof of the film under "one incredibly big restriction: no action figures.
"Contemporary animated comedy TV series Family Guy, Robot Chicken, and
The Simpsons have produced episodes satirizing the film series.
Star Wars, together with Lucas, is the subject of the 2010 documentary film
The People vs. George Lucas that details the issues of filmmaking and fanaticism pertaining to the film franchise and its creator.
Many elements of the film have also endured presence in popular culture.
The iconic weapon of choice of the Jedi, the lightsaber, was voted as the most popular weapon in film history in a survey of approximately 2,000 film fans.
Characters such as Darth Vader, Han Solo, and Yoda have become iconic, and all three were named in the top twenty of the British Film Institute's "Best Sci-Fi Characters of All-Time" list.
The expressions "Evil empire" and "May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon.
A pun on the latter phrase has led to May 4 being regarded by many fans of the franchise as an unofficial Star Wars Day.
To commemorate the film's 30th anniversary in May 2007, the United States Postal Service issued a set of 15 stamps depicting the characters of the franchise.
Approximately 400 mailboxes across the country were also designed to look like R2-D2.
===
Cinematic influence ===
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.
"
It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures.
The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.
Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.
Filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by Star Wars include James Cameron, J.J. Abrams, Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Gareth Edwards, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Peter Jackson, Joss Whedon, Christopher Nolan, Ridley Scott, John Singleton, and Kevin Smith.
Scott, Cameron, and Jackson were influenced by Lucas's concept of the "used future" (where vehicles and culture are obviously dated) and extended the concept for their films, such as Scott's science fiction films Alien (1979) and Blade Runner (1982), Cameron's acclaimed sequel Aliens (1986) and his earlier breakthrough film
The Terminator (1984).
Jackson used the concept for his production of The Lord of the Rings trilogy to add a sense of realism and believability.
Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film, Inception.
Some critics have blamed Star Wars, as well as Jaws, for ruining Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy.
On a late 1977 episode of Sneak Previews, Gene Siskel expressed concern that, "It's so successful and so mindless fun
that I hope Hollywood doesn't forget that there are people who like to see serious pictures too.
"
Another critic, Peter Biskind, later complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies...
They marched backward through the looking-glass.
"
In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth."
===
Recognition ===
In its May 30, 1977 issue, the film's year of release, Time magazine named Star Wars the "Movie of the Year.
"
The publication said it was a "big early supporter" of the vision which would become Star Wars.
In an article intended for the cover of the issue, Time's Gerald Clarke wrote that Star Wars is "a grand and glorious film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the best movie of the year so far.
The result is a remarkable confection: a subliminal history of the movies, wrapped in a riveting tale of suspense and adventure, ornamented with some of the most ingenious special effects ever contrived for film.
"
Each of the subsequent films of the Star Wars saga has appeared on the magazine's cover.

Star Wars was voted the second most popular film by Americans in a 2008 nationwide poll conducted by the market research firm, Harris Interactive.
Star Wars has also been featured in several high-profile audience polls: in 1997, it ranked as the 10th Greatest American Film on the Los Angeles Daily News Readers' Poll; in 2002, the film and its sequel
The Empire Strikes Back were voted as the greatest films ever made in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Films poll; in 2011, it ranked as Best Sci-Fi Film on Best in Film:
The Greatest Movies of Our Time, a primetime special aired by ABC that counted down the best films as chosen by fans, based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People magazine; in 2014 the film placed 11th in a poll undertaken by The Hollywood Reporter, which balloted every studio, agency, publicity firm, and production house in the Hollywood region.
Reputable publications also have included Star Wars in their best films lists: in 2008, Empire magazine ranked Star Wars at No.
22 on its list of the "500 Greatest Movies of All Time"; in 2010, the film ranked among the "All-Time 100" list of the greatest films as chosen by Time magazine film critic Richard Schickel; the film was also placed on a similar list created by The New York Times, "The New York Times Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies
Ever Made"; in 2012, the film was included in Sight & Sound's prestigious decennial critics poll "Critics' Top 250 Films", ranking at 171st on the list, and in their directors poll at 224th.
Lucas's original screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time.
In 1989, the United States Library of Congress named Star Wars among its first selections to the National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"; at the time, it was the most recent film to be selected and it was the only film from the 1970s to be chosen.
Although Lucas declined to provide the Library with a workable copy of the original film upon request (instead offering the Special Edition), a viewable scan was made of the original copyright deposit print.
The soundtrack was added to the United States National Recording Registry 15 years later (in 2004).
The lack of a commercially available version of the 1977 original theatrical edit of the film since early '80s VHS releases has spawned numerous restorations by disgruntled fans over the years, such as Harmy's Despecialized Edition.
In addition to the film's multiple awards and nominations, Star Wars has also been recognized by the American Film Institute on several of its lists.
The film ranks first on 100 Years of Film Scores, second on Top 10 Sci-Fi Films, 15th on 100 Years...
100 Movies (ranked 13th on the updated 10th anniversary edition), 27th on 100 Years...100 Thrills, and 39th on 100 Years...
100 Cheers.
In addition, the quote "May the Force be with you" is ranked eighth on 100 Years...
100 Movie Quotes, and Han Solo and Obi-Wan Kenobi are ranked as the 14th and 37th greatest heroes respectively on 100 Years...
100 Heroes & Villains.
==
Merchandising ==
Little Star Wars merchandise was available for several months after the film's debut, as only Kenner Products had accepted marketing director Charles Lippincott's licensing offers.
Kenner responded to the sudden demand for toys by selling boxed vouchers in its "empty box" Christmas campaign.
Television commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a "Star Wars Early Bird Certificate Package" could be redeemed for four action figures between February and June 1978.
Jay West of the Los Angeles Times said that the boxes in the campaign "became the most coveted empty box[es] in the history of retail.
"
In 2012, the Star Wars action figures were inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame.
The novelization of the film was published as Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker in December 1976, six months before the film was released.
The credited author was George Lucas, but the book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster.
Marketing director Charles Lippincott secured the deal with Del Rey Books to publish the novelization in November 1976.
By February 1977, a half million copies had been sold.
Foster also wrote the sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978) to be adapted as a low-budget film if Star Wars was not a financial success.
Marvel Comics also adapted the film as the first six issues of its licensed Star Wars comic book, with the first issue sold in April 1977.
Roy Thomas was the writer and Howard Chaykin
was the artist of the adaptation.
Like the novelization, it contained certain elements, such as the scene with Luke and Biggs, that appeared in the screenplay but not in the finished film.
The series was so successful that, according to Jim Shooter, it "single-handedly saved Marvel.
"
In 2013, Dark Horse Comics published a comic adaption of the original screenplay's plot.
Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set.
Released in 1979, the 24-page Star Wars read-along book was accompanied by a 33⅓ rpm 7-inch phonograph record.
Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the movie with an abridged and condensed version of the story.
The record was produced by Buena Vista Records, and its content was copyrighted by Black Falcon, Ltd., a subsidiary of Lucasfilm "formed to handle the merchandising for Star Wars."
The Story of Star Wars was a 1977 record album presenting an abridged version of the events depicted in Star Wars, using dialogue and sound effects from the original film.
The recording was produced by George Lucas and Alan Livingston, and was narrated by Roscoe Lee Browne.
The script was adapted by E. Jack Kaplan and Cheryl Gard.
An audio CD boxed set of the Star Wars radio series was released in 1993, containing the original 1981 radio drama along with the radio adaptations of the sequels
, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.

==
Sequels ==
A sequel
, The Empire Strikes Back, was released in 1980.
In 1983, the final installment of the trilogy, Return of the Jedi, was released.
A prequel trilogy was released between 1999 and 2005, and following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, a sequel trilogy was released between 2015 and 2019.
Spin-off films Rogue One and Solo
: A Star Wars Story are set before and explore the backstory to the original film.
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==


==
Further reading ==
Paul Duncan (2020): The Star Wars Archives.
1977–1983, Taschen GmbH
; Anniversary edition, ISBN 978-3836581172
George Lucas (Alan Dean Foster), Donald F. Glut & James Kahn (2017): Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (Novelizations), Arrow, ISBN 978-1784759384
J. W. Rinzler (2007).
The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film, Quarto Publishing, ISBN 978-1781311905
Bailey, T. J. (2005).
Devising a Dream:
A Book of Star Wars Facts and Production Timeline.
Louisville, KY:
Wasteland Press.
ISBN 1-933265-55-8.

Blackman, W. Haden (2004).
The New Essential Guide to Weapons and Technology, Revised Edition (Star Wars).
New York: Del Rey.
ISBN 0-345-44903-7.

Steven A. Galipeau (2001).
The Journey of Luke Skywalker:
An Analysis of Modern Myth and Symbol, Open Court, ISBN
978-0812694321
Sansweet, Stephen (1992).
Star Wars:
From Concept to Screen to Collectible.
San Francisco:
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 0-8118-0101-2.
==
External links ==
Star Wars essay [1] by Matt Zoller Seitz at National Film Registry
Star Wars essay
[2] by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy:
The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010 ISBN 0826429777,
pages 740 & 741
Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars at AllMovie
Star Wars at the American Film Institute Catalog
Star Wars, Episode IV:
A New Hope (1977) at Filmsite.org
Star Wars at IMDb
Star Wars at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars:
Episode IV
A New Hope on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Multiple global locations were used for filming locations during the production of the Star Wars films to provide the setting for alien planets in the Star Wars Universe.

Most locations were used to shoot principal photography with actors; more recently as digital filmmaking has become more common, some prequel trilogy locations were shot with no actors present and digitally composited into the films to provide a backdrop of a story setting.

In addition to filming locations, a list of film studios is also included for reference.

== Locations ==
Listed below are locations used for filming of the following Star Wars films:
Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977)
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983)
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005)
Star Wars:
Episode VII –
The Force Awakens (2015)
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016)
Star Wars:
Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi (2017)
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018)
Star Wars:
Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker (2019)


===
Map ===


===
Location filming ===
==
Studios ==


==
See also ==
Behind-the-scenes documentaries:
The Making of Star Wars
SP FX:
The Empire Strikes Back
Classic Creatures:
Return of the Jedi
From Star Wars to Jedi:
The Making of a Saga
Empire of Dreams
Star Wars:
The Legacy Revealed


==
References ==
Notes
Sources
Howard, Marcus Hearn ; foreword by Ron (2005).
The Cinema of George Lucas.
New York: Abrams.
ISBN 0810949687.

==
External links ==
Star Wars Locations and their GPS coordinates - Article featuring every filming location, Lat/Long coordinates and scene comparisons
Star Wars Locations - fan site devoted to Star Wars filming locations
Star Wars filming locations category on Wookieepedia
Star Wars filming locations category on 501st
Legion Spanish Garrison
Filming locations on the Internet Movie Database:
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
Episode IV:
A New Hope
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi
Episode VII:
The Force Awakens
George Lucas's filming locations on Movie-Locations.com
Below is a list of actors and actresses that are part of the voice cast of the American 3D CGI animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars and its corresponding film.

The show's main voice actors have included: Matt Lanter, James Arnold Taylor, Ashley Eckstein, Dee Bradley Baker, Catherine Taber, Tom Kane, Anthony Daniels, Ben Burtt, Ian Abercrombie, Corey Burton, Terrence C. Carson, Nika Futterman, and Matthew Wood.

Actors from the live-action films who returned to reprise their roles for the show include: Wood as the B1 Battle Droids and General Grievous, Ahmed Best as Jar Jar Binks (although Binks was voiced by Phil LaMarr in three early episodes), Daniels as C-3PO, Burtt as R2-D2, Chewbacca, and Darth Vader's breaths, Daniel Logan as the young Clone Trooper Cadets and Boba Fett, Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, and Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker, respectively.
Additionally, Samuel L. Jackson and Christopher Lee reprised the roles of Mace Windu and Count Dooku in the animated film, respectively, but not in the television series.

Actors who appear by original recordings from Revenge of the Sith to represent their characters in the final season episode "Shattered" include: Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, Jackson as Mace Windu and Ian McDiarmid as Palpatine.
The characters of Ahsoka and Darth Maul appear by motion capture of Lauren Mary Kim and Ray Park—who reprises his role from The Phantom Menace—in the episode "The Phantom Apprentice", whilst Eckstein and Sam Witwer retain the voice talent.

== Cast ==


==
Notes ==


==
See also ==
List of Star Wars cast members
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Full cast and crew of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at the Internet Movie Database
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is an American 3D CGI animated television series created by Lucasfilm Animation, Lucasfilm Animation Singapore, and CGCG Inc.
On August 15, 2008, the debut film was released in theaters; it served as the introduction of the series.
The series made its debut on the American Cartoon Network on October 3, 2008.
It is set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy during the three-year interim between Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (the same time period as the previous 2003 Clone Wars series).
Each episode has a running time of 22 minutes, filling a half-hour time slot.
Star Wars creator George Lucas originally claimed that at least 100 episodes would be produced.
During the course of the series, 133 episodes of Star Wars: The Clone Wars were released over seven seasons, between October 3, 2008, and May 4, 2020.

On March 11, 2013, Lucasfilm announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down", effectively canceling the series as Lucasfilm ended its contract with Cartoon Network following its acquisition by Disney.
The unreleased episodes that had already been produced were referred to at the time as "bonus content".
On January 16, 2014, the German television network Super RTL announced their plans to air these episodes as a sixth season, which consisted of 13 episodes.
Season 6, along with the other seasons and the feature film, were made available on Netflix on March 7, 2014.In July 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes on Disney+.
The new episodes served as the series' final season, which premiered on February 21, 2020 and concluded the series on May 4, 2020.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Film (2008) ===
As a lead-in to the TV series of the same name, the film was released theatrically on August 15, 2008, and was distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures.
Though critical reception was negative, the film was a box-office success and grossed $68.3 million worldwide against an $8.5 million budget.

===
Season 1 (2008–09) ===
The premiere episodes of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars aired on October 3, 2008, and set a new record with Cartoon Network as their most-watched series premiere, attracting 3.992 million total viewers.
The season finale, "Hostage Crisis", was broadcast on March 20, 2009, and the original broadcast received 3.297 million viewers.
Season 1 depicted the attempts of the Republic and the Separatists to gain the allegiance of many planets and moons.

===
Season 2:
Rise of the Bounty Hunters (2009–10) ===
The season two premiere, "Holocron Heist", was broadcast on October 2, 2009 and attracted 2.581 million viewers.
Episode 15 was first released in Canada.
Episodes 16–21 were released in the UK before airing in the US.
In season 2, the Sith resort to hiring bounty hunters and mercenaries to steal objects and intel or to assassinate targets for them.
Meanwhile, the Jedi lead the Republic forces in an assault on the primary battle droid manufacturing facility.

The one-hour season finale combined of "R2 Come Home" and "Lethal Trackdown" was broadcast on April 30, 2010 and the original broadcast received 2.756 million viewers.

===
Season 3
: Secrets Revealed (2010–11) ===
The season three premiere, consisting of "Clone Cadets" and "ARC Troopers," was broadcast on September 17, 2010, attracting 2.42 million viewers.
These episodes, and certain others in this season, cover events from previous seasons.
Episodes 21 and 22 were released in the UK before airing in the US.
The season finale, consisting of "Padawan Lost" and "Wookiee Hunt", was broadcast on April 1, 2011, attracting 2.31 million viewers.

=== Season 4:
Battle Lines (2011–12) ===
The season four premiere, consisting of "Water War" and "Gungan Attack", was broadcast on September 16, 2011, and attracted 1.93 million viewers, the lowest premiere viewing of all seasons.
The season finale, "Revenge" was broadcast on March 16, 2012, attracting 2.03 million viewers.

===
Season 5 (2012–13) ===
The season five premiere, "Revival", was broadcast on September 29, 2012, and attracted 1.94 million viewers.
Season five consisted of 20 episodes instead of the normal 22 episode count.
The season five finale, "The Wrong Jedi", was broadcast on March 2, 2013, and attracted 2.18 million viewers.
Unlike the first four seasons, the episodes of the fifth season were released to DVD and Blu-ray in chronological order as opposed to broadcast order.

===
Season 6:
The Lost Missions (2014) ===
The sixth season was released in its entirety on March 7, 2014 on Netflix.
The season had already premiered in Germany on February 15, 2014 on Super RTL.
===
Season 7:
The Final Season (2020) ===
On July 19, 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes to be released on Disney+
during the service's first year.
The seventh and final season premiered on February 21, 2020.
===
Chronological order ===
While the series is designed to be an anthology of both standalone episodes and small story arcs, various events throughout inform stories, characters, and relationships to create a recognizably continuous narrative.
On March 17, 2014, in recognition of the release of the complete series on Netflix, StarWars.com released the official chronological episode order for the first six seasons; this was later updated to include links to the episodes on Disney+.
Regarding the seventh and final season, StarWars.com revealed that episodes five through eight are set before the season premiere "The Bad Batch".

==
The Clone Wars Legacy ==
At the time of cancellation in March 2013, there were still many episodes in development.
Thirteen of these episodes were finished to become part of Season 6:
The Lost Missions
but there were still additional arcs that were never released.
In September 2014, Lucasfilm released details of multiple story arcs from the unfinished episodes.
The Bad Batch was eventually completed and aired as the first arc of season 7.
===
Print ===


====
Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir ====
A four-episode arc continued the story of Darth Maul following the events of the season 5 episode "The Lawless".
The four episodes were titled: "The Enemy of My Enemy", "A Tale of Two Apprentices", "Proxy War", and "Showdown on Dathomir" (original production codes: 6.21–6.24).
According to Dave Filoni, the four scripts "came out of one of our story conferences with George Lucas".
The scripts and designs for the arc were adapted into a four-issue comic book titled Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir, released in August 2014 by the publisher Dark Horse Comics.
The comic was the last Star Wars comic published by Dark Horse before Lucasfilm transferred the license to Marvel Comics in 2014 and was collected into a trade paperback by Marvel in 2018.The plot follows Darth Maul, who has been captured by Darth Sidious.
He is tortured by Count Dooku for information about the Shadow Collective and the allies Maul has made.
Maul escapes and heads to Zanbar to command the Death Watch army, but is followed by General Grievous and his droids.
They battle Maul and the Mandalorians, who are soon overwhelmed by the droids.
Maul flees and confers with Mother Talzin, who is revealed to be his biological mother, and plots to draw out Sidious by capturing Dooku and Grievous.
The scheme works, and Talzin is able to restore herself to her physical form, but sacrifices herself to save Maul and is killed by Grievous.
Although Maul escapes with a company of loyal Mandalorians, the Shadow Collective has fallen apart due to the conflict with Sidious, as the Hutts, Pykes, and Black Sun have all abandoned Maul.

====
Dark Disciple ====
An eight-episode arc with Asajj Ventress and Jedi Quinlan Vos was adapted into a novel by Christie Golden titled Dark Disciple, released on July 7, 2015.
The eight episodes were titled: "Lethal Alliance", "The Mission", "Conspirators", "Dark Disciple", "Saving Vos, Part I", "Saving Vos, Part II", "Traitor", and "The Path" (original production codes: 6.13–6.16 and 7.05–7.08).
The story follows Vos partnering up with Ventress, hoping to execute Count Dooku.
Eric Goldman of IGN gave the book an 8 out of 10, saying it was great.

===
Story reels ===


====
Crystal Crisis on Utapau ===
=
In September 2014, four unfinished episodes were released in completed story reel format, titled: "
A Death on Utapau," "In Search of the Crystal," "Crystal Crisis,” and "The Big Bang" (original production codes: 6.01–6.04).
The arc takes place on Utapau with Obi-Wan and Anakin investigating an arms deal involving the Separatists and a kyber crystal.
The arc also deals with Anakin's feelings after Ahsoka left the Jedi Order.
It was included in the season 6 Blu-ray.

====
The Bad Batch ====
The story reels for this four-episode arc were screened on April 17, 2015, at Star Wars Celebration Anaheim, and were released on the official Star Wars website on April 29, 2015.
Scripted by Brent Friedman, the four episodes were later completed and aired as the first arc of season 7 (with some changes from the original story reels).
On July 13, 2020, a spin-off sequel series titled Star Wars: The Bad Batch was announced; it will follow the titular group of clones working as mercenaries in the immediate aftermath of the Clone Wars.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars:
Clone Wars episodes
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (film)


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
List of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars   episodes at TV.com
Skymovies.com
Episode Guide
The Clone Wars section on StarWars.com
CartoonNetwork.com
Schedule
Chronological order on StarWars.com
This is a list of Star Wars cast members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the film series.
The list is sorted by film and character, as some of the characters were portrayed by multiple actors.

As the franchise is composed of multiple films (including spin-offs and anthologies) there are multiple lead actors.
In the primary series, dubbed the "Skywalker saga", Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher starred as Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia respectively in the original films Star Wars (1977)
, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983) and reprised the roles in the sequel trilogy films
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017) and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
James Earl Jones, David Prowse and Sebastian Shaw collectively portrayed Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader, and Alec Guinness portrayed Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original films.
Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen portray a younger version of Anakin in the first and next two installments of the prequels and Ewan McGregor stars in all three, Star Wars:
Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999),
Star Wars:
Episode II - Attack of the Clones (2002) and Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith (2005) as a younger Obi-Wan Kenobi, being top billed in the later two films.
Daisy Ridley plays Rey and
Adam Driver plays Kylo Ren in the sequel films (2015—19).

Also starring in the franchise include, Felicity Jones who plays Jyn Erso in Rogue One (2016) and Alden Ehrenheich as Han Solo in Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018).
Solo served as a lead and supporting character in the original (1977—83) and sequel (
2015—19) films respectively, played by Harrison Ford.

Also recurring throughout the franchise include, Frank Oz, Samuel L. Jackson, Jimmy Smits, Natalie Portman, Pernilla August, Liam Neeson, Christopher Lee, Billy Dee Williams, Joel Edgerton, Peter Mayhew, Joonas Suotamo, Emilia Clarke, Ray Park, Andy Serkis, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, Warwick Davis, Oscar Isaac, Kelly Marie Tran, John Boyega, Gwendoline Christie, Domnhall Gleeson, Temuera Morrison, Jeremy Bulloch, Matthew Wood and Ian McDiarmid.

With the release of Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker in 2019, Daniels is credited with the most acting appearances as the same character, having played C-3PO in all nine films of the Skywalker Saga, as well as the anthology film Rogue One, The Clone Wars film and TV series in 2008 and 2003, and a guest appearance in the first season of Rebels.
He also appeared in Solo, but as a different character named "Tak", as well as a character named "Dannl Faytonni" in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, the latter being alongside C-3PO.

Indicators only apply for characters portrayed within multiple categories.
All characters without indicators were introduced within the category they are listed on.
The cast is divided in six categories: main saga (M), anthology series (A), animated series and Star Wars: The Clone Wars film (S), books (B), comic books (C), and the non-canonical Legends series (L).

List indicators:
^M  denotes the character was introduced within the main saga.

^A
denotes the character was introduced within the anthology series.

^S
denotes the character was introduced within an animated series or The Clone Wars film.

^LS
denotes the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends animated series of film before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^B
denotes the character was introduced within a novel.

^LB
denotes the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends novel before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^C
denotes the character was introduced within a comic book or graphic novel.

^LC
denotes
the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends comic book or graphic novel before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^+
denotes the character introduced within the current category, but also has an extended plot-line within another category.
(
Example: ^+A  would denote the character was introduced within the current category but has an extended plot-line in the anthology series, alternatively ^+S  would denote an extended plot-line in the animated series, and ^+AS  would denote extended plot-lines on both categories.)
==
The Skywalker saga ==


==
Anthology series ==
A series of stand-alone films was announced in 2013:
Rogue One was released in 2016, Solo was released in 2018, and another film is planned with an unknown title or release.
The films do contain some characters and cast from the main series, along with new characters.

==
Animated series and Star Wars: The Clone Wars film ==
In 2008, an animated film entitled Star Wars: The Clone Wars was released.
It was followed by a television series of the same name within the same year, three other series entitled Star Wars Rebels, Star Wars Forces of Destiny and Star Wars Resistance premiered soon after.

==
Legends films and television series ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, the Star Wars Holiday Special and Ewok prequel films: Caravan of Courage and The Battle for Endor, as well as most comics and books produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars, were re-branded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Despite the decanonization, the television films do retain many major cast members from the original trilogy reprising their roles; the Holiday Special featured most of the cast from the original film, while the Ewok prequel films featured Warwick Davis reprising his role as Wicket, who originated in Return of the Jedi.

== Notes ==
a The Clone Wars was Saw Gerrera's first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first film appearance in Rogue One, he is portrayed by Forest Whitaker.

b
The Holiday Special was Boba Fett's first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first canon appearance in TESB, he is portrayed by Jeremy Bulloch.

c Kevin Pollack, Ken Grantham, Mark Dodson and Rick Cimino are credited as providing Ewok voices for The Battle for Endor, although which Ewok they voice is not stated.

d Clone Wars was General Grievous' first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first canon appearance in ROTS, he is voiced by Matthew Wood.

e Carrie Fisher appears in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker from footage originally shot for Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, but cut from the film.
The previously unseen footage was repurposed to fit the narrative for the franchise's ninth installment.
Additional material for Fisher's character is provided by Billie Lourd via motion capture.

f
Ewan McGregor's voice can be heard saying the newly recorded dialogue "These are your first steps" while archive recordings of Alec Guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "Rey", both occurring during a flashback caused by Rey's touching of Anakin Skywalker's lightsaber.

g Ewan McGregor's voice can be heard saying the newly recorded dialogue "These are your final steps, Rey, rise and take them" while archive recordings of Alec Guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "Rey", both occurring when Rey says "Be with me", and voices of past Jedi are heard.

h
In the original release of the film, Yoda is portrayed via puppeteery.
In the 2011 Blu-ray re-release, he is played via computer-generated imagery.

==
References ==
The Star Wars Actors Database
Over 1000 Star Wars actors listed with biographies, photos, in-depth credit listings and more.
==
External links ==
Star Wars Episode
I: The Phantom Menace
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope
Star Wars
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi
Star Wars Episode VII:
The Force Awakens
Star Wars Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi
Star Wars Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is a 2008 computer-animated epic space-opera film directed by Dave Filoni (in his feature directorial debut), produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and Lucasfilm Animation, and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures.
The film is set in the Star Wars universe during the Clone Wars, a three-year conflict between the Galactic Republic and the Confederacy of Independent Systems, established at the end of Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002).
In Star Wars: The Clone Wars, Count Dooku and Jabba the Hutt's uncle Ziro orchestrate a plot to turn Jabba against the Republic by framing the Jedi for the kidnapping of his son, which would in turn allow Ziro to take over Jabba's criminal empire after Jabba is arrested.
While Anakin Skywalker and his newly-assigned apprentice, Ahsoka Tano, attempt to deliver Jabba's son back to his father, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Padmé Amidala lead separate investigations of Dooku and Ziro's plot.
The film marks the first appearances of fan-favorite characters Tano and Captain Rex in the franchise.

The film premiered on August 10, 2008, at Grauman's Egyptian Theatre, followed by a wide release in Australia on August 14 and in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom the next day.
The Clone Wars was the first Star Wars film to not be distributed by 20th Century Fox, and the first to be completely animated.
The film received largely negative reviews, becoming the worst-reviewed theatrically-released Star Wars film with critics panning the writing, animation, tone, repetitive action scenes, dialogue and the decision to release the pilot episodes as a feature-length film, while some praise was directed at the voice acting and score.
While the film was a commercial success, grossing $68.3 million worldwide against an $8.5 million budget, it is also the lowest grossing Star Wars film.
The Clone Wars served as the backdoor pilot to the Cartoon Network television series of the same name, which had a far more favorable reception than the film.

==
Plot ==
The events of the film chronologically take place between the Clone Wars season 1 episode "The Hidden Enemy" and the season 3 episode "Clone Cadets".
During the first year of the Clone Wars, Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker and his former master, Obi-Wan Kenobi lead a small battalion of Republic Clone troopers against the Separatist droid army on the planet Christophsis.
Awaiting reinforcements, the two Jedi greet a shuttle carrying a young Jedi named Ahsoka Tano, who insists that she has been assigned by Jedi Grandmaster Yoda to serve as Anakin's apprentice.
Anakin reluctantly accepts Ahsoka as his apprentice and the two succeed in deactivating the Separatists' energy field while Obi-Wan stalls the droid army commander, allowing a Republic victory.
Ahsoka earns Anakin's respect.

Following the battle, Yoda arrives and informs the Jedi that crime lord Jabba the Hutt's son Rotta has been kidnapped.
Anakin and Ahsoka are tasked with retrieving the Huttlet, while Obi-Wan is sent to Tatooine to negotiate with Jabba over a potential treaty between the Hutts and the Republic.
Anakin and Ahsoka track the kidnapper and Rotta to the planet Teth, where they are ambushed by Separatist forces led by Count Dooku's apprentice Asajj Ventress.
Unknown to the Jedi, the plot has been engineered by Dooku's Sith master Darth Sidious, who hopes to frame the Jedi for Rotta's kidnapping in order to get Jabba to ally with the Separatists and fuel anti-Jedi sentiment from the Hutts.
The Jedi manage to escape the trap along with R2-D2 and hijack a derelict transport with which they travel to Tatooine.
Obi-Wan, alerted by Anakin, arrives on Teth and defeats Ventress in a lightsaber duel, though she manages to escape.

Meanwhile, Anakin's secret wife Senator Padmé Amidala learns of her husband's mission and fears for his safety.
She decides to contact Jabba's uncle Ziro on Coruscant.
The Hutt refuses to cooperate, apparently believing that it is the Jedi who are responsible for the situation.
However, Padmé soon discovers that Ziro has actually conspired with Dooku to have Rotta killed, so that Jabba would execute Anakin and Ahsoka in return and be taken into custody by the Jedi Council, which will allow Ziro to seize power over the Hutt Clan.
Against Chancellor Palpatine's wishes, Padmé travels to Tatooine but is discovered and detained.
However, a chance call by C-3PO enables her to summon a squadron of clone troopers, and Ziro is arrested.

Upon their arrival on Tatooine, Anakin and Ahsoka are shot down by MagnaGuards.
Anakin devises a ruse to confront Dooku while carrying a decoy Rotta, leaving Ahsoka to take the real Rotta to Jabba's palace.
While Anakin fights off Dooku, Ahsoka is ambushed by the MagnaGuards, whom she defeats.
The two deliver Rotta safely to Jabba, who nonetheless orders the Jedi to be executed for their supposed kidnapping attempt.
However, Padmé contacts Jabba in time and reveals Ziro and the Separatists' responsibility for the kidnapping.
Acknowledging the Jedi's heroism and allowing the Republic to have Ziro punished for his betrayal, Jabba agrees to the treaty while Anakin and Ahsoka are picked up by Obi-Wan and Yoda.
Meanwhile, Dooku reports the plot's failure to Darth Sidious, who assures him that the tide of the war is still in their favor.

== Cast ==
Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, a former Jedi Padawan who has recently been promoted to the rank of Jedi Knight, and a general in the Republic' army, leading the 501st Legion
Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, Anakin's new Padawan apprentice and commander of the 501st Legion
James Arnold Taylor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Master, Anakin's mentor, and general of the Republic,
leading the 212th Attack Battalion
Taylor also voices 4A-7, a droid spy
Tom Kane as Yoda, the Jedi Grandmaster and leader of the Jedi Council
Kane also voices the film's Narrator, who explains the events driving the film's plot, and Admiral Yularen, an admiral of the Republic Navy assigned to Anakin
Dee Bradley Baker as Captain Rex, a Clone Captain of the 501st Legion and Anakin's
second-in-command
Baker also voices Commander Cody, a Clone Commander of the 212th Attack Battalion and Obi-Wan's second-in-command, as well as the other clone troopers
Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, a Sith Lord and the puppet leader of the Separatist Alliance
Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, a Jedi Master, senior member of the Jedi Council, and general of the Republic
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, Anakin and Padme's protocol droid
Nika Futterman as Asajj Ventress, Count Dooku's disciple, and as TC-70, Jabba the Hutt's protocol droid
Ian Abercrombie as Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic who is secretly a Sith Lord, Count Dooku's master, and the mastermind behind the Clone Wars
Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala, the Senator of Naboo and Anakin's secret wife
Corey Burton as Ziro the Hutt, a member of the Hutt Clan and
Jabba's uncle
Burton also voices Whorm Loathsom, commander of the Separatist Droid Army occupying Christophsis, and KRONOS-327, an assassin droid working for Ziro
David Acord as Rotta the Huttlet, Jabba's kidnapped son
Kevin Michael Richardson as Jabba the Hutt, a notorious crime lord, leader of the Hutt Clan, and Rotta's father
Matthew Wood as battle droids
==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars was made to serve as both a stand-alone story and a lead-in to the weekly animated TV series of the same name.
George Lucas had the idea for a film after viewing some of the completed footage of the early episodes on the big screen.
Those first few episodes, originally planned for release on television, were then woven together to form the theatrical release.
Warner Bros. had tracked the series' development from the beginning, and Lucas decided on a theatrical launch after viewing early footage declaring "This is so beautiful, why don't we just go and use the crew and make a feature?"
This decision helped convince WB parent company Time Warner to distribute the movie, and to encourage its subsidiary Cartoon Network to air the series.
Lucas described the film as "almost an afterthought."
Howard Roffman, president of Lucas Licensing, said of the decision, "Sometimes George works in strange ways."
Producer Catherine Winder said the sudden decision added to an already large challenge of establishing a show "of this sophistication and complexity," but she felt it was a good way to start the series, and thought budgetary constraints forced the production team to think outside the box in a positive way.
The story of the kidnapped Hutt was inspired by the Sonny Chiba samurai film titled Shogun's Shadow.
===
Animation ===
Lucasfilm and Lucasfilm Animation used Autodesk software to animate both the film and the series using the Maya 3D modeling program to create highly detailed worlds, characters and creatures.
The film's animation style was designed to pay homage to the stylized looks of both Japanese anime and manga, and the supermarionation of the British 1960s series Thunderbirds.
At a Cartoon Network-hosted discussion, Lucas said he did not want the Clone Wars film or television series to look like such movies as Beowulf, because he wanted a stylized look rather than a realistic one.
He also felt it should not look like the popular Pixar movies such as The Incredibles, because he wanted the film and characters to have its own unique style.
Lucas also decided to create the animated film and series from a live-action perspective, which Winder said set it apart from other CGI films.
Essentially, it "meant using long camera shots, aggressive lighting techniques, and relying on editing instead of storyboards.
"
Animators also reviewed designs from the original 2003 Clone Wars series when creating the animation style for the film and the new series.
In charge was Steward Lee, working as the storyboard artist during filming.
Some actors from the live-action films returned to vocally reprise their roles of their respective characters: Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, Matthew Wood as B1 Battle Droids, Christopher Lee as Count Dooku, and Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu.
However, Lee and Jackson did not reprise their roles in the subsequent television series.

===
Music ===
The musical score for Star Wars:
The Clone Wars was composed by Kevin Kiner.
The original motion picture soundtrack was released by Sony Classical on August 12, 2008.
The disc begins with the main theme by John Williams, followed by more than 30 separate music cues composed by Kiner.
Kiner is known for his work on such television series as Stargate SG-1, Star Trek: Enterprise, Superboy and CSI: Miami.
The soundtrack uses some instruments never heard before in a Star Wars score, including erhus, duduks and ouds.

==
Marketing ==


===
Toys ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars merchandise was first released on July 26, 2008.
Hasbro released several 33⁄4-inch Clone Wars action figures, an electronic clone trooper helmet, a customizable lightsaber, and an electronic All Terrain Tactical Enforcer (AT-TE).
Target and KB Toys also devoted shelf space for Clone Wars toys, but did not hold midnight releases or pursue the branding opportunities Toys "R"
Us did.
Toys "R"
Us mounted digital clocks in all 585 of its stores that counted down to the release of the Clone Wars toys, and
more than 225 of the stores opened at midnight for the debut of the Star Wars products.
Two of the Toys "R" Us flagship outlets in Mission Bay, San Diego and Times Square in Manhattan, New York City held costume and trivia contests on July 26, and gave away limited-edition Star Wars toys with every purchase.
A section of the Toys "R" Us website was also dedicated to The Clone Wars.
The toy line continues with The Clone Wars figures being well received by collectors for their detail to the characters and vehicles.

===
Food ===
Due to Lucas' sudden decision to produce the film, Lucas Licensing did not have time to enter into agreements with previous Star Wars marketing partners like Pepsi, Burger King and Kellogg's, with which the Lucasfilm licensing company had a ten-year marketing plan for the other films.
When questioned by The New York Times about Star Wars merchandising in July 2008, a Pepsi spokesperson was unaware a new Star Wars film was being released.
On August 15, McDonald's held its first ever Happy Meal promotion for a Star Wars film and for four weeks, 18 exclusive toys came in specially designed Happy Meal boxes.

===
Comics and books ===
Dark Horse Comics published a six-issue digest-sized comic book miniseries.
Randy Stradley, vice president of publishing for Dark Horse, said the sudden decision to release the Clone Wars film required the company to temporarily delay plans for two other Star Wars comic book series, Dark Times and Rebellion.
The Clone Wars comics did not receive the promotional campaign it otherwise would have due to the abruptness of the theatrical and comic book releases.
Topps, the trading cards company, released a series of 90 Clone Wars cards on July 26, which also included foil cards, motion cards, animation cel cards and rare sketch cards by top Star Wars artists and Lucasfilm animators.
DK Publishing and the Penguin Group released books, activities and other merchandise that tied in with the film.
Also released was the Clone Wars: The Visual Guide, published by DK, and Star Wars: The Clone Wars in the UK, published by Puffin and in the U.S. by Grosset & Dunlap.
The publishers also released a storybook, picture books and an activity book.
At the American International Toy Fair, Lego announced a product line for the film and the TV series, to be released in July 2008 in the United States and on August 2008 in the United Kingdom.

===
Video games ===
The LucasArts video game developer adapted the film into Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance for the Nintendo DS and Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels for Wii.
A reviewer from PocketGamer.co.uk said his expectations for Jedi Alliance were low due to poor Clone Wars movie reviews, but he found the game "a varied and well-paced experience."

===
Portable media players ===
A Star Wars:
The Clone Wars MP3 player was released in August 2008.
The player includes one gigabyte of memory, which holds 200 songs or 20 hours of music and comes with three interchangeable faceplates: a green one with Yoda and a lightsaber on it, a silver one with Captain Rex and a Galactic Empire logo on it, and one with two clone troopers on Coruscant.
One review claimed it improved upon a Darth Vader MP3 player released in July 2008, which featured only 512 megabytes of memory and a dated visual display.
A Star Wars iPod iSpeaker (a speaker/dock for iPods, iPhones and MP3 players) was also released.
The speaker includes an image of Captain Rex and three other Clone Troopers.

===
Racing sponsorship ===
A Star Wars:
The Clone Wars open wheel car for the IndyCar Series was unveiled at the 2008 San Diego Comic-Con International.
The No.
26 car, which also included Blockbuster Inc. decals and was driven by Andretti Green Racing driver Marco Andretti, ran August 24 on the Infineon Raceway in the Sonoma Mountains in California.
Andretti said, "I'm hoping that my upcoming battle at Infineon will be as exciting as anything in a Star Wars movie
so I can win it for both Blockbuster and Lucasfilm.
"
The car finished 14th at Infineon, which Andretti attributed to a slow pit stop early in the race; he added, "I just don't think it was a very good performance for us today."
The Clone Wars car was the second collaboration between Lucasfilm, Blockbuster and Andretti Green Racing.
It premiered as an Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull car at the Indianapolis 500 in May 2008.

===
Novelization ===
A novelization of the film by Karen Traviss was released by Del Rey Books on July 26, 2008.
In addition to narrating the film's plot from various points of view, it includes some of Anakin's memories of his early childhood as a Hutt slave, as well as some of Dooku's recollections of battling the Mandalorians (previously explored in the 2002 comic book Jango Fett: Open Seasons).

===
Home media ===
The film's two-disc DVD and Blu-ray Disc was released on November 11, 2008 in the United States and on December 8, 2008 in the United Kingdom.
The film was released as a single-disc DVD, two-disc Special Edition DVD, and Blu-ray Disc.
The standard-definition versions include the film in widescreen format with Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround EX sound, and with feature-length audio commentary.
The film is also available on the Disney+ streaming service, which launched on November 12, 2019.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
The film was panned by critics.
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 18% based on 170 reviews, with an average rating of 4.2/10.
The site's critical consensus reads: "Mechanical animation and a less-than stellar script make The Clone Wars a pale shadow of George Lucas' once great franchise.
"
This constituted the lowest Rotten Tomatoes rating of any Star Wars film; the previous six theatrical films ranged from 52% to 95% and the made-for-television Ewok films and the Star Wars Holiday Special garnered higher ratings, although their averages encompassed far fewer reviews.
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 35 out of 100 based on 30 critic reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B-" on an A+ to F scale.

Entertainment Weekly listed Star Wars: The Clone Wars as one of the five worst films of 2008 with critic Owen Gleiberman saying, It's hard to tell the droids from the Jedi drones in this robotic animated dud, in which the George Lucas Empire Strikes Back—at the audience.
What wears you out is Lucas' immersion in a Star Wars cosmology that has grown so obsessive-compulsively cluttered yet trivial
that it's no longer escapism; Because this movie has bad lightsaber duels and the lack of the original cast, it's something you want to escape from.

Ain't
It
Cool News posted two reviews of the film during the week before its release, but pulled them down due to an embargo placed on those attending the screening its writers attended.
The same reviews were re-posted on the site, on the day of the film's release.
The retraction prompted some readers to allege a conspiracy by Lucasfilm to keep negative press out of circulation until the release of the film, but although the review by site creator Harry Knowles was negative, Drew McWeeny said that his review was positive and that no such conspiracy existed.
Several critics compared The Clone Wars to a Saturday morning cartoon and described it as little more than a plug for the upcoming animated series.
Linda Barnard, of the Toronto Star, said the movie "pretty much drives a stake into the heart of every loyal fan of the movies.
And now [George Lucas is] out to stick it to those too young to know about Jar Jar Binks."
Variety magazine reviewer Todd McCarthy said, "This isn't the Star Wars we've always known and at least sometimes loved."
Joe Neumiar, of the New York Daily News, wrote, "If this were a true Star Wars film, right about now somebody would say, '...
I've got a bad feeling about this.'
"
In his review for Entertainment Weekly, critic Owen Gleiberman gave the film an F grade and wrote, "George Lucas is turning into the enemy of fun."
Carrie Rickey, of The Philadelphia Inquirer, said, "The best that can be said about the movie is that it's harmless and mostly charmless.
The Clone Wars is to Star Wars what karaoke is to pop music."

The main criticism toward the film was the animation.
Many criticized it as cheap, wooden, non-engaging and out-of-date; some reviewers drew negative comparisons to 1960s
marionette-based shows Thunderbirds and Fireball XL5, although George Lucas previously said the animation style was a deliberate homage to such shows.
Tom Long of The Detroit News said the animation "is downright weak compared to what's generally seen on screens these days" and said the characters are so stiff they look like they were "carved by Pinocchio's father."
Roger Ebert gave the film 1.5 stars out of 4 and said "the characters have hair that looks molded from Play-Doh, bodies that seem arthritic, and moving lips on half-frozen faces—all signs that shortcuts were taken in the animation work."
McCarthy said "the movements, both of the characters and the compositions, look mechanical, and the mostly familiar characters have all the facial expressiveness of Easter Island statues."
But some of the same reviewers who criticized the animation acknowledged some positive elements about it; McCarthy said it allowed for "somewhat more dramatic compositions and color schemes," and Carrie Rickey, of The Philadelphia Inquirer, said the scenery and backgrounds were "vivid and alive", although she said the characters "move as you would imagine the statues at a waxworks might.
"Reviewers also criticized the dialogue, which Ebert said was limited to "simplistic declamations" and Claudia Puig of USA
Today described as "stilted and overblown, a problem also in some of the live-action incarnations.
"
Many critics also said that the battle scenes were repetitive and lacked tension; McCarthy described the action sequences as "a little exposition, an invasion; some more exposition, a lightsaber fight; a bit more blah-blah, a spaceship dogfight, and on and on."
Linda Stasi, of the New York Post, also described the lack of character development in the film, writing that whereas the original Star Wars films dedicated time to allowing viewers to get to know the characters, "Director Dave Filoni is so concentrated on the action that we're never given the chance to care who lives and who is blown into spare parts."
Jason Anderson, of the Globe and Mail, wrote that although The Clone Wars is intended for younger audiences, "parents may be perturbed by the film's relentless violence."
Ebert also found protagonist Ahsoka Tano "annoying," and Michael Rechtshaffen, of The Hollywood Reporter, said the attempts of humor amid the bickering between Ahsoka Tano and Anakin Skywalker are "strained".
Puig said she enjoyed the character, and that "her repartee with Anakin enlivens things."

===
Box office ===
The Clone Wars earned $68,282,845 worldwide, including $35,161,554 in North American domestic box office grosses and $33,121,290 in international grosses.
The film earned $14,611,273 on 3,452 screens in its opening weekend, including $6,228,973 on its opening day, August 15.
It was the third-highest earning film of the weekend in spite of negative critical reception, behind Tropic Thunder and The Dark Knight, which earned $25.8 million and $16.3 million, respectively.
Dan Fellman, head of distribution for Warner Bros., said that the box office performance met expectations because two-thirds of the audience were families and the budget for the film was $8.5 million, frugal considering it was a CGI film and because the film was meant to introduce the animated series.
Fellman said, "It was targeted to a specific audience for specific reasons.
We accomplished that mission, and it will continue in another medium.
"
When The Clone Wars dropped to $5.6 million in its second week of release, ContactMusic.com described it as "the first bona fide Star Wars flop.
"
The film also earned $23,428,376 from DVD sales in the US.

===
Accolades ===
The film was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award in the category "Worst Prequel, Remake, Rip-Off or Sequel", but lost to Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at LucasFilm.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at Box Office Mojo
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is a computer-animated television series created by George Lucas.
The series began with a theatrical feature film which was released on August 15, 2008, and debuted on Cartoon Network two months later on October 3, 2008.
It is set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy during the three years between the prequel films
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.
Being a reboot of the previous 2D series Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003–2005), each episode had a running time of approximately 22 minutes to fill a half-hour time slot instead of the 3–15 minute episodes that the previous series had.
Dave Filoni was the supervising director of the series.
The Clone Wars was a massive ratings success, becoming one of Cartoon Network's highest rated shows during its initial run.
Throughout its run, the series received mostly positive reception from critics, receiving praise for its writing, action, characters, visuals, voice acting, music, scale and tone.
The series has also garnered a massive fan following and was also nominated for many industry awards, including the Daytime Emmy Awards and the Annie Awards.
In early 2013, Lucasfilm announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down".
Thirteen episodes composing a new sixth season were made available in the U.S. for streaming on Netflix, along with the entirety of the series, beginning March 7, 2014.
A project known as The Clone Wars Legacy adapted unproduced story arcs into other formats, such as comics and novels.
The series was revived for a seventh and final season of 12 new episodes, which premiered on Disney+
on February 21, 2020.A sequel series, Star Wars Rebels, was released during the hiatus between the sixth and seventh seasons of The Clone Wars, featuring several characters from The Clone Wars, including Captain Rex, Ahsoka Tano and Maul.
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch, a spin-off/sequel series centering on the titular clone trooper team introduced in the seventh season, is set to premiere on May 4, 2021.

==
Series overview ==


===
Setting ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is set during the prequel trilogy era, in the period of three years between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
The series focuses on the eponymous conflict between the Galactic Republic, which is supported by the Jedi Order, and the Confederacy of Independent Systems, a movement organized by the Sith Lord Count Dooku to unite numerous planetary systems seeking independence from the Republic against it.
Unbeknownst to the galaxy, Darth Sidious, Dooku's secret master, is the one pulling the strings of both sides, as part of his master plan to eliminate the Jedi and gain enough power to create a new governing state under his rule.

The series was initially conceived as an anthology, with episodes sharing little narrative connections between them, but later seasons feature story arcs that span several episodes.
The protagonists are various characters from the live-action films, including Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Padmé Amidala, Yoda, and Mace Windu, as well as new characters created for the series, such as Anakin's Padawan learner Ahsoka Tano, and various clone troopers who are given distinct personalities, like Captain Rex of the 501st Legion.
The antagonists are typically members of the Separatist Alliance, though numerous episodes also focus on crime lords, bounty hunters, and Force-sensitive characters (Sith or just dark side users) who are not affiliated with the Separatists.

===
Synopsis ===
Season one focuses on various battles fought between the Republic and the Separatists, and their efforts to convince more planets and races to join them.
The main antagonists are Count Dooku, his informal apprentice Asajj Ventress, and the cyborg commander of the Separatists' droid armies, General Grievous.
There are also several episodes that do not focus on the conflict with the Separatists, but rather other aspects of the Clone Wars.

Season two features both one episode-storylines, and a few arcs that span between two and five episodes.
This season focuses heavily on bounty hunter characters, with one story arc featuring Darth Sidious hiring Cad Bane to steal a holocron from the Jedi Temple on Coruscant that will help him locate Force-sensitive children, while another deals with Boba Fett beginning his bounty hunter career and, alongside a group of more experienced mercenaries, seeking revenge against Mace Windu for killing his father.
Other major story arcs focus on the planet Mandalore, which took a neutral stance in the Clone Wars and whose pacifist leader, Duchess Satine Kryze, is targeted by both the Separatists and the Mandalorian terrorist faction Death Watch; and the Jedi leading Republic forces in an assault on the main Separatist battle droid manufacturing facility on Geonosis.

The first half of both season three and four are diplomatic in nature, and focus on the role of the Republic Senate in the Clone Wars, and how different races and planets are affected by the galaxy-wide conflict, as well as the Republic's efforts to help them.
During season three, several story arcs focus on the development of certain characters, such as Anakin, who is led to an ancient Force realm alongside Obi-Wan and Ahsoka, and learns more about the nature of the Force and his role as the Chosen One; Ahsoka, who defies Anakin's orders to join his team in a mission to break a Jedi Master out of a Separatist prison, and must later lead her own team of captured Jedi Padawans when they find themselves hunted by Trandoshans; and Ventress, who is betrayed by Dooku, returns to her Nightsister clan on Dathomir, and tries to exact revenge on her former master through his new apprentice, Savage Opress, who ultimately turns on both Ventress and Dooku to follow his own path.

In season four, one story arc focuses on the 501st Legion, who must act independently for the first time when the Jedi General they have been temporarily assigned to serve under is revealed to be a traitor, and manipulates them into killing each other, forcing the clones to capture and execute him.
Other story arcs feature Obi-Wan faking his death and going undercover as a bounty hunter to thwart a plot to capture Chancellor Palpatine; Ventress abandoning her Sith ways and becoming a bounty hunter after the Separatists' massacre of the Nightsisters; and Savage finding his long-lost brother, Darth Maul, who seeks revenge against Obi-Wan for his defeat over a decade prior.

Season five features five main story arcs.
In the first one, the Republic helps a group of rebels from Onderon, led by siblings Steela and Saw Gerrera, liberate their planet from Separatist occupation.
The second arc focuses on a group of Jedi younglings who, after completing their path to becoming Padawans, have to prove themselves by rescuing Ahsoka from pirates.
The third arc revolves around a team of droids who, while undertaking a mission to intercept an encrypted Separatist message, encounter an amnesiac former clone commando and must help him recover his memories to escape the planet they have been stranded on.
The fourth arc deals with the return of Darth Maul, who joins forces with Death Watch and other criminal syndicates to take over Mandalore and exact revenge on Obi-Wan.
The final arc features Ahsoka being framed for bombing the Jedi Temple, and having to prove her innonence while on the run from the Republic.
Though she is ultimately cleared of the charges against her after Anakin captures the real culprit, Ahsoka elects to abandon the Jedi Order, leaving Anakin devastated.

Season six consists of four story arcs:
clone trooper Fives investigating the premature activation of Order 66 in a fellow trooper's mind, and discovering the truth about the inhibitor chips implanted in each clone's brain, only to be silenced by Palpaine before he can expose it; Padmé trying to help her old flame
Rush Clovis expose the corruption in the Intergalactic Banking Clan, which causes tensions in her and Anakin's relationship when he learns about her secret mission and intervines; Jar Jar Binks and Mace Windu rescuing the captured Queen of Bardotta from a cult headed by the Nightsisters' former leader, Mother Talzin; and Yoda embarking on a journey to learn more about the nature of the Force after he is visited by the spirit of the late Qui-Gon Jinn.

Season seven consists of three story arcs.
The first one is focused on Captain Rex's character, as he, Anakin, and a team of clones with genetic mutations rescue ARC Trooper Echo, previously believed to have been killed in action, and defeat the Separatists on Anaxes with his help.
The second one focuses on Ahsoka, who befriends sisters Trace and Rafa Martez and helps them settle a debt with the Pyke Syndicate, while trying to conceal her Force powers because of the sisters' hatred of Jedi.
The final arc, which is set concurrently with Revenge of the Sith, depicts the Siege of Mandalore, a battle that had been referenced in previous Star Wars media.
Ahsoka reluctantly returns to the Republic to lead an assault alongside Rex and Mandalorian warrior Bo-Katan Kryze against Darth Maul's forces on Mandalore in hopes of capturing him.
Unbeknowst to them, Maul has foreseen the fall of the Republic and the Jedi Order, and Darth Sidious turning Anakin to the dark side, and hopes to prevent these events by killing the latter.
After Maul is captured, Sidious executes Order 66, causing Ahsoka to be attacked by her own clone troopers, whom she is hesitant to kill.
She manages to restore Rex's free will, and releases Maul to cause a distraction, but he ends up disabling the ship they are on.
All three ultimately escape, with Ahsoka and Rex later burying the clones who died in the ship's crash, and going their separate ways.
The final scene of the series shows Darth Vader finding Ahsoka's lightsaber among the ship's wreckage some time later, and leaving with it in silence.

==
Episodes ==
The series started with a theatrically released animated film; this decision were made after the production team watched completed footage of several early episodes for the planned television series, which were ultimately combined into a single feature-length film.
Warner Bros. Pictures distributed the film, while subsequent episodes aired separately on Cartoon Network.
For the film, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Samuel L. Jackson, and Matthew Wood reprised their roles as Count Dooku, C-3PO, Mace Windu, and the B1 Battle Droids, respectively, from the live-action movies, but Lee and Jackson would not return for the television series.

On December 5, 2011, a full-length feature cut of one of the Season 3 trilogies of episodes (the one composed by "Nightsisters," "Monster," and "Witches of the Mist") was released for download on iTunes as an uninterrupted movie that was previously shown at selected screenings in 2010.
The three episodes were written by Katie Lucas, who had previously written the Season 1 episode "Jedi Crash" as well as the Season 3 episodes "Sphere of Influence" and "Assassin."
A repeat of season one aired in "decoded" episode format.
Each installment contained unobtrusive text windows giving supplemental information about the characters and events playing out on screen.
The series was cancelled in March 2013, after the conclusion of its fifth season, as a result of The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm and the decision to remove most Star Wars Expanded Universe works from canon.
Despite this, The Clone Wars was one of the few pieces of Star Wars media to remain part of the new continuity established by Disney, and a sixth season was released on March 7, 2014 on Netflix, along with additional media, such as comic books and novels, based on unfinished story arcs that would have been included in the season.
On July 19, 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes in a seventh season to be released on Disney+.
A trailer for the season was released on April 14, 2019 at Star Wars Celebration Chicago.
On August 23, 2019, series creator Dave Filoni announced at the D23 Expo that it will be the final season.
On March 17, 2014, in recognition of the release of the complete series on Netflix, StarWars.com released the official chronological episode order for the first six seasons; this was later updated to include links to the episodes on Disney+.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, Additional voices
James Arnold Taylor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Plo Koon, Additional voices
Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano,
Additional voices
Dee Bradley Baker as Clone Troopers, Saesee Tiin, Onaconda Farr, Bossk, Arok the Hutt, Admiral Trench,
Additional voices
Tom Kane as Narrator, Yoda, Admiral Wullf Yularen,
Additional voices
Matthew Wood as General Grievous, Battle Droids, Poggle the Lesser, Wat Tambor,
Additional voices


===
Recurring ===
Ian Abercrombie (Seasons 1–6) /
Tim Curry (Seasons 5–6) /
Ian McDiarmid (Season 7) as Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious
B.J. Hughes (Season 1) /
Ahmed Best
(Seasons 1–6) as Jar Jar Binks
Clancy Brown as Savage Opress
Corey Burton as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, Cad Bane, Ziro the Hutt, Chairman Papanoida, Additional voices
Terrence C. Carson as Mace Windu
Jim Cummings as Hondo Ohnaka
Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
Ben Diskin as AZI-3, Krismo Sodi, Morley, Otua Blank, WAC-47
Robin Atkin Downes as Castas, Cham Syndulla, Cin Drallig, Ima-Gun Di, Rush Clovis
Jon Favreau as Pre Vizsla
Nika Futterman as Asajj Ventress, Chi Eekway Papanoida, Gardulla
the Hutt, Sy Snootles, TC-70
Brian George as King Katuunko, Chi Cho, Ki-Adi-Mundi
Barbara Goodson as Mother Talzin
Anna Graves as Duchess Satine, Sugi, Tiplar, Tiplee,
Additional voices
Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura,
Riyo Chuchi
Julian Holloway as Almec, Admiral Killian
Tom Kenny as Greedo, Lt.
Tan Divo, Nute Gunray, Silood
Jaime King as Aurra Sing, Cassie Cryar, Additional Voices
Phil LaMarr as Bail Organa, Kit Fisto,
Orn Free Taa
Daniel Logan as Boba Fett, Clone Cadets
James C. Mathis III as Gregar Typho
Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia, Mama the Hutt
Kevin Michael Richardson as Jabba
the Hutt, Hay-Zu, Xomit Grunseit
Katee Sackhoff as Bo-Katan Kryze
Meredith Salenger as Barriss Offee,
Che Amanwe Papanoida, Ione Marcy, Pluma Sodi
Kath Soucie as Mon Mothma, Jek Lawquane, Mina Bonteri
Jason Spisak as Lux Bonteri, Zinn Paulness
Stephen Stanton as Mas Amedda, Tarkin, Colonel Meebur Gascon, Moralo Eval, Marg Krim, Additional voices
Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala, Additional voices
Tasia Valenza as Shaak Ti
Sam Witwer as Darth Maul,
The Son


===
Notable guests ===
Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker
Clare Grant as Latts Razzi
Seth Green as Todo 360, Ion Papanoida
Mark Hamill as Darth Bane
James Marsters as Faro Argyus
Bobby Moynihan as Pintu Son-El
Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn
Simon Pegg as Dengar
Greg Proops as Tal Merrik
Elizabeth Rodriguez as Rafa Martez
Ray Stevenson as Gar Saxon
George Takei as Lok Durd
David Tennant as Huyang
Adrienne Wilkinson as The Daughter
Michael York as
Dr. Nuvo Vindi


==
Production ==
At April 2005's Star Wars Celebration III, George Lucas stated that "we are working on a 3-D continuation of the pilot series that was on the Cartoon Network; we probably won't start that project for another year.
"
Lucas hired Dave Filoni after having seen episodes of Avatar: The Last Airbender he had worked on.
By July 2005, pre-production had begun on the series, according to Steve Sansweet, head of Lucasfilm fan relations.
Sansweet referred to the series as "the next generation of the Star Wars saga, a cutting edge 30-minute, 3-D computer-animation series based on the Clone Wars that take place between Episode II ... and Episode III."
Sansweet described the look of the new series as "a melding of Asian anime with unique 3-D animation styling.
"
Primary production took place at the Lucasfilm Animation facility in Singapore.
According to another statement by Sansweet, "Lucasfilm Animation will be hiring a total of about 300 digital artists and others in both California and Singapore locations to produce not only the series but animated feature films in the years ahead."
He said about the series, "to get the series underway, Lucasfilm Animation has hired key production and creative talent to lead the development of its first animation project.
"
Sansweet has said that "a large component of the future of Star Wars and Lucasfilm is CGI animation."

Lucasfilm Animation used Autodesk software to animate both the film and the series.
The Maya 3D-modeling program was used to create the highly detailed worlds, characters and creatures.
Character designer Kilian Plunkett referred to the character designs from Genndy Tartakovsky's original 2003 Clone Wars series, and animators reviewed designs from the 2D series when creating the animation style.
Tartakovsky was not involved with the production, and criticized Lucas's decision to revisit the era.
In 2007, Rob Coleman divulged that one episode was complete, with 15 more in production, and that he was going to direct five of the first 22 episodes.
He revealed that the reaction from licensees was very positive, and that the final assembly of shows was done at Skywalker Ranch.

Speaking at PaleyFest on March 3, 2007, Lucas revealed that the series would be episodic, and as such would not focus on Anakin Skywalker's story; with episodes dedicated to clone troopers and other characters.
Lucas revealed further information in a fan interview, including a new character named Ahsoka Tano, over 100 episodes and a possible appearance by Boba Fett.
The first trailer for the series was released on the official Star Wars website on May 8, 2007.
In an interview in the September 24, 2007 issue of TV Guide, Lucas confirmed that 39 episodes of the series had been completed.
On April 8, 2007, Ain't It Cool News reported that musician Eric Rigler had recorded music for the series.
Rigler disclosed that each planet in the Star Wars galaxy would have its own theme music.
The episode Mr. Rigler performed on was based on Bulgarian music and played on Uilleann pipes.
Kevin Kiner composed the original score for each episode.

Stuart Snyder, who oversaw Cartoon Network and other Turner Broadcasting System cable networks from 2007 to 2014, said he became interested in the new Clone Wars series immediately upon starting the job in May 2007.
Snyder flew out to San Francisco, California to screen several episodes, and told Lucas the only place he wanted to see the show was on Cartoon Network.
Snyder wished to create an action/adventure block of shows on Friday night in an attempt to rejuvenate Cartoon Network.
Snyder expressed confidence that the shows would help boost ratings: "You catch me at a time where I have a smile on my face because of our internal results.
I can say there's a little bit of bragging on the third quarter for us.
"The
"Young Padawans" arc from Season 5 was intended to be aired separately from The Clone Wars as a feature-length pilot for a spin-off series that never materialized.
Seasons 6, 7, and 8, were in some form of production at the time of the show's cancellation in March 2013, shortly after Lucasfilm was purchased by Disney.

==
Release ==
An online comic released alongside the series depicts story snippets between episodes.

=== Broadcast ===
The Clone Wars premiered on October 3, 2008 at 9 p.m. on Cartoon Network.
The Clone Wars on Cartoon Network is shown in a 16:9 (1.77:1) aspect ratio, cropped from its original aspect ratio (OAR) of 2.35:1 (as seen in the UK Sky Premiere screenings).
The show began airing on their Adult Swim block on March 14, 2009, making the series the first Cartoon Network series to simultaneously air on both Cartoon Network and Adult Swim.
The series also aired from January 15 to March 26, 2009 on TNT, making it the first form of animation to air on that channel in over a decade.
The show entered an off-network syndication in 2012, and in the fall of that year Trifecta Entertainment & Media put it into barter syndication.
on Weekends It aired on many affiliates on the Independent Stations as well as an affiliates of Fox MyNetworkTV and The CW
(the latter network's CW Plus service also carries the program as part of its national schedule).
The show has been taken off the air in off-network syndication since fall 2013 due to low costs and was not renewed for Season 2 in the 2013-2014 TV Season due to Disney's completed acquisitions of Lucasfilm Ltd In December 2012.

On March 11, 2013, it was announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down" to focus on the Star Wars sequel trilogy and a new series, Star Wars Rebels.
On February 13, 2014, Netflix announced that starting on March 7, 2014 they would begin the US distribution of the entire TV series, including some previously unreleased director's cuts, and the previously unaired new season dubbed "The Lost Missions".
The latter also became available for purchase on digital video stores, such as iTunes, in mid-2014.
The Netflix distribution of the series, along with the Blu-rays, included versions of some episodes with previously censored material deemed too inappropriate for the demographic of Cartoon Network.
One of the most well-known edits was the removal of the character Ventress kissing a clone after she had stabbed him with her lightsaber.
The show was removed from Netflix on April 7, 2019.
For the revival and final season, the remaining episodes of the series are exclusively available on Disney+.
The first episode for Season 7 was released on February 21, 2020, with the final episode being released on May 4 of the same year.

===
Home media ===
Warner Home Video distributed the videodisc releases of the first five seasons, while Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment handled the videodisc release of the sixth season as Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – The Lost Missions.

Apart from the season-by-season videodisc sets, there were also three special DVD releases consisting of four episodes from a particular season that reflected a certain story arc or theme:

A Galaxy Divided, an early DVD release of the series which included the four season 1 episodes ("Ambush", "Shadow of Malevolence", "Destroy Malevolence", "Downfall of a Droid")
Clone Commandos, another DVD compilation that includes episode five "Rookies" as well as episodes 19 through 21 ("Storm over Ryloth", "Innocents of Ryloth" and "Liberty on Ryloth").

Darth Maul Returns, a feature-length "director's cut" edited together from Season 4 episodes "Massacre", "Bounty", "Brothers" and "Revenge" and was initially available exclusively at Target.
==
Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
Although it began with mixed-to-positive reviews, the series achieved critical acclaim over time.
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 67% of critics have given the first season a positive review based on 15 reviews, with an average rating of 5.73/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "With an agreeably entertaining first season, Star Wars: The Clone Wars opens a fun, kid-friendly chapter of the franchise's sprawling mythology.
"
100% of critics have given the third and fifth seasons a positive review based on 5 reviews each, with an average rating of 8/10 and 7.85/10 respectively.
100% of critics have given the sixth season a positive review based on 12 reviews, with an average rating of 8.92/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "Sophisticated storytelling and quality animation make the sixth season of Star Wars
: The Clone Wars a fitting end to the series.
"
100% of critics have given the seventh season a positive review based on 24 reviews, with an average rating of 8.43/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "
Thanks to its beautifully animated action-sequences and its impressively layered storytelling, The Clone Wars' final chapter affirms its place as one of Star Wars' greatest entries.
"
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average score of 64 out of 100 based on 9 critic reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
On July 11, 2008, television critics were shown a completed episode of the series.
The Hollywood Reporter's Live Feed blog called the footage "likely the most photo-realistic animated TV series ever produced."
On August 31, 2008, a sneak peek of the new series was shown on Cartoon Network.
IGN named it the 89th best animated series.
They specifically praised the episodes "Rookies", "Cloak of Darkness", and "Lair of Grievous" saying that their storylines stood out as some of the best in the Star Wars expanded universe.

===
Ratings ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars became the most-watched series premiere in Cartoon Network history.
The series averaged 3 million total viewers in its debut, according to Nielsen Media Research.
Cartoon Network said the Star Wars spin-off ranked as the number one channel among all major animated networks in the time slot among total viewers (the largest in the demographic for any premiere telecast of an original Cartoon series).
On July 23, 2010, at the San Diego Comic-Con, Craig Glenday, editor of the Guinness World Records, presented Star Wars: The Clone Wars supervising director Dave Filoni, CG supervisor Joel Aron, and lead designer Kilian Plunkett a certificate proclaiming the cartoon series "the highest rated sci-fi animation currently on television".
Tech Times said that, "while the Star Wars prequel films fail to make audiences care about characters like Anakin Skywalker, The Clone Wars succeeds.
"
During May 2020, following the release of the seventh season on Disney+, The Clone Wars became the most streamed digital original show in the United States.

=== Accolades ===


==
The Clone Wars Legacy ==
At the time of cancellation in March 2013, 65 more episodes were in development.
Thirteen of these episodes were finished to become part of Season 6: The Lost Missions, but there were still additional arcs that were never released.
In September 2014, StarWars.com released details of three story arcs from the unfinished episodes.

===
Literature ===


====
Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir ====
A four-episode arc continued the story of Darth Maul following the events from the season 5 episode "The Lawless", detailing his escape from Sidious; Maul regains control of the criminal Shadow Collective, and battles Dooku, Grievous, and Sidious.
The arc was adapted into a four-part limited comic book series, Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir, which debuted in May 2014.

====
Dark Disciple ====
An eight-episode arc with Nightsister Asajj Ventress and Jedi Quinlan Vos was adapted into Dark Disciple, a novel by Christie Golden released on July 7, 2015.
The story follows Vos partnering up with Ventress, hoping to execute Count Dooku.

===
Story reels ===
Two arcs consisting each of four episodes were released on the official Star Wars website for free in the form of complete animatics, albeit with unfinished animation as those episodes only went through the earliest stages of production.
Both were fully voiced by the cast.

====
Crystal Crisis on Utapau ===
=
In September 2014, four unfinished episodes were released on the official Star Wars website.
The arc took place on Utapau with Obi-Wan and Anakin investigating an arms deal involving the Separatists and a Kyber crystal.
The arc also dealt with Anakin's feelings after the departure of Ahsoka.
It was also included in the season 6 Blu-ray.

====
The Bad Batch ====
The unfinished animatics for The Bad Batch, a four-episode arc, were screened at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Anaheim, California on April 17, 2015.
Scripted by Brent Friedman, it is a four-part story arc focusing on a ragtag unit of clone commandos of the same name.
The arc was subsequently released on StarWars.com for free shortly after on April 29, 2015.
The completed episodes were aired as the first part of the seventh season.
On July 13, 2020, a spin-off sequel series titled Star Wars: The Bad Batch was announced; it will follow the titular group of clones working as mercenaries in the immediate aftermath of the Clone War.

==
Video games ==
Seven video games have been released, which are based on the style and character designs of the series.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels, a fighting game released on November 11, 2008 for Wii.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance, an action-adventure game released on November 11, 2008 for Nintendo DS.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes, another action-adventure game taking place between Season 1 and Season 2, released on October 9, 2009 for Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 2 and Nintendo DS.

Clone Wars Adventures, an online PC game launched on September 15, 2010 online by Sony Online Entertainment and shut down on March 31, 2014.

Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars, released in March 2011 by TT Games for PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, Wii, Nintendo DS, PC, Mac, and Nintendo 3DS, which further stylizes the characters as part of the Lego Star Wars theme and is mostly based on the first two seasons.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars Pinball, a virtual pinball adaptation of the series' original run, released in 2013 as a purchaseable add-on for Zen Studios' Star Wars Pinball collection for most seventh- and eighth-generation home video game systems, computers and mobile devices.

Disney Infinity 3.0, released in September 2015 by Disney Interactive for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U, Microsoft Windows, iOS and Android, which stylizes select major characters from the show as action figures that become playable only via a toys-to-life NFC system.
Each copy of the game comes with the playset, "Twilight of the Republic", which is an alternate storyline set during the Clone Wars era, along with two starting characters, Anakin and Ahsoka.
Other characters from the show also appear, although most of them are not playable or are fought as bosses.
Characters and/or locations from the show have also appeared in the following Star Wars games listed below:
Star Wars: Galactic Defense, a now-defunct tower defense game released on iOS and Android by DeNA, in which a number of playable champions include characters from the show.
Several levels in the main campaign also take place on the planet Felucia, a major Clone Wars hotspot featured in some episodes.

Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, a turn-based RPG also released on iOS and Android by Electronic Arts, where some levels take place on planets depicted in the show (such as Dathomir) and a number of collectible, playable characters are from the show.

Star Wars:
Force Arena, an online MOBA game released on iOS and Android by Netmarble, where an August 2017 update allowed players to recruit characters, vehicles and battle units from the series, as well as battle on planets like Felucia.

Star Wars Battlefront II, a video game available on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, in which players can battle on or directly above planets like Ryloth and Kamino, where some battles in the series were fought.
Wood, Taylor, Lanter and Burton also reprise their voice roles for four new playable heroes (General Grievous, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker and Count Dooku, respectively) being added to the game's third season in late 2018, themed after the Clone Wars.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at StarWars.com
The Clone Wars Legacy at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
‹The
template TV.com show is being considered for deletion.›
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at TV.com
The Star Wars franchise has spawned multiple films and television series.
Two animated series were released in the mid-1980s.
Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the prequel trilogy-era Clone Wars.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only The Clone Wars was kept in the canon of continuity of the episodic Star Wars films.
Two additional half-hour animated series were created: Rebels, which ties into the original trilogy, and Resistance, which ties into the sequel trilogy.
An additional series spun off from The Clone Wars, titled The Bad Batch, will debut on Disney+
in 2021.

At least seven original Star Wars series will be released on Disney+.
The first live-action series in the franchise, The Mandalorian, premiered in November 2019, and spawned three spin-offs, The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic and Ahsoka.
Additional live-action series include Andor, Obi-Wan Kenobi, The Acolyte, and Lando.

==
Animated series ==


===
Droids and Ewoks (1985–1987) ===
Nelvana, the animation studio that produced the animated segment of the Holiday Special, was hired to create two animated series which aired together on ABC: Droids (1985–1986) follows the adventures of C-3PO and R2-D2, and its sister series Ewoks (1985–1987) features Wicket and other members of the titular species from Return of the Jedi, both set before the events of the original trilogy.
One reviewer calls Droids "rudimentary" and Ewoks "unremarkable", but writes that both "marked the first major effort to expand the Star Wars 'brand' beyond its original live-action film existence."
===
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) ===
George Lucas created his own animation company, Lucasfilm Animation, and used it to produce his first in-house Star Wars CGI-animated series, using Cartoon Network's 2003 Clone Wars micro-series as a "pilot".
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) was introduced through a 2008 animated film of the same name.
The series is set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith of the prequel trilogy.
It focuses mainly on the Jedi characters of Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi, as well as Anakin's Padawan apprentice, Ahsoka Tano (an original character created by Filoni for the series), with other characters from the live-action films in supporting roles.
The series marked the beginning of Dave Filoni's involvement in Star Wars animation projects.

After Disney's acquisition of the Star Wars franchise, The Clone Wars was cancelled in 2014 before its intended final episodes were completed.
The remaining unaired episodes were released on Netflix as "The Lost Missions".
The chronological storyline order was released after the series had initially finished airing.
The film and series were included in the canon established in 2014.
The show was later revived for an additional final season that premiered on February 21, 2020, on the streaming service Disney+.
===
Rebels (2014–2018) ===
In 2014, Disney XD began airing Star Wars Rebels, the first CGI-animated series produced following the Disney acquisition.
It follows a band of rebels as they fight the Galactic Empire in the years leading up to A New Hope.
It closed some of the arcs introduced in The Clone Wars.
Due to the film Rogue One being produced at the same time, the film and the series acknowledged each other.
The series also included an in-canon version of Grand Admiral Thrawn from the Legends  Thrawn trilogy.

===
Resistance (2018–2020) ===
The animated series Star Wars Resistance debuted in late 2018, shifting the animation style towards anime-inspired cel-shading visuals, and focuses on a young Resistance pilot Kazuda Xiono before and during The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, leading up to The Rise of Skywalker.
Sequel trilogy characters such as Captain Phasma, General Hux, and Kylo Ren appear.
The second and final season premiered on October 6, 2019.
===
The Bad Batch ===
Set after the events of The Clone Wars, The Bad Batch follows the titular squadron making their way through the galaxy as mercenaries in the early days of the Empire.
The series was announced in July 2020, to debut on Disney+
on May 4, 2021.
Dave Filoni, Athena Portillo, Brad Rau, and Jennifer Corbett serve as executive producers, with Carrie Beck as co-executive producer and Josh Rimes as producer.
Rau also serves as supervising director with Corbett the head writer.

===
Visions ===
Announced on December 10, 2020, Star Wars: Visions is an anime anthology series of ten short films by different creators set in the Star Wars universe.
It is scheduled for release on Disney+
in 2021.

== Micro-series ==


=== Clone Wars (2003–2005) ===

After the release of Attack of the Clones, developed and drawn by Genndy Tartakovsky.
Cartoon Network produced and aired the micro-series Clone Wars from 2003 to weeks before the 2005 release of Revenge of the Sith, as the series featured events set between those films.
The plot in the series was intended as prequel to then upcoming feature movie Episode III: Revenge of The Sith and directly leads to the starting point in the movie.

It won the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program in 2004 and 2005.
===
Blips (2017) ===
Star Wars Blips is an animated micro-series created to promote The Last Jedi.
It features droids such as
BB-8 and R2-D2, in addition to porgs.

===
Forces of Destiny (2017–2018) ===
The animated micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny debuted in 2017; it focuses on the female characters of the franchise and is set in various eras.

===
Galaxy of Adventures (2018–2020) ===
Star Wars Galaxy of Adventures debuted on the "Star Wars Kids" YouTube channel and website in late 2018.
Using stylized animation, the series of shorts reimagine key scenes from the saga, initially leading up the release of Episode IX.
The shorts feature audio from the original films (with narration by Dante Basco) and are animated by Titmouse,
Inc.


==
=
Roll Out (2019–2020) ===
Star Wars Roll Out debuted on the Star Wars Kids YouTube channel and website in August 2019.
The shorts depict the main characters from the franchise as ball-shaped, similar to BB-8, and utilize a kid-friendly cutout animation style.
io9 calls the design of the series "adorable".

== Live-action series ==


===
The Mandalorian (2019–present) ===
In March 2018, Jon Favreau was hired to write and produce a live-action Star Wars series for Disney+.
The series follows "a lone gunfighter in the outer reaches of the galaxy far from the authority of the New Republic" a few years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
In August 2018, it was reported that the series would cost about "$100 million for 10 episodes".
Pedro Pascal stars as the titular character, and is joined by supporting actors Gina Carano, Nick Nolte, Giancarlo Esposito, Emily Swallow, Carl Weathers, Omid Abtahi, and Werner Herzog.
The series premiered on November 12, 2019, with the launch of Disney+.
The second season premiered on October 30, 2020.
===
The Book of Boba Fett ===
In November 2020, Deadline Hollywood reported that a miniseries focused on Boba Fett could begin filming before the end of the year, before a third season of The Mandalorian went into production.
The series, known as The Book of Boba Fett, was revealed the following month, and confirmed to be in production ahead of The Mandalorian season three.
Favreau and Filoni executive produce along with Robert Rodriguez, with Temuera Morrison and Ming-Na Wen reprising their roles as Boba Fett and Fennec Shand, respectively.
It will be released in December 2021.
===
Andor ===
The series will follow Rebel spy Cassian Andor, five years before the events of Rogue One, during the formative years of the Rebellion.
In November 2018, a prequel series to the 2016 film Rogue One centered on Cassian Andor was confirmed to be in development, and described as a "rousing spy thriller".
Diego Luna will reprise his role for the series.
Stephen Schiff was hired to serve as showrunner and executive producer of the series, which was developed by Jared Bush, who wrote a series bible and a draft of the pilot episode.
In April 2019, Alan Tudyk was confirmed to be reprising his role of K-2SO.
In April 2020, Tony Gilroy, who worked on the reshoots of Rogue One, replaced Schiff as showrunner.
Gilroy was going to write and direct the pilot, and direct other episodes as well.
It was also revealed in April 2020 that Stellan Skarsgård, Kyle Soller,
Denise Gough had joined the cast in undisclosed roles, along with Genevieve O'Reilly reprising her role of Mon Mothma.
In September 2020, it was announced that Gilroy would step down from his directing duties in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and would be replaced by Toby Haynes, who is set to direct the first three episodes.
Filming began in late November 2020 in London.
Andor will be released in 2022, and consist of 12 episodes.

===
Obi-Wan Kenobi ===
In August 2019, it was reported that a streaming series focused on Obi-Wan Kenobi was in development, with Ewan McGregor in talks to reprise his role from the prequel trilogy.
The series was initially thought to have been developing as a standalone film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the performance of Solo at the box office.
During the 2019 D23 Expo, Lucasfilm officially announced that the series was in development, with McGregor confirmed to reprise his role as the titular character.
It will take place eight years after Revenge of the Sith and prior to the events of A New Hope, thus exploring the time during Kenobi's exile on Tatooine.
In September 2019, Deborah Chow and Hossein Amini were announced as the series' director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive producers alongside McGregor.
In October 2019, McGregor said the series would comprise six episodes.
According to Amini, filming for the series was set to begin around July 2020, but after he departed from the series, it was reported in January 2020, that production had been pushed to January 2021.
In April 2020, it was announced that Joby Harold would officially be taking over writing duties from Amini.
In August 2020, Kennedy told TheWrap that it would be a limited series.
In September 2020, McGregor said that the series is now scheduled to begin filming in early 2021.On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that Hayden Christensen would reprise his role as Darth Vader, and that the series would be titled Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Obi-Wan Kenobi is scheduled to be released in 2022, and will consist of 6 episodes.

===
The Acolyte ===
In April 2020, Variety reported that a female-centric live-action Star Wars series is in development for Disney+
with Russian Doll co-creator Leslye Headland serving as a writer and showrunner.
In early November, Headland expounded that the series would be set "in a pocket of the universe and a pocket of the timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the geography of the Star Wars universe than its existing visuals.
On November 5, Deadline reported that the series was expected to be an "action thriller with martial arts elements".
On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that it would take place during the late High Republic era.

===
Ahsoka ===
In December 2020, Ahsoka was announced.
Developed by Favreau and Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett and Rangers of the New Republic through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".
Rosario Dawson headlines the series, reprising her role as Ahsoka Tano.
It will be a limited series set sometime after Rebels.

===
Lando ===
In December 2020, Lando was announced as a Disney+ limited series, focusing on the titular character, with a story by Justin Simien.

===
Rangers of the New Republic ===
In December 2020, Rangers of the New Republic was announced.
Developed by Favreau and Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett and Ahsoka through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".

==
Game show ==


===
Jedi Temple Challenge (2020) ===
Star Wars:
Jedi Temple Challenge is a web-based children's game show developed by Lucasfilm.
First announced in December 2019, the series debuted on the Star Wars Kids website and YouTube channel on June 10, 2020.
The series features young contestants competing as Jedi Padawans in a series of obstacle courses and knowledge tests in the attempt to gain the rank of Jedi Knight.
The show is hosted by Ahmed Best, who plays the character of Kelleran Beq, the Jedi Master mentor of the contestants who is joined by his droid companions, AD-3
(voiced by Mary Holland and performed by Gordon Tarpley) and LX-R5.
Sam Witwer provides the voice of an unknown character of the Dark Side of the Force during the final challenge of each episode.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings ===


===
Critical response ===


===
Emmy Awards ===


==
Abandoned projects ==


===
Underworld ===
In 2005, plans for a live-action television series set between the prequel and original trilogies were announced at Star Wars Celebration.
In 2007, Lucas described the project as "one show that will split into four shows, focusing on different characters.
"
It entered development in early 2009.
The series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as Han Solo, Chewbacca, Lando Calrissian, Boba Fett, C-3PO, and Emperor Palpatine.
Lucas described the series as "more talky.
It's more of what I would call a soap opera with a bunch of personal dramas in it.
It's not really based on action-adventure films from the '30s—
it's actually more based on film noir movies from the '40s!"
Producer Rick McCallum revealed the working title, Star Wars: Underworld, in 2012, and that it would focus on criminal and political power struggles in the "period when the Empire is trying to take things over.
"Over one hundred 42-minute episodes were planned, with 50 scripts written.
These were mostly second drafts, but due to their complex content, were too expensive to produce.
Ronald D. Moore was one of the writers, and extensive artwork including character, costume, and set designs were developed at Skywalker Ranch under the close supervision of Lucas and McCallum.
The project was still being considered after Lucasfilm was sold to Disney, including by ABC, with stories being reviewed as of December 2015.
According to Kathleen Kennedy,
That's an area we've spent a lot of time, reading through the material that he developed is something we very much would like to explore. ...
So our attitude is, we don't want to throw any of that stuff away.
It's gold.
And it's something we're spending a lot of time looking at, pouring [sic] through, discussing, and we may very well develop those things further.
We definitely want to.

The plot of the anthology film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story was originally pitched as an episode of the series.
The story of Han winning the Millennium Falcon from Lando was planned to be featured and later developed as Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
In early 2020, Stargate Studios shared test footage made to promote the series to networks, as well as a Google Doc listing production details for the series.

===
Detours ===
Star Wars Detours is an unaired animated parody series from the creators of Robot Chicken, which was postponed in 2013 and ultimately unaired.
Production began in 2012 prior to the Disney acquisition, with 39 episodes completed and 62 additional scripts finished.

===
Cara Dune-centered series ===
A Mandalorian spin-off series centered on the character Cara Dune was reportedly considered for Disney+ by November 2020, which Lucasfilm had intended to announce at Disney's Investor Day event the next month.
However, after Gina Carano, who portrayed Dune in The Mandalorian, posted a series of controversial social media posts in both November 2020 and February 2021, any such project was cancelled and Disney severed its ties with the actress.

== See also ==
Lego Star Wars § Films and videos
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars films


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
The Star Wars series has spawned multiple live-action and animated films.
The series started with a film trilogy set in medias res—beginning in the middle of the story—which was later expanded to a trilogy of trilogies, better known as the "Skywalker saga".
The original trilogy was released between 1977 and 1983, the prequel trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a sequel trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
The original eponymous film, later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope, was followed by the sequels Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983), forming what is collectively referred to as the original trilogy.

Years later, a prequel trilogy was released, consisting of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
After Lucasfilm was sold to Disney, a sequel trilogy began with Episode VII – The Force Awakens (2015), continued with Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi (2017), and concluded with Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
In between the sequel films, two anthology films were released, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016) and Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018), both set between the prequel and original trilogies.
The combined box office revenue of the films equates to over US$10 billion, and it is currently the second-highest-grossing film franchise.
All the major theatrical live-action films were nominated for Academy Awards.
The original film was nominated for most of the major categories, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, while all sequels have been nominated for technical categories.

The first spin-off film produced was the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
In 1984 and 1985, two live-action films featuring the Ewoks were televised in the United States and released theatrically in Europe.
Several Star Wars television series have also been released.

==
Skywalker saga ==
The main Star Wars film series is a trilogy of trilogies; as it neared completion, it began to be referred to as the "Skywalker saga".
It was released beginning with the original trilogy (Episodes IV, V and VI, 1977–1983), followed by the prequel trilogy (Episodes I, II and III, 1999–2005) and the sequel trilogy (Episodes VII, VIII and IX, 2015–2019).
The first film released, Star Wars (1977), is the fourth film chronologically and was later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope.
The saga begins with Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999) and concludes with Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

The story follows each generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family and their struggle against the evil Sith lord Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
The prequel trilogy focuses on Anakin Skywalker, his training as a Jedi, and eventual fall to the dark side as Darth Vader.
The original trilogy follows his children, Luke and Leia, as they join the Rebel Alliance and battle Vader, Palpatine and his Galactic Empire.
The sequel trilogy features Ben Solo a.k.a Kylo Ren—the son of Leia and Han Solo, nephew of Luke, and grandson of Anakin—who seeks to rule the galaxy with Rey, the granddaughter of Palpatine and the last Jedi apprentice of Luke and Leia.

Each episodic film begins with an opening crawl, accompanied by the main Star Wars theme by John Williams, who composes the scores for each film.
The first six films—most notably the original trilogy—have had retroactive changes made after their initial theatrical releases.

==
Standalone films ==
As Lucas was outlining a trilogy of trilogies, he also imagined making additional movies unrelated to the Skywalker saga.
The first theatrical films set outside the main episodic series were the Ewok spin-off films Caravan of Courage: An Ewok Adventure (1984) and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985), the first of which was screened internationally after being produced for television.
After the conclusion of his then six-episode saga in 2005, Lucas returned to spin-offs in the form of television series.

An animated film, The Clone Wars (2008), was released as a pilot to a TV series of the same name.
An anthology series set between the main episodes entered development in parallel to the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney CFO Jay Rasulo as origin stories.
The first entry, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016), tells the story of the rebels who steal the Death Star plans directly before Episode IV.
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) focuses on Han's backstory, also featuring Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian.

===
Animated film ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Preceding the airing of the animated TV series in late 2008, the theatrical feature Star Wars: The Clone Wars was compiled from episodes "almost [as] an afterthought.
"
It reveals that Anakin trained an apprentice between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith; the series explains Padawan Ahsoka Tano's absence from the latter film.
The character was originally criticized by fans, but by the end of the series the character had become a fan favorite.
The film and series exist in the same level of canon as the episodic and anthology films.

===
Anthology films ===
Before selling Lucasfilm to Disney in 2012, and parallel to his development of a sequel trilogy, George Lucas and original trilogy co-screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan started development on a standalone film about a young Han Solo.
In February 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger made public the development of a Kasdan film and Entertainment Weekly reported that it would focus on Han Solo.
Disney CFO Jay Rasulo has described the standalone films as origin stories.
Kathleen Kennedy confirmed that there was "no attempt being made to carry characters (from the standalone films) in and out of the saga episodes.
"
The standalone films released so far are subtitled "A Star Wars Story".
====
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016) ====
Rogue One is set directly before Episode IV: A New Hope and focuses on the eponymous group of rebels who obtain the plans to the Death Star.
Its laser was developed by scientist Galen Erso (played by Mads Mikkelsen) after the Empire forcibly abducted him, separating him from his daughter Jyn.
Galen secretly sends a defecting Imperial pilot, Bodhi Rook, to deliver a message warning of the weapon's existence and revealing its weakness to his rebel friend Saw Gerrera.
Under the false promise of her father's liberation, Jyn agrees to help Rebel Alliance intelligence officer Cassian Andor and his droid K-2SO retrieve the message from Saw, now the paranoid leader of an extremist cell of rebels.

The idea for the movie came from John Knoll, the chief creative officer of Industrial Light & Magic.
In May 2014, Lucasfilm announced Gareth Edwards as the director of an anthology film, with Gary Whitta writing the first draft for a release on December 16, 2016.
The film's title was revealed to be Rogue One, with Chris Weitz rewriting the script, and Felicity Jones in the starring role.
Ben Mendelsohn and Diego Luna also play new characters, with James Earl Jones returning to voice Darth Vader.
Edwards stated, "It comes down to a group of individuals who don't have magical powers that have to somehow bring hope to the galaxy."
The film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated Star Wars TV series, namely The Clone Wars' Saw Gerrera, portrayed by Forest Whitaker in the film.
The movie received generally positive reviews, with its performances, action sequences, soundtrack, visual effects and darker tone being praised.
The film grossed over US$500 million worldwide within a week of its release.

====
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) ====
Solo, the second anthology film, focuses on Han Solo about 10 years before A New Hope.
After an escape attempt from his Imperial-occupied home planet of Corellia goes wrong, a young Han vows to return to rescue his girlfriend Qi'ra.
Han "Solo" joins the Imperial Academy; however, he is expelled for his reckless behavior.
Han and his newfound Wookiee friend Chewbacca resort to a criminal life, mentored by veteran smuggler Beckett.
After angering gangster Dryden Vos, Han and his company's lives depend on pulling a heist for him.
Without a ship to travel, they hire Lando Calrissian, the captain and owner of the Millennium Falcon.

Before selling Lucasfilm to Disney, George Lucas had hired Star Wars original trilogy veteran Lawrence Kasdan to write a film about a young Han Solo.
The film stars Alden Ehrenreich as a young Han Solo, Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca (after serving as a double for the character in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi), Donald Glover as Lando Calrissian, Emilia Clarke as Qi'ra, and Woody Harrelson as Beckett.
Lucasfilm originally hired Phil Lord and Christopher Miller to direct, but they were fired during principal photography, and replaced by Ron Howard.
A twist ending acknowledges one of the major story arcs of The Clone Wars and Rebels animated series, while leaving the story open ended for sequels.
====
Rogue Squadron (2023) ====
During Disney Investor Day 2020, it was announced that Patty Jenkins would direct a film titled Rogue Squadron, set to be released on December 22, 2023.
The film will be the first film in the franchise directed by a woman, and according to StarWars.com, "will introduce a new generation of starfighter pilots as they earn their wings and risk their lives in a boundary-pushing, high-speed thrill-ride, and move the saga into the future era of the galaxy."
According to Jenkins, the film will be "something original with great influence from the games and the books.
There's a lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the greatness of all of those things, but yes, it's an original story
and I'm so psyched to do it.
"
When asked who was writing the Script for Rogue Squadron, Patty Jenkins said, "I want him to have his own proper announcement, so I'm going to wait until that comes out."
==
Unspecified future films ==
Rian Johnson, the writer/director of The Last Jedi, is confirmed to write and direct the first film of a new trilogy he was outlining as of early 2019.
Though the project is still active as of February 2021, no release date has been set due to Johnson's involvement with other projects.
The trilogy will differ from the Skywalker-focused films in favor of focusing on new characters and possibly a different era than the main film franchise.
The status of the Johnson trilogy remains uncertain.

In mid-2018, Lucasfilm confirmed that multiple anthology films were in development, with their release following a hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker.
In addition to Rogue Squadron (2023), two untitled films are scheduled for mid-December 2025, and 2027.On May 7, 2019, Disney released its 2020–2027 theatrical release schedule, which revealed that Star Wars films are scheduled to hit theaters in 2023, 2025, and 2027.On September 25, 2019, it was announced that Marvel Cinematic Universe producer Kevin Feige was developing a Star Wars film with Kathleen Kennedy, with Michael Waldron set to write the screenplay.
On February 21, 2020, Variety reported that a Star Wars film from Sleight director J. D. Dillard and Luke Cage writer Matt Owens was in the early stages of development.
On May 4, it was officially announced that Taika Waititi (who directed the first-season finale of The Mandalorian) will direct a Star Wars film from a screenplay he is co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.

== Produced for television ==
The first spin-off film (also the first sequel to be released) was a holiday TV special aired in 1978.
Two live-action TV films created in the mid-1980s feature the Ewoks.

===
Star Wars Holiday Special (1978) ===
Produced for CBS in 1978, the Star Wars Holiday Special was a two-hour television special, in the format of a variety show.
Stars of the original film and archive footage from the original Star Wars film appeared alongside celebrity guest stars in plot-related skits, musical numbers, and an animated segment, all loosely tied together by the premise of Chewbacca's family waiting for his arrival for the "Life Day" celebration on his home planet, Kashyyyk.
The special was aired only once and had a widely negative reception.
The 11-minute animated sequence, which features the debut of bounty hunter Boba Fett, was positively received.
===
Ewok films ===
The Ewoks from Return of the Jedi were featured in two spin-off television films, The Ewok Adventure and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor.
Both aired on ABC on the Thanksgiving weekends of 1984 and 1985, respectively, with at least the first also being given a limited international theatrical release.
Warwick Davis reprised his debut role as the main Ewok, Wicket, in both.
They are set between the events of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Both films were released on VHS, Laser Disc, and on a double-feature DVD.
Although based on story ideas from Lucas, they do not bear Star Wars in their titles, and were considered to exist in a lower level of canon than the episodic films.
Following Disney's acquisition of the franchise, they were excluded from the canon.
The Battle for Endor would be the last live-action Star Wars television project produced by Lucasfilm until 2019's The Mandalorian.

====
The Ewok Adventure (1984) ====
In a story by Lucas and a screenplay by Bob Carrau, the Towani family spaceship shipwrecks on the forest moon of Endor.
While trying to repair their ship, the castaway family is split, when a giant creature known as the Gorax kidnaps the parents.
Taking pity on the kids, a group of native Ewoks led by Wicket decides to help little Cindel Towani and her older brother Mace, rescue their parents.
Among other stylistic choices making the film unique from the Star Wars episodes is the inclusion of a narrator.

====
Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985) ====
The sequel focuses on the Ewoks protecting their village from marauders led by the evil Lord Terak, who killed all the members of the Towani family except for Cindel, in search of a power battery.

===
A Droid Story ===
In December 2020, A Droid Story, an animated adventure film for Disney+ was announced.
According to the official Star Wars Twitter, the "epic journey will introduce us to a new hero guided by R2-D2 and C-3PO.
"

== Reception ==


===
Box office performance ===
The Star Wars films are the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time worldwide, behind the Marvel Cinematic Universe, having grossed over $10 billion at the global box office.

===
Critical response ===


===
Accolades ===


====
Academy Awards ====
The eleven live-action films together have been nominated for 37 Academy Awards, of which they have won seven.
The films were also awarded a total of three Special Achievement Awards.
The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
received Special Achievement Awards for their visual effects, and Star Wars received a Special Achievement Award for its alien, creature and robot voices.
====
Grammy Awards ====
The franchise has received a total of fifteen Grammy Award nominations, winning six.

Notes
==== Library of Congress ====
In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.
By 2015, Star Wars had been transferred to a 2K scan which can be viewed by appointment.

====
Emmy Awards ====
Caravan of Courage:
An Ewok Adventure was one of four films to be juried-awarded Emmys for Outstanding Special Visual Effects at the 37th Primetime Emmy Awards.
The film was additionally nominated for Outstanding Children's Program but lost in this category to an episode of American Playhouse.
At the 38th Primetime Emmy Awards, Ewoks: The Battle for Endor and the CBS documentary Dinosaur!
were both juried-awarded Emmys for Outstanding Special Visual Effects.
The film additionally received two nominations for Outstanding Children's Program and Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Miniseries or a Special.

==
Unproduced and rumored films ==
In early 2013, Bob Iger announced the development of a spin-off film written by Simon Kinberg, reported by Entertainment Weekly to focus on bounty hunter Boba Fett during the original trilogy.
In mid-2014, Josh Trank was officially announced as the director of an undisclosed spin-off film, but had left the project a year later due to creative differences, causing a teaser for the film to be scrapped from Star Wars Celebration.
In May 2018, it was reported that James Mangold had signed on to write and direct a Fett film, with Kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
By October, the Fett film was reportedly no longer in production, with the studio instead focusing on The Mandalorian, which utilizes a similar character design.
In August 2017, it was rumored that films focused on Jabba the Hutt, and Jedi Masters Obi-Wan and Yoda were being considered or were in development.
Stephen Daldry was reportedly in early negotiations to co-write and direct the Obi-Wan movie.
At D23 Expo in August 2019, it was announced that a streaming series about the character would be produced instead.
Felicity Jones, who played Jyn Erso in Rogue One, has the option of another Star Wars film in her contract; notwithstanding her character's fate in Rogue One, it has been speculated that she could return in other anthology films.
In 2018, critics noted that Solo was intentionally left open for sequels.
Alden Ehrenreich and Emilia Clarke confirmed that their contracts to play Han Solo and Q'ira extended for additional films, if required.
An unannounced film centered around the Mos Eisley Spaceport was reportedly put on hold or cancelled in mid-2018, leading to rumors of the cancellation or postponement of the anthology series.
Lucasfilm swiftly denied the rumors as "inaccurate", confirming that multiple unannounced films were in development.
Game of Thrones creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss were to write and produce a trilogy of Star Wars films scheduled to be released in December 2022, 2024, and 2026, which were first announced to be in development in February 2018.
However, citing their commitment to a Netflix deal, the duo stepped away from the project in October 2019.
Kennedy stated her openness to their returning when their schedules allow.
Additionally, though unconfirmed by Lucasfilm, BuzzFeed reported in May 2019 that Laeta Kalogridis was writing the script for the first film in a potential Knights of the Old Republic trilogy.
In January 2020, a film set in the era of The High Republic was rumored to be in development.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars television series


===
Parodies ===
Hardware Wars
Spaceballs
Thumb Wars
Robot Chicken Star Wars
Laugh
It Up
, Fuzzball:
The Family Guy Trilogy
Ice Pirates


==
Footnotes ==


==
References ==
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Official website
Clone troopers are fictional characters in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
They have been featured in a number of Star Wars media, including Episode II:
Attack of the Clones (2002), Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005),
The Clone Wars animated film (2008), the related television series of the same name (2008–2020), and the Rebels television series (2014–2018), as well as comics, novels, and video games of the Star Wars Legends expanded universe.

In-universe, the clone troopers serve as the military of the Galactic Republic, created in the wake of the Confederacy of Independent Systems' formation, which threatened the galactic peace established by the Republic.
The three-year conflict between the clones and the Separatists' battle droid armies is known as the "Clone Wars", in reference to the former, and was secretly orchestrated by the Republic's Chancellor Palpatine to seize power and transform the Republic into the Galactic Empire.
All clone troopers are humans, bred from the DNA of their genetic template, the bounty hunter Jango Fett, at the cloning facilities on Kamino, run by the native Kaminoans, who genetically modified the clones to display unquestioned obedience to the higher chain of command, and age at twice the rate of a normal human.
During the Clone Wars, they served under the command of the Jedi Order, but ultimately turned on them and killed them, as a result of Palpatine issuing Order 66, which branded the Jedi as traitors and ordered their deaths.
The nature of Order 66 is explored in more detail in The Clone Wars animated series, which reveals that Palpatine had secretly arranged for the Clone Army's creation almost a decade before the Clone Wars, and ordered that all clones be outfitted with inhibitor chips, which would alter their mentality and force them to carry out Order 66 unquestionably.
Following the formation of the Empire, clone troopers became more and more uncommon as they were slowly replaced by stormtroopers.
At the time of the original Star Wars trilogy, the 501st Legion, aka "Vader's Fist", was the only known branch of the Imperial Army to consist mostly of former clone troopers.

During development of The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas initially conceived a planet of clones, which is why the Clone Wars was mentioned for the first time in the original Star Wars (1977) film.
The clone trooper armor was designed to suggest an evolution into the stormtroopers of the original trilogy, and it incorporated features from both the armor of stormtroopers and Boba Fett, revealed in Attack of the Clones to be an unaltered clone of Jango.
The armored troopers in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith are computer-generated images voiced by Temuera Morrison, who played Jango.
Younger clones were played by Bodie Taylor and Daniel Logan, who played the younger Boba.
Unhelmeted clones were played by both Morrison and Taylor, who wore bodysuits to isolate their heads, and some clone troopers featured a blend of the actors' features.
In the animated The Clone Wars film and television series, adult clone troopers are voiced by Dee Bradley Baker and child clone troopers are voiced by Logan.

While the prequel trilogy depicted clone troopers as soldiers lacking any personality, The Clone Wars animated film and television series introduced numerous clones with distinctive traits, who quickly became fan favorites.
Clone troopers were humanized especially by the television series, which explored their motivations and feelings about the Clone Wars.
Since then, numerous Star Wars works set during the Clone Wars era have featured clone troopers as main characters.
Clone troopers have become cultural icons, and a widely recognized element of the Star Wars franchise.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Development and design ===
In writing The Empire Strikes Back, Leigh Brackett's first draft of the film initially developed Lando Calrissian as a clone from a planet of clones involved in the Clone Wars mentioned in A New Hope and were nearly made extinct by the war, but this concept was not featured in the final film.
George Lucas later came up with the alternate concept of an army of clone shock troops from a remote planet used by the Republic in the war that followed.
Lucas intended for the prequel trilogy to depict the evolution of the galaxy's fighting forces, and the clone troopers were the step after flawed battle droids.
Clone troopers were designed to strongly suggest the army's evolution into the Empire's stormtrooper army.
Concept artist Jay Shuster said of the armor design, "It follows the formula for a lot of the prequel trilogy.
Take something pre-conceived in the existing trilogy and de-generate it."
Design Director Doug Chiang incorporated both features of the Boba Fett and stormtrooper armor into the design, acknowledging the "vague assertion in Star Wars lore" that Fett's armor was connected to those of the stormtroopers.
Initial concept models implied that the first generation armor was thicker and bulkier than stormtrooper armor, and this characteristic was retained by the art department for Revenge of the Sith.
Lucas expressed a desire for individualized trooper armor from the beginning of art development for Revenge of the Sith.
Several variations were largely dictated by environmental needs, but others were influenced of the 2003 Clone Wars animated series and the desert stormtroopers of A New Hope.
The clone trooper designs "progressed" closer toward the stormtrooper designs, and the film included variant designs similar to the sandtrooper, scout trooper, and snowtrooper armor of the original trilogy.
The designs of clone trooper in snow and cold weather gear, seen in season one of The Clone Wars, are heavily inspired by early concept and costume by Ralph McQuarrie, Joe Johnston, and John Mollo for The Empire Strikes Back.
===
Portrayal ===
In Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, all clone troopers are computer-generated images and are voiced by Temuera Morrison, who played the clone template Jango Fett.
The child clone troopers were played by Daniel Logan, who also played Jango's clone son Boba Fett, and the clone troopers as young men were played by Bodie Taylor, who was cast for his resemblance to a younger Morrison.
Taylor was filmed multiple times and composited to fill out crowded shots set in Tipoca City, and in some cases, such as for distant shots, he was entirely digital.
Commander Cody, seen in armor without his helmet in Revenge of the Sith, was played by Morrison.
He wore a blue bodysuit and only footage of his head was used for Cody; he held a stormtrooper helmet to approximate the digital clone trooper helmet Cody carries.
Like Morrison, Taylor also played armored and unhelmeted clones in Revenge of the Sith, wearing a blue bodysuit that isolated his head.
Some clone troopers were entirely digital and featured a digital blend of Morrison's and Taylor's facial features.
The armor was match-animated to the actors' bodies.
The clone troopers are voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in the 2008 animated film The Clone Wars and its related animated television series of the same name.
Baker attempted to give each clone trooper a unique voice, taking into account personality, age, and position within the unit, sometimes describing the clone in a single adjective and focusing on that descriptor for the voice work.
Each clone was voiced individually, with all the clone's lines for the episode recorded at one time before moving to another character, and the dialogue was edited together.
Logan voiced the young clone troopers in seasons two and three of the 2008 television series.
Baker reprises his role in the 2014 Rebels animated series.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===
In Attack of the Clones (2002), Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi discovers the clone army on Kamino.
He is told by the Kaminoans that Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas ordered the army on the Republic's behalf ten years prior; however, Sifo-Dyas' apparent death shortly before that timeframe leads the Jedi Order to doubt this.
The clone troopers are cloned from Jango Fett, a bounty hunter hired by a man named Tyranus, later revealed to be Sith lord Count Dooku.
The clone troopers' genetics are altered so that they age at twice the normal rate and are more loyal and easier to command.
The clone army is deployed to Geonosis under the command of the Jedi to rescue Obi-Wan, Anakin Skywalker, and Padmé Amidala from execution by the Separatists.
The ensuing battle becomes the first one in the Clone Wars.
Although the clone army emerges victorious, Dooku and many other Separtists leaders escape, meaning that the war has only just begun.
In Revenge of the Sith (2005), set three years later, the clone army continues to fight in the Clone Wars against the Separatist battle droid army.
However, just as it appears that the Republic will win the war, Chancellor Palpatine, secretly the Sith lord Darth Sidious, orders the clone army to execute Order 66, turning them against the Jedi.
The clone troopers kill their Jedi commanders, although a few manage to escape, while the 501st Legion, led by the newly christened Darth Vader, storms the Jedi Temple, burning it and killing the Jedi inside, which effectively ends the Jedi Order.
Following Vader's assassination of the remaining Separatist leaders, Palpatine transforms the Republic into the Galactic Empire and the clone army becomes the basis of the Imperial Army.
Clone troopers are referenced in The Force Awakens (2015) when Kylo Ren chides General Hux for the betrayal of rogue stormtrooper FN-2187 and suggests that Supreme Leader Snoke should consider a clone army.

===
Animation ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Clone troopers are heavily featured in the 2008 animated film The Clone Wars, which spawned an animated series of the same name that lasted until 2014, with a final season released in 2020.
Many named clone troopers are introduced and given individual personalities, serving as the focus of several story arcs.
In the 6th season, more of the nature of "Order 66" is revealed when a clone trooper named Fives discovers that he and his brothers have chips implanted into their brains that would compel them to kill Jedi when "Order 66" is uttered.
Ultimately, the Jedi remained unaware of this as Fives was executed by a shock trooper clone ordered by Palpatine to conceal the existence of the contingency order.

====
Rebels ====
The 2014 animated TV show
Star Wars Rebels features a group of former clone troopers who had removed their chips and, therefore, were not forced to carry out Order 66.
These clones help the crew of the Ghost in their fight against the Empire, and eventually join the Rebel Alliance.
It is also revealed that in the years after the end of the Clone Wars, the Empire gradually replaced the aging clones with the less-effective but more numerous stormtroopers.

===
In other media ===
In the novels Lords of the Sith by Paul S. Kemp, and Tarkin by James Luceno, several clone troopers are still in active service during the early years of the Empire's reign, such as among stormtroopers serving Darth Vader, and even among the Emperor's elite Imperial Guard.

In the Legends game Star Wars Battlefront II, the surviving clone troopers were fitted with new armour and weapons, and became the Imperial Stormtrooper corps of the Empire.
Later, a combination of natural-born humans as well as clones from different donor templates would be incorporated into the Stormtrooper corps.

==
Individual clone troopers
==
===
Coruscant Guard ===
The Coruscant Guard is a division of the Grand Army of the Republic tasked with internal security and peacekeeping operations on Coruscant, protecting "soft target" public spaces and important "hard target" buildings, and serving as escorts and guards on diplomatic missions.
They first appear in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, where they search for Yoda's body in the Senate building after his duel with Darth Sidious and later help Sidious recover Darth Vader's body on Mustafar.
The Coruscant Guard appears in The Clone Wars film and television series, led by Commander Fox.
They hunt Jedi fugitive Ahsoka Tano when she is framed for the bombing of the Jedi Temple and for murder in season five, and they search for ARC trooper Fives when he is framed for an assassination attempt on Supreme Chancellor Palpatine in season six.
In season seven, a skirmish broke out onboard former Jedi Padawan Ahsoka Tano's Venator-class Star Destroyer during the final days of the Clone Wars when clone troopers of the 332nd Company and Coruscant Guard received Order 66 from Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine.
Members of the Coruscant Guard wear armor with red markings.

====
Commander Fox ====
Commander Fox, CC-1010, led the Coruscant Guard, an elite clone trooper unit assigned to serve as peace-keepers on the Galactic Republic capital.
Following the Battle on Teth, Fox's squad rescued Senator Padmé Amidala from Ziro the Hutt.
Fox stormed Ziro's Palace, took out his battle droids, and freed Amidala.
Ziro was taken to the Republic Judiciary Central Detention Center.
When Cad Bane entered the Senate building and held a number of Senators and the Supreme Chancellor hostage, Fox led a company of the Coruscant Guard to cut off his escape.
Unfortunately, Bane had rigged the chamber and the hostages with explosives.
Seeing this, Fox ordered his men to stand down and allowed the bounty hunter and his team to leave the Senate building
Like every other clone trooper in the Guard, Fox was bound by honor and duty to protect and serve the Supreme Chancellor and the members of the Galactic Senate.
Utterly fearless, he was always the first to lead the charge into battle, even in the most perilous combat situations.
His unquestionable loyalty meant he would carry out his orders without question, even if it meant killing a Jedi or another "brother".
His exemplary performance has made him one of the most highly decorated soldiers in the Republic army.
Additional sources state that Fox continued his duty on Coruscant, until an error on his part led Darth Vader to execute him by force snapping his neck.

====
Commander Thire ====
Commander Thire, CC-4477, is a Coruscant Guard clone shock trooper who served as a lieutenant in the Coruscant Guard of the Grand Army of the Republic.
During the Clone Wars, he accompanied Grand Master Yoda of the Jedi Order on an diplomatic assignment to meet with King Katuunko of Toydaria.
In the course of their mission Yoda inspired his clone troopers to take strength from their individual traits, such as Thire's patience.

Following the initiation of Order 66 and the subsequent confrontation between Yoda and Emperor Palpatine in 19 BBY, Thire and his troopers were ordered to hunt the Jedi Master.
The failure to locate his body convinced Mas Amedda that Yoda was still alive, leading the Emperor to order Thire to resume the search.
However, Yoda succeeded in escaping from Coruscant with the aid of Senator Bail Organa.
Thire later accompanied Palpatine to Mustafar to recover the critically wounded Darth Vader.

=== 501st
Legion ===
The 501st Legion is a division of the Grand Army of the Republic—in both canon and Legends—under the command of Jedi General Anakin Skywalker and Padawan Commander Ahsoka Tano.
The 501st fought against the droid forces of CIS (the Confederacy of Independent Systems) throughout the Clone Wars.

The 501st first appears unnamed in Revenge of the Sith under the leadership of Commander Appo, and they assault the Jedi Temple on Coruscant under Order 66.
The 501st Legion also appears extensively throughout Star Wars Battlefront video game franchise and The Clone Wars television series, under the leadership of Captain Rex of Torrent Company.
In the Star Wars Legends expanded universe, after the conversion of the Republic into the Galactic Empire,
the 501st Legion (nicknamed "Vader's Fist") is placed under the command of General Maximilian Veers that serves as Darth Vader's personal battalion.
In current Canon media, the 501st still remain under the command of Vader, however a new group named the First Legion is established as his personal task force, which recruits only from 501st ranks.
Members of the 501st
Legion wear armor with blue markings.
The unit is named after the 501st Legion costuming group.

Notable sub-divisions within the 501st
Legion include:

332nd Company, which was active during the Clone Wars after former Jedi Padawan Ahsoka Tano left the Jedi Order.
When she returned to help Republic forces stage an invasion of Mandalore, the company—alongside Clone Commander CT-7567 "Rex" and Clone Captain CT-0292 "Vaughn"— was assigned to aid her.
After Order 66 is issued, the 332nd's Star Destroyer crash lands on the surface of an unnamed moon, killing all except Ahsoka, Rex, and Maul, who manage to escape; The troopers under the command of Ahsoka Tano have orange marks on their helmets.
Ahsoka and Rex have dug graves for the fallen soldiers as a memorial to them.

Torrent Company was an elite military unit led by Clone Captain CT-7567 "Rex", who served as first-in-command to Jedi General Anakin Skywalker.
The company is distinguished for their engagements against the Confederacy of Independent Systems throughout the war, including the Battle of Christophsis, Battle of Teth, and the Battle of Horain.
Torrent Company died along with the 332nd soon after Order 66.During Star Wars Celebration 2016, Dave Filoni stated that in a planned story arc for The Clone Wars, Ahsoka, who has left the Jedi Order, is given command of part of the 501st Legion, including Captain Rex; those under her command repaint their helmets orange and adorn them with Ahsoka's togruta markings.
She leads them at the siege of Mandalore, which takes place at the same time as the beginning of Revenge of the Sith.
It would later be a part of the new Season 7 episodes on Disney+.
====
Commander Appo ====
Commander Appo, CC-1119, served in the 501st Legion under the command of Jedi General Anakin Skywalker.
He first appears in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, in which he and other members of the 501st carry out Order 66 and follow Anakin, now Darth Vader, in attacking the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.
He stops Senator Bail Organa from entering the Temple.
Appo later appears in season four of The Clone Wars television series as a sergeant in the 501st serving under clone Captain Rex.
His armor bears blue markings.
In The Clone Wars television series, his helmet is adorned with a white arrow in reference to Appa of the Avatar: The Last Airbender television series, on which The Clone Wars supervising director Dave Filoni worked.
====
Captain Rex ====
Captain Rex, CT-7567, leads Torrent Company of the 501st Legion, often under the command of Jedi General Anakin Skywalker and Jedi Commander Ahsoka Tano.
He first appears in The Clone Wars film and its related television series, and he is the primary clone trooper character of the series.
In the seventh season of the series (which overlaps with Revenge of the Sith), Rex is promoted to Commander and leads part of the 501st Legion, called the 332nd legion (Ahsoka Troopers) in the Siege of Mandalore alongside Ahsoka.
When Order 66 is issued, he attempts to execute Ahsoka, but she removes his chip and restores his free will, before the pair fake their deaths and part ways.
Rex later appears in the Rebels television series, set fourteen years after Revenge of the Sith.
Now a much older man because of his accelerated aging, he lives on the wasteland planet Seelos and hunted worm-like joopa with fellow clones Wolffe and Gregor before they are offered a place in the Rebel Alliance, which leads to Rex reuniting with Ahsoka.
In the series' epilogue, it is mentioned that Rex fought in several battles throughout the Galactic Civil War.

====
ARC Trooper Fives ====
ARC trooper Fives, CT-27-5555, serves alongside fellow ARC trooper Echo.
He first appears in The Clone Wars season one episode "Rookies" as a regular trooper.
He and his unit are assigned to a remote listening outpost that is invaded by Separatist droids.
Though the invasion is successfully repelled, only Fives and Echo survive, and they are reassigned to the 501st Legion.
The season three episode "Clone Cadets" depicts Fives and his unit as cadets in training on Kamino.
The unit, called Domino squad, is initially unable to work together to pass their final test.
Fives and Echo feel weighed down by the others in the squad and ask to be reassigned, but the request is denied.
Under the advice of Jedi General Shaak Ti, Fives and Echo recommit themselves to Domino, and the squad is able to pass.
Fives and Echo are eventually promoted to ARC troopers together for their actions while defending Kamino and continue serving with the 501st.
When assigned to the command of Jedi General Pong Krell during the campaign on Umbara, Fives finds Krell's disregard for clone trooper lives appalling and openly disagrees with Krell and with Captain Rex, who is insistent on following orders.
After discovering how to pilot Umbaran fighters, Fives, along with fellow clones Jesse and Hardcase disobey direct orders and destroy Umbaran supply ships delivering arms to the Umbaran Capital using the starfighters, with Hardcase sacrificing himself in the process.
Though their actions allow a Republic victory, Krell, without process of a court-martial, finds Fives and Jesse guilty of treason and sentences them to execution by firing squad.
However, Fives urges his fellow troopers to see this as an injustice, and the firing squad refuses to execute him.
After Krell is ousted as a Republic Traitor, Fives is freed from custody and aids Rex and the 501st in arresting Krell, with clone trooper Dogma eventually using Fives’ blaster to execute Krell.

In season six, during a battle over Ringo Vinda, Fives and the 501st are winning the battle until fellow clone Tup mysteriously executes Jedi General Tiplar, forcing the 501st to retreat.
After rescuing Tup from Separatists and delivering him to Kamino for a medical investigation, Fives discovers a mysterious tumour in Tup’s head before the latter dies.
After realising the Kaminoans intend to wipe his mind, Fives launches his own investigation and realises the “tumour” in Tup’s head is an inhibitor chip implanted in every clone from a young stage.
Jedi Master Shaak Ti brings him to inform Palpatine about the chips, where Palpatine, being the true mastermind behind the conspiracy, reveals the chips’ true purpose to Fives.
He frames Fives for an assassination attempt, initiating a manhunt for Fives.
With the help of 501st medic Kix, Fives is able to contact Rex and Anakin Skywalker, and he attempts to warn them of the conspiracy and of Palpatine's involvement.
He is ultimately killed by Commander Fox of the Coruscant Guard and dies in Rex's arms.

Fives' name is derived from his designation number (CT-27-5555), which features fives in sequence.
He is distinguished by a goatee and a stylized numeral five tattoo on his right temple.
His armor bears blue markings, and a stylized worm creature adorns his helmets; after his promotion to ARC trooper, he also wears light gray pauldrons on his shoulders and
kilt-like kama painted with blue stripes.
He regards duty and honor above orders and protocol, feeling that there is no honor in following foolish orders and marching to his death.
He insists that clone troopers be referred to by name, not number, and that they are soldiers, not units, and should be treated as such.
He is a close friend of Rex and, after the apparent death of Echo, considers his best friend to be fellow trooper Tup, who aids Fives against Krell and is one of the first to refuse executing Fives when given the order by Krell.
When Tup begins behaving abnormally due to his inhibitor chip malfunctioning, Fives goes to great lengths and disregards order to attempt to save Tup's life and, later, discover the true cause of Tup's death.
With his dying words, he describes attempting to expose the conspiracy to have been his duty.

====
ARC
Trooper Echo ====
ARC trooper Echo, CT-21-0408, sometimes CT-1409, serves alongside fellow ARC trooper Fives.
He first appears in The Clone Wars season one episode "Rookies" as a regular trooper.
He and his unit are assigned to a remote listening outpost that is invaded by Separatist droids.
Though the invasion is successfully repelled, only Echo and Fives survive, and they are reassigned to the 501st Legion.
The season three episode "Clone Cadets" depicts Echo and his unit as cadets in training on Kamino.
The unit, called Domino squad, is initially unable to work together to pass their final test.
Echo and Fives feel weighed down by the others in the squad and ask to be reassigned, but the request is denied.
Under the advice of Jedi General Shaak Ti, Echo and Fives recommit themselves to Domino, and the squad is able to pass.
Echo and Fives are eventually promoted to ARC troopers together for their actions while defending Kamino and continue serving with the 501st.
Echo is apparently killed in an explosion during a rescue operation in the season three episode "Counter Attack".

Story reels for a previously-unfinished four episode arc called "Bad Batch" (initially part of The Clone Wars Legacy project, the episodes were later released on Disney+
in their completed state) revealed that Echo survived and was captured by the Separatists.
He was modified into a cyborg able to communicate directly to computers and tasked with decoding the Republic strategy algorithm.
Echo is rescued by Captain Rex, and with his ability to understand Separatist transmissions, he plays a key role in the Battle of Anaxes, earning a victory against the Separatists.
After the mission, Echo decided to join Clone Force 99.

Echo's armor bears blue markings, and a blue handprint adorns his chest-plate, created when Rex touched it while covered in eel blood during Echo's first mission.
After his promotion to ARC trooper, Echo also wears light gray pauldrons on his shoulders and a kilt-like kama painted in an asymmetrical white and blue design.
Later, after his rescue from Separatist capture, he is visibly a cyborg, with various apparatus protruding from his head and a droid plug in place of his right hand; post-rescue, he takes to wearing what appears to be a stripped-down variant on Standard Phase II Armor.
Throughout his appearances, he is characterized as one who strictly follows orders, regulations, and protocol.
Echo's name is given to him by Domino squad on Kamino as a sarcastic reference to his tendency to immediately repeat orders, even if his squad already heard.

====
ARC
Lieutenant Jesse ====
ARC Lieutenant Jesse, CT-5597, is a member in the 501st Legion.
In season four' Battle of Umbara, Jesse, like Fives comes to consider General Pong Krell to be ruthless and reckless (mainly over the casualty numbers).
He later helps Fives and Hardcase on a rogue mission to destroy a Separatist supply ship, which succeeds at the cost of Hardcase's life.
In season seven, he takes part in the Siege of Mandalore, during which he is captured and interrogated by Maul, and later attempts to execute Ahsoka Tano when Order 66 is issued.
After Commander Rex has his chip removed and sides with Ahsoka, Jesse accuses him of treason and tries to kill him as well, but dies along with all the troopers aboard when the Venator-class Star Destroyer they are on crashes on a small moon, and is buried by Ahsoka and Rex.

Jesse is distinguished by his shaved hair with the Republic symbol tattooed on most of his head.
His armor bears blue markings with the Republic symbol on the center.

====
Trooper Kix ====
Kix, CT-6116, is a medic serving in the 501st Legion.
In season six, Kix aids Fives, a fugitive because he discovered the inhibitor chip conspiracy.
The short story "The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Count Dooku" reveals that this action prompted Count Dooku to capture Kix, who discovered the conspiracy himself by the time of his capture.
With droids failing to secure a confession, Kix was frozen in stasis for delivery to Dooku.
The ship crashed into a planet during a randomized hyperspace jump to escape a Republic attack and protect "Dooku's prize".
Fifty years later, Kix is released from stasis by pirates searching for "the lost treasure of Count Dooku".
Kix is taken aboard the Corsair's ship and welcomed to their endeavor of raiding forgotten Separatist bases.
Kix is distinguished by his shaved hair and a phrase translating to "a good droid is a dead one" tattooed across his head.
His armor bears blue markings, and his Phase II armor bears a red insignia marking him as a medic.
He is "dedicated to preserving the life of his brothers", and he even tells an injured Captain Rex, "As the team medic, when it comes to the health of the men, including you, I outrank everyone."
However, he still has "no qualms about fighting the enemy".
====
Trooper Tup ====
Tup, CT-5385, was part of the 501st legion under Captain Rex.
He served in the Umbara campaign and was key to the capture of treasonous Jedi General Pong Krell, supporting and siding with his friend Fives even after Fives had been condemned to death by Krell and stunning the Jedi after a fierce battle with mutinous 501st clones led by Rex.
In the sixth season, Tup suffered a malfunction in a biotechnical chip implanted in his brain shortly after his creation by the Kaminoans.
Intended to ensure that the clones obeyed Order 66, the chip caused Tup to shoot and kill Jedi General Tiplar despite not having been ordered to.
As Tup was being shipped back to Kamino for evaluation, he was kidnapped by the Separatists (who wanted to know why his chip had malfunctioned), only to be recovered shortly afterwards.
Tup's actions led to the discovery of the chips by both the Jedi and the clones themselves, but Tup died of medical complications soon afterwards.
Though Fives attempted to avenge Tup's death by finding the truth behind the chips, he was killed before he could reveal what he had learned, with Tup's actions and death officially declared to be the result of a locally acquired virus.

Tup's armor featured the blue markings common in the 501st, as well as an image of a single blue teardrop underneath the right eye of his helmet; this matched a tattoo on his face.

===
212th Attack Battalion ===
The 212th Attack Battalion is a division of the Grand Army of the Republic under the command of Jedi General Obi-Wan Kenobi and his subordinate, Commander Cody.
The 212th fought against the droid forces of the Confederacy of Independent Systems throughout the Clone Wars.
A component of the 7th Sky Corps of the Third Systems Army, it consisted of both standard clone infantry and clone paratroopers.
The battalion fought on a multitude of worlds throughout the Clone Wars, including early campaigns on Christophsis, Teth, Ryloth, Saleucami and Geonosis, to latter battles on Kiros, Sarrish, Moorjhone and Umbara.
The 212th was also involved in numerous special operations missions; which included an infiltration mission on Lola Sayu.

By the third and last year of the conflict, the 212th led an invasion of the Separatist-controlled worlds, including Anaxes and Utapau.
During the latter battle, Kenobi killed General Grievous, marking a major loss for the Separatists and bringing the Republic one step closer to winning the war.
However, Kenobi was ultimately betrayed by his soldiers upon the activation of Order 66, a protocol that called for the extermination of all Jedi.
The clones failed to execute their former leader, however.
Following the proclamation of the New Order, the 212th was folded into the armed forces of the Galactic Empire.
During their days in service to the new government, with General Kahdah as the commanding officer, the battalion was dispatched to the Wookiee homeworld of Kashyyyk where they suppressed an indigenous uprising.

Notable sub-divisions within the 212th Attack Battalion include:

Ghost Company - participated in several battles and campaigns.
Most Ghost Company clone troopers bore orange markings on their standard clone trooper armor.
Many also had customized helmet coloration designs.

Foxtrot Group - an elite commando unit, led by Clone Captain Gregor, within the Special Operations Brigade of the Grand Army of the Republic.
It was attached in direct support to the 212th Attack Battalion and was deployed during the Battle of Sarrish, though many of its troopers perished in that battle.

====
Commander Cody ====

Commander Cody, CC-2224, leads the 212th Attack Battalion under the command of Jedi General Obi-Wan Kenobi.
He first appears in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith during the Battle of Utapau, aiding Obi-Wan against General Grievous on the planet Utapau.
He is the first clone trooper to receive Order 66 on-screen, and he obediently commands his troopers to shoot down Obi-Wan and to locate his body to confirm the kill.
Cody later appears in The Clone Wars film and its related television series.
Cody is distinguished by a scar on the left side of his face.
His armor bears orange markings, and he wears visors on his helmets.
He is characterized as a cautious but "natural and practical leader" whose "keen ability to strategize, combined with his fierce combat style in the heat of battle, earned him the respect of the Jedi, and of his fellow clones".
He is also noted to adhere to standard procedures and protocol.
Cody is particularly loyal to Obi-Wan, whom he complemented well, and their relationship is characterized by a mutual camaraderie and trust, though this did not prevent Cody from attempting to kill Kenobi as part of Order 66.
Cody is also friends with Captain Rex, having completed many missions together.

====
Captain Gregor ====
Captain Gregor, Ct-5576-39, is the former leader of Foxtrot Group, an elite commando unit within the Special Operations Brigade of the Grand Army of the Republic, attached in direct support to the 212th Attack Battalion.
He is introduced in the season five episode "Missing in Action"—suffering amnesia and living on the distant planet Abafar, where a stranded D-Squad—a Republic covert-ops unit consisting of droids looking for a Separatist decoding chip—discovers him working as a dishwasher in a diner.
It is revealed that he lost his memories and sense of identity after a shuttle crash during the devastating Battle of Sarrish.
He was rescued by his employer, who keeps Gregor's true identity from him to prevent him from leaving, but Gregor is able to regain his sense of duty and his armor to help the Republic.
Gregor holds off Separatist droids to allow the Republic mission to escape, and despite his promise to make his way home, he is seemingly killed in an explosion of rhydonium.
He later appears in the Rebels television series, set fourteen years after Revenge of the Sith.
He is revealed to have removed his inhibitor chip, preventing him from carrying out Order 66.
Now a much older man because of his accelerated aging, he lives on the wasteland planet Seelos and hunts worm-like joopa with Captain Rex (CT-7567) and Commander Wolffe (CT-3636).
Sometime after the Clone Wars, he suffered a brain injury, causing him to suffer brief periods of apparent insanity.

When the Spectres, a team of rebels from the planet Lothal, arrive on Seelos to ask for help, Gregor initially declines, but eventually assists them in fending off an Imperial attack after Wolffe inadvertently exposes them to the Empire.
He later took part in a final battle to free Lothal from Imperial control, where he was fatally wounded by an Imperial technician.

Gregor's commando armor bears yellow markings and an off-white camouflage pattern, and his helmet is adorned with hash-marks modeled after those on Gerry Cheevers' hockey mask.
===
Special Operations Brigade ===
Special Operations Brigade (SOBDE)—a.k.a.
GAR Special Forces—was a brigade of elite clone troopers in the Grand Army of the Republic under the command of Jedi General Arligan Zey and Jedi General Iri Camas.
Within the film series and in the Star Wars expanded universe media, the brigade contained highly-specialized elite Republic special forces soldiers enhanced with genetic experimentation, including Clone Commandos, Advanced Reconnaissance Commandos (ARC Troopers), Alpha-class ARCs, Null-class ARCs, clone assassins, clone shadow troopers, covert operations clone troopers, and special operation clone troopers who usually work alone.
All clone commandos and ARCs were trained by Mandalorian mercenaries.

The style and color of a clone troopers armor often varies depending on their rank, specialization, unit, or environment, for example, the clone troopers on Kashyyyk wear camouflage green scout-style armour whereas the 501st legion wears standard white armor with blue accents.
Another example is the aquatic SCUBA troopers, who appear in the animated series Star Wars: Clone Wars.
SCUBA troopers are equipped with high-tech breathing apparatuses and long range blaster rifles.

====
Clone Force 99 ====
Clone Force 99—informally known as "The Bad Batch"—was a clone commando squad consisting of four clone troopers with personality quirks that only slightly resemble normal clones—the result of specially designed genetic experimentation.
Their names were "Crosshair," a scout sniper specialist with brilliant eyesight abilities; "Wrecker," a reckless heavy ordnance specialist with enhanced muscular form; "Tech," a security specialist with enhanced mental capacity and intelligence; and squad leader Clone Sergeant "Hunter," a CQC specialist with enhanced sensory abilities.
The squad had maintained an impressive 100% mission completion ratio, but were notorious for their insubordination and considered themselves superior to other special operations units.
The squad was introduced in their self-titled story arc of the seventh season of The Clone Wars animated series, where they came to Anaxes to assist Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Rex on their mission to investigate a source of Separatist' victories, as well as trying to rescue Echo, the ARC Trooper who was presumed dead on Lola Sayu, now revealed to have been captured by the Techno Union and held on Skako Minor.
Following the successful mission, Echo decided to join Clone Force 99.

In July 2020, it was announced that Clone Force 99 would be receiving their own spin-off series in 2021 on Disney+
titled "The Bad Batch" and will follow their actions in the early days of the Empire.
==== 05
Commando Battalion ====
05 Commando Battalion was one of 10 units of commando groups within the Grand Army of the Republic's Special Operations Brigade.
The unit held five companies, with each consisting of 100 commandos per company, which accounted for 25 squads.
Within the battalion, Arca Company was housed, who also held Delta Squad and Omega Squad.
Veshok Squad was also housed in a separate company.
During the Clone Wars, Jedi General Bardan Jusik was placed in charge of the unit, until he stepped down from the Jedi Order and as a military General.
When Jusik stepped down, Jedi General Etain Tur-Mukan was placed in charge.
Notable sub-divisions within the 05 Commando Battalion include:

Delta Squad is a unit of four Republic commandos, a type of specialized clone trooper.
The squad is introduced in the video game
Star Wars:
Republic Commando and featured thorough the Republic Commando novels by Karen Traviss, and its troopers make a brief appearance in The Clone Wars television series.
Delta is led by Sergeant Boss, RC-1138 and often referred to as simply 38; he is distinguished by orange markings on his armor, and he is voiced by Temuera Morrison.
Scorch, RC-1262 and
often referred to as simply 62, is the squad's demolitions expert and has a jocular sense of humor; he is distinguished by yellow markings on his armor, and he is voiced by Raphael Sbarge.
Sev, RC-1207 and often referred to as simply 07, is the group's sniper and is characterized as grim.
During a mission on Kashyyyk at the end of the Clone Wars, depicted at the end of Republic Commando, Sev's transmission signal is lost, and he is declared missing in action; his ultimate fate is uncertain.
Sev is distinguished by red markings on his armor, and he is voiced by Jonathan David Cook.
Fixer, RC-1140 and often referred to as simply 40, is the hacker and technical expert and is characterized as distant and stern; he is distinguished by green markings on his armor, and he is voiced by Andrew Chaikin.

Omega Squad is a unit of four Republic commandos featured in the "Republic Commando" novels.
The members wear black armor, and each man is the sole survivor of his previous unit.
Omega is led by Sergeant Niner, RC-1309, who is characterized as serious and protective of the other men.
Darman, RC-1136, is a demolitions expert; he falls in love with Jedi Etain Tur-Mukan, and they have a child.
Fi, RC-8015, is the squad's sniper and medic, and he is described as seemingly easy-going but troubled by the denial of a normal life.
Fi suffers a brain injury in True Colors and is declared legally dead when he falls into a coma; medical procedure requires he be euthanized, but he is taken to Mandalore where he eventually makes a full recovery.
Atin, RC-3222, is the squad's technical expert, and he is described as quiet but deeply stubborn.
Atin was trained by Walon Vau, unlike the others, and he initially harbors deep resentments for Vau.
Corr, CT-5108/8843 later RC-5108/8843, joins the squad upon Fi's injury.
Corr is a regular trooper who served as a bomb disposal expert; because of an injury, both arms from the elbows are prosthetic.

===
Notable Commanders ===


====
Commander Gree ====
Commander Gree, CC-1004, leads the 41st Elite Corps under the command of Jedi General Luminara Unduli.
He first appears in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith aiding Jedi General Yoda on Kashyyyk.
He attempts to carry out Order 66, but he and another Kashyyyk Scout trooper are decapitated by Yoda.
He later appears in the first and second seasons of The Clone Wars television series serving under Luminara.
Gree is distinguished by his dyed red hair shaved into two parallel stripes and eyebrows dyed to match his hair.
His armor bears green markings, and he appears in green camouflage armor in Revenge of the Sith.

====
Commander Bly ====
Commander Bly, CC-5052, leads the 327th Star Corps under the command of Jedi General Aayla Secura.
He first appears in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, in which he and his men carry out Order 66 and shoot Aayla in the back, killing her.
He later appears in season one of The Clone Wars television series alongside Aayla.
Bly is distinguished by his close-shaved hair and yellow rectangular tattoos on his cheeks.
His armor bears yellow markings, and he wears a brown pauldron on his left shoulder, a kilt-like kama, and binocular attachments on his helmets.
He is known as a dependable soldier who greatly values the success of the mission, and he has a "close working relationship" with Aayla and respects her dedication to achieving her objectives.

====
Commander Neyo ====
Marshal Commander Neyo, CC-8826, leads the 91st Mobile Reconnaissance Corps, with initial-command given to Jedi General Mace Windu in the Battle of Ryloth and Battle of Anaxes; command was later transferred to Jedi Generals Adi Gallia and Stass Allie.
Aside from BARC speeders, the corps utilized AT-AP walkers, and AT-RT walkers.
The elite cavalry unit Lightning Squadron was part of the 91st Reconnaissance Corps.
As the war with the Confederacy of Independent Systems progressed, in 20 BBY, the Republic Military formed a special covert-ops team of droids known as D-Squad;
consisted of four astromech droids, R2-D2, QT-KT, U9-C4, and M5-BZ, Neyo's DUM-series pit droid, designated WAC-47, and was placed under the command of Colonel Meebur Gascon.
D-Squad's primary objective was to infiltrate a Separatist Providence-class carrier/destroyer and steal an encryption module that was housed aboard, which was successful.
Later, the commander attended a Republic strategy conference at the Valor space station located in the Carida system.
During the conference, a Separatist attack on the station was thwarted by the members of D-Squad.
Neyo and his troops were stationed on the Outer Rim world of Saleucami, under the command of Jedi General Stass Allie, in the waning days of the Clone Wars.
While patrolling the planet's surface, he received a message from Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine instructing him to execute Order 66.
Neyo fired his BARC speeder's laser cannons on the general, adding Allie to the list of Jedi who perished.
After the transformation of the Galactic Republic into the Galactic Empire, 91st Recon Corps was folded into the Imperial Army.
Neyo had a specialized helmet similar to that of Commander Wolffe, and sported a sash on his armor, and a small, grey, shoulder pauldron over his right shoulder as well.

====
Commander Wolffe ====
Commander Wolffe, CC-3636, leads the 104th Battalion under the command of Jedi General Plo Koon.
He is introduced in The Clone Wars season one episode "Rising Malevolence".
He is the first officer aboard Plo's flagship Triumphant when it is destroyed by General Grievous and is one of three clones to survive.
Afterward, he appears with a redesigned character model, including a cybernetic eye implant, and leads a tight-knit unit nicknamed Wolfpack on the battlefield.
He later appears in the Rebels television series, set fourteen years after Revenge of the Sith.
Wolffe is revealed to have removed his inhibitor chip, preventing him from carrying out Order 66.
Now a much older man because of his accelerated aging, he lives on the wasteland planet Seelos and hunts worm-like joopa with Rex and Gregor.
When they are sought by the rebel protagonists, Wolffe is suspicious of their motives and contacts the Empire to protect himself, Rex, and Gregor.
Rex convinces him that the rebels can be trusted, and Wolffe regrets his actions.

He then thwarts an incoming attack from the Empire to save the rebels, and
later on helps them free their planet from Imperial occupation once and for all.

Wolffe is distinguished by a scar running through his eye and a silver cybernetic eye implant.
His armor is adorned with a gray stylized likeness of a wolf, and he wears a kilt-like kama.
He is characterized as detail-oriented and as having "a sense of strategy superior to that of most clone officers, making him a highly effective complement to Plo.
"
He is impatient with missions that send him away from the battlefield and becomes quickly exasperated with garrulous protocol droid C-3PO.
==
Reception ==
Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter felt the decision to make an army of clones is a "softening of the Star Wars' own mythology", though the article later corrected that not all troopers in the franchise were clones.
Noting that the films never specify that the clone troopers are replaced by regular soldiers by the original trilogy, he believed that the idea of soldiers who are created solely for war and are little more than machines "sanitizes the war of the franchise's title".
He praised the decision of The Force Awakens to explicitly move away from clone troopers as bringing "much-needed moral complexity" to the film's conflict.
The story arcs and character development of various clone trooper characters in the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars was met with praise from both fans and critics alike, with many clones such as Captain Rex becoming fan favorite characters.

== See also ==
Stormtrooper (Star Wars)
501st
Legion
Captain Rex
Galactic Republic
Galactic Empire
Mandalorians
Spartiate


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Clone Troopers in the StarWars.com Databank
Clone trooper on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (also known as Star Wars: Episode IX –
The Rise of Skywalker) is a 2019 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the third installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015) and The Last Jedi (2017), and the final episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Carrie Fisher, Mark Hamill, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Anthony Daniels, Naomi Ackie, Domhnall Gleeson, Richard E. Grant, Lupita Nyong'o, Keri Russell, Joonas Suotamo, Kelly Marie Tran, Ian McDiarmid, and Billy Dee Williams.
The Rise of Skywalker follows Rey, Finn, and Poe Dameron as they lead the Resistance's final stand against Supreme Leader Kylo Ren and the First Order, who are aided by the return of the deceased Galactic Emperor, Palpatine.

Following initial reports that The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson would write the script for Episode IX, in August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a script with his collaborator Derek Connolly; both ultimately retain story credit with Abrams and Chris Terrio.
In September 2017, Trevorrow left the project following creative differences with producer Kathleen Kennedy, and Abrams returned as director.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score for the last time for the franchise.
Principal photography began in August 2018 at Pinewood Studios in England and wrapped in February 2019, with post-production completed in November 2019.
With an estimated budget of $275 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on December 16, 2019, and was released in the United States on December 20.
Unlike The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi which received positive reviews, The Rise of Skywalker received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the acting, action sequences, musical score, and visual effects, but criticized the story, pacing, and its perceived departures from the plot and themes of The Last Jedi.
The film grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2019; although the film was the lowest-grossing installment of the trilogy, it turned an estimated net profit of $300 million.
The film received three nominations at the 92nd Academy Awards (Best Original Score, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound Editing) as well as three at the 73rd British Academy Film Awards (also Best Special Visual Effects, Best Original Music, and Best Sound).
==
Plot ==
Following a threat of revenge by the revived Emperor Palpatine, Kylo Ren obtains a Sith Wayfinder, leading him to the uncharted planet Exegol.
There, he finds Palpatine, who reveals that he created Snoke as a puppet to control the First Order and lure Kylo to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order—a secret armada of Star Destroyers—and tells Kylo to find and kill Rey, who is continuing her Jedi training under Resistance leader Leia Organa.
Finn and Poe Dameron deliver intelligence from a spy that Palpatine is on Exegol; Rey has learned from Luke Skywalker's notes that a Sith Wayfinder can lead them there.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, BB-8, and C-3PO depart in the Millennium Falcon to Pasaana, where a clue to a Wayfinder is hidden.

Kylo initiates a Force bond with Rey to discover her location; he travels to Pasaana with his warrior subordinates, the Knights of Ren.
With the help of Lando Calrissian, Rey and her friends find the clue—a dagger inscribed with Sith text, which C-3PO's programming forbids him from interpreting—and the remains of a Jedi hunter named Ochi and his ship.
Rey senses Kylo nearby and faces him.
The First Order captures the Falcon, Chewbacca, and the dagger; attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys a First Order transport with Force lightning.
Believing Chewbacca to be dead, the group escapes on Ochi's ship.

The group travels to Kijimi, where a droidsmith extracts the Sith text from C-3PO's memory, revealing coordinates to a Wayfinder.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive, and the group mounts a rescue mission to Kylo's Star Destroyer.
Rey recovers the dagger and has visions of Ochi killing her parents with it.
Kylo informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter; the Sith Lord had ordered Ochi to recover Rey as a child, but her parents hid her on Jakku to protect her.
General Hux saves Poe, Finn, and Chewbacca from execution, revealing himself as the spy.
He permits the group to escape on the Falcon but is discovered and killed by Allegiant General Pryde.
The group flies the Falcon to the Wayfinder's coordinates on a moon in the Endor system.

Rey retrieves the Wayfinder from the remains of the second Death Star, but she is met by Kylo, who destroys the Wayfinder and duels her.
In a dying act, Leia calls to Kylo through the Force, distracting him as Rey impales him.
Sensing Leia's death, Rey heals Kylo and takes his ship to exile herself on Ahch-To.
There, Luke's Force spirit encourages Rey to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber.
Rey leaves for Exegol in Luke's X-wing fighter, using the Wayfinder from Kylo's ship.
Meanwhile, Kylo converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber and reclaims his identity as Ben Solo.
Sensing Leia's death and Ben's redemption
, Palpatine sends one of his superlaser-equipped Star Destroyers to destroy Kijimi as a show of force.

Rey transmits her coordinates to R2-D2, allowing the Resistance—now led by Poe and Finn—to follow her to Exegol.
There, she confronts Palpatine; he demands that she kill him for his spirit to pass into her.
Lando brings reinforcements from across the galaxy to join the battle.
Ben overpowers the Knights of Ren and joins Rey, but Palpatine drains their power to rejuvenate himself.
He incapacitates Ben and attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who lend her their strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing Palpatine before dying herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive her at the cost of his own life; they share a kiss before he dies.
The Resistance defeats Palpatine's armada, while people across the galaxy rise up against the First Order.
The Resistance returns to their base to celebrate.

After the celebration, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries his and Leia's lightsabers.
A passerby asks her name; as the spirits of Luke and Leia watch, she replies, "Rey Skywalker."
== Cast ==
Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa, the Force-sensitive leading general of the Resistance, mother to Ben Solo, Luke Skywalker's twin sister, and Anakin Skywalker's daughter.
Fisher, who died in late 2016, appears through the use of repurposed unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi Master and maternal uncle of Kylo Ren.
He became one with the Force in The Last Jedi.

Adam Driver as Ben Solo / Kylo Ren, the Supreme Leader of the First Order.
He is the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, and the grandson of Anakin Skywalker.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a former scavenger from Jakku, member of the Resistance, and the next JediCailey Fleming and Josefine Irrera Jackson as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn, a member of the Resistance and a former stormtrooper (FN-2187) who defected from the First Order
Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot and commander of the Resistance who later inherits the rank of general from Leia
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of General Organa
Naomi Ackie as Jannah, a former stormtrooper of the First Order (TZ-1719) living on the planet Kef Bir, who aids the Resistance
Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the First Order's third in-command
Richard E. Grant as Allegiant General Pryde, a high-ranking general in the First Order, who previously served in the Galactic Empire
Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a former space pirate and ally of the Resistance
Keri Russell as Zorii Bliss, an old acquaintance of Poe's from Kijimi
Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca, a Wookiee and first mate of the Millennium Falcon
Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a mechanic in the Resistance and friend of Finn
Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the resurrected Dark Lord of the Sith and Rey's paternal grandfather
Billy Dee Williams
as Lando Calrissian, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance, a former owner of the Millennium Falcon, and an old friend of ChewbaccaBillie Lourd and Greg Grunberg reprise their roles as Lieutenant Kaydel Ko Connix and Temmin "Snap" Wexley respectively.
Additionally, Dominic Monaghan portrays Resistance trooper Beaumont Kin, Shirley Henderson voices Babu Frik, and Nick Kellington portrays Klaud via capture performance.
Hassan Taj and Lee Towersey perform the role of R2-D2, while Dave Chapman and Brian Herring return as the puppeteers of BB-8, and director J. J. Abrams also provides the voice for D-O. Martin Wilde, Anton Simpson-Tidy, Lukaz Leong, Tom Rodgers, Joe Kennard, and Ashley Beck appear as the Knights of Ren.
Amanda Lawrence reprises her role as Commander Larma D’Acy, while Vinette Robinson plays her wife, Pilot Wrobie Tyce.
Jodie Comer and Billy Howle briefly appear as Rey's parents, while Tom Wilton and screenwriter Chris Terrio briefly appear as the performer and voice for Aftab Ackbar, the son of Admiral Ackbar, respectively; and Mike Quinn and Kipsang Rotich return as the performer and voice of Nien Nunb, respectively.
Denis Lawson and Warwick Davis briefly reprise their roles as Wedge Antilles, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance; and Wicket W. Warrick, now the leader of the Ewoks, respectively.
Harrison Ford reprises his role as Han Solo in an uncredited cameo.
Composer John Williams cameos as Oma Tres, a Kijimi bartender, Kevin Smith cameos as a Kijimi inhabitant, and Abrams' frequent composer collaborator Michael Giacchino cameos as a Sith Trooper, while Lin-Manuel Miranda and Jeff Garlin both cameo as human and alien Resistance troopers, respectively.
Ed Sheeran, Karl Urban, Dhani Harrison, Nigel Godrich, J. D. Dillard, and Dave Hearn all cameo as stormtroopers.
Actors making reprisal vocal cameos include James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, Andy Serkis as Snoke, and the voices of several past Jedi, including Ewan McGregor and Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi (the latter via digitally altered archive audio), Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli, Frank Oz as Yoda, Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura, Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, and Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney subsequently announced the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
In June 2014, it was announced that Rian Johnson, writer and director of The Last Jedi, would write a story treatment for Episode IX.
However, Johnson later stated that he was not involved in writing the film.
In August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was announced as the director of the film; he was to write the script with frequent collaborator Derek Connolly.

=== Pre-production ===

In February 2016, Disney chief executive officer Bob Iger confirmed that pre-production on Episode IX had begun.
Carrie Fisher died in December 2016.
Prior to the release of the film, Carrie Fisher's brother Todd Fisher, who planned her character
General Leia Organa to appear in the film before her death, revealed that “she was going to be the big payoff in the final film” and “she was going to be the last Jedi, so to speak.
”In
August 2017, it was announced that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.
In September 2017, Lucasfilm stated that Trevorrow had left the production following creative differences, resulting his working relationship with Kathleen Kennedy to become unmanageable after failing to deliver a satisfactory script, despite writing several drafts.
That same month, Johnson was rumored as the top choice to replace Trevorrow as director, but stated "it was never in the plan for me to direct Episode IX", and later, J. J. Abrams, the director of The Force Awakens, was announced to return as the director in Episode IX.The story team met with George Lucas before writing the new script to discuss the nature of the Force.
Abrams co-wrote the script with Chris Terrio, though Trevorrow and Connolly retain story credits.
The story was rewritten to some extent before filming was completed.
The film was produced by Abrams' company Bad Robot Productions, Kathleen Kennedy, and Michelle Rejwan.
According to Terrio, the film's script had to include certain narrative beats provided by Kennedy and Rejwan, including the redemption of the character Kylo Ren.
Before filming, Episode IX was initially given the working title Black Diamond, which was then changed to TrIXie in 2018, so that the roman numeral "IX" would be included in the working title.
The film's title, The Rise of Skywalker, was announced at April 2019's the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago.

===
Casting ===
Carrie Fisher, who played Leia Organa, died on December 27, 2016.
Variety and Reuters reported that she had been planned for a key role in Episode IX.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm stated that there were no plans to digitally generate Fisher's performance as they had for Rogue One (2016).
The following April, Fisher's brother Todd revealed that Fisher's daughter, Billie Lourd, had granted Disney the rights to use recent footage of Fisher.
However, a week later, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not appear in the film.
In July 2018, J. J. Abrams announced that unused footage of Fisher from The Force Awakens would be used to help complete the story.
In flashback scenes, digital de-aging was used for the appearance of Luke and Leia through the use of facial shots of both characters from the Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi respectively.

In July 2018, Keri Russell was in talks to play a part with some "action-heavy fight scenes", and it was confirmed that Billy Dee Williams would return as Lando Calrissian, onscreen for the first time since 1983's Return of the Jedi—marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.
At the end of July, Russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an announcement of returning and additional new cast members.
In late August, Deadline Hollywood announced that Dominic Monaghan and Matt Smith had been cast in unspecified roles, but Smith later denied his involvement.
Greg Grunberg reprises his role as Temmin "Snap" Wexley.
At the Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, it was revealed via the film's teaser trailer that Ian McDiarmid would return to portray Palpatine.
Since the event was held after principal photography wrapped, Abrams was thrilled that news of McDiarmid on the set never leaked.
Kathleen Kennedy said they decided to reveal Palpatine's return ahead of the film's release because of the characters playing a larger role in the story, having them differentiated from Baby Yoda, the character from The Mandalorian.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography began on August 1, 2018, at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.

Filming also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan.

Oscar Isaac stated that Abrams was allowing more improvised acting than in the previous two films.
Due to the tight schedule, some editing took place on set.
Principal photography wrapped on February 15, 2019.
Footage from the film was shown at The Walt Disney Company's annual shareholders meeting on March 7, 2019.
Two weeks of reshoots took place at Pinewood involving Hamill, Ridley, and Isaac in July 2019.
Another round of reshoots took place between late September and October.

===
Post-production ===
The visual effects were created by Industrial Light & Magic and supervised by Roger Guyett.
The film finished post-production on November 25, 2019.
After Boyega accidentally left a copy of the script in his hotel room, it was listed on eBay for around £65.
===
Music ===
In January 2018, it was confirmed that John Williams would return to compose and conduct The Rise of Skywalker.
The next month, Williams announced that it would be the last Star Wars film for which he would compose the score.
In August 2019, it was revealed that Williams had written about 35 of an expected 135 minutes of music for the film, which according to Williams' brother Don, would incorporate all of the major themes of the Skywalker saga.
Scoring began in July 2019 with Williams and William Ross conducting and orchestrating the sessions over the course of six months.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 20, 2019.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Despite staying silent about many details of the film, Abrams expressed his hopes that fans and general audiences would be "satisfied".
He headed a panel dedicated to the film on April 12, 2019, during the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago, where the film's title was revealed.
Additionally, the story events of the Disneyland themed area Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge precede the film, including the Millennium Falcon:
Smugglers Run motion simulator, which features Chewbacca.
On August 24, a new poster and "sizzle reel" was released at D23; the latter was released to the public two days later.
The footage includes a montage of the Skywalker saga so far, as well as several new shots from the film.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
A publishing campaign titled "Journey to Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker" was announced on May 4, 2019.
It includes the novel Resistance Reborn, set between The Last Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker, and various other titles.
From December 18, 2019, to March 11, 2020, a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren, telling the story of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren and elaborating upon the character's backstory, was published by Marvel Comics, written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney.
The official novelization of The Rise of Skywalker is by Rae Carson:
hardcover and audiobook versions were released on March 19, 2020.
The novel details Palpatine's return in more depth
: he transferred his consciousness into a clone body following his death in Return of the Jedi, and his "son", Rey's father, was a failed clone of Palpatine.
The junior novel and corresponding audiobook are by Michael Kogge and were released on April 21, 2020.
Additionally, a five-issue Marvel Comics adaptation written by Jody Houser and illustrated by Will Sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later canceled, making the film the first in the franchise not to receive a comic adaptation.

===
Video games ===
The video game Star Wars Battlefront II (2017) released a free level set on Ajan Kloss.
In December 2019, the video game Fortnite Battle Royale released several cosmetics featuring character skins for Rey, Finn, a Sith Trooper, Kylo Ren, and Zorii Bliss along with a TIE fighter glider, a Millennium Falcon glider (which was given to players for free from the Winterfest Event), four emotes, and two free banners.
On December 14, Fortnite's publisher Epic Games released a preview of the film on an in-game theater screen as a live event.
At the end of the event, a message from Palpatine (the one mentioned in the film's opening crawl) was heard.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film was originally planned to be released in the United States on May 24, 2019, before being pushed back to December 20.
It had its world premiere at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles on December 16.
Unlike most studio films, Disney reportedly did not hold test screenings for The Rise of Skywalker, instead only showing it to Abrams' friends and family, as well as a terminally-ill fan.
Before the film's release, Disney issued a warning that the scenes with strobe-like flashing lights may trigger photosensitive migraines and seizures during some of those scenes.

===
Home media ===
The Rise of Skywalker was scheduled to be released on Digital HD on March 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Its DVD, Blu-ray, and 4K Ultra HD release was followed on March 31 by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment.
The 4K version of the film was also released in "The Skywalker Saga" Ultra HD Blu-ray box set that same date.
It was released on Disney+
on May 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of its previously scheduled release date.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $558.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.074 billion.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $300 million when factoring together all expenses and revenues.
Pre-sale tickets went on sale on October 21, 2019, and the film sold more tickets in their first hour of availability on Atom Tickets than the previous record-holder for ticket sales, Avengers: Endgame (2019).
It became Atom Tickets' second-best first-day seller of all time behind Endgame, selling more than twice the number of tickets as The Last Jedi sold in that same timeframe, while Fandango reported it outsold all previous Star Wars films.
Box office tracking had The Rise of Skywalker grossing around $200 million in its opening weekend, though some firms predicted a debut closer to $175 million.
The film made $90 million on its first day, including $40 million from Thursday night previews.
It went on to debut to $177.3 million, and it was also noted that Saturday (which saw a 47% drop from Friday's gross) was the busiest shopping day of the year, likely affecting ticket sales.
The film made $32 million on Christmas Day, the second-best total ever for the holiday after The Force Awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.
It went on to have a five-day total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the weekend.
In its third weekend, the film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in its fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).Worldwide the film was projected to gross around $450 million in its opening weekend, including $250 million from 52 international territories.
It made $59.1 million from its first day of international release in 46 countries.
The biggest markets were the United Kingdom ($8.3 million), Germany ($7.2 million), France ($5.3 million), and Australia ($4.3 million).
In China, the film made $1.6 million (RMB11.6 million) through its first day.
It went on to open to $198 million from overseas countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than The Last Jedi's total.
Its biggest opening totals remained the UK ($26.8 million), Germany ($21.8 million), France ($15.2 million), Japan ($14.6 million), Australia ($12.6 million), and China ($12.1 million).

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 51% of 507 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.1/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "The Rise of Skywalker suffers from a frustrating lack of imagination, but concludes this beloved saga with fan-focused devotion.
"
As of January 2020, the film is the lowest-rated live-action film of the Star Wars series.
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 61 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 53 out of 100, The Rise of Skywalker received "mixed or average reviews".
Richard Roeper, reviewing for the Chicago Sun-Times, gave the film three stars out of four, writing that it "rarely comes close to touching greatness, but it's a solid, visually dazzling and warmhearted victory [for] quality filmmaking."
The A.V. Club's A. A. Dowd gave the film a C+, stating that the film "is so freighted with obligation that it almost groans under the weight, flashing a weak smile as it vaguely approximates the appearance of a zippy good time."
Michael Phillips for Chicago Tribune wrote that the film "does the job.
It wraps up the trio of trilogies begun in 1977 in a confident, soothingly predictable way, doing all that is cinematically possible to avoid [upsetting the] tradition-minded quadrants of the Star Wars fan base.
"Mick
LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle described the film as "a disappointment" and wrote, "For all the movie's faults, it's likely that most people will consider The Rise of Skywalker and accept the trade: Sit through a
so-so 110 minutes to get to a strong half hour.
"
Owen Gleiberman of Variety called the film "the most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying Star Wars adventure since the glory days of Star Wars (1977) and The Empire Strikes Back (1980) [...]
but given the last eight films, the bar isn't that high.
"
The BBC's Nicholas Barber praised the film's acting and wrote, "The Rise of Skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a host of talented people, and yet the best they can do is pay tribute to everything he did several decades ago.
"Scott
Mendelson for Forbes described the film as "possibly worse" compared to the previous Skywalker saga films while ending the main saga and "denying this new trilogy its artistic reason for existence", and criticized the film for retconning The Last Jedi and its plot; saying that "patronizing reversals in the name of mollifying the fans who merely want to be reminded of the first three movies."
Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times described the film as "a Last Jedi corrective", which is "more accurate way to describe it" and is "an epic failure of nerve"; saying that "feels more like a retreat, a return to a zone of emotional and thematic safety from a filmmaker with a gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
"
Writing for The New Yorker, Richard Brody states that the film's faults "are those of the franchise over all"; as the film's director "J. J. Abrams is mainly a distiller and a magnifier and brings virtually no originality to it", using the controls of Michael Bay.
Whereas Asian actress Kelly Marie Tran was a main character in The Last Jedi, she appears for about a minute in The Rise of Skywalker.
The reduced role was interpreted by some critics as a concession to fans who disliked her character; Tran had been a target of online harassment following the release of The Last Jedi.
People involved on the previous film defended her, with some claiming some of the attackers were racist, and body shamers.
Critics said she was "sidelined" into a minor character, and commented on how she was written out "without any explanation" and her minor role was considered by one critic to be "one of the film's biggest disappointments".
In regards to the criticism towards her reduced screen-time, screenwriter Chris Terrio said it was due to the difficulty of including the deceased Carrie Fisher archive footage in scenes planned to feature both characters.

===
Audience response ===
According to CinemaScore, American audiences gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, the lowest among the live-action films.
On PostTrak, audiences gave the film an average four stars out of five, with 70% saying they would definitely recommend it; parents and children under 12 years old (who made up 16% of opening night attendance) gave it a full five stars out of five.
Men (who made up 67% of the audience) gave the film an overall positive score of 80% while women (32%) gave it an 84%.
RelishMix, which tracks social media posts and online presence, "noticed a divided reaction to Skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
Months prior to the film's trailer release, it was review bombed on Rotten Tomatoes to the point where the "Want to See" percentage went down as far as 5% within a day, with many of the reviews focusing on lingering negativity towards The Last Jedi.
Similar bombing with Captain Marvel (2019) caused Rotten Tomatoes to completely remove the "Want to See"  feature after temporarily changing it to a number.
===
Accolades ===
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Disney A to Z
This list of characters from the Star Wars franchise contains only those which are considered part of the official Star Wars canon, as of the changes made by Lucasfilm in April 2014.
Following its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the novels, comics, video games and other works produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars as Star Wars Legends and declared them non-canon to the rest of the franchise.
As such, the list contains only information from the Skywalker Saga films, the 2008 animated TV series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and works published after April 2014.

The list is organized in humans and various alien species.
No droid characters are included, so for those, see the list of Star Wars droid characters.
Some of the characters featured in this list have additional or alternate plotlines in the non-canonical Legends continuity.
To see those or characters who do not exist at all in the current Star Wars canon, see the list of Star Wars Legends characters and list of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters.

==
Humans ==
Humans are a sentient, sapient species in the fictional Star Wars universe.
They are the most numerous and dominant species, with apparently millions of major and minor colonies galaxy-wide.
Humans are native to many different worlds, and they are characterized by multidimensional complex personalities that are both individual and unique.
They are the only race accepted as pure by Emperor Palpatine.

By the time the hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a few scattered worlds throughout the galaxy; according to the New Essential Chronology, the humans of Coruscant managed to send out a number of 'sleeper ships' between the fall of the Rakatan Infinite Empire and the invention of the hyperdrive.
Star Wars humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life humans.
The presence of ordinary humans in the story is important dramatically and the first movie establishes their vulnerability and weakness.
Luke Skywalker's introduction early in the first movie was rewritten to establish this.
In the Star Wars mythology, the human homeworld, according to the New Essential Chronology, is generally believed to be Coruscant.
However, there is actually no real consensus on the issue; according to releases from the official Starwars.com site, the ancient human home world has simply been lost to history.

Star Wars humans live on many different worlds throughout the galaxy, with many populations living together with several other species—something which is most common either on the cosmopolitan worlds at the core, such as on Coruscant, or on the frontier at the Outer Rim of the galaxy, such as on Tatooine.

===
Skywalker and Solo families ===


====
Extended family ====
Naberrie family - Padmé Amidala's family
Lars family - Luke's adoptive familyOrgana
family - Leia's adoptive family


===
Force-wielders ===
Human Force-sensitive characters.
They are divided into Jedi and those affiliated with the light side of the Force; and Sith and those affiliated with the dark side (such as Dark Jedi, who are former Jedi who have fallen to the dark side, and Inquisitors, who are Jedi hunters trained by Darth Vader and serving the Empire).
===
Mandalorians ===
Mandalorians are a culture of humans from the planet Mandalore with strong warrior traditions.
Most of them wear armor and helmets, the strongest ones made from beskar, a blaster-resistant steel that is originally from Mandalore.
The Mandalorian culture was carried on by humans from Mandalore around the galaxy.
The name of their home planet, "Mandalore", is the same as the title given to their leader.
The Mandalorians are also associated with the Darksaber, a black-bladed lightsaber built by Tarre Vizsla, the first Mandalorian Jedi, which has since become a symbol of power for the Mandalorian people and is passed from a leader to the next.
===
Galactic Republic ===
The Galactic Republic is a democractic government, overseen by a Galactic Senate, that governed most of the known galaxy for thousands of years.
With the help of the Jedi Order, it maintained intergalactic peace, but during its last years, it became highly corrupt, causing numerous planets and systems to abandon the Republic and form the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
The ensuing conflict between the two factions became known as the Clone Wars, which Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious and the mastermind behind the war, took advantage of to manipulate the Republic's Senators and citizens into supporting his plans for the government's reorganization into the Galactic Empire for the purpose of intergalactic "peace".
The Republic serves as the protagonist faction of the prequel trilogy, which depicts its downfall and conversion into the Empire.

====
Clone troopers ====
Clone troopers were the soldiers of the Galactic Republic's army during the Clone Wars.
Created from Jango Fett's DNA, they were genetically modified to have accelerated growth and be predisposed toward unquestioning obedience to the chain of command, including being outfitted with mind-controlling biochips, which were put to use during Order 66, when the clone troopers turned on and tried to kill their Jedi Generals.

===
Confederacy of Independent Systems ===
The Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) is an organization of multiple planets and systems formerly part of the Galactic Republic, who decided to secess after becoming annoyed with the corruption and injustice within the Galactic Senate.
Formed by Count Dooku under the orders of his master, Darth Sidious, it is the main antagonistic faction of the prequel trilogy.
Most of the planets that made up the Confederacy attempted to earn their freedom by force, engaging in the three year-long Clone Wars with the Republic using an army of battle droids.
Once Sidious achieved his goal of scaring the people of the Republic into supporting his plans for the formation of a Galactic Empire, he ended the Clone Wars by having his new apprentice, Darth Vader, kill the Separatist Council leaders.
The remaining systems of the Confederacy were subsequently reabsorbed into the newly formed Empire.
===
Rebel Alliance ===
The Rebel Alliance is an organization of multiple planets and systems that oppose the rule of the Galactic Empire, with which it engages in the five year-long Galactic Civil War.
It serves as the protagonist faction of the original trilogy.
The Partisans are a faction or rebels led by Saw Gerrera known for their extreme methods, who have distanced themselves from the rest of the Alliance.
Rogue One is a squad of Rebel soldiers formed in the film of the same name that embarked on a suicide mission to steal the Death Star's schematics.

====
Erso and Gerrera families ====


===
Galactic Empire ===
The First Galactic Empire is an autocracy formed by Emperor Palpatine at the end of the Clone Wars, replacing the old Galactic Republic.
Palpatine's rise to power and manipulation of the Galactic Senate into supporting his plans for the formation of an empire and extermination of the Jedi Order with the purpose of intergalactic "peace" are depicted in the prequel trilogy.
In the original trilogy, the Empire serves as the main antagonistic faction.
At its peak, the Empire sprawled most of the known Star Wars galaxy.
The Empire was eventually defeated by the Rebel Alliance and collapsed, but some remnants continued to exist for 30 years and reunited to form the First Order.

The stormtroopers are the elite, faceless shock troops serving the Empire's military.
Originally the clone troopers of the Republic's army, over time they became mostly human recruits.

===
Resistance ===
The Resistance is a military organization founded and led by Leia Organa, and the successor of the Rebel Alliance.
It fought against the First Order to defend the New Republic and maintain peace in the galaxy, 30 years after the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War.
It is the protagonist faction of the sequel trilogy.

===
New Republic ===
The New Republic is a democractic government established in the aftermath of the Galactic Empire's defeat.
Formed from the Rebel Alliance and meant to be a restoration of the old Galactic Republic, it governed most of the known galaxy, until it fell after the First Order destroyed its capital, the Hosnian Prime system.
The New Republic is only briefly featured in the sequel trilogy, but has a more prominent presence in related works.
===
First Order ===
The First Order is an autocratic military dictatorship and the successor of the Galactic Empire, formed from its remnants.
Its main goal is to overthrow the New Republic and destroy the Resistance and Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi.
It is the central antagonistic faction of the sequel trilogy.
Ruled by Supreme Leader Snoke, a Force-sensitive being created by the resurrected Darth Sidious to act as his puppet ruler, the First Order succeeded in destroying the New Republic and conquering much of the known galaxy, especially during Kylo Ren's reign, who killed Snoke and became the next Supreme Leader.
Near the end of its one-year-long war with the Resistance, it allied itself with the Sith Eternal, a secret cult of Sith loyalists led by Sidious on Exegol, though both were ultimately defeated by the remains of the Resistance and the civilians of the galaxy, who finally gathered the courage to rise against their oppressors.

Much like the Empire before it, the First Order uses stormtroopers as its main military.
Most stormtroopers are children who had been abducted from their homes and brainwashed into serving the First Order.

===
Bounty hunters, mercenaries, and criminals ===


===
Naboo humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Naboo.

===
Tatooine humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Tatooine.
===
Sorgan humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Sorgan.
===
Versio family ===


===
Uncategorized humans ===


==
Other sentient species ==
A mix of non-human characters from the Star Wars galaxy, organized by species, in alphabetical order.

===
A–E ===


====
Abednedos ====
Abednedos are a humanoid, sentient species native to the planet Abednedo.
They have either brown or tan skin, mouth tendrils, long faces, and widely spaced fleshy nostrils.
Abednedos are known for their ingenuity, and generally peaceful nature, being acceptant of other species.

====
Abyssins ====
Abyssins are a humanoid, cycloptic, sentient species native to Byss.
They have green or blue skin, can regenerate missing limbs, and can live for up to 300 years.

====
Aleena ====
The Aleena are a short, humanoid, sentient species native to Aleen.
They have scaly skin, elongated skulls, and large mouths with tiny teeth.

====
Anacondans ====
Anacondans are a large, snake-like sentient species.

====
Anzellans ====
Anzellans are a diminutive sentient species native to Anzellan.
Their eyes have corneal micro-lenses that can see microscopic details.

====
Aqualish ====
The Aqualish are a species of tusked humanoids from the planet Ando.
They can have either two or four eyes, fur around their cheeks, and varying skin color and number of fingers.
The Aqualish have a reputation of being nasty, crude, and aggressive.

====
Ardennians ====
Ardennians are a species of short, four-armed, monkey-like humanoids from the planet Ardennia.

====
Artiodacs ====
Artiodacs are a hulking, humanoid, sentient species from Artiod Minor.
They are distinguished by their broad, flat noses, bulging arms, and deep, rumbling voices.

====
Askajians ====
Askajians are a near-human species from Askaji, whose bulky appearance is given by their internal water storages.
They are also distinguished by their wrinkled foreheads and six breasts (present at females).

====
Bardottans ====
Bardottans are a humanoid, reptilian-like sentient species from Bardotta.
They are distinguished by their long, curving necks, pointed snouts, and crested heads, and are a generally insular and secretive society.

====
Besalisks ====
Besalisks are a humanoid, four-armed, sentient species from Ojom.
Often thick-set, they are also distinguished by their bony, three-pronged headcrests, inflatable wattles, and wide mouths, with large, pudgy lips.
Besalisks are known to be industrious and hardworking.

====
Bith ====
The Bith are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Bith.
They are distinguished by their bald, domed heads, black, glassy eyes, and skin flaps on their faces, which are used to smell because they lack noses.
They are a generally intelligent and peaceful species, and are known to be good scientists, engineers, and musicians.

====
Blarina ====
The Blarina are a species of short, pudgy, sentient humanoids from the planet Rina Major.
They have snouts, tough skin, and small eyes.
The Blarina are famously accomplished liars, and are known to be highly sociable and fond of words, often talking very quickly and incomprehensibly.

====
Cereans ====
Cereans are a near-human species from the planet Cerea, distinguished by their coned skulls, which hold their binary brains.
They are known to be an intelligent species, although their homeworld lacks most of the advanced technology found on other planets.

====
Chagrians ====
Chagrians are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from the planet Champala.
They are distinguished by their long horns, head tentacles with additional horns, forked tongue, and varying skin color.
Chagrians are known for their skills as military commanders.

====
Chiss ====
The Chiss are a near-human species native to Csilla, distinguished by their blue skin, red eyes, and dark blue-black hair.
Prior to Thrawn's rise within the ranks of the Galactic Empire, the Chiss had relatively very little contact with the rest of the galaxy, and some even considered their existence a myth.

====
Clawdites ====
Clawdites are a species of sentient, shape-shifting, reptilian humanoids from the planet Zolan.
With their unique ability they can impersonate virtually any humanoid, although the shape-shifting requires great concentration and they return to their true, reptilian form if knocked unconscious or killed.

====
Cloddograns ====
Cloddograns are a humanoid species with four arms and nose tendrils.

====
Cosians ====
Cosians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species native to Cosia.
They are short in stature and have beaked mouths, four-fingered hands, and medium-length tails.
A genetically-engineered subspecies called Nu-Cosians also exists.

==== Crolutes ====
Crolutes are a species of hulking, amphibian, sentient humanoids from the planet Crule, distinguished by their blobfish-like faces.
They are all males, while their mates, called Gilliands, are exclusively female.
Crolutes rarely travel beyond their homeworld and its moons.

====
Delphidians ====
Delphidians are a near-human species from the planet Delphidian Cluster, with dark gray, leathery, and striated skin.

====
Devaronians ====
Devaronians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Devaronian.
They are distinguished by their two horns (present only at males), pointed ears, and sharp teeth.
The males are known for their spirit of travel and are among the first species in the galaxy to develop interstellar travel, while the females usually remain on their homeworld to look after the children and govern the place.

====
Dianoga ====
The Dianoga are large, highly adaptable cephalopods from the planet Vodran.
They live in semi-aquatic environments, like swamps and sewers, and are a sentient, but primitive species.

====
Dowutins ====
Dowutins are a species of large, sentient humanoids native to Dowut.
They have a bulky build, brown-orange skin, and two chin horns.
They are known for their strength, and can live for several centuries.

====
Dressellians ====
Dressellians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Dressel, distinguished by their round, hairless, wrinkled faces.

====
Dugs ====
Dugs are a sentient species from the planet Malastare, distinguished by their elongated faces, and the fact that they walk on their arms.
They are known to be very greedy.

====
Duros ====
Duros (or "Durosians") are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Duro, with large, ovular heads, red eyes and blue skin.
They are known for their superior astronavigational skills, and were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the development of hyperdrives and other related technological advancements.

====
Er'Kit ====
The Er'Kit are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Er'Kit.
They have white-blue skin, long skinny legs, and elongated skulls.

====
Ewoks ====
Ewoks are a small, furry, sentient species who live in trees on the forest moon of Endor.
While primitive, they have proven themselves to be loyal, skilled hunters, and ingenious in designing their traps.

===
F–J ===


====
Falleen ====
The Falleen are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species native to Falleen.
They have green skin, ridged skulls, and long, black hair, usually worn in ponytails.

====
Faust ====
The Faust are a species of tall, slender, gray or purple-skinned humanoids native to Adana.
They are recognized by their narrow faces and two sets of eyelids.

====
Gabdorins ====
Gabdorins are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species with large, round heads, ridged nostrils, and massive sweat glands.

====
Gamorreans ====
Gamorreans are a humanoid, pig-like, sentient species native to Gamorr.
They have green, thick, and hairless skin, large-nostriled snouts, and upturned tusks.
Gamorreans are known for their low intelligence, strength, and love of conflict and violence.

====
Gand ====
The Gand are a humanoid, insectoid, sentient species native to Gand.
They have three-fingered hands, two-toed feet, and large, silver-coloured eyes.
They wear respiratory masks in oxygen-rich environments, because it is toxic to them.

====
Geonosians ====
Geonosians are a humanoid, winged, insectoid sentient species native to Geonosis.
They live in large colonies like insects, and are generally regarded as a primitive species, but are skilled engineers and operated the Confederacy of Independent Systems' battle droid factories during the Clone Wars.

====
Gossams ====
Gossams are a humanoid, sentient species native to Castell.
They have wrinkled skin, squat bodies, and long, thin necks.
They are known to care about status, power, and wealth, and most wear expensive jewelry for this reason, such as neck rings.

====
Gran ====
The Gran are a humanoid, three-eyed, sentient species native to Kinyen and Malastare, and with major colonies on several other planets, such as Hok and Varkana.
They have brown-orange skin, goat-like snouts, bulky hands, and small antennae-like nubs.
The Gran of Kinyen are known for their peaceful nature, pursuing simple careers like farmers, while others have more dangerous pastimes.

====
Gungans ====
Gungans are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient and sapient species native to the swamps of Naboo.
They have a very flexible skeletal structure, long necks and head tails, and muscular tongues.
While usually regarded as clumsy and primitive, they have proven themselves to be very loyal and ingenious.

====
Harches ====
Harches are a humanoid, spider-like, sentient species native to Secundus Ando.
They have six arms, six red eyes, fangs, and brown or white hair that covers most of their body, and can supposedly live for centuries.

====
Hutts ====
Hutts are a portly, grotesque, slug-like sentient species native to Nal Hutta.
They are often depicted as being very greedy and very gluttonous.
Some famous Hutts, such as Jabba the Hutt, are crime lords, and speak in their native language, Huttese.

====
Iktotchi ====
The Iktotchi are a near-human species from the planet Iktotch, recognized their large cranian horns.

====
Ithorians ====
Ithorians are a species of humanoids from the planet Ithor, with curved necks and two mouths, located on the sides of the neck.
Their faces resemble those of hammerhead sharks, for which reason they were nicknamed "hammerheads".
===
K–O ===


====
Kaleesh ====
The Kaleesh are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from the planet Kalee.
They have red skin, elongated ears, and flat noses (which are rarely seen because they wear masks), and are known for being skilled and merciless warriors and hunters.

====
Kaminoans ====
Kaminoans are a species of tall, thin, amphibian, sentient humanoids from the ocean planet Kamino.
They have white skin, large eyes, and long necks and limbs.
Kaminoans are skilled scientists specialized in cloning technology, and were responsible for the creation of the Republic's Clone army during the Clone Wars.

====
Karkarodon ====
The Karkarodon are a humanoid, shark-like, amphibian sentient species from the planet Karkaris.
With their webbed feet and hands and sharp teeth, they are fast swimmers and skilled hunters.

====
Kel Dors ====
Kel Dors are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Dorin.
Their body is covered by a leathery hide, which allows them to survive the vacuum of space for a brief time, and they wear respiratory masks and protective eye goggles on planets with oxygen-rich atmospheres, because it is toxic to them.

====
Kiffar ====
The Kiffar are a near-human species from the planets Kiffu and Kiffex, distinguished by their ceremonial tattoos and scarlet blood.

====
Kitonak ====
The Kitonak are a species native to Kirdo III, distinguished by their white-pink and tough skin, large hands and feet, and tiny eyes, ears and mouths.
They are known to be slow and patient, but also skilled musicians.

====
Klatooinians ====
Klatooinians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Klatooine.
They are distinguished by their leathery skin, imposing brows, and toothy underbites.

==== Koorivar ====
The Koorivar are a near-human sentient species with reptilian-like skin and a large cranial horn that spirals upwards from their skull.

====
Kowakian monkey-lizards ====
Kowakian monkey-lizards are a small, semi-sentient species from Kowak.
They have beak-like mouths, long ears, medium-length tails, and a distinct laughter, which is used to scare predators on their homeworld.
Most are kept as pets by members of the underworld.

====
Kubaz ====
The Kubaz are a humanoid sentient species from Kubindi, distinguished by their long snouts, dark skin, protective eyewear, and unique manner of speech, consisting of a series of whirring syllables.

====
Kyuzo ====
The Kyuzo are a humanoid, sentient species from Phatrong.
They have green skin, wrinkled faces, and yellow eyes, and are known for their exceptional combat abilities and fast reflexes.
When not on their homeworld, Kyuzo always wear masks to filter the atmosphere, which conceal most of their faces.

====
Lanniks ====
Lanniks are a species of short humanoids from the planet Lannik, with long, droppy ears.
They are known for their honor and bravery.

====
Lasats ====
Lasats are a humanoid, sentient species native to Lira San, though they later settled on Lasan.
They are very tall, strong, and agile, and possess superior sight and hearing thanks to their large eyes and ears, respectively.
Lasats are distinguished by their prehensile feet, and varying fur patterns, which are unique for every individual.
The species was nearly driven to extinction by the Empire.

====
Latero ====
The Latero are a short, four-armed, humanoid sentient species from Lateron.
They have small, pointed ears, gray skin, and gray sideburns hair.

====
Lepi ====
The Lepi are species of bipedal, humanoid, sentient rabbits.

====
Lurmen ====
The Lurmen are a species of diminutive, lemur-like humanoids from Mygeeto.
They have brown and gray fur, large yellow eyes, and medium-length tails.
Pacifists by nature, they have often found themselves oppressed for this reason.

====
Melitto ====
The Mellito are a humanoid, insectoid, sentient species from Li-Torran.
They lack eyes and mouths, and are capable of sensing their environment using super-sensitive hairs called cilia.
They also wear masks and use breathing tubes to filter other planets' atmospheres, as most contain substances that are toxic to them.

====
Miraluka ====
The Miraluka are a species of near-humans, distinguished by their lack of eyes.
The only known member of this species, Prosset Dibs, could use the Force to make up for his lack of eyesight and become familiar with his surroundings


====
Mirialans ====
Mirialans are a near-human species from Mirial.
They are distinguished from humans by their skin color (yellow, green, pink, or purple), and geometric tattoos on their faces.
Mirialans are known for their spirituality and strong connection with the world around them.

==== Mon Calamari ====
Mon Calamari are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species native to Mon Cala.
They have salmon-coloured skin (though their skin may have other tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a high-domed head with large, sideways eyes, and webbed hands.
They are known for their swimming and engineering abilities.

====
Mortis Gods ====
The Mortis Gods are a family of three mythical, immortal, and god-like beings who are the sole inhabitants of the Force realm Mortis.
They are believed to be the embodiments of the Force itself: the light side, the dark side, and the balance between the two.

====
Muuns ====
Muuns are a tall, thin, humanoid sentient species with elongated skulls and flat noses.
Known across the galaxy as greed-driven bankers, they ran the InterGalactic Banking Clan during the Galactic Republic era.

====
Mythrol ====
The Mythrol are a humanoid, sentient species with blue skin and amphibious traits.

====
Nautolans ====
Nautolans are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Glee Anselm.
They are distinguished by their head tentacles, which allow them to detect chemicals, and large, black, pupil-less eyes.
Nautolans are a generally peaceful species, but can be strong warriors when needed to.

====
Neimoidians ====
Neimoidians are a humanoid large-eyed, amphibian, and reptilian-like sapient species native to Neimoidia.
They are known for their dishonesty, wealth, and cowardice, as well as for being in charge of the Trade Federation during the Galactic Republic era.

====
Nikto ====
The Nikto are a humanoid sentient species native to Kintan.
There are at least three known subspecies: the Red Nikto (Kajain'sa'Nikto), the Green Nikto (Kadas'sa'Nikto), and the Mountain Nikto (Esral'sa'Nikto); the former two have scaly, coarse skin and horns and spikes on their face, while the latter present no horns and have facial fins instead.

====
Noghri ====
The Noghri are a humanoid, short, sentient species native to Honoghr.
They have grey, leathery skin with a row of horns on their head, sharp teeth, and clawed fingers, and are known for their exceptional combat abilities and keen sense of smell.

====
Nosaurians ====
Nosaurians are a humanoid sentient species from the planet New Plympto.
They are distinguished by their six horns, red eyes, and orange, white, and yellow skin, and are considered to be ill-tempered.

====
Ongrees ====
Ongrees a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Skustell.
They are distinguished by sideways eyes, located underneath their mouths, four nostrils, and lipless mouths.
Most Ongrees are considered to be even-minded individuals and are skilled diplomats and negotiators.

====
Ortolans ====
Ortolan are a species of squat, blue-skinned, sentient humanoids from Orto.
They are distinguished by their large, floppy ears, trunk-like noses, and black eyes, and are known to consume large amounts of nutrients through their fingers.
Some Ortolans have no arms.

====
Ovissians ====
Ovissians are a humanoid, sentient species, distinguished by their four head horns (two sideways horns, and two extending from the chin).
They can have either green or orange skin, which matches the color of their blood.

===
P–T ===


====
Pa'lowicks ====
Pa'lowicks are a sentient species from Lowick.
They have bulbous bodies supported by long, reed-thin legs, small eyes located in stalks on the top of their heads, and long, thin, trunk-like mouths.

====
Palliduvans ====
Palliduvans are a near-human species, with chalky white skin, and long, bony fingers, with which they can draw blood.

====
Pantorans ====
Pantorans are a near-human species from the moon of Pantora, distinguished by their blue skin.

====
Pau'ans ====
Pau'ans are a species of gaunt, tall, and long-limbed humanoids from Utapau.
They have white or gray skin, sunken eyes, and sharp, jugged teeth.
Pau'ans are an intelligent and peaceful species, though they often seem afraid of outsiders.

====
Phindians ====
Phindians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Phindar.
They have green-yellow skin, long arms, and elongated skulls, and are known to be very cautious.

====
Pykes ====
Pykes are a humanoid, sentient species from Oba Diah.
They are distinguished by their elongated, tapered skulls with an undersized face.
The Pykes are best known for running the Pyke Syndicate, an illegal spice-dealing group.

====
Quarren ====
The Quarren are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Mon Cala.
They have four tentacles protruding from their jaws, for which reason they are nicknamed "squid heads" around the galaxy, as well as suction-cup tipped fingers, and the ability to spit ink in self-defense.
They are more introverted than the Mon Calamari, with whom they share their homeworld, and rarely invite strangers to their planet.

====
Quermians ====
Quermians are a species of gaunt, tall, long-necked and white-skinned humanoids from Quermia.

====
Rodians ====
Rodians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Rodia.
They have green skin, antennas, large pupil-less eyes, a row of spike on the back of their head, slender snouts, and fingers with suction cups at the end.

====
Shawda Ubb ====
The Shawda Ubb are a diminutive, amphibian, sentient species with green skin and small faces that sport heavy brow ridges.

====
Skakoans ====
Skakoans are a humanoid, sentient species native to Skakoa.
They have crown-shaped skulls and are required to wear special suits with breathing masks to survive off their homeworld.
Skakoans are best known for running the Techno Union during the Galacic Republic era.

====
Snivvians ====
Snivvians, also known as "snaggletooths", are a short, humanoid, sentient species native to Cadomai Prime.
They have a protruding lower jaw with two small tusks, and large nostrils.
Snivvians have great tracking skills, and are good scouts and trackers.

====
Sullustans ====
Sullustans are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sullust.
They are mouse-eyed and have two flaps of jowls around their cheeks.
Sullustans are a sophisticated species and experts at manufacturing, scientific and technological development, and economics.

====
Tarsunt ====
The Tarsunt are a humanoid, sentient species from Tarsunt.
They have long faces, widely spaced nostrils, and hair on various places of their body, including their faces, where it resembles a beard.

====
Teedos ====
Teedos are a short, humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Jakku.
They have three-fingered hands and feet, and are almost always wrapped completely in clothing.
All Teedos are identical, sharing the same name and a telepathic connection that allows one Teedo to recount events experienced by another.

====
Terrelian Jango Jumpers ====
Terrelian Jango Jumpers are a humanoid, sentient species from Terrelia.
They are tall, slender and very acrobatic, while having blue, gray, and white skin.

====
Thisspiasians ====
Thissipiasians are a humanoid, serpentine, sentient species from Thisspias.
While the lower part of their bodies is snake-like, they have arms and can grow facial hair.

====
Tholothians ====
Tholothians are a near-human species from Tholoth, distinguished by their scaled craniums and head tendrils.

====
Togruta ====
The Togruta are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Shili.
They are distinguished by their three, rarely four "head tails" called lekku (similar to those of Twi'leks), which are striped to help them blend in with their natural surroundings.
Togrutas are known for their solidarity and for possessing a form of passive echolocation by means of their hollow montrals, which allows them to sense space and the proximity and movement of physical objects around them.

====
Toong ====
The Toong are a humanoid, sentient species from Tund, with disproportionately large heads for their bodies.

====
Toydarians ====
Toydarians are a species of short, winged humanoids from Toydaria.
They have long snouts, tusks, and webbed feet, and have been shown to be strong-willed, resisting Force mind tricks.

====
Trandoshans ====
Trandoshans are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Trandosha, known for their hunting abilities and bad history with the Wookiees.
They are tall and muscular and have a pointed skull, sharp teeth, long claws, and four fingers on their hands and three on their feet.

====
Triffians ====
Triffians are a humanoid, sentient species recognized by their triangle-shaped appendages that extend from their shoulders to their heads.

====
Trodatome ====
The Trodatome are a slug-like sentient species that lack arms, but possess sensory antennas and flippers.

====
Troigs ====
Troigs are a two-headed and four-armed humanoid sentient species from Pollillus.

====
Tusken Raiders ====
Tusken Raiders, also known as Sand People or simply Tuskens, are a culture of nomadic, primitive sentients indigenous native to Tatooine.
They are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing their identity.
Tuskens are known for their aggressivity towards strangers, which they consider possible threats, and unique manner of speech, which combines vocal sounds (mostly screams) with sign language.

====
Twi'leks ====
Twi'leks are a humanoid, sentient species native to Ryloth.
They are distinguished by their "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the back of their head, and varying skin color.
Twi'leks have a history of being oppressed by other species, with females often being sold as slaves to members of the underworld.

===
U–Z ===


====
Ugnaughts ====
Ugnaughts are a short, humanoid, sentient species from the planet Gentes, with pig-like faces.
They are considered to be one of the hardest-working species in the galaxy.

====
Umbarans ====
Umbarans are a near-human species from Umbara, distinguished by their pale skin and colorless eyes, with which they can see in the ultraviolet spectrum.
They have developed technology much more advanced than that found in the rest of the galaxy.

====
Veknoids ====
Veknoids are a humanoid, sentient species from Moonus Mandel, distinguished by their large under-bites, sharp teeth, slender tails, and fleshy ears.

====
Vulptereens ====
Vulptereens are a species of stocky humanoids, recognizable by their shovel-like snouts which sport six tusks and a single long feeler.

====
Vurk ====
The Vurk are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sembla.
They are distinguished by their bony crests on the top of their heads (similar to those of the parasaurolophus), and three-fingered hands.
While regarded as a primitive species, the Vurk are highly empathetic and skilled mediators.

====
Weequays ====
Weequays are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sriluur.
They are distinguished by their though, leathery skin, which helped them survive the harsh life conditions of their homeworld.
Most of them are pirates, mercenaries, and bounty hunters, as a result of the Hutts' takeover of Sriluur.

====
Wookiees ====
Wookiees are a large, hairy, primate-like sentient species native to Kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the modern-day depictions of Sasquatch.
They are known for their strength, loyalty, unique manner of speech (depicted as a series of growls and purrs), and bad history with the Trandoshans.

====
Xexto ====
The Xexto are a species of short, four-armed humanoids from the planet Troiken.
They have white skin, glassy eyes, and long necks and fingers.

====
Yakora ====
The Yakura (also known as Yakorans) are a humanoid, sentient species, with yak-like faces.

====
Yoda's species ====
"Yoda's species" is the name given to a species of diminutive, green-skinned, sentient creatures, of which the popular character Yoda is a member.
The species is characterised by their pointy ears, strong connection to the Force, and slow aging, for which reason they can live for several centuries.
Much about the species, including its name and origins, has been deliberately left vague.

====
Yuzzums ====
Yuzzums are a humanoid, round-bodied, furred, sentient species from the forest moon of Endor.
They have long limbs compared to the rest of their body, medium-length antennae, big mouths, and no neck.
Yuzzums are considered a primitive and unintelligent species.

====
Zabraks ====
Zabraks are a near-human, sentient species, distinguished by their horns and tattoos.
Most originate from Iridonia (in which case they are also referred to as Iridonians), though some males also lived on Dathomir (in which case they are referred to as Dathomirians), as part of the warrior clan called the Nightbrothers, who served the witches known as the Nightsisters.

====
Zygerrians ====
Zygerrians are a humanoid, feline-like sentient species from Zygerria, who had built and run the biggest slave empire in the galaxy, until the Jedi overthrew them and outlawed slavery.
Attempts to rebuild the empire were made during the Clone Wars and the Imperial Era, but were thwarted.

===
Unknown species ===


==
See also ==
List of The Mandalorian characters
List of Star Wars creatures
List of Star Wars droid characters
List of Star Wars Legends characters
List of Star Wars Rebels characters
List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars cast members
List of Star Wars books
== Notes ==


==
References ==
